

Nib Health Care Services P/L versus Dental Board of NSW [1996] NSWSC 168 (30
May 1996) 
NIB HEALTH CARE SERVICES P/L versus DENTAL BOARD OF NSW /92; 30073/91 
Thursday, 30 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, COLE JA 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: The materials relevant to the decision of this appeal are set out in the reasons of Cole JA.

The decision depends upon the meaning to be given to subs 5 of <case> the [Dentists Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/).
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) is headed "Professional misconduct". Subsection (1) says that for the purposes of the Act "professional misconduct" includes a number of things. The first is conduct showing a lack of adequate professional competence in the practice of dentistry. The second is contravention of the Act or regulations. The third is carrying on practice in breach of conditions imposed under specified sections of the Act designed to secure that only competent dentists practice dentistry. The fourth is practising under a name other than the dentist's own name, subject to two exceptions. The fifth is permitting the use of the dentist's name in connection with practice where the dentist is not in regular attendance. The sixth is being employed in the practice of dentistry by a person not a dentist. The seventh is habitual drunkenness or addiction to a deleterious drug.

It is apparent that the inclusive description of "Professional misconduct" in subs (1) is part of a scheme implemented by the Act for ensuring that all practising dentists are registered under the Act, maintaining an appropriate standard of competence and behaviour by such registered dentists, and enabling them to be removed from the register when their competence or behaviour falls below required standards.

It is also apparent that the fourth, fifth and sixth matters mentioned above, which are contained in pars (d), (e) and (f) of subs (1) are all based on the proposition that it is conducive to competent practice that the rewards for work done by registered dentists should go to registered dentists, an ingredient in this proposition being that employment of registered dentists by persons other than registered dentists may lead to unprofessional pressures of various kinds being exerted on the practice of registered dentists to the possible detriment of that practice.

The particular paragraph of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) which has become relevant in the present case is (f). This paragraph has the effect of including within the categories of "Professional misconduct" a registered dentist's "being employed by or associating with ... for fee, salary or other reward ... in carrying on the practice of dentistry, a person ... not a dentist".
 [Section (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) excludes from the meaning of "person" in par (f) a number of specified legal entities. The nature of these entities is such that they would not be likely to exert pressure on registered dentists employed by them of the kind that would be likely to have an adverse effect on their professional standards.
That seems clearly enough to have been the view of the legislature in excluding them from the otherwise general operation of par (f).

The last of the listed entities in subs (4) is "(f) any body or corporation which on application made for the purpose has been approved by the Board".
 [Section (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) is as follows: "(5) The approval of the Board referred to in subsection (4)(f): is not to be granted unless the Board is satisfied that the interests of the public generally or of any section of the public, other than dentists, warrant the granting of the approval; may be granted subject to any terms and conditions the Board thinks fit to impose; and may be revoked by the Board for any cause which it considers reasonable." 
The language of par (a) of subs (5) appears at first glance to be very wide.
It speaks of "the interests of the public generally or of any section of the public". Such words ordinarily connote a very wide range of considerations as falling within the meaning of "interests"; however, I do not think the words in par (a) have such a wide connotation. The purpose of the paragraph is shown by its own terms as being to place a limitation on what entities may be regarded as not being "persons" for the purposes of par (f) of subs (1).
Thus "the interests of the public generally or of any section of the public" with which the Board is concerned when considering an application pursuant to subs (4)(f) are those relevant for the purposes of subs (1)(f). Those purposes are, in my view, and in light of what I have earlier said about [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) as a professional misconduct section, related exclusively to the operation of the statutory scheme directed towards the maintenance of professional standards.

Thus par (a) means, in light of what has preceded it, that "approval is not to be granted unless the Board is satisfied that the interests of the public generally or of any section of the public, other than dentists, in the maintenance of proper professional standards of registered dentists warrant the granting of the approval".

I think this conclusion is reinforced by the historical analysis set out in the reasons of Cole JA.

Cole JA has also shown, in my opinion, that in the case under appeal, the
Board when considering "the interests of the public generally etc", took into account and was influenced by considerations going to a much wider meaning of "the interests of the public generally" than, for the reasons I have given, I think the words have. My opinion of their meaning, and that the
Board misunderstood them seems to me to be further strengthened by (i) the direction in par (a) of subs (5) that in satisfying itself in the matter of the public interest, limited as I think it is to the public interest in maintenance of professional standards, the Board is not to take the interests of registered dentists into account and (ii) the various indications in the Board's reasons that the interests of registered dentists were taken into account.

From my view that in reaching its conclusion on the application before it, the
Board was acting on an incorrect interpretation of subs (5) of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html), it follows that, as Cole JA concludes, in the circumstances of this case the decision of the Board must be quashed.

It also follows that it is unnecessary to consider other grounds of appeal.
One of these, however, is, to a degree, relevant to the construction question.
The arguments that were put to the court concerning bias focused heavily on the situation brought about by the Act, that the Board was deliberately constituted to comprise a majority of registered dentists, and that the legislature must have meant that they should be able to bring their professional opinions to the decision of matters before the Board concerning their profession. The construction which I think is the appropriate one for subs (5) of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) has the effect of reducing the range of matters which the Board must consider in which the interests of registered dentists are directly involved. In dealing with applications under subs (5), all members of the Board must put the interests of dentists out of their minds as an irrelevant consideration.

I agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Cole JA.

COLE JA: This is an appeal from the decision of Sully J delivered 11 September 1992 dismissing a summons in which the appellant, NIB Health Care Services Pty Limited (NIB), sought orders setting aside the determination of the Dental Board of New South Wales (the Dental Board) whereby the Dental Board declined to approve the operation by NIB of a Dental Care Centre at Newcastle.

HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION 
NIB is a wholly owned subsidiary of NIB Health Funds Limited. NIB Health Funds is a company limited by guarantee and is a non-profit registered health benefits group operating throughout New South Wales and the Australian Capital
Territory. It has been so operating since 1953. NIB operates an eye care centre in Newcastle, Wollonging and at Charlestown. NIB Health Fund offers its contributors a number of health fund benefits tables, including an Ancillary
Benefit Table which includes benefits for dental treatment. Accordingly NIB wished to establish a dental care centre at Newcastle to provide dental care services for its members. The number of members who had contributed to the
Ancillary Benefit Table was 167,938 single and family members, having a total number of dependents of 216,973. Thus NIB contended that 384,911 persons were eligible for ancillary benefits including dental care benefits.

On 24 September 1986 the Dental Board approved an application by NIB Health
Funds to conduct a dental clinic within the city Newcastle for a period of three years from 1 October 1986. However no clinic was opened and on 21 March the Board determined that the "approval date had expired" and purported to terminate the approval.

On 7 June 1989 NIB Health Funds made application to the Dental Board pursuant to [s.8(2)(h)(iv)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s8.html)
Dentists Act 1934 to enable it to employ dentists and thus operate a dental clinic at Newcastle. On 26 September 1989 the Dental Board declined to approve that application. In consequence NIB Health Funds commenced proceedings in the
Supreme Court on 2 April 1990 seeking orders declaring the Board's decision void and that it be set aside. The then President of the Board, Dr J W Dale, was joined as a second defendant in those proceedings. The proceedings were settled upon terms that the Board's determination of 26 September 1989 be set aside, and that the Board would endeavour to determine a new application to be lodged by NIB within two months. It was a term of the settlement that the "President of the Board (Dr Dale) will not participate in the consideration of the determination of the fresh application by the plaintiff".

On 16 September 1991 the Dental Board refused the application lodged by NIB as contemplated by the terms of settlement. Proceedings were then commenced which were heard by Sully J and which have resulted in this appeal.

Before Sully J three grounds for vitiating the decision of 16 September were asserted, namely: "(i) Procedural irregularity and/or unfair and improper conduct on the part of the Board in dealing with the application.

That the Board misconceived the nature of the discretion it was obliged to exercise, ignored relevant considerations, and took into account irrelevant considerations, and exercised its discretion for a collateral purpose, namely to protect the business of existing dentist in private practice in the
Newcastle region from competition.

A real likelihood of bias." 
Sully J rejected all three contentions. On appeal, the fifth ground in the notice of appeal was abandoned. Grounds 1,2, 3 and 4 which were argued were in the following terms: "1. His Honour should have found that the decision of the respondent was invalid because: the reasoning of the Respondent Board was predicated upon or took into account factors irrelevant to its legitimate field of consideration under the
Dentists Act applicable to applications of bodies or corporations to carry on the practice of dentistry, namely the pecuniary interests of existing
Newcastle dentists and the protection of those dentists in respect of such pecuniary interests from prospective conduct of the Appellant as an additional provider of dental services in Newcastle, in circumstances where the
Appellant's said conduct would not so operate as to preclude or deny the provision of dental services to members of the public in Newcastle; whilst the Respondent Board expressed the view in its reasons for decision that there would be a diminution in the availability in the range, quality and diversity of existing services provided by dentists in Newcastle because of the prospective competitive conduct of the Appellant, such a factor or consideration was irrelevant in the absence of a finding that any such diminution would not be made good by the prospective competitive conduct of the Appellant; notwithstanding the obligation of the Respondent Board to give reasons for its decision as a term of the compromise of earlier legal proceedings between the parties, the Respondent Board provided no reasons explanatory of the "serious risk" factors referred to in its decision, and in particular, how the same would supposedly cause the adverse results predicted by the Respondent, save for the irrelevant factor of the prospective competitive conduct of the
Appellant; the Respondent Board took into account a further irrelevant factor, namely its prediction that the Appellant would not succeed in its stated objective of providing services to large numbers of patients in Newcastle who did not presently have access or adequate access to dental care, since the non- fulfilment of such prediction carried the irrelevant consequence that the
Appellant would not do as well for its own members as it was its stated objective, and would constitute in any event a contradiction of the "serious risk" factors propounded by the Respondent Board.
His Honour should also have found that the Respondent Board failed to take into account a factor of pre-eminent relevance arising upon the true construction of the Dentist's Act, which the Board was bound to take into account, namely the public interest in the enhancement of competition between providers of dental care services in Newcastle, with the consequence that the decision was invalid.
Alternatively to 1. above, if the factors therein referred to were relevant, His Honour should have found that they were nevertheless of no great importance, yet the Respondent Board gave excessive weight thereto, and in any event, the findings made in relation to the existence of such factors were unsupported by probative material, with the consequence that the decision was invalid: 
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs versus Peko-Wallsend <case>; [(1985-6) 162 CLR 24] at 41 
Australian Broadcasting tribunal versus Bond <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 321] at 367
His Honour was in error in finding that there was presented for consideration by the Respondent Board the "two contrasted points of view" set out on pages 36 and 37 of his Judgment, and that the effect of the reasoning of the Respondent Board was as described on page 38 of his Judgment."[1] 
Ground 2 was recognised as a fall back position if it were held that the Board had a broad general discretion in reaching its decision. Mr Gyles QC for the appellant recognised the difficulty of sustaining ground 3 assuming the factors referred to in Ground 1 were available for consideration. The primary matter argued on appeal involved a contention that the Dental Board has misunderstood the proper nature of the discretion conferred upon it in considering NIB's application, and that the decision was vitiated by the Board having taken into account an immaterial consideration, namely the pecuniary interests of existing dentists in private practice. It will be necessary to consider the history and provisions of the Dental Act to determine the true scope of the discretion conferred upon the Board in considering the application.

THE DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD 
As Sully J found, the reasoning justifying the Board's decision to refuse the plaintiff's application is found in its letter to NIB dated 16 September 1991 communicating its decision. It expressed its reasons in the following terms: "1. The Board's construction of s.5(5) of the Act is similar to that put forward in the applicant's letter of 15th July 1991. In particular, the Board accepts that: 
It is a precondition of the Board's approval of an application that it be satisfied that the interests of the public generally, or of a section of the public, warrant the granting of the approval.

In determining whether the precondition is satisfied, the Board, is not to consider the interests of dentists as such; 
Notwithstanding that there are or may be advantages to the public, or a section of the public, the Board may consider all relevant factors to determine whether the interests of the public, or any section of the public, would be sufficiently advanced by the proposal to justify granting approval to the application; 
In making the determination referred to in (c), the Board is not necessarily precluding from having regard to the interests of dentists, if relevant; 
It is for the Board to assess the competing considerations which bear on the determination referred to in (c), provided they are relevant to the question.
Material was put before the Board which suggests that a section of the public might benefit from the establishment of the proposed Dental Care Centre in Newcastle. That is, the members of the NIB Health Fund who contributed to the Ancillary Benefits Table.
The benefits to those members of the NIB Health Fund who contribute to the
Table, and who avail themselves of the services of the Centre, would include the provision of basic dental services without additional charges (i.e.
additional to the contributions the Fund (sic)). In addition, they would receive the benefit of a range of professional dental services, including specialised dental care. These, however, would be subject to a patient moiety.
The proposal, as specified in the application, envisages that the centre will operate on the basis that the usual benefits will be paid by NIB Health Fund to the operating company and that patients will contribute moieties for procedures other than basic dental treatment.
For budgetary purposes, the application assumes that ultimately 30% of the services which NIB Health Fund members are presently obtaining from private practitioners would be provided by the Centre (para. 8.1). It is claimed that this does not necessarily involve an assumption that up to 30% of the business now being directed to private practitioners will be transferred directly to the Dental Care Centre. The claim is based upon survey results that indicate that a significant proportion of the population in the catchment area do not seek regular dental treatment. However, the material presented to the Board does not enable a clear judgment to be made as to the source of the patients who are likely to attend the centre.
While the Board acknowledged that there would be some benefits accruing to some members of the Nib Health Fund, they considered that a number of countervailing factors had to be taken into account in determining whether the interests of a section of the public warranted the granting of approval to the application. These factors include the following: 
The special characteristics of the Newcastle region, including the relatively small population compared with Sydney; 
The availability of a full range of services through existing service providers; 
The high level of satisfaction with existing services (of which the survey provides some confirmation); 
A serious risk that the establishment of the Centre would have a substantial adverse effect on existing service providers in the Newcastle region; 
A serious risk that the adverse effect referred to in (d) would result in a significant diminution in the range, quality and diversity of dental services available to the people of the Newcastle region; 
The fact that the Board was not satisfied that the establishment of the
Centre would provide services to large numbers of patients who do not presently have access, or adequate access, to dental care.
The Board did not consider that the advantages of the proposed centre to a section of the public outweighed the disadvantages to the public constituted by the people of Newcastle as a whole. In making this determination, the Board took into account the stated emphasis in the application on prevention and the other matters relied upon by the Applicant."[2] 
Of particular importance are paragraphs 2, 5 and 6. It seems tolerably clear that the Board found that benefits did accrue to some members of the NIB
Health Fund, namely those contributors who had subscribed to the Ancillary
Benefit Table which gave benefits for dental treatment and who resided in such proximity to Newcastle as to permit their likely use of the clinic if established. It seems clear that the Board regarded that group as "a section of the public". However, as appears from paragraph 6, the advantages so found to that section of the public were thought to be "outweighed (by) the disadvantages to the public constituted by the people of Newcastle as a whole". It was Mr Gyles QC's contention that once advantages to a section of the public had been found, it was impermissible to consider disadvantages to another and different sector of the pubic, and further it was impermissible have regard to the public as a whole. This was said to be so because of the terms of [s.5(5)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) of the [Dentists Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/).

THE LEGISLATIVE SCHEME - [DENTISTS ACT 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/) [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s57.html) [Dentists Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/) provides that a person, other than a dentist, must not practise in dentistry or do or perform any act, matter or thing, the doing or performance of which forms part of the practice of dentistry. The practice of dentistry is defined in [s.4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s4.html) and relates to the performance of dental work. Nonetheless a dentist may carry on the practice of dentistry as a director or employee of a corporation if all of its shareholders are dentists or members of the dentist's family and the controlling interest in the corporation is held by a dentist.[3] Even though a dentist carries on practice as a director or employee of such a corporation, the directors of the incorporated practice attracted civil liability for claims arising from that practice. 4 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) defines professional misconduct. Apart from dental incompetence, it is professional misconduct to carry on practice in dentistry under a name other than a dentist's own name except where the name is that of an incorporated practice of which the dentist is director, or where the dentist is a locum tenens of another dentist.[5] Further, it is professional misconduct to carry on the practice of dentistry under a name other than the dentist's own name except: "(f) for fee, salary or other reward, being employed by or associating with, in carrying on the practice of dentistry, a person (within the meaning of subsection (4)) who is not a dentist;" [Subsection ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s4.html) provides that: "For the purposes of subsection (1)(f), "person", includes a body or corporation, but does not include: any body or corporation which on application made for the purpose has been approved by the Board." 
It was pursuant to [s.5(4)(f)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) that NIB sought the approval of the Board as a corporation so that it could employ dentists as contemplated by [s.5(1)(f)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html), and such dentists would not be guilty of professional misconduct.
 [Section (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) provides: "The approval of the Board referred to in subsection (4)(f): is not to be granted unless the Board is satisfied that the interests of the public generally, or of any section of the public, other than dentists, warrant the granting of the approval." 
I will return to the construction of [section (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) which is of critical importance in this appeal. Before doing so, however, it is important to have regard to the history of [s.5.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s5.html) 
THE STATUTORY HISTORY OF DENTAL PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT 
Section 9 of the Dentists Act 1990 empowered the Dental Board to remove from the dental register any person who was guilty of "infamous conduct in any professional respect". The Dental Board, as s.3 of the 1909 Amending Act provided, consisted of eight members, two of whom were medical practitioners, four of whom were registered dentists with the remaining two being the head of the Faculty of Dentistry at the University of Sydney and the President of the
United Dental Hospital of Sydney. That latter institution was for the "gratuitous treatment of the necessitous poor". To become registered as a dentist one had to have professional qualifications of defined types. Section prohibited unregistered persons from assuming the name "dentist" or "dental practitioner".

In Re Kennely[6] the Full Court considered the meaning of "infamous conduct". The Chief Justice said: "It is, of course, clear that the object of such a statute is to benefit the public; the Legislature does not create a privileged class merely to enable its members to increase their incomes by excluding competition. But the machinery whereby the Legislature attempts to attain the end sought is not necessarily limited to the prohibition of acts directly concerning any members of the public. And "infamous conduct" in a professional respect is not necessarily conduct which the public would regard as infamous, or such as would expose the offender to the stigma of having behaved infamously if he were bound by no tie of honour."[7] 
The Chief Justice continued: "I think that a registered dentist may or may not, according to the circumstances, fairly expose himself to the charge of infamous conduct in a professional respect by taking service under an unregistered person. To put an extreme case on the one side, it may be found on investigation that his employer is an ignorant and unscrupulous charlatan, against whose type it was one main object of the Act to protect the public; to put an extreme case on the other side, it maybe found that his service is under the managing board of a public hospital, which is rendering the greatest public benefit by providing skilled treatment gratuitously to the poor."[8] and later: "I am not prepared to dissent, that the conduct of the appellant was such as, if commonly followed, would very seriously militate against any effort to secure high standards either of qualification or character in dental practice.
It would enable the most ignorant and untrustworthy to carry on lucrative practices by the assistance of persons who could openly avow themselves as qualified dentists, though their employers themselves dared not do so under the law."[9] 
The court upheld the Dental Board's finding that a registered dentist was guilty of infamous conduct for practising whilst employed by an unregistered dentist.

Thus one could practise dentistry only in one's own name, or when employed by another registered dentist, and this was thought to be for the protection of the public.

By the Dentists (Amendment) Act[10] 1909 a power was conferred upon the
Governor to prescribe regulations "regulating or prohibiting the employment of persons in dentistry other than under the direct personal supervision of registered dentists".[11] 
By the Dentists (Amendment) Act 1927[12] the Act was amended to provide: "Without limiting the meaning of the expression "misconduct in a professional respect", a dentist shall be deemed guilty of such conduct who - save or in such cases as are prescribed, practises in dentistry in a name other than his own;" 
A new Dentists' Act was enacted in 1934[13]. Section 8(2) provided: "Without limiting the meaning of the expression "misconduct in a professional respect" a dentist shall be guilty of such misconduct who - : carries on the practice of dentistry under a name other than his own name except whilst he is acting as the duly appointed locum tenens of another registered dentist; or allows the use of his name in connection with the practice of dentistry at premises at which he or his duly appointed locum tenens is not in regular attendance for the purpose of practice and supervision during the hours in which such premises are open for the practice of dentistry; for fee, salary or other reward is employed by or associates himself with a person who is not a registered dentist in carrying on the practice of dentistry. In this paragraph "person" includes a body or corporation (other than the Crown, a public hospital, or charitable or philanthropic institution.)" 
There was thus a statutory enactment of the substance of the decision in
Kennely constituting it professional misconduct to be employed by a non- dentist. That included employment by a corporation, unless the corporation was the Crown or a body devoted to good works. The exception permitting employment by such a body recognised that the protection of the public did not require a restraint upon dentists being employed by charitable or philanthropic bodies, much as the Chief Justice had illustrated in Kennely.

A significant change was effected by the Dentist's Amendment Act 1946.[14]
Section 8(2)(h) was amended by deleting the words after corporation reading: "(other than the Crown, a public hospital or charitable or philanthropic institution)" and inserting in lieu: "That does not include - 
The Crown; 
A public hospital or charitable or philanthropic institution; 
A society registered under the Friendly Societies Act 1912, or any amendment thereof; 
Any body or corporation which upon application made for the purpose has been approved by the Board.

The approval of the Board referred to in sub-paragraph (iv) of this paragraph shall not be granted unless the Board is satisfied that the interests of the public generally or of any section of the public, other than registered dentists, warrant the granting of such approval ..." 
The amendment was enacted to permit the "establishment of a dental clinic by the Broken Hill Mining Companies in association with their employees, whereby the latter will be enabled to obtain dental attention for themselves and families at reduced charges in return for a small weekly contribution. It is agreed by the Dental Board and the Government that the proposed scheme is excellent and deserving of every encouragement, but it cannot be brought into operation until the law is amended to permit a registered dentist to be associated with such a clinic. The amendment is designed to remove this legal debility."[15] 
In the second reading speech the Minister for Health said: "The term `person" includes a body or corporation other than the Crown, a public hospital, or charitable or philanthropic institution. Obviously this provision was designed to prevent the corporate practice of dentistry, and also to prevent any unregistered person from securing the benefits of dental practice by employing a registered dentist. The Broken Hill Mining Companies contemplate the establishment, at their own expense, of an up to date dental clinic to afford employees and their dependants expert dental attention. When established, the clinic will be conducted on a co-operative basis; it will be financed by weekly contributions by the employees with a subsidy on a pound for pound basis by the employers, and there will be a scale of moderate charges for treatment received. The control and administration of the clinic will be vested in a board, which will comprise equal representation of employers and employees. The Dental Board has been assured that the proposal has the whole hearted support of union officials and employees."[16] 
Later the Minister said: "The main objective of the Bill is to remove this difficulty by exempting a dentist who associates himself with any body or corporation approved by the
Board from the disciplinary provisions of the Act. In approving of any such body or corporation the Board must be satisfied that the interests of the public generally or any section of the public other than registered dentists warrant such approval which may be granted on such terms and conditions as the
Board thinks fit ... it will be clear to Hon. members that it is desirable in the public interest to exempt dentists who may associate themselves with
Friendly Societies or approved bodies or corporations from disciplinary action before the Board which might involve removal from the register, merely by reason of such association. I am confident that the Dentists Act 1934 was not intended to operate adversely against dentists in such circumstances. The provisions of the Bill will make the original intention quite clear and enable the Broken Hill and any other bona fide scheme of like nature to be brought into operation so that dental attention at moderate fees would be available to those participating therein. As Minister for Health I attach great importance to dental health which is admitted by all authorities to have a decided bearing on the general health and well being of the community. For this reason any plan to provide expert dental attention to the people or any section of the people is deserving of the support of all Hon. members of this
House. By no stretch of imagination should a dentist be regarded as guilty of professional misconduct if he is employed in an approved clinic or by a
Friendly Society.[17] (emphasis added) 
The words emphasised make clear that if any body such as a co-operative, friendly society or similar institution could show that either the public generally, or any section of the public, excluding registered dentists, had interests warranting the establishment of a corporation to run a dental clinic, it was not misconduct to be employed by such corporation providing the corporation received the approval of the Dental Board. Two things are clear; first, only a section of society need be advantaged by such a scheme, and, second, the concept of misconduct flowing from employment by others was yet further narrowed. Whereas in 1912 employment by others, possibly excepting charitable or philanthropic institutions, constituted infamous conduct, by it was recognised that whilst it remained professional misconduct to be employed by a non-dentist, that was not so where the employer was the Crown, a public hospital, a charitable or philanthropic institution, a friendly society, or a body which advantaged a section of society, provided it had the
Board's approval.

It is difficult to think that in 1946 there were not private dentists in
Broken Hill who would be disadvantaged by the establishment of a clinic as spoken of by the Minister. No doubt it was to exclude their interests, and the interests of similar private practitioners elsewhere where corporations advantaging a section of society might be established, that there was introduced the prohibition upon the Board having regard to the interests of "other registered dentists" when considering whether the interests of the public generally or any section of the public warranted approval of the corporation.

It is clear from the Minister's speech that the Parliament contemplated that a corporation which advantaged a section of the public by providing for them cheaper dental care in return for modest weekly contributions would receive
Board approval, and that it would not be professional misconduct for a dentist to be employed by such a body. That is what NIB proposed. Its proposal is materially indistinguishable from the Broken Hill Mining Company's proposal which the Act was amended to accommodate.

No doubt the expression "any section of the public" was used to make clear that, in reaching its decision, the Board did not have to consider the whole public of New South Wales where a proposal related to a sectional interest. It would have been clear, for instance, that the mining employees of Broken Hill were advantaged, but not clear that it could be said the public of New South
Wales generally were benefited by the Broken Hill proposal. Thus the legislative edict was to consider a sectional interest only, where there was a limited or regional proposal, and in that consideration to disregard the interests of dentists who might be affected by it.

When the 1964 amending act was passed the definition of professional misconduct arising from employment by a "person" being a non-dentist was yet further restricted by excluding from the definition of "person" a Council within the meaning of the Local Government Act 1919. All of these 1946 and restrictions were re-enacted in the [Dentists Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/) which further restricted the definition of "person" by excluding "an incorporated practice". Otherwise the 1989 Act re-enacted the provisions introduced in 1946 requiring the Board to consider the interests of the public generally or of any section of the public, other than dentists, and determine whether those interests warranted the granting of approval of a corporation so that a dentist employed by such a body would not be guilty of professional misconduct.

THE CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION 5(5)(A) 
The subsection uses the expression "the interests of the public generally or of any section of the public, other than dentists". It does not use the word "and", and in my opinion "or" is not to be read as "and". That means that when confronted with a proposal affecting the public of New South Wales generally, the Board must determine whether the interests of the public generally warrant the granting of approval, excluding the interests of dentists; or alternatively when confronted with a sectional or regional proposal, whether the interests of any section of the public warrant the granting of the approval, excluding the interests of dentists. The words of the section, and its history, make clear that the emphasis and intention of the various Dentists' Acts is the protection of the public by ensuring proper professional standards by dentists. Those standards include both standards of skill, and the manner in which dentistry is practiced. The words "other than dentists" make clear that the Board is not entitled to have regard to the pecuniary interests of dentists in reaching its determination whether the interests of either the public generally, or a section of the public, warrant approval of a corporate employer. Attention is required to be directed to the interests of the segment of the public, not to that of dentists who might be disadvantaged by the proposal. As was said in the First Reading Speech to the 1946 amendment: "It was never intended to prohibit a dentist being employed by a non-profit making concern such as the proposed Broken Hill Clinic." and as Sir W Portus Cullen made clear in 1912, the aim of requiring registration as a dentist is to protect the public, not to "create a privileged class, merely to enable its members to increase their incomes by excluding competition." 
The legislative history makes clear that the concern which must motivate the
Dental Board in considering the approval of the corporation is not a concern regarding the number of dentists in an area, the effect that a clinic may have on other dentists in private practice, or the social aspects of change. If an identified section of the public is advantaged by the proposal such that it would warrant in that section of the public's interest the approval of the corporation, approval should be given. The discretion in considering whether the interests of that section of society warrant the approval is a narrow one limited to a consideration of the interests of that section of the public, not of the public generally, and to the exclusion of a consideration of the interests of dentists.

There are expressions to the contrary of the view I have enunciated to be found in N R McGregor Pty Limited versus Dental Board of NSW.18 In my opinion insofar as McGregor might be thought to express contrary view to that in this judgment it should be regarded as wrongly decided.

Once it has been decided that a section of society will be advantaged it will only be, on some basis difficult to foresee, if it can properly be said that a registered dentist is likely to be inhibited in the practice of dentistry in accordance with proper professionals standards, excluding the nature of his employer, that a Dental Board would properly be able to refuse approval of such corporation as an employer of a registered dentist.

It is apparent that the Board fell into significant error in its understanding of the scope of its function, and the scope of its discretion in considering the NIB application. First, it found that section of the public would be advantaged, namely those members of the NIB Health Fund who contribute to the
Ancillary Table. They will receive dental care at reduced cost. The Board fell into error in weighing the interest of that section of the public against what it perceived to be the interest of a different and wider general public.

Second, the Board took into account the interests of existing practising dentists. That is clear from paragraph 5(d) of its reasons. That was impermissible.

Third, the Board took into account an irrelevant consideration, namely that the proposed clinic would not service non-members.

It follows, in my opinion, that Sully J was in error in not upholding the challenge to the Dental Board's decision. In my opinion ground 1 in the notice of appeal should be upheld.

In the circumstances it is unnecessary to consider the remaining grounds of appeal.

I would propose the following orders:
The appeal be upheld.
The order of Sully J made 11 September 1992 be aside.
The determination made by the Dental Board of New South Wales communicated on 16 September 1991 be set aside.
That the matter be returned to the Dental Board of New South Wales to be determined in accordance with law.
Order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal and of the proceedings before Sully J but that it have, if qualified, a certificate under the Suitor's Fund Act in respect of the proceedings before Sully J.

NIB HEALTH CARE SERVICES P/L versus DENTAL BOARD OF NSW 
Thursday, 30 May 1996 
CA 40502/95; CL 30049/92, CL 30075/92 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, COLE JA 
PRIESTLEY JA: This appeal was argued at the same time as appeal No /92, the reasons for judgment in which have just been handed down.

In this appeal, as in the other, I agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA.
My reasons for this are the same as those stated in the other appeal.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with the order proposed by Cole JA, and generally with his Honour's reasons. However, on the question of perceived bias, I do not agree with his Honour's tentative view. In my opinion, the ordinary reasonable man, once he realized that the Dental Board was constituted by
Parliament in such a way that it would usually be dominated by practising dentists, would find it unexceptionable - and indeed, inevitable - that one or more of its members from time to time had strong views on the matters on which it deliberated. He would not perceive bias if this in fact happened.
Maybe the average psychopath, to whose imaginary views modern courts seem to pay so much attention, would think otherwise.

COLE JA: This is an appeal by the Dental Board of New South Wales from the decision of Smart J delivered 11 July 1995 in which his Honour declared void the Board's determination made on 2 October 1992 refusing NIB Health Care Services' (NIB) application for it to employ or be associated with dentists in carrying on the practice of dentistry at dental health clinic in the Sydney Central Business District (CBD). His Honour also declared that the participation of Dr J W Dale, the then President of the Board, in the consideration and determination of the application gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias. Smart J directed that the Board determine the application according to law. 
On this appeal the Board challenged by grounds 1 and 2 of the notice of appeal the decision regarding apprehended bias. By grounds 3 and 4 it challenged the trial judge's finding that the Board took account of an irrelevant consideration, namely the anticipated economic effects of granting the application upon dentists in private practice, in circumstances where: "(a) Although the interests of dentists did not constitute the interests of the public generally or any section of the public, the effects of approving the application could have economic effects on dentists in private practice, with consequential effects on the interests of the public generally or a section of the public; and 
There was no evidence to suggest that the Board had taken account of the effect on dentists otherwise than in a legitimate manner in coming to its conclusion with respect to the application, and 
His Honour had held that the respondent had not established that the decision was taken for purposes of or influenced by an attempt to protect the commercial interests of dentists in private practice." 
Ground 4 contended that Smart J erred in failing to hold that: "(a) It was permissible for the Board to consider the effect of an approval on dentists in so far as that approval might affect the provision of dental services to the public or a relevant section of the public, and 
The effect of the approval of the application on dentists in private practice was, in that context a relevant consideration and was properly considered by the Board." 
NIB relied on the trial judge's findings regarding bias and the taking account of irrelevant considerations to sustain the orders made. In addition, by a notice of contention, NIB argued that, having found that protection of the interests of dentists in private practice was one of three reasons which activated the Board, Smart J had misdirected himself in holding that it was necessary to find that the protection of the interests of dentists in private practice was the primary purpose of the Board before he could set aside the determination. It was contended that having found that consideration of the interests of dentists in private practice was an operative substantial and illegitimate purpose, the Board's decision was vitiated, event though the factor was not found to be the primary factor guiding the decision. Reliance was placed upon the decision of this Court in Warringah Shire Council v
Pittwater Provisional Council.19 
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION 
On 4 November 1991 NIB made application to operate a dental care centre in the
Sydney CBD. On 9 December 1991 the Board invited submissions concerning the participation of Dr Dale, the President of the Board. NIB objected to Dr
Dale's participation on 23 December 1991. This was supported by detailed submissions of 6 March 1992. On 3 April 1992 the Board resolved that the fully constituted Board, would consider the application. Oral submissions by NIB were heard by the Board on 1 May 1992 but the Board did not consider the application until 2 October 1992. It resolved that the application be refused.
The Board declined to give reasons but Finlay J directed on 28 October 1993 that reasons be given. The decision was published on 6 November 1992.

FINDINGS OF SMART J 
Smart J found that there existed a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of Dr Dale. This flowed from Dr Dale being an "implacable opponent of health funds being allowed to establish and operate dental clinics". That finding was based upon a great number of statements made by Dr Dale whilst President of the Australian Dental Association between September 1986 and December 1987. There was abundant material to support the trial judge's finding that, at least during that time, Dr Dale was "vigorously pursuing his campaign" even after he had been appointed a member of the Dental Board in June 1987. Smart J found that "Dr Dale holds deep convictions not merely views".

Regarding the taking account of an improper purpose, Smart J, after considering the published reasons of the Board, and the minutes of the Board meeting of 2 October 1992 which recorded the basis of opposition to or support for the application, made the following findings of fact concerning the factors which motivated the Board's finding: "The economic interests of dentists received major attention during the discussion by Board members. There is emphasis in the reasons on the services already provided by dentists in private. The conclusion to be drawn from the observations of members and the Board's reasons is that the decision was made: 
To protect the interests of dentists in private practice, and 
The clinic would add nothing to the services already provided by private practitioners, and 
The only benefit was small costs savings to a small group of people, being the contributors to the Ancillary Benefits Table who had easy access to the
Clinic." 
Further, in relation to improper purpose his Honour found: "It is impermissible for the Board to consider the interests of dentists, other than in relation to the effects that would impact upon "non-dentists" (that is the public generally or a section of the public other than dentists).
Applications are to be granted where good and sufficient reason is shown that approval will benefit "non-dentists". It is an irrelevant consideration that approval may adversely affect dentists in private practice where there is no implication for `non-dentists"." and later: "The terms of discussion at the Board meeting indicate that the effects of health fund clinics on the interests of dentists in private practice were prominent in the minds of the Board's members.

On balance, NIB has established that the Board took account of an irrelevant consideration, that is, the anticipated economic effect on dentists in private practice. This could not be described as a consideration which made no material difference. The decision of the Board is ultra viries." 
THE APPEAL 
In my opinion grounds 3 and 4 argued on appeal fail, and the point of contention raised by NIB succeeds. The consequence is that the orders of Smart
J should be upheld.

The reason for this may be shortly stated. Smart J made a finding of fact which I have quoted regarding the matters which motivated the Board to reach the decision it did. It is true, as Smart J noted, that the protection of the interests of dentists in private practice was not referred to in the formal reasons delivered by the Board. Nonetheless it was open to Smart J to make the finding of fact that he did if it was permissible for him to have regard to the minutes of 2 October 1991 which recorded the discussion which resulted in the decision being taken that day to refuse the application. In my opinion
Smart J was entitled to consider the discussion by the various members of the
Board in the process of reaching their decision and preliminary to the vote to reject the application. A tribunal of fact, when determining the reason for a decision, is not bound by the formal statement of reasons for decision. Were it otherwise decisions could rarely be challenged upon the basis that regard was had to immaterial or irrelevant considerations, or that a decision was reached for an improper purpose. It was not submitted on behalf of the Board that Smart J was not entitled to consider the minutes of meetings at which the decision was reached: rather it was submitted that greater regard should be had to the formal published reasons for decision than to the discussion which occurred preliminary to the vote.

For reasons which I have expressed in NIB Health Care Services Pty Limited v
Dental Board of New South Wales delivered today, it was impermissible to have regard to the protection of the interests of dentists in private practice. As it has been found that was taken into account, Smart J's finding that an irrelevant consideration which could not be described as a consideration which made no material difference to the decision must be upheld. Grounds 3 and 4 thus fail.

Additionally, the decision in Warringah Shire Council makes clear that where there are mixed purposes which motivate a decision, if one impermissible purpose is "a substantial purpose" as that expression is used in Thompson v
Randwick Municipal Council,20 the decision is tainted by that improper purpose. Having found that the protection of the interests of dentists in private practice was one of three reasons guiding the Board's decision, that test is satisfied and the ground of contention made out.

BIAS 
I have found the issue of perceived bias in this case difficult.

The Dental Board is a creature of statute. The Parliament determined that the
Board is to comprise of nine members, five of whom are to be dentists elected by dentists and the remaining four to be appointed by the Governor and comprising a person nominated by the Faculty of Dentistry at the University of
Sydney, a barrister or solicitor nominated by the Minister and a nominee of the Minister from the Department of Health, and as a representative of consumers.[21] The President is to be a dentist[22]. Thus the Parliament must have anticipated that the President and the majority of the Board would reflect the interests and approaches of dentists. They could be expected to hold views, even strong views, concerning matters affecting the profession, and practice of it. As was said by the High Court in Re Polites[23]: "Qualification for membership cannot disqualify a member from sitting." 
There it was made clear that the undemanding tests of perception of bias enunciated in Livesey versus New South Wales Bar Association:24 "[C]annot be pressed too far when the qualifications for membership of a tribunal are such that the members are likely to have some prior knowledge of the circumstances which give rise to the issues for determination or to have formed an attitude about the way in which such issues should be determined or the tribunal's powers exercised." 
Nonetheless it was found that Dr Dale had maintained at least during 1986 and a determined campaign against health funds being permitted to open dental clinics, principally because it would affect the livelihood of dentists in private practice. Further, in relation to another application by NIB to open a clinic in Newcastle, litigation to which Dr dale was a party had been resolved upon the basis that he would not sit on the hearing of a new application. That seems to be an acceptance by him of the inappropriateness of him doing so. And further still, the Dental Board had thought that the question of whether Dr
Dale should sit was of such consequence that it sought advice from the
Solicitor General and a Queen's Counsel regarding whether he should so, and held a full Board meeting to debate that question.

All this tends one to the view that it is incongruous of the Board now to contend that a reasonable, fair minded, informed member of the public might not have a reasonable perception that the decision of the Board chaired by Dr
Dale might be biased.

One can accept that the test propounded in Livesey may need some qualification in circumstances where the Parliament has prescribed a board which can reasonably be regarded as representing the views or sectional interests of dentists. The question to be asked is probably whether a reasonable fair minded informed observer might have a reasonably apprehension that Dr Dale might not fairly consider arguments advanced for and against the granting of approval having regard to the factors which are permitted to be considered by s.5(5)(a) of the Act.

I incline to the view that the decision of Smart J holding such a reasonable apprehension of bias was established was correct. However, in light of my views in relation to the other grounds of appeal, and the notice of contention, it is unnecessary that I express a final view.

I would propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.
 [1] Appeal Book, pp405,406,407.
 [2] Appeal Book, pp.388,389,390.
 [3] Section 53.
 Section 54.
 [5] Section 51D.
 [6] (1912) 12 SR 319.
 [7] (1912) 12 SR 319 at 325.
 [8] (1912) 12 SR 319 at 326.
 [9] (1912) 12 SR 319 at 329.
 [10] No. 27 1909.
 [11] Section 4 inserting a new s.15(d).
 [12] George V No. 8 [13] No. 10 1934.
 [14] No. 2 1946.
 [15] First reading speech 4 December 1945, Hansard p.1646.
 [16] Hansard, 5 December 1945, p.1712.
 [17] Hansard, 5 December 1945, p.1713.
 [(1988) 15 NSWLR 635], in particular at 638C-F.
 [(1992) 26 NSWLR 491] at 508-510,520-521,522-523.
  <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 87] at 105-106.
 [21] S.8 [Dentists Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/).
 [22] Schedule 1, [Rule .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da1989123/s1.html) <case>; <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 288] at -294.
 * * * 
