

Building Services Corporation versus International Pools (Australia) P/L and
Anor [1996] NSWSC 228 (25 June 1996) 
BUILDING SERVICES CORPORATION versus INTERNATIONAL POOLS (AUST) PTY LTD &
ANOR /96 
THURSDAY 23 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for interim injunction brought in rather unusual circumstances. Time does not permit me to provide a full discussion of the facts and, indeed, I very much fear that in the short time which I have been exposed to the case I may have missed some of the nuances.

Essentially the plaintiff is a corporation which is charged with ensuring as far as possible that members of the public are not prejudiced by building work that is done in a defective manner or by builders who become insolvent.

There was work done on various swimming pools by a corporation which can be referred to as UFI. UFI went into voluntary administration and the plaintiff was left with the problem of completing and remedying defects to swimming pools under contracts entered into by UFI. For that purpose the plaintiff entered into a tendering process and one of the companies with which it entered into negotiations was the first defendant. In connection with the tendering process the plaintiff supplied the first defendant with the names and addresses of persons who might need to have their pools completed or rectified.

The plaintiff made a decision that it would not award the contract to fix these pools to the first defendant. The first defendant has challenged this decision in the Administrative Law Division of the Court and I am told that those proceedings are next in the list for mention on 25 June 1996. There was some discussion before me as to whether those proceedings could be moved to the Equity Division and heard together with this case, but nothing came of those suggestions.

The defendants wish to send to the persons who have defective swimming pools a letter, which is at p 21 of Mr Pudig's affidavit of 10 May 1996. The letter suggests that the pool owners might sign and post an enclosed form of letter to the responsible Minister. The plaintiff wishes to restrain the sending of this letter. It says, first of all, that the list of persons was obtained in confidential circumstances, the first defendant should have known it was in confidence and that in any event it is a complete waste of time the members of the public being afflicted with the first defendant's correspondence because unless and until the Administrative Law Division sets aside the decision it has made, the first defendant, no matter what it says and no matter what protests are made, will not get the contract. As I understand the situation,
Mr Biscoe QC who appeared with Mr Renwick, for the defendants, says that there are other matters relating to the pools, other than those covered by the contract. Mr Biscoe QC does not say, but it is quite obvious that there may be also political pressure brought to bear on the situation.

The matter came before Brownie J last week. Initially an injunction was granted, but then it was discharged because his Honour considered there was some non-disclosure of a material fact. After that decision the parties agreed that there should be an undertaking not to send the letter up until 7pm tonight, and the matter stand over until next Monday. This is put forward by
Mr Biscoe QC as allowing the defendants a window of opportunity in which they could send out the letter.

Mr Biscoe QC puts that where there is a consent order which is based upon contract then the Court should not act contrary to the agreement that is contained in the consent order. This is true up to a point, but it must always be remembered that even if a real contract is embodied in an interlocutory consent order the Court always has power over its own interlocutory orders and may vary the order despite the contract; Purcell versus F C Trigell Ltd [[1971] QB 358.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1971%5d%201%20QB%20358 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Indeed, the cases point out that in many situations what is embodied in the consent order is not a contract but merely an understanding of two solicitors; see Cliffs Robe River Iron Associates versus Dravo Pty Ltd [[1988] WAR .]
However, the fact that there is a consent order which contains within it a contract is certainly a factor that one takes into account.

Dr Flick SC, who appeared for the plaintiff, puts the case on two bases; (a) that an injunction should be granted under <case> of the Building Services [Corporation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1989154/); or (b) it should be granted as a general law remedy.

Section 138(1) of the Building Services [Corporation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1989154/), so far as is relevant provides:- "If, on the application of the General Manager of the Corporation made with the consent of the 
Minister, the Supreme Court is satisfied ...
 the Court may grant an injunction in such terms as the Court determines to be appropriate." 
I have great trouble in finding a satisfactory construction of <case>. It appears to grant jurisdiction to this Court only with the consent of the
Minister. One would think, accordingly, that the Act recognises that apart from <case> there is no capacity in the plaintiff to seek an injunction under the general law. It may be, however, that the legislature did not intend that, but that the focus of s 138 is subs (3), that is that an injunction may be granted without an undertaking as to damages. I think that as, assuming the general principles as to injunctions apply, I would not grant an interim injunction, it is better to leave <case> to another day.

One flavour I do get from the Act, however, which is relevant is that sections, such as <case>, suggest that there is a public interest recognised by the legislature in information, which the plaintiff obtained and is of commercial value, being kept secret and confidential. I have not had time to look at the authorities dealing with sections, such as <case>, which are in common form and which usually say something like: "A person must not disclose any relevant information obtained in connection with the administration or execution of this Act to any person." except to say that I think ordinarily the cases show that such a prohibition applies only to a person within the Department and does not apply to a person who that Department may have, in the course of the administration of the Act, disclosed to a third party outside the Department; see eg Oudman versus Warren <case>; Cooper versus Yukich <case>; [(1989) 98 FLR 21.] Accordingly, I do not consider that apart from the flavour that there is confidentiality about information that the section takes me very much further.

In Commonwealth of Australia versus John Fairfax Sons Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39] at 51, Mason J, when sitting as a single Justice of the High
Court, relying on Coco versus A N Clark (Engineers) Ltd [[1969] RPC ], 47, pointed out that a plaintiff must show not only that the information is confidential in quality, but that it was imparted so as to import an obligation of confidence.

At this stage, when I have merely got to consider whether there is an arguable case, I would have to say there is an arguable case that the information was confidential, though it is obviously in the grey area of what is confidential and it may very well be at the final hearing the judge considering the matter will rule the other way.

However, when I have to consider questions of the balance of convenience and whether damages are an adequate remedy the matter, to my mind, becomes relatively clear. There may be some political advantage to be gained by the defendants, and that may be a matter of irritation to the plaintiff, but it does not seem to me that the defendants' action is likely to cause any appreciable damage to the plaintiff and I think it is more likely than not that the fact that the plaintiff has already awarded the contract to a third party means that (omitting political considerations) what the defendants are doing is more likely than not to be a complete waste of time.

Normally once a department has awarded the contract it is a matter that is forever finished and cases such as Helicopter Utilities Pty Ltd versus Australian
National Airlines Commission  <case>; [(1983) 52 ALR 185).] 
Accordingly, because of the balance of convenience, and because the plaintiff has not really suffered any damage, and further because of the additional factors of the consent order that was made last week and, I suppose, the general freedom of speech that should be enjoyed unless there is a good reason to the contrary, I decline to grant an injunction.

I should, however, say that one of Mr Biscoe QC's submissions is that there is a public interest in having this information disseminated and that Government information ordinarily should not have that confidential character. Certainly this is true of some information held by Government Departments particularly relating to the executive workings of the bureaucracy; see the Fairfax case at p 52. It is not necessarily true of all Government information; see for instance Director-General of Education versus Public Service Association NSW [(1985) 79 FLR 15]; [4 IPR 552.] 
If I could paraphrase, Chief Justice Griffith said in Melbourne Steamship Co
Ltd versus Moorehead <case>; [(1912) 15 CLR 333], 342, "If you cannot trust the Government who can you trust?"
This thought was approved by Mahoney J in P & C Cantarella versus Egg
Marketing Board (New South Wales) [[1973] 2 NSWLR 366.] This suggests that when one gets a statutory duty of confidentiality, such as brought about by <case>, members of the public who give information to a statutory corporation which is designed to protect their interests can expect that that information will be kept confidential and there is a public interest in restraining its dissemination. However, I do not consider that that particular principle affects the result in this case.

Accordingly, I decline to grant an injunction and I stand the matter over to the Duty Judge's List at 10 o'clock Monday 27 May 1996.

Normally the plaintiff should have to pay the costs because it has been unsuccessful and the defendants have been brought here today to answer the claim for interlocutory relief. However, this is a rather peculiar type of case, the plaintiff is a statutory corporation to protect the public, there are associated proceedings in the Administrative Law Division and I think it preferable merely to reserve costs. I have recorded these remarks to help whoever has to decide the matter in due course.
 * * * 
