

Islam versus South Sydney City Council Matter No 4542/98 [1998] NSWSC 684 (17
December 1998) 
Last Updated: 14 January 1999 
ISLAM versus SOUTH SYDNEY CITY COUNCIL /98 December 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by the tenant of a restaurant at 122 Oxford Street, Darlinghurst for relief against forfeiture. However, as the proceedings developed, there appeared to be considerable doubt as to whether such a remedy was needed because the tenancy might still continue. 
In December 1997, the plaintiff purchased the restaurant business for $65,000.
The restaurant was conducted on premises owned by the defendant 
Council by lease O048132L terminating on 26 January 2000 with a five year option. The lease was granted to the plaintiff's vendor, Kynfield Pty Ltd. No transfer of lease was ever registered in the name of the plaintiff, though a signed transfer is ready for registration. However, this is of little moment as relief against forfeiture can be given in respect of an agreement to lease or other equitable lease and the court can make the appropriate order for the grant of a new lease by way of relief against forfeiture or otherwise.

The plaintiff was already a tenant to the Council in respect of another restaurant known as the Tandoori Palace at 86 Oxford Street, Darlinghurst.

There is no doubt that as at 5 August 1998, the plaintiff was in arrears of rent in respect of 122 Oxford Street in the amount of $10,707.63. The plaintiff says the reason for this was that his mother, who lives in
Bangladesh, was very ill and he went to visit her at the end of June 1998. He gave instructions to his brother to pay the rent. The brother paid some, but not all the rent. The evidence does not show whether it was the default of the brother or default on the plaintiff's part in not supplying his brother with money which resulted in non-payment. The plaintiff did not return to Australia until the end of August. He then found that the Council had purported to re- enter and change the locks on 5 August 1998.

The plaintiff contacted his then solicitor who wrote to the defendant on 1
September 1998 requesting that the plaintiff be allowed back into possession.
The letter informed the Council that the outstanding rent, which was said to be $15,732.58, would be paid by Friday 4 September 1998 and that from then on rent would be paid and all obligations complied with by the due dates.

The Council's copy of this letter has noted against the indication that the rent would be paid by 4 September the following words: "1. Notified not to accept any money." On 3 September the Council replied that the lease had in fact been cancelled in the office of the Registrar General on 20 April 1998.
(There was some evidence that this was a typographical error for 20 August and this seems more than likely). The letter then continued: "Given your client's history of late payment and non-payment of rent, I consider it most inappropriate for Council to reverse its decision and allow your client continued occupation." 
On 15 October, a Minute Paper (DX06) was presented to the Council by one of its officers which said as follows: "Officers of this Department's properties Branch arranged the locks to be changed at the premises on 5 August, 1998.

All efforts to recover the outstanding rent were unsuccessful and by letter dated 3 September, 1998, the solicitor for Mr Islam was advised that Council had terminated his Client's lease of the premises in question.

Under the terms of the Lease Mr Islam is required to pay rent until Council finds a suitable Tenant to lease the premises." 
The memorandum then went on to advise that various people were interested in leasing the premises and that there should be a lease granted to a Ms Tong.
The rent payable by Ms Tong was about 60% more than under the lease to the plaintiff's vendor. It was a material misstatement to state in the Minute
Paper that "All efforts to recover the outstanding rent were unsuccessful."
That may have been correct as at 5 August, but it was not a statement that any person with regard to the truth could make without qualification on 15
October.

Statements such as "Council had terminated his Client's lease" and "Mr Islam is required to pay rent until Council finds a suitable Tenant" are somewhat dubious. The first of these statements is arguably correct, though in the ultimate, I would hold against it. I will examine it in detail later in these reasons. The second must be wrong.

Mr Charles for the Council sought to support the second statement on two bases. First, he argues that clause 5 of the Deed of Assignment of Lease of 19
June 1998 shows that the covenant to pay rent does not cease on re-entry. The problems for that argument are that the deed never came into effect and, even if it did, it only operates so that the damages may be claimed for loss of rent in lieu of damages for loss of the lease in the same amount as the rent:
Haberecht versus Chapman [(1992) NSW ConvR 55-639], ,658.

Secondly he argues that the landlord may decline to terminate for breach of the covenant to pay rent in which case the liability continues. This is obvious: the problem with the submission is, however, that the Council's case is that it did elect to terminate the lease.

Of course, if one wants to get away from theory and back to reality, it must be remembered that the Council's own file had marked that no payments were to be received.

There are a series of singular facts in this case which have made me wonder what was really going on behind the scenes at the Council. Fortunately I do not have to assess many of these including why Council received an application from a Ms Tong to lease the restaurant on 11 July 1998, even before the purported re-entry, though every other application was made after the purported re-entry. The explanation that this was another typographical error was not convincing.

On 5 August when the locks were changed, Mr Clark, the Council's property manager, issued a letter indicating the amount of rent that was outstanding, that the locks have been changed and adding "You will not be allowed possession of such premises until all outstanding arrears are paid in full.
 "In this regard, it is requested that the above amount be paid immediately." 
In evidence, Mr Clark was cross examined. He admitted that the Council had a
Code of Conduct in terms of dealing with its tenants, requiring it to adopt a policy of ameliorating the effect of any rigid adherence to the letter of the law. He admitted that he had addressed the letter of 5 August to Mr Islam's home address and he went straight from changing the locks to Mr Islam's home address and put it in the letter box. He found out in mid-August that Mr Islam was in fact overseas.

On 4 September, Mr Islam went to the Council's offices with his cheque to pay the rent. At that stage, Mr Clark was on leave. He saw a Mr Fisher in
Accounts, and Mr Fisher said, "It's too late. I can't help this shop." He tried to see someone else but was unsuccessful. He then went home and rang another Council officer Coralie Doyle, the person who had signed some letters as "Acting Property Manager" and told her, "I went to Council to pay my rent and they would not accept it." The officer said, "It is too late, the shop is no longer yours." The plaintiff said, "I paid $65,000 for the business, won't you at least give a week to week lease so I could at least sell the business?"
The officer repeated, "The shop is not yours." 
In cross examination Mr Clark was asked who made the decision not to accept the cheque on 4 September. His answer was Mr Fisher in Accounts and Ms Doyle.

I indicated to defendant's counsel at the oral hearing on 19 November 1998 that I did not seem to have any evidence as to who it was that made the decision to terminate the lease or to refuse payment from Mr Islam on 4
September. Although Mr Clark kept making broad statements that "The Council decided", there was no evidence as to anyone's delegated authority to make any decisions for the Council and accordingly I said I would give an opportunity to the defendant to re-open if it so wished. An adjournment was arranged for this purpose.

During the adjournment, a further affidavit by John Maddox was filed on behalf of the Council which, with the agreement of Mr W Hodgekiss who appeared for the plaintiff, I read in chambers. He annexed a delegated authority given to the general manager to terminate leases. He also annexed a Minute Paper of 3
August 1998, which is set out as the Appendix to these reasons.

It will be noted from the Appendix that as at 3 August 1998, there was only a default of one full month's rent, that for July. The August rent had become due and payable, but as the action taken was because of a recommendation based on a conversation between officers of the finance and property sections as at July 1998, the decision for action was really taken on the basis of one full month's rent being unpaid plus $824 arrears. Further the emphasis on failure to contact the plaintiff doubtless influenced the general manager.
However, when looked at dispassionately, non-contact is at least equally consistent with the plaintiff being on a month's holiday as with refusal to answer. It must also be remembered that the plaintiff was operating another restaurant just down the street, a matter well known to Mr Clark who not only was writing to the plaintiff at that address in May 1998, but had a free meal there during October.

Furthermore, the minute does not actually say that the lease is to be terminated and the Registrar General so notified. All it authorises is for Mr
Islam to be locked out and "not be permitted to regain possession until the arrears are paid in full." 
Despite the adjournment, there was not a scintilla of evidence as to how it came about that the Registrar General was asked to write off the lease on 20
August, what evidence was presented to the Registrar General to cause him to do so or who (other than themselves) authorized the refusal of tender of rent on 4 September 1998. In view of the fact that the adjournment was granted for the purpose of the Council to provide any evidence on this subject that it thought should be before the court, absence of such evidence is significant.

On about 9 September, the Council officers were contacted by Mr Islam to allow him to remove his goods from the property. He did this on that date.

Mr Islam then changed solicitors and his current solicitor, Mr Parbury, at the end of October, commenced pursuing the Council in earnest about restoring his client to possession. He was given the run around by the Council and its officers and it was only on the brink of his commencing the current proceedings, which happened on 5 November 1998, that things began to happen.

Mr Clark attended Mr Islam's other restaurant on 26 October 1998 and was treated to a free meal. During the meal they discussed 122 Oxford Street
Darlinghurst. Mr Clark said, "If I were you I would not pursue the course of solicitors, due to expense. But it's up to you. The shop is gone but I can offer you another shop in Oxford Street." The plaintiff said, "I don't want another shop." Mr Clark replied, "If this matter goes to Court, this meeting never took place." 
Mr Clark said he reported the meeting to his superior and that Council's Code of Conduct did allow him to have a free lunch at the premises of a tenant, so long as it was not valued at more than $30. He said that "I went to that lunch in good faith, as Mr Islam, when I spoke to him on the Friday, was quite stressed that he lost the lease and I, out of my good heart as a human being was prepared to go and see Mr Islam and sit down and talk and say look Council cannot do any more in that matter. I have been with Council for nine years. I don't go to lunch. I go for walks. My relationship with Mr Islam is a landlord/tenant relationship, nothing more, nothing less." 
Mr Clark, in his affidavit, deposed in para 17: "As at 9 November 1998 the amount of rent and interest outstanding in respect of the premises was $25,968.76.

That sum is due by the plaintiff to the Council." 
There is also in evidence a document headed "Statement of Account" issued by the defendant Council on 16 October 1998 which shows that apart from service and interest charges Mr Islam was billed for rent for September and October .

During the hearing before me Mr Hodgekiss indicated that he had a bank cheque for $25,000 in favour of the South Sydney Council which he waved in front of the court. As Mr Charles told me that his client refused the cheque, I did not require it to be tendered.

The first question of fact to decide is whether or not the lease was terminated on or about 5 August. Normally, when there is a lock-out after non- payment of rent the answer to this question would be clear. However, one must take into account all the factors including the demand for rent.

A person can only demand rent if there is a lease in existence. Furthermore, ordinarily if a person, and especially a statutory authority, makes a claim for money due and that claim can only be justified if a certain state of facts exist, then that person or authority will either be estopped from denying the facts or alternatively denying that matter is a most relevant matter when considering what are the true facts; cf Franklin versus Manufacturers Mutual
Insurance Ltd <case>; [(1935) 36 SR 76.] 
The next matter that is of concern is that when the premises were locked, the tenant was given a letter which indicated that he could pay the rent and regain possession so long as he did it soon. The minute in the Appendix was to the same effect. A re-entry has usually got to be a final determination of the lease at which time the landlord relying on its superior title extinguishes the tenant's rights. A locking of the doors with an invitation to the tenant to pay the rent so that the tenant could get back into possession may not be an act of re-entry. The problem is, however, that if it is not classed as an act of re-entry, what is it? The landlord has no right to lock the tenant out unless it is re-entering. As I have indicated, the minute in the Appendix is really equivocal as to whether the act of 5 August was a re-entry or a technical trespass aimed at forcing the tenant to pay the rent.

The fact that there was not a re-entry is further reinforced by the fact that rent was continually demanded. Not only was it demanded, but Mr Clark in his affidavit swore that it was due to the Council. The Minute Paper of 15 October cited earlier shows that at least someone in the Council's property department thought that even though there was a re-entry rent was still payable, so that it may be that the demands for rent were merely made out of ignorance, but as there was at least one other serious misrepresentation in the minute, namely that the Council had not been able to get the rent, it is difficult to place much store on that minute.

In Campbell versus Payne [(1953) 53 SR 537], , Owen, J, when giving a judgment in the Full Supreme Court, with which KW
Street, CJ agreed, said: "A right of forfeiture might arise if the tenant committed such a breach of covenant as to show he was repudiating the contract, or it might arise, in the case of any breach of covenant however trifling, if the parties had agreed that a breach of that covenant should create a forfeiture. This was, of course, only an application of the general law of contract; and, where a breach giving rise to a forfeiture occurred, the lease became voidable, and if the lessor elected to avoid it, it thereupon terminated. Until that election was made, the lease continued to exist and rent was payable under it. Thereafter the tenant was a trespasser from whom mesne profits, and not rent, were recoverable Elliott versus Boynton [[1924] 1
Ch 236],
But an unequivocal act indicating the lessor's intention to exercise his option to treat the lease as at an end was necessary. If, instead of evidencing that intention, the lessor with knowledge of the breach accepted rent accruing due after the date of the breach, he was regarded as having conclusively elected not to exercise his right of forfeiture." Herron, J said in the same case at 547 that where the lessor had a right to forfeiture "the lessor may elect to avoid or not to avoid the lease. He may do this by deed or by word. If with notice of the breach he says he will not avoid the lease and if the circumstances are such as to bind him he thus elects not to avoid the lease. He may equally elect not to avoid the lease if he does an act inconsistent with his so doing, such as distraining for rent or demanding subsequent rent. ... Once it is established that the lessor has knowledge of the existence of a cause of forfeiture and of his right to re-enter he has an election of the doing of an unequivocal act in either direction determines that election forever." 
Mr Charles submits that the sending of demands for rent after the lock- out of August was not an election to treat the lease as subsisting, but rather the exercise by a landlord of its obligations to mitigate its damage. The question, of course, is not quite whether there was an election to treat the lease as subsisting, but I will pass over that technicality. No professional landlord in my experience has accepted or even billed for rent without the strongest disclaimer that the lease was on foot. The Council's property department falls under this head. Again, this argument ignores the fact that
Mr Clark swore in his affidavit that rent was still accruing.

The problem for a tribunal of fact in the instant case is that the landlord's conduct tries to have the best of both worlds. However, the circumstances of the letter given on 5 August contemporaneously with the lock-out and the subsequent demands for rent makes me consider that it is more likely than not that there was no unequivocal act putting an end to the lease and accordingly it still continues.

Had I been of the view that there had been a re-entry it would have been necessary to assess the significance of the demand for rent made after termination. As has been seen, once an unequivocal election has been made to terminate the lease then the lease is gone forever and any waiver cannot restore it. If rent is actually accepted, then the court will readily infer the grant of a new lease; see Arnold versus Mann <case>; [(1957) 99 CLR 462.] However, where rent is tendered but not accepted then the material from which an inference of new tenancy can be drawn is not as strong and I would have declined to have drawn such an inference in the instant case.

Had the lease been terminated the question of relief against forfeiture would have arisen. The Council relied not only on non-payment of rent but on breach of covenant in that the tenant did not, in accordance with the lease, keep the restaurant open at all proper trading times. However, as no notice under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s129.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) was given, this is not a relevant matter when considering whether or not to grant relief against forfeiture: Pioneer Quarries (Sydney) Pty Ltd versus Permanent Trustee
Company of NSW Ltd (1970) 2 BPR 9562.

Another matter that must be noted is that traditionally, asking for relief against forfeiture is an admission that there is a forfeiture: Lock versus Pearce [[1893] 2 Ch 271], 275 and see also Langley versus Foster <case>; [(1909) 10 SR 54],
Mr Charles strongly relied on the key passages set out on those pages.
However, care should be taken with respect to such passages because if one looks at Lock's case there was already a County Court judgment for possession and in Langley's case para 6 of the statement of claim filed in equity admitted the breach of covenant. Now that there are no such pleadings, the court may in a suit for relief against forfeiture find that there is no forfeiture and mould orders accordingly.

Equity gives relief on the basis that the re-entry provisions in a lease were intended by the parties to be security for the payment of the rent and it would be unconscionable for a landlord to use a provision which was designed for security for payment of rent for an ulterior purpose. It would be a fraud on the power.

In the instant case, the tenant has explained his default by his absence in
Bangladesh. There was only just over three months' rent owing when he offered to pay the full amount of the rent on 4 September. He later made a further attempt to pay the rent in court. On those two occasions, the payment has been refused. Although the plaintiff's rent paying record before he went to
Bangladesh was not perfect, there is not the material to find that he is likely to be a continual defaulter. Mr Charles puts that the plaintiff has shown himself to be an unreliable tenant. I do not consider that the facts as elicited in the evidence show that this statement is correct.

Mr Charles also argues against relief against forfeiture being given on discretionary grounds. He points to the jurisdiction, whether statutory or equitable, being discretionary. This is, of course, completely true. Mr
Charles then puts that the position of Ms Tong is unacceptably prejudiced by the late application to the court for relief. He puts that any such application should have been made shortly after September 4 when the rent was refused.

Delay and arrangements made with third parties are a relevant fact to take into consideration when considering relief against forfeiture; see eg
Stanhope versus Haworth [(1886) 3 TLR 34], though this present case does not involve as serious a delay as in Stanhope's case.

It is significant to note that in [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lata1899177/s8.html) to [10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lata1899177/s10.html) of the [Landlord and Tenant Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lata1899177/), if a landlord commences proceedings in ejectment against a tenant whose rent is less than six months in arrears, the action is automatically terminated if the amount of the rent is paid into court and there are similar provisions with respect to relief against forfeiture. This shows a general legislative intention that almost as of course a tenant who is in arrears to that extent may rehabilitate the lease. Apart from that provision, which is not actually applicable in the instant case because the landlord resorted to self help rather than to ejectment proceedings, there are provisions for statutory relief against forfeiture under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s129.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) as well as equity's ordinary jurisdiction to give relief.

I have already pointed out the strange date when Ms Tong applied to the
Council for the tenancy. Ms Tong did not give evidence. When the plaintiff's present solicitor tried to find out what was going on in mid to late October, he was given what I have described earlier as the run around, by being referred from one Council officer to another when all the time Council officers knew or ought to have known of the minute of 15 October. It is very difficult for a landlord to seek discretionary refusal of a tenant's application for relief when it has itself acted in such a singular way. I do not consider that the discretionary factors pointed to, which, of course, I have taken into consideration, affect the result of the case.

The Council says that it could now get, and indeed could get from Ms Tong, a rent of about 60% higher than that which Mr Islam is paying and that it has a statutory duty to get the best rent for its property. This is just a red herring as the Council is already contractually bound to Mr Islam. However, I should note that the statutory duty to act commercially does not justify unconscionable, unfair or Rachmannist conduct by councils who are landlords.

The lease continues on for the reasons I have already set out. It will be necessary, however, for the Council to have the lease restored to the title.
This can be done either by requesting the Registrar General to reverse his previous entry and to register a transfer of the lease or by signing and registering a fresh lease.

I should note that not one word was said by either side during the hearing about the [Retail Leases Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rla1994135/). That Act would seem to apply to leases granted by local government bodies. I can only assume that it does not bear on the present dispute.

The plaintiff is accordingly entitled to succeed. I make orders 2, 3 and 4 in the summons of 5 November 1998. I reserve further consideration in case it should be necessary. If something needs to be done during vacation, and if the
Vacation Judge is satisfied that the matter should be dealt with in vacation, then the Vacation Judge may deal with the matter notwithstanding that it is part-heard before me. The defendant must pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings to date. Further costs reserved.
 * * * 
