

Zizza versus Zizza Matter No 4615/87 [1998] NSWSC 145 (5 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 `PETER ZIZZA versus ANTHONY SAMUEL ZIZZA` ` 4615/87` `5 May 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT: 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings between two brothers as to who owns certain old system land at 199 to 201 Bourke St, Sydney. Were it not for mortgages the legal owner of the properties would be the two brothers as joint tenants.

The parties attended an auction for the properties on 24 April 1979. There were different versions as to how they came to attend the auction. The plaintiff says that there was a discussion and that they agreed to buy the properties as partners. The defendant says that he always intended to buy the properties himself, but, at the auction, the plaintiff said that they should buy the properties together as his wife had monies coming from New Zealand which he could put into the project. The parties were the successful bidders and the properties were knocked down to them for $47,000. They both signed the contract as purchasers on the same day.

The settlement did not take place until 10 August 1979. The evidence shows that the vendor had issued a notice to complete and that on 10 August 1979 the balance of the purchase price was duly paid and conveyance 996/3374 was registered on that day in which the seisin was recorded as being held by the brothers as joint tenants.

The defendant says that he paid all the stamp duty and legal expenses in connection with the purchase. He says that when the vendor issued the notice to complete he had to organise bridging finance to fund the purchase pending the sale of other property he owned. He says that the plaintiff at that time provided no money at all.

The defendant admits that the plaintiff did provide about $15,000 about a month after settlement towards the cost of renovating the properties.

The plaintiff was not completely consistent in his evidence. In his first affidavit the plaintiff says that he paid one half of the purchase price together with adjustments to Bowen and Gerathy, the solicitors who were acting for the brothers and that the parties entered into the contract. He remembered handing a cheque to the defendant to cover half the cost of stamp duty and he said that shortly prior to completion he handed the defendant a cheque for $10,000 which seems to be the cheque he had received from an insurance company for the sale of a boat and he endorsed this cheque over to the defendant.

However in his second affidavit the plaintiff changed his evidence. He says that initially the defendant did pay all the legal costs and stamp duties, but later was reimbursed with half the monies. He denies that any bridging loan was obtained and he denies ever having said that the amount of $10,000 was going to come from sources in New Zealand.

Today the plaintiff in evidence slid between the stories that the insurance cheque for $10,000 had been obtained before settlement to saying that it had been received in 1980, back to saying that it had been received towards the end of 1979.

It seems to me that the initial affidavit of the plaintiff just could not be right, that if there was any insurance cheque it issued after the settlement of the purchase but there is a great deal of doubt in my mind as to whether there ever was any insurance cheque at all.

The plaintiff was vigorously cross examined. He said that he had no documents to support his claim and even said this was because all the events happened so long ago and he had moved home. I find this very hard to accept as an excuse because correspondence suggesting that the claim would be made had been circulating at least at the end of 1985. The present proceedings were commenced in 1987 and it must have been obvious, at least from 1985, that all relevant documents must be preserved and that all statements of cash payments should be noted down so that they could be used at the trial. However, as the plaintiff kept admitting he could not prove his case because he had no documents.

Mr Wales who appeared for the plaintiff, rescued that situation by pointing out that the onus was on the defendant in this case rather than the plaintiff.
This is because there is no doubt at all that the original agreement was that the parties would become joint tenants of the properties at law and they would contribute equally. Accordingly, it is only if something happened subsequently that the position might be different in equity. Thus the onus of establishing what happened subsequently must be on the person who alleges it, namely the defendant.

The defendant gave quite elaborate evidence as to what were the circumstances in which the properties were purchased. He said that at the auction the plaintiff said his wife had just come into an inheritance from New Zealand and that that money would be coming through. He then says that the plaintiff kept telling him the money would be coming until in due course the plaintiff told him that his wife had refused to give the money to him. The plaintiff says that there was never any talk about money coming from New Zealand at all.

After completion, the parties started renovating the properties. They had great difficulty in doing this and part of the problems were that they did not have planning permission and that the businesses that may have been operating on the premises were not at that stage strictly legal.

The properties were mortgaged in 1981 for $50,000. There is no doubt about that fact. There is also no doubt about the fact that of the $50,000 the plaintiff received $22,000. Why that $22,000 was paid out to him at least to some extent is in dispute.

The plaintiff was at that stage purchasing a property in Leet's Vale on the
Hawkesbury River. The settlement of that transaction took place on 21 January about the same time as the mortgage for $50,000. The plaintiff's $22,000 went into purchasing the Hawkesbury River property. So far as the other $28,000 is concerned, the plaintiff's version is that the defendant used it to purchase or to purchase and renovate another property solely in the defendant's name in Rainbow St, Coogee. The defendant says that the $28,000 was used primarily for the renovation work on the properties in Bourke Street.
When accounting for the difference between $22,000 and $25,000, the plaintiff said that the difference must have been the legal costs that were paid to the solicitors.

The properties were not in a letable state at the time when the mortgage was raised and indeed it was probably not until 1982 when the first of the properties was able to be let. It is quite clear that the plaintiff paid nothing in respect of the mortgages on the properties, either this mortgage or a subsequent mortgage for $25,000. The plaintiff said that the reason for this was that the interest was to come from the rents and that at least from after the rents covered the mortgage payments. This may be so but it does not explain why it is that the plaintiff did not contribute to the mortgage from .

There was then a second mortgage raised for $25,000 in March 1992. This was again borrowed on the Bourke Street properties and both parties signed. The $25,000 either went in renovating the Bourke Street properties as the plaintiff would say or on the Rainbow St Coogee property as the defendant says.

The defendant says that what really happened in January 1981 was that the plaintiff made it quite clear that he was fed up with the problems that had been generated by the Bourke Street properties and that he wished to withdraw from the project and furthermore he now had his recreational property on the
Hawkesbury River and needed monies to complete the purchase. The defendant says that the arrangement that the brothers came to was that the plaintiff would be bought out of the Bourke Street properties for $22,000.

I should make it clear that the defendant accepts that the plaintiff did pay about $15,000 towards the renovations. He did this by obtaining a loan from the ANZ Bank for $10,000 and by making a couple of other payments by cheque.
The plaintiff says that there was more money paid than that. He says that the $10,000 cheque from the insurance company was endorsed to the defendant, that both the defendant and the plaintiff were working in a cash economy and the plaintiff would from time to time pay over cash to the defendant.

The defendant has produced his bank statements from 1978 onwards and there is little that one can find in those which can support anything that the plaintiff said about the $10,000 endorsed cheque. The defendant has also provided details of the Bowen and Gerathy ledger cards as to the financial transactions that went through their books. Of course, neither of these is necessarily conclusive because they do not represent the whole picture. On the other hand the plaintiff has virtually no documents that can support his claim other than three books of cheque butts between 1980 and 1984 and the cheque book stubs in March 1980.

The plaintiff took no interest in the projects at least after 1982 until towards the end of 1985. He did however work from time to time on some renovations. The defendant says that he was paid cash of $200 per week when he did this. The plaintiff denies any such payment. In November 1985, the plaintiff had his solicitor write to the defendant's solicitor and demand that money be paid for his equity. The letter says, amongst other things, that the plaintiff told his solicitors that the defendant had offered him $30,000 to purchase his share in the properties and the plaintiff's solicitors were now putting a counter offer of $90,000. If there was no settlement then the plaintiff's solicitors said that they would put in a receiver. There does not appear to be any actual answer to that letter in the file. There certainly does not appear to be any denial. The defendant in the witness box said that he could see how the plaintiff might consider that he was badly done by in being paid out at $22,000 and might have a moral claim for more and he was prepared to listen. Mr Wales says that it is hard to fit in with the correspondence between the solicitors because the solicitors were negotiating on the basis that there would be a valuation which would be attributed on a fifty-fifty basis.

Mr A Young for the defendant says that there are various oddities about the plaintiff's case. Why does the plaintiff pay cash early on of which there is absolutely no record and then in 1980 start paying by cheque? Why did he make no protest at all between 1982 and 1985? Why did the defendant service the loans in that period and in due course pay off the $25,000 mortgage without asking the plaintiff for any contribution if he did not believe that he had paid out his brother in 1981? 
Mr Wales points to other matters including the non- reaction by the defendant to the plaintiff's allegations and his willingness to pay the plaintiff even more money in 1985 which was inconsistent with the plaintiff having been paid out in 1981. He emphasizes that the defendant has the onus and even though there are some problems with the evidence on either side, the defendant has not established his case. Indeed he goes further and says that even if there is no problem with the onus the plaintiff would have established the contrary case.

In my view on the balance of probabilities, the defendant's case is the stronger. The defendant's version seems to me to dovetail in more exactly with all the facts. In particular it seems to me that the plaintiff took out $22,000 rather than $25,000 and the balance of the first mortgage more likely than not mainly going into the Bourke Street properties is a significant factor. Another very significant factor is that the defendant paid the interest on the $50,000 mortgage without recourse to the plaintiff until the first property became rent producing. Again the first affidavit of the plaintiff could not be correct. It seems to suggest that he told his solicitors a very vague tale and then was prepared to swear that in an affidavit. I do not accept the $10,000 cheque from the insurance company which
I think would be picked up somewhere as a cheque if it had occurred. The plaintiff's sliding of his evidence about that cheque and its date also told against him. These factors, given their appropriate weight, lead me to the view that it is more likely than not that the defendant's version is correct.

Accordingly, the plaintiff's claim must be dismissed and I make declaration 1 in the cross claim. I order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings. I give liberty to apply with respect to any consequential orders that need to be made. The exhibits may be returned after twenty eight days.
 * * * 
