

Regina versus Websdale Matter No 60204/97 [1997] NSWSC 261 (15 July 1997) 
Regina versus Geoff Ian WEBSDALE /97 July 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Meagher JA, Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from Supreme Court (Studdert J) 
FILE NO: 60204/97 
DELIVERED: Tuesday 15 July 1997 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday 15 July 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus GEOFF IAN WEBSDALE 
JUDGMENT OF: Gleeson CJ, Meagher JA, Grove J 
COUNSEL 
APPELLANT: In person 
RESPONDENT: M. Latham 
SOLICITORS 
APPELLANT: - 
RESPONDENT: S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Application for leave to appeal refused. 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - NOTICE OF ABANDONMENT OF APPEAL GIVEN - PROPOSED
GROUNDS OF APPEAL EXAMINED - NO MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE EVIDENT - MURDER (2
COUNTS) AND OTHER OFFENCES - FOUR VICTIMS - NO DEFECT IN CROWN CASE OR ITS
PRESENTATION - DEFENCE APPROPRIATELY CONDUCTED ON JUSTICIABLE ISSUES -
INTERVENTION DECLINED 
NO OF PAGES: 12 
REGINA versus GEOFF IAN WEBSDALE 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: Geoffrey Ian Websdale is applying for leave to appeal against convictions on two counts of murder, a count of wounding with intent to murder and a count of maliciously wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm, having previously given notice of abandonment of appeal against those convictions. Written submissions lodged by the appellant (as I shall refer to the applicant) reveal that legal advice was taken prior to the filing of that notice of abandonment. There has been no hearing of the appeal on the merits and the Court retains jurisdiction to vacate its order dismissing the appeal if that be necessary to avoid miscarriage of justice: R versus Cartwright [1989 17 NSWLR 243] @ 246. 
The offences occurred on 7 November 1989 at a property Oolambeyan Station which is located some 21 kilometres from Carrathool. Three of the victims (Karen Deacon, Deborah Astill and Daryl Lamb) were part of a shearing team in which the appellant worked as an apprentice. All relevant persons had been to the Carrathool Hotel during the afternoon where they watched the running of the Melbourne Cup. The two female victims shared quarters on the property to which the party had returned at about 7.30 pm accompanied by the fourth victim (Ian Hutchinson). Later in the evening the appellant, having armed himself, kicked open the door of the women's quarters and observed them on their respective beds in each case accompanied by one of the males. The appellant commenced firing his weapon. Karen Deacon was found lying on her bed after being fatally shot. Deborah Astill was wounded in the arm but was able to flee from the room but the appellant discharged a number of shots at her from a window, one of which wounded her in the back. The non member of the shearing team (Mr Hutchinson) was wounded whilst in the bedroom but climbed out the window. There was evidence of his being shot twice, once when upright and on the other occasion in a crouched position according to forensic pathology evidence, and he died from loss of blood. Daryl Lamb was shot twice and fell from the bed where he was found alive but rendered paraplegic. Seven discharged .30 calibre cartridge cases were found in the room and a further three near the body of Mr Hutchinson outside the window.

The appellant left the station in a utility belonging to Deborah Astill. He encountered some men by the Murrumbidgee River and sold them firearms which he still had with him for a small amount of money. Shortly afterwards he ran out of petrol and a motorist gave him a lift to Griffith. The following morning he was spoken to by police when he was sitting in the centre parking bay area of the main street of that town. He was interviewed by police and signed an inculpatory record of interview. That record was not challenged at trial. The appellant was then represented by senior counsel. He appears for himself in this application.

I have already recorded the obstacle faced by the appellant in connection with the notice of abandonment but it is convenient to examine the question of possible miscarriage in the light of the grounds of appeal which he now advances and the arguments in support of them. Although Studdert J the presiding judge gave appropriate directions concerning proof of the elements of murder there was no challenge of any significance to the objective facts and setting to one side the inference that was open to a jury from the circumstances of the repeated discharge of the weapon, the issue of intent on some charges was powerfully supported from the Crown's point of view by explicit admissions in the police interview. The appellant raised the issue of provocation in relation to the count of murdering Karen Deacon. She and the appellant were associated in the shearing team and some earlier alleged conduct of her towards him was explored. The issue of provocation was also left the jury in relation to the count of murdering Ian Hutchinson and was left on the basis of a claim by the appellant that he was induced to kill by the conduct of Hutchinson in being on the bed in a sexually compromising situation when the appellant entered. On both counts the appellant relied upon a defence of diminished responsibility. The issue of provocation and the defence of diminished responsibility have no application to the counts charging wounding of the victims who survived and directions entirely appropriate to those counts were included in the trial judge's charge to the jury.

The appellant has submitted numbered appeal points which I can conveniently treat as grounds of appeal and use coordinating numbers for reference. Grounds , 2 and 3 are each headed "fresh evidence". Ground 1 is based upon an asserted discovery that the solicitor acting for the appellant at trial had a conflict of interest and construction of a conclusion from that circumstance that he did not adequately serve the appellant's interests. The discovery is the claimed circumstance that one of the victims, the solicitor and his firm had addresses in the same street of Temora. It is also claimed that the solicitor's firm had some unidentified dealings with the victim. It is unnecessary to investigate whether these assertions are based upon fact as, even if true, they could not possibly give rise to the conclusion which the appellant seeks to draw. The second and third grounds refer to fresh evidence relating to psychological assessments and sessions with the appellant and Ms
Diana Hutchison and Ms Sally Thomason. Both of the named persons are psychologists who at the time were engaged by the Department of Corrective
Services. The evidence at trial included testimony from two psychiatrists called on behalf of the appellant, Dr Jolly and Dr Lucire, each of whom was qualified to express psychiatric opinion and could and did draw upon psychological assessments to assist in their respective diagnoses. A psychologist Ms Walker was also called on behalf of the appellant.

At the hearing of the appeal the appellant produced copies of material sent to the solicitor before trial. A letter referred to psychiatrists and psychologists whom the appellant had apparently seen. Dr Lucire is one of them. The appellant also suggested the name of a specialist said to be a "Dr
Barkley" of whom he had heard. Nothing in this material is demonstrative of any failure of the solicitor to competently prepare the case. Nor, I add, is any miscarriage of the discretion of senior counsel in selection of witnesses to be called in any way manifest.

The material now suggested to be relevant by the appellant was available and cannot fit the category of fresh evidence but in any event psychological assessment was utilized in the fashion that I have mentioned.

Grounds 4, 5 and 6 are headed "objection to evidence". None of the matters now agitated was the subject of objection at trial. Detective Sergeant Moore said that he had some knowledge of the M1 carbine rifle which he understood to be semi-automatic. It is implicit in the appellant's claims that this was, as indeed was the fact, a relevant weapon. The appellant now wishes to contend that the weapon is capable of being converted to full automatic. Therefore it is said that it is importance that a jury be provided with evidence as to the operation of the weapon. It is not clear what advantage the appellant perceives in demonstrating this circumstance, if it be capable of demonstration and I would be prepared to assume for present purposes that it is. Nevertheless a jury would still be placed in the position of needing to assess the applicant's statements about the circumstances in which he directed fire at all four victims. Detective Sgt Moore did not claim expertise in the weapon but said that he had some knowledge and it is not perceptible that the appellant suffered any potential prejudice even if the understanding that it was semi-automatic was wrong.

The 5th ground seeks to challenge the evidence of Dr Den-Houting concerning his conclusion that the pathway of one of the bullets in the body of Mr
Hutchinson indicated that he was crouched down at the time he was shot. This evidence was not challenged at trial and the appellant now wishes to complain that counsel did not do so. The basis upon which this ought to have been done is not clear in that the appellant does not suggest that he is in possession of or can access any contradictory opinion but rather he states that he has himself formed an opinion derived from the description of the traced projectile path in the testimony.

The 6th ground re-agitates objection to photographs admitted into evidence after ruling by the trial judge. As is frequently the case in homicide trials the prosecution was in possession of a considerable volume of photographs and the trial judge examined those proposed to be tendered and gave his ruling in respect to each of them. In a separate judgment he gave reasons for admitting those to which the appellant now wishes to object again but no error in his
Honour's ruling or exercise of discretion has been demonstrated.

The 7th ground complains of the testimony given by Dr William Barclay. Dr
Barclay was qualified by the Crown for the purpose of giving evidence concerning a defence of diminished responsibility. The appellant complains that he personally has only seen Dr Barclay's report in recent months. More relevantly Dr Barclay's report was available to the expert witnesses who were called on his behalf and there is no suggestion that the appellant sought access to that report at the time of trial or that he was denied such access.
I do not suggest that even if that had happened this would be a ground for intervention and I mention the matter only to demonstrate the untenability of the appellant's proposition. Also untenable is his objection to Dr Barclay's use of the language of <case> of the Crimes Act because he is a psychiatrist and not a lawyer.

Ground 8 relates to a response by counsel to the presiding judge which the appellant describes as being made whilst "waiting for the jury to come back during recess". It can be noted that the response by counsel is on the appellant's own description consistent with the instructions he gave him but the assertion is now made that the appellant should elaborate upon the matter.
It is also asserted that counsel was "in breach of his fiduciary duty of confidentiality". Whatever the appellant might seek to convey by that expression there was no impropriety in the response given by counsel to the judge's enquiry in accordance with instructions received.

The 9th ground is headed "unreasonable verdict". This ground is directed to the count of wounding with intent to murder which was the 5th count in the indictment. The reference by the appellant to the 3rd count no doubt flows from its sequence in the convictions. The matters sought to be raised by the appellant do no more than challenge the jury's assessment. The jury were correctly directed about the issues upon which they should deliberate and there is no substance in the contention now advanced by the appellant.

The 10th ground seeks to canvass a ruling given by the trial judge concerning objection to some of the testimony of Ms Walker (previously mentioned as a psychologist) called in the defence case. The submissions contain some misconceived references to the writ of mandamus. This is now not pressed but a comment can apply to a matter lately raised. The gravamen of the complaint was, I gather, that the learned presiding judge declined to permit a qualified psychologist to express a psychiatric diagnostic opinion. That ruling was in my view entirely consistent with the evidence of the qualifications and expertise of the witness.

The 11th ground explores the purported significance of the appellant's memory loss. In this context it is sufficient to direct attention to what the appellant himself said in part of his unsworn statement to the jury. He included: "Seven hours before the shooting, the initial shooting it is just totally blank. It might be very hard to believe but from about half past 3 in the afternoon when we were down at the river having drinks on that day of the
Melbourne Cup, it just suddenly everything is blank, right up until the incident. I just can't remember a thing so I don't really know what triggered me off to do what I have done." 
There is no need to emphasize the inclusion in that statement of the words "up until the incident". The descriptions of the shootings given to police were detailed and entirely consistent with the objective findings of investigators.
It is acknowledged that the appellant also told the jury that he was trying to reconstruct matters for the police but it was for them to assess what part if any was reconstruction or whether it was in fact as purported a drawing upon memory.

The 12th ground asserted that Studdert J erred in not directing the jury on automatism. This was abandoned by the appellant who stated that further research had persuaded him that this was inappropriate. He did, however, produce two reports by the prison psychologist Miss Hutchinson to the
Classification Committee in 1990 (just after trial) and to the Serious
Offenders Review Board in 1992. It appears that from the history of memory gap given to her by the appellant she was moved to comment "He appears to have been rather dissociated at the time." The appellant now wishes his mental state to be examined from that point of view. As already observed psychiatric assessment is not an expertise of psychologists and it is significant that no one of the three psychiatrists suggested that the appellant may not have been responsible for his acts because he was in a dissociative state. The reopening of the trial to explore the theory now advanced is not justifiable.

None of the matters now raised by the appellant is sustainable. Even less has he demonstrated that any one of them or any combination of them has been productive of miscarriage of justice. Whilst the grounds have been examined for the purpose of ensuring that there was no miscarriage, I am of opinion that the appellant has failed to demonstrate that the notice of abandonment should be set aside. I propose that application for leave to appeal be refused.

GLEESON CJ: I agree. 
MEAGHER JA: So do I. 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Grove J. * * * 
