

Pedler versus Richardson; Richardson versus Gill Matter Nos 1860/97 [1997] NSWSC 568 (20 November 1997) ` 
Glenn Anthony Pedler versus Robyn Anne Richardson` ` 1860/97` `Robyn Anne Richardson versus David Edward Gill` ` 2575/97` `20 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `  /97 GLENN ANTHONY PEDLER V ROBYN ANNE RICHARDSON` `2575/97 ROBYN ANNE RICHARDSON V DAVID EDWARD GILL` `  
JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: Various matters have been raised when short minutes were brought in to carry out the judgments of 16 October 1997. 
I gave separate judgments on the same day, one of the reasons for that course concerns the appeal process. If there is to be an appeal from my decision in /97, which were proceedings cross-vested from the Family Court, I took the view that <case> of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/joca427/), 1987 of the
Commonwealth meant that as part of the decision involved a matter arising under the Family Law Act 1982 , 1975 the appeal would go to the Full
Family Court. In proceedings 1860/97, being a purely State matter, the appeal would go to the Court of Appeal.

The second reason is that one only makes a declaration as to the ultimate fact, not as to facts along the way.

I am not determining the matter of appeal process as a matter of law. I am just indicating that that is the basis for giving two separate judgments and what Mr Shaw of counsel for Mr Gill put this morning seems to confirm that.
The proposed appeal in 2575/97 is on the basis that there was a mistrial, it being alleged that it was not competent for a State Court to which a Family
Court matter has been transferred under the Cross-Vesting Act to decline to make an order under <case> of the Family Law Act merely because it could make a far more efficacious order under State Law. My decision was to the effect that when a Family Court matter is transferred to the State Court, the
State Court can exercise all its powers, whether the powers of the transferring Court or its own, and it does not have to be troubled by what is a "matrimonial cause" when it has both arrows in its quiver. Mr Shaw wishes to challenge that and probably the question is a matter arising under the
Family Law Act, which is a scheduled Act under <case> of the Cross-Vesting
Act.

The significance of all this is that Mr Shaw asks for a stay. The Court usually grants a stay, at least for a short period of time, so that the right to appeal is not nugatory. If there is an appeal to the Court of Appeal, my usual practice has been to grant a stay for a short period of time so that the
Court of Appeal can consider whether it will expedite the appeal because that is a matter which bears on the question as to how long the stay will be. The procedure, I am told, in the Full Family Court is that appeals come on far more quickly, but even so, it is a matter of perhaps four to six months before this appeal would be heard. I believe that it would still be appropriate to grant a stay until the first week of the new term on the basis that there is an injunction in accordance with para 1.3 of the notice of motion that Mr Gill filed in court this morning on the conditions set out in paras 1.1 and 1.2 of the notice of motion. On that basis I will stay the orders that are to be made in 2575/97 up to and including 6 February 1998.

The only other matter in 2575/97 is whether there should be indemnity costs. I cannot see any basis for such an order.

Dealing with the short minutes filed for Ms Richardson in 2575/97, I have amended order 1 to read: "judgment in favour of the Plaintiff in the sum of $176,271" being $165,000 plus $11,271 interest. I make orders 2 and 3 in the short minutes. I make order 4 as amended, and order 5, reserving further consideration of the question as to whether there should be any
Bullock-type order in respect of the costs which Ms Richardson might have to pay in the first suit.

In 1860/97 various other matters arise. The first order in the proposed short minutes is that the matter be transferred to the Probate Division. I think that that is technically correct, but it will just add to expense so I will just cross that out. Mr Skiller for Ms Richardson asks for discrete declarations as to when the will was destroyed. I decline to do this for two reasons. First, it is not clear on the evidence when that occurred. However, this does not matter very much as secondly, if on 5 July 1996, when the Deed of Arrangement was entered into, Ms Richardson knew there was a valid will, that itself would be fraud. If she had already destroyed it by that date, that would still be fraud and the only other possibility, that is, that she discovered the will after 5 July, is not one that is in accordance with the judgment I have already given. So in 1860/97 I make orders 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 as in the short minutes.

Mr Hallen SC for Mr Pedler asks that an administration bond be dispensed with.
I will refer that matter to the Registrar. I make orders 9 and 10 in the short minutes.

Order 11 seeks an order that Ms Richardson vacate the property at Hunters Hill within 21 days from the making of these orders. Mr Hallen SC asked for that order in the initiating process. However, this is really an action in ejectment in which his client has to prove that as at the date of the commencement of the proceedings he had a better title than Ms Richardson. He would have had a good title had it not been for the fraud but that fact in an ejectment action is legally irrelevant. Accordingly, Mr Pedler cannot to my mind, for technical reasons, sue in ejectment.

Another basis for ordering Ms Richardson vacate possession would be because of the due administration of the estate. However, even here Mr Pedler would first have to have title and then make a demand. Apart from that, Ms Richardson intends to file an application to extend the time for making a claim under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/),. Mr Hallen
SC says that she has got no chance of success but I would not be quite so pessimistic about it. I think she should be given an opportunity to make that application so long as it is made before the end of term. Accordingly, I decline to make order 11 at this stage.

Order 12 seeks judgment for Mr Pedler for $319,626.78, being the moneys received by Ms Richardson whilst she was adminstratrix. However, again Mr
Pedler's title at this stage is not sufficient for the court to give judgment for a money sum and some of the amounts only became payable after the proceedings were commenced. A more substantial reason is that the only remedy that Mr Pedler has against Ms Richardson is for an account and one cannot have part of an account, one can only have one account once and for all, and that making a judgment for a money sum at this stage might preclude a proper accounting. So I decline to make order 12.

Order 13 is premature at this stage because Mr Pedler is not entitled to the assets because he has not yet got a grant.

Orders 14 and 15, which require an accounting and transfer of assets, are also premature. However, some orders should be made to preserve the assets pending the formal grant by the Registrar in Probate. It does not seem to me that it is sufficient to appoint a receiver because a receiver does not have possession of the assets. He only has the power to administer them.
Accordingly, some form of limited grant should be made and the appropriate form of limited grant is a grant commonly described as the grant of administration ad colligenda bona defuncti, that is, a grant limited to the collection of assets which might otherwise perish. I direct the grant of administration to Mr Pedler of the estate of Roger Kevin Pedler ad colligenda bona defuncti, the grant to last up until 6 February 1998 or until a grant of administration cta is made to him.

The remaining matter is a request that Ms Richardson pay Mr Pedler's costs on an indemnity basis. The reason for this request is, Mr Hallen SC says, that the conduct of Ms Richardson was so criminal and reprehensible and yet she continually maintained denials and so postponed Mr Pedler getting the protection he required.

I do not, with respect, consider that the conduct which is complained of in the suit is by itself a sufficient reason to get indemnity costs; nor is the fact that Ms Richardson may have told lies during the hearing. Certainly there are cases where proceedings have been maintained which have no real prospect of success such as Fountain Selected Meats (Sales) Pty Limited v
International Produce Merchants Pty Limited <case>; [(1988) 81 ALR 397], where such an order has been made. However, where a defendant is accused of some dastardly matter, which she denies and she fights the case without undue delay or prevarication, it does not seem to me that the mere fact that the verdict goes against her is sufficient to trigger my discretion to order indemnity costs. Accordingly, I will just cross out the words in order 16 "on an indemnity basis". Accordingly, the Court makes orders to 7, 8 as amended, 9 and 10, 16 as amended and 17 in the short minutes of order which I have initialled, dated and placed with the papers and, in addition, makes the order for limited administration referred to in these reasons.

I have reserved further consideration by order 17. What I have in mind is that when the Registrar in Probate makes the proper grant, Mr Pedler would probably give a notice to Ms Richardson about possession of the property and that he would also ask her for an accounting. Should she not comply with proper and legal requests, then it will be open to Mr Pedler to file a notice of motion in this suit for consequential orders. I should note that my present feeling, so far as possession is concerned, is that as Ms Richardson has been in possession for some time and noting the matters in the draft affidavit bearing date 20 November 1997, which I will leave in file 2575/97, I would not think that I would make an order for possession to take effect before 6 February next year but it may very well be that if an application is made to me by motion in the new term, I would have to balance the chances of success of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) application, the amount of occupation fee Ms Richardson was prepared to pay and the urgency in realizing and protecting the estate assets in deciding whether Ms
Richardson's possession should continue.
 * * * 
