

Regina versus Webster Matter No Cca 60407/96 [1997] NSWSC 276 (29 July 1997) ` 
Regina versus Daniel James Webster` ` 60407/96` `29 July 1997` `Grove J, McInerney J, James J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal` /96 REGINA versus DANIEL JAMES WEBSTER 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: This application for leave to appeal against sentence brought by Daniel James Webster (who I will refer to as Mr Webster or the applicant) raises issues under the Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act, which I will refer to as "the Act". Mr Webster has appeared in person on the hearing of the application. However, Mr Game of senior counsel, who was appearing in another matter in the Court's list, appeared as an amicus curiae and the court is indebted to Mr Game for his assistance. Mr Strickland of counsel appeared for the Commissioner of Corrective Services as one respondent to the application and the Crown Advocate appeared for the Crown as another respondent. 
In order to understand the issues which arise, it is necessary to refer to some of the background facts. On October 1995 the applicant came before his Honour Judge Ford QC in the
District Court. On that day the applicant pleaded guilty before Judge Ford to two charges of breaking, entering and stealing which had been committed on 28 and 29 November 1994. The applicant asked Judge Ford to take into account in sentencing the applicant a number of other offences, consisting of three offences of breaking, entering and stealing, one offence of breaking and entering with intent, one offence of assaulting a police officer and one offence of resisting arrest. On each of the charges of breaking, entering and stealing to which the applicant had pleaded guilty, Judge Ford imposed a sentence of imprisonment for 12 months and ordered that it be served by way of periodic detention commencing on 27 October 1995. In sentencing the applicant
Judge Ford took into account the further offences.

On 9 May 1996 an application by the Commissioner of Corrective Services for an order under <case> of the Act cancelling the periodic detention order made by
Judge Ford, came before his Honour Judge Flannery. The Commissioner was legally represented before Judge Flannery; however, there was no appearance by or for Mr Webster and the application was heard ex parte. Evidence was given in support of the Commissioner's application by a prison officer who was stationed at the Malabar Periodic Detention Centre. A number of documents were tendered by the Commissioner's representative and admitted into evidence.
These documents included a computer print-out of Mr Webster's periodic detention record as a periodic detention detainee, showing that he had served periods of periodic detention, that he had not attended at the periodic detention centre after 26 April 1996, that he had been absent for a total of periods, that he had incurred two penalty periods pursuant to <case> of the
Act and that the total number of periods remaining to be served was 41. The prison officer called on behalf of the Commissioner gave evidence that Mr
Webster had telephoned the periodic detention centre to say that he was ill but he had not provided any documentary evidence of illness. She gave evidence that the applicant had not been granted leave of absence under <case> of the Act or an exemption from an extension of the sentence pursuant to section 21 A of the Act.

Judge Flannery queried whether the address, Room 7, 66 Josephine Street,
Riverwood, to which notices, including notice of the application for cancellation of the periodic detention order, had been sent, was the right address. His Honour was referred to clause 46 of the Periodic Detention of
Prisoners Regulations 1995. The prison officer gave evidence that, although the applicant's address according to the warrant of commitment issued upon the making of the order for periodic detention was 407 Catherine Fields Road,
Catherine Fields, and the applicant had given evidence before Judge Ford on 14
October 1995 that that was his address, the applicant had subsequently notified that as from 27 October 1995 his address was Room 7, 66 Josephine
Street, Riverwood and no notification of any further change of address had been received from the applicant.

The Commissioner's representative had prepared what could be described as short minutes of orders, one of which provided for the setting of a minimum term and an additional term pursuant to <case> of the Act. His Honour Judge
Flannery said in his remarks:- "I have a discretion under <case> of the Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act to fix a minimum and additional term. However his (that is the applicant's) absence has this result, as far as I am concerned, that there is no material on which I could satisfactorily or at all exercise such a discretion and there is no evidence in support of such an exercise".

His Honour then said:- "Accordingly, I make the following orders: 
Periodic detention order cancelled 
Detainee to serve the unexpired portion of periodic detention order by way of full-time imprisonment for a period of forty-one weeks 
Warrant to issue for apprehension and detention 
A notice under clause 48 of the Regulation to be sent to the Registrar of the Court." 
On 9 June 1996 the warrant ordered to be issued by Judge Flannery for the apprehension and detention of the applicant was executed and accordingly the deemed term of imprisonment under <case> of the Act commenced from that date (see <case>(c)(ii)). On 4 July 1996 the applicant was convicted of a traffic offence in the Sutherland Local Court and sentenced to a fixed term of imprisonment of three months.

On 16 July 1996 the applicant lodged a Notice of Appeal to this Court, which was completed by himself. On the face of it, the Notice of Appeal is notice of an application for leave to appeal from the cancellation of the periodic detention order by Judge Flannery. The grounds of appeal given in the notice were:- "(1) I have medical reasons for each absence from periodic detention; 
I was not notified of the application to cancel periodic detention even though the Periodic Detention Centre knew my new address." 
The notice was not lodged within 28 days of Judge Flannery's order cancelling the order for periodic detention but as the delay in lodging the notice was not great and the applicant was not taken into custody until 9 June 1996, I do not consider that the delay should be held against the applicant and it was indicated in the course of argument that the Court would grant any necessary extension of time.

On 30 July 1996 the applicant obtained bail both in respect to his application for leave to appeal and his sentence for the traffic offence. He was released on bail on 2 August 1996. Between 9 June 1996 and 2 August 1996 the applicant served about eight weeks of full-time custody.

There have been a number of decisions of this Court on the effect of the provisions of pt 4 of the Act, which deals with the cancellation of orders for periodic detention. These decisions include R versus Sommerville [(1995) 77
ACrimR 122]; R versus Mikas [(1996) 85 ACrimR 34]; Wilson v Department of Corrective Services (unreported 12/2/97); R versus Biddle (unreported 6/3/97); R versus Lloyd (unreported 17/6/97). It has been held that the Court of Criminal Appeal has no jurisdiction to hear an appeal from a decision of a District Court Judge cancelling an order for periodic detention.
Such a decision is not a "sentence" within section 5(1)(c) of the Criminal
Appeal Act. (See R versus Sommerville, Wilson versus Department of Corrective
Services).

However, it has been held that the Court of Criminal Appeal does have jurisdiction to hear an appeal from a decision of a District Court Judge to direct, or not to direct, under section 27(4) of the Act, that the unexpired portion of the sentence be taken to consist of a minimum term and an additional term and from the lengths of any minimum term or additional term set(R versus Mikas). The Court of Criminal Appeal also has jurisdiction to hear an appeal from the original sentence which was ordered to be served by way of periodic detention.

As I have already stated, the notice lodged with this Court, as completed by the applicant himself, is expressed as being an application for leave to appeal from the decision of Judge Flannery cancelling the order previously made by Judge Ford that the sentence imposed by Judge Ford be served by way of periodic detention. I have already referred to the cases which clearly establish that no appeal lies to this Court from the decision of Judge
Flannery cancelling the order for periodic detention.

Proceedings for the administrative review of a decision cancelling an order for periodic detention can be brought to the Court of Appeal, as distinct from the Court of Criminal Appeal, and the grounds stated by the applicant in the notice might be grounds for proceeding for the administrative review of Judge
Flannery's order. However, we were informed by Mr Game as amicus curiae that after speaking to the applicant he had formed the opinion that there were no grounds for the taking of proceedings in the Court of Appeal for the administrative review of the order made by Judge Flannery. In any event, the utility of adopting such a course in this particular case would be slight, because even if Mr Webster was able to establish grounds for the administrative review of Judge Flannery's decision (as to which I express no opinion) Mr Webster was on 4 July 1996 convicted of another offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment for more than one month, thus bringing into operation <case> of the Act.

As I have already stated, an appeal does lie to the Court of Criminal Appeal from a decision under <case> of the Act as to whether the unexpired portion of the sentence of imprisonment to which the order for periodic detention applied, which, upon the cancellation of the order for periodic detention is to be deemed to be a separate term of imprisonment, is to be taken to consist of a minimum term and an additional term.

In this particular case Judge Flannery adverted in his remarks to the discretion conferred on him by <case> of the Act. The precise effect of what his Honour said in his Honour's remarks has been the subject of argument before the Court. It was suggested that his Honour, although adverting to the discretion under section 27(4), had failed to exercise the discretion. I have, however, concluded that the proper reading of his Honour's remarks is that his
Honour, after adverting to the discretion, proceeded to exercise it but in the exercise of the discretion decided, on such material as there was before him, that he should not direct that a minimum term and an additional term be set.

I have accordingly reached these conclusions; that no appeal lies to this
Court from the decision of his Honour Judge Flannery cancelling the order for periodic detention made by his Honour Judge Ford and that there was no failure by his Honour Judge Flannery to exercise the discretion conferred on his
Honour by section 27(4) of the Act and that there is no ground on which the way in which his Honour exercised his discretion can be challenged. It accordingly follows in my opinion that this Court should refuse leave to appeal. I would propose that the following orders be made: Application for extension of time granted; application for leave to appeal refused; the applicant to be returned to custody to serve the unexpired portion of the sentence as ordered by his Honour Judge Flannery.
 
GROVE J: I agree.
 
MCINERNEY J: I agree likewise.
 
JAMES J: It will be obvious to the parties that I had not had the opportunity of fully considering the formal orders that should be made. The
Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the purported appeal against the cancellation of the periodic detention order and perhaps that is how the application should be regarded in its entirety. The Court would have jurisdiction to entertain an appeal against a non-exercise of the discretion under 27(4), so it seems to me, and in relation to that part, what the Court is really doing is saying that no ground of appeal has been made out.

GROVE J: The conclusion, as I understand the judgment in which I agree, is that what his Honour Judge Flannery did was recognise that he had a discretion, but exercise it contrary to the interests of the applicant. 
JAMES J: That is certainly my intent. 
GROVE J: The orders of the Court are that the application for extension of time is granted, the application for leave to appeal is refused, the applicant is to be returned to custody to serve the unexpired portion of sentence as ordered by his Honour Judge Flannery. 
Mr Webster, you have no doubt heard what has been said. In relation to time that you have served afterwards, credit will be worked out and you will be told what is involved but you will be taken back into custody for somewhere between 33 and 41 weeks and I understand that from what Mr Strickland, who appears for the Commission has said, it is likely to be the lesser of those two figures.
 oOo * * * 
