

Ivymere Pty Ltd (Receiver and Manager Appointed) versus Cooloombla Pty Ltd (No ) Matter No 3315/97 [1997] NSWSC 329 (25 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 `

IVYMERE PTY LTD (RECEIVER & MANAGER APPOINTED) versus COOLOOMBLA PTY LTD (NO )` `3315/97` `25 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By the amended summons in these proceedings, the second plaintiff, who is the first mortgagee of land and premises at Camden known as "Cooloombla", seeks possession from the defendant, who is the second mortgagee. 
There is virtually no contest as to the following facts:
The registered proprietor, the first plaintiff, gave a mortgage to the second plaintiff, which is a first mortgage.
The registered proprietor is in default over that mortgage.
The mortgage is for, at least, $2.4m.
The second mortgagee, the defendant, is owed approximately $365,000.
There is also a further loan by the second plaintiff to the mortgagor.
There is probably an unregistered third mortgage.

The second mortgagee took possession pursuant to an order of Smart J made in proceedings between the mortgagor and itself. Execution took place on 20 May
The Receiver for the mortgagor asked the second mortgagee for possession, which was refused and rightly so. However, the first mortgagee, without making any formal demand, has made it known that it requires possession, the most recent manifestation of that being the application on 19
August 1997 to seek orders in its favour for possession contained in the notice of motion filed in court that day. The second mortgagee remains in possession and declines to give up possession.

The first mortgagee purported to issue a notice under s.57(2)(b)of the [Real
Property Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) against the mortgagor. Mr Mendel, for the second mortgagee, has attacked the validity of the notice. As such a notice is not a pre-requisite for proceedings in ejectment (Long Leys Co Pty Ltd versus Silkdale Pty Ltd (1991) 5 BPR 11512), I need not deal with that argument.

After some debate about the matter, the Court of Appeal held in Zanzoul v
Westpac Banking Group (1995) 6 BPR 14142, that a second mortgagee had a right to obtain possession because it was a "mortgagee" within the meaning of [s.60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s60.html) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). However, it is clear that that right is not as strong as the right of the first mortgagee. Ordinarily, the second mortgagee, before taking possession, at least liaises with the first mortgagee so that there can be an approach against the common name. Doubtless for commercial reasons, that does not seem to have occurred in the instant case. However, when there is a test between the second mortgagee and the first mortgagee, the latter has the better right to possession. See, for instance, Reliance Finance Corporation Pty Ltd v
Allwin Walsh & Ward [[1964-5] NSWR 970.] 
The only matter raised against this, apart from the reliance on a supposedly invalid [s.57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice was that the first mortgagee was estopped because of its conduct and had waived its rights in favour of the second mortgagee. Mr Mendel went through the history of the matter, especially the history of the matter during and attempted to demonstrate that, by the course of proceedings, the first mortgagee had stood by and allowed the second mortgagee to suffer detriment by taking the proceedings against the mortgagor and by going to the expense of taking possession and of arranging with real estate agents to sell the property.

The conduct does not, to my mind, amount to an estoppel or a waiver. The alleged detriment has not been shown to be caused by the first mortgagee's conduct. Rather, it would appear to be a commercially realistic attempt by a second mortgagee, who might otherwise get nothing, to have the property marketed to its best advantage.

Accordingly, there is no reason why the ordinary result should not follow and that is that the first mortgagee be held entitled to possession.

Mr Mendel then asks that possession be postponed to 17 September 1997. The reason for that appears to be so that some sale can be put into effect. That does not seem to me, at least in the case of a second mortgagee, to be sufficient. If the sale is likely to be the best one that can be arranged, then one would have thought that the first mortgagee would take advantage of it in any event.

There is no hardship, as Mr Robinson for the plaintiffs, points out as opposed to a situation where the mortgagor is in possession, to make the court postpone the order. The pre-requisites to the issue of a writ of possession have been proved. Accordingly, there should be orders 14 and 15 in the amended summons and leave to the second plaintiff to apply for an assessment of mesne profits from 20 August 1997 to the date on which possession is given to the second plaintiff.

Costs, up to and including 18 August 1997, were dealt with in a judgment I gave last week, where I ordered that the first plaintiff pay the defendant's costs on the indemnity basis. As the first plaintiff would appear to be hopelessly insolvent, that is likely to be cold comfort. Mr Mendel asks that the order be amended so that the costs be costs against the second plaintiff, but I cannot see at the moment any reason for doing that. The costs were not sought as a condition of giving relief to amend the summons and I think that, having given leave to amend unconditionally, I can no longer revisit that.

The second plaintiff has succeeded and so is entitled to its costs from 19
August 1997 to today. However, I consider that it would be just that the costs awarded against the first plaintiff should be set off against the costs which have been awarded to the second plaintiff under this order, which probably has the practical commercial result that each party will bear their own.

Thus, I make orders 14 and 15 in the amended summons. Leave to the second plaintiff to assess the mesne profits from 20 August 1997 to the date upon which possession is given to the second plaintiff. Order that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings on and after 19 August 1997 but the costs awarded to the defendant against the first plaintiff are to be set off against those costs. Exhibits should be retained.

Stay the orders up to and including 29 August 1997 on condition that the defendant permits the representatives of the second plaintiff to inspect the subject property, so long as the inspection takes place on site at 10 am
Wednesday 27 August 1997.

Stood over to my list at 9.50 am on Friday 29 August 1997. Not to be called on before 10.30 am.
 * * * 
