

Regina versus McAdam Matter No Cca 60054/97 [1997] NSWSC 444 (29 September )

Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Regina versus John McAdam /97 September 1997 
Grove J, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus JOHN MCADAM 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against the severity of sentence imposed by Ducker DCJ in the Wollongong District Court. On 20
November 1996 the applicant was scheduled to face trial but in the events of the day he was indicted on a single count of malicious wounding contrary to s (a) of the Crimes Act to which he pleaded guilty. The prescribed maximum penalty for malicious wounding contrary to that provision is seven years penal servitude. His Honour imposed a total sentence of four years divided into a minimum term of two years six months with an additional term of 18 months. The applicant was represented at the hearing but appears for himself on this application. In response to the Registrar's directions, he has placed before the Court a typescript of written submissions which are acknowledged on the face of them to have been prepared with the assistance of another person. I mention this fact not as a matter of any criticism but to refer specifically to par 7 of those submissions which would appear obliquely to seek to challenge the question of conviction.

At the outset of this hearing the nature of the jurisdiction of this Court as presently constituted was explained to the applicant and he has confirmed, as indeed his original application indicates, that his application is limited to complaining of the alleged severity of sentence.

It would appear that his application is out of time and application is made for extension. For my part any extension of time necessary should be granted to the applicant and I turn to deal with the merits of his application for leave to appeal.

The offence occurred in Housing Commission premises which appear to have consisted of various flats, one of which was then occupied by the applicant.
On the particular evening he was accompanied by a female friend who apparently was the occupant generally of one of the other flats. A man came to the door and it is suggested he was seeking a light for a cigarette. There was a considerable dispute as to the surrounding circumstances and his Honour had before him a number of statements prepared for the purpose of the prosecution brief tendered by consent upon the plea of guilty being accepted and some oral testimony from the applicant. In his remarks on sentence his Honour canvassed the different versions that had been advanced to him in those various forms of evidence. Having done so, he expressed himself in this language: "There is a threshold question of fact that needs to be decided here. Of course by his plea of guilty the accused abandoned any defence of self- defence. It seems that he accepts by his plea that his reaction in using the knife in the way he did was excessive. I am satisfied that he went to the door carrying the knife because he was very angry at being woken up and that it was his intention to get rid of the person there by whatever means he felt were necessary. I am satisfied that he went to the door in a very aggressive frame of mind and ready to use the knife as a weapon. He had been told who it was, this was not a total stranger to him. It was a person who was known to the woman that he was in company with and I don't accept that he was in any fear of a home invasion at all. I am satisfied that what happened here, although Mr
Mizzi apparently does not concede it, was that Mr Mizzi was himself responsible for using very insulting and aggressive language. I am satisfied it was not because he was fearful for his own safety but because he was provoked by that language that the accused used, the words 'I'll give you a light, cop this'. Those are not the words of a man acting in self-defence. A man who acts in self-defence does not want to fight, does not want to participate in violence, and I am satisfied that violence was very much on the prisoner's mind at the time he opened that door." 
Mr Mizzi was the victim of the assault and the evidence before his Honour demonstrated that subsequently he needed a number of operations to his eye and that these had been largely unsuccessful leaving him with only five to ten percent vision in that eye. I observe that in submissions Mr McAdam asserted that Mr Mizzi's situation had improved but this Court is required as a first step to look at the correctness of the decision of Ducker DCJ having regard to the evidence that was before him at the time.

For my part, I am unable to detect any such error. The applicant draws attention to some of the written submissions placed before the Court on behalf of the Crown, a copy of which was in the appropriate course despatched to him.
He challenges an assertion concerning home invasion but, as is apparent from the excerpt which I have read, his Honour's finding was as stated and it remains inviolable in this Court.

Reference was made to the observation about the applicant awakening from a drunken stupor and the applicant contends before this Court that whilst he was admittedly affected by alcohol when he went to bed, he would wish to suggest that the effects of that alcohol had passed by the time he was awakened. The reference to "drunken stupor" is taken from the written submissions advanced to the Court on behalf of the applicant and I see no error in the reference by the Crown.

Similarly, a challenge by the applicant to a number of matters of fact on the basis that they were uncontested cannot be supported in the light of the material before the District Court. If I simply take the first taken by way of example the applicant says that he was peacefully at rest in his own flat. It is true that he was in his own flat but the thrust of his Honour's findings was that upon his being disturbed he behaved anything but peacefully.

He then in the second of the alleged uncontested facts goes on to assert that the victim was harbouring preconceived ill intentions against him. There is simply no evidence of this at all and certainly no finding by his Honour which would support such an alleged uncontested fact.

In oral submissions to the Court, Mr McAdam has pointed out that having been in custody for eleven months he feels that his situation as regards alcohol intake has improved considerably. The Court received provisionally a letter from a friend of the applicant's which, amongst other things, indicates how she had noticed considerable improvement in the applicant's presentation since he had been in custody. This is of course a matter which is subsequent to sentence and it remains for the applicant to show a basis upon which this
Court should intervene.

In the ultimate, the applicant said that he was astonished by the severity of the sentence and that when the learned sentencing Judge indicated that a custodial sentence was to be imposed, he, the applicant, was expecting something in the order of a sentence of up to three years with a minimum term component of about 18 months.

This Court can intervene only upon a demonstration that the sentence imposed by the Judge below was outside of the range of sentence which could be reached by the sound exercise of his discretion. That observation, of course, is exclusive of the occasions when it can be demonstrated that there was manifest error in the conduct of the proceedings below.

The applicant has a considerable criminal record. As his Honour observed, it included convictions on two counts of manslaughter. The applicant says that he has not been to gaol for nearly 16 years, and that would appear to be correct, but it is not correct to say that he has not been in any trouble in the interim and on no less than three occasions he has been granted recognisances on each of those occasions for offences involving violence. No doubt the applicant's situation and some attempts to rehabilitate himself provoked those
Courts into granting him leniency and it can be observed, as the applicant remarked, that he kept the recognisances when they were granted to him.
Nevertheless, the current offence was one of considerable seriousness and observation needs only to be made of the permanent effect upon the victim to make that assessment.

In the whole of the circumstances, I am far from persuaded that there was any error in the assessment made by the sentencing Judge. I regard the sentence imposed as well within the range of the sound exercise of discretion and, as I have indicated, no other error is demonstrable.

In those circumstances, whilst I would grant leave to appeal, I would propose the appeal be dismissed, the conviction and sentence confirmed.

NEWMAN J: I agree.

GROVE J: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
