

A and G Formworkers (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Mentlex Steel Reinforcements Pty
Ltd Matter No 55016/98 [1998] NSWSC 180 (20 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
A & G FORMWORKERS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD versus MENTLEX STEEL REINFORCEMENTS PTY LTD /98 April 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division Construction List 
Name of Case: A & G FORMWORKERS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD versus MENTLEX STEEL REINFORCEMENTS PTY LTD 
Proceedings: 55016/1998 
Date of Hearing: 20 April 1998 
Date of Judgment: 20 April 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr J E Armfield 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Nesci & Romano 
Solicitor for Defendant: Mr A Milshon 
Solicitors for Defendant: Tzovaras & Company 
Application for security for costs in arbitration proceedings.

Application refused with costs.
Jurisdiction to make order pursuant to [s.47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s47.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/) assumed.
Grounds for refusal:- 
Applicant for security has cross-claim, which it proposes to pursue, and against which the respondent could set off its claim even if an order for security made.

In such circumstances such applications have frequently been refused.

Delay in bringing application, which is prejudicial to respondent and has led to respondent preparing for the arbitration and incurring costs in doing so.

On the facts not clear that respondent insolvent, and amount admittedly owing by the applicant would have to be taken into account in resolving that issue.

JUDGMENT - On application for security for costs 
HIS HONOUR: The defendant, Mentlex Steel Reinforcements Pty Ltd, ("Mentlex"), carried on business, at all material times, as a steel fixer. On 1 July 1996 it entered into a building subcontract with the plaintiff, A & G Formworkers (Australia) Pty Ltd, ("A & G"). The contract provided for the resolution of disputes thereunder by arbitration. Disputes having arisen, they have been referred to an arbitrator, Mr B A Frost. The hearing is due to commence on Monday 27 April 1998 and has been fixed for a four day hearing. In the arbitration Mentlex, which is the claimant, has claimed $68,407 for work performed, $26,947 for the refund of a bond, and unspecified consequential damages. A & G has brought a cross-claim for damages, which it proposes to pursue, in the sum of $274,546. 
On Thursday 16 April 1998 I granted leave to A & G to file a summons seeking security for costs of the hearing of the arbitration returnable before me today. I did so because of the imminency of the arbitration. The claim for security is based on certain financial difficulties, which Mentlex is said to be experiencing. Since 3 April 1998, but not before then, A & G has been attempting to ascertain details of Mentlex's financial position. The only satisfactory evidence of that is in the 1996 balance sheet, which is annexed to the affidavit of Mr Bruno Nesci sworn 15 April 1998. It does not show a particularly rosy financial situation, but nonetheless it is not one which indicates insolvency or necessarily an inability to meet an order for costs.
It is somewhat disturbing that there is not more up-to-date financial information, but that is the position.

The arbitration proceedings were commenced some time before June 1997, in which month A & G filed its defence and cross-claim, and the pleadings concluded in November 1997. A preliminary point of jurisdiction arises, namely, the right of the court to make an order for security for costs in arbitration proceedings which are being conducted pursuant to the [Commercial
Arbitration Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/). I have not heard full argument on this, but I am satisfied that the court does have that jurisdiction where the jurisdiction is not contained in the arbitration agreement, pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s47.html) of that Act. However, there are several reasons why I do not consider that this application should succeed.

Firstly, as the solicitor for A & G indicated to me when I granted the leave to file the summons, A & G proposes to prosecute its cross-claim. Mr
Armfield of counsel, who appears on behalf of it today, has stated that that is still its intention. It is not in issue that the matters raised by the cross-claim arise from and call for consideration of the same factual matrix as the matters giving rise to Mentlex's claim. Further, on the pleadings, A & G does not dispute that it owes certain amounts to Mentlex, but rather that it has retained those amounts against the claims it alleges it has against Mentlex. In these circumstances if an order for security for costs were made and Mentlex were not able to comply with it, I see no reason why
Mentlex could not raise the issues of its claim by way of a defence of equitable set-off to the cross-claim. Mr Armfield frankly enough conceded that this would be possible, and accordingly, the order for security for costs would not prevent either A & G's cross-claim going ahead or, more importantly for present purposes, Mentlex's ability to ventilate its financial claim against A & G notwithstanding the existence of an order for security.

I have on a number of occasions had to consider security for costs in similar circumstances, and I have expressed on a number of occasions the view that where there is a cross-claim being pursued by an applicant for security for costs that, in many cases, is a very powerful reason, as a matter of discretion, for refusing to grant an application for security. Other judges sitting in this Division have expressed the same view, and I must say I am somewhat surprised, not only in the light of those expressions of view but also in the light of the fact that I expressly raised this matter with the solicitor for A & G when the application was made to file the summons, that further consideration was not given to those principles.

The second reason, which persuades me to refuse the present application, is the delay in bringing it forward. As I have said, the arbitration proceedings have now been on foot since at least June 1997. Mentlex has been allowed to pursue those proceedings without any threat, until 3 April 1998, that an application for security for costs would be made. It has, accordingly, incurred the costs of preparation and suffered from the time necessary for that exercise. In my opinion, where a company is the moving party and may be susceptible to an order for security for costs, it is incumbent upon the party seeking any such order to move promptly to obtain it. In the present case A & G submits that it only became aware on 3 April 1998 that there may be some difficulty in relation to the financial position of Mentlex. That, however, is not the test. The test is for the party seeking security for costs to make itself aware by normal inquiries, which would include a search of documents in the relevant corporations offices, as to the financial position of the party which is suing it. That should have been done in my view months ago. The reasons for this are, firstly, as I have indicated, that Mentlex has been allowed to pursue the litigation without fear of any such order being sought against it and to incur the costs and trouble of doing so. Secondly, I consider that it is totally inappropriate for such an application to be brought forward shortly before arbitration proceedings are to begin unless it can be shown that there has been a quite unforeseeable change in events, which warrants that course being taken. The bringing of such an application is distracting to the preparation of the principal claim and it should, save in very exceptional circumstances, be discouraged.

For these two reasons, even if I were satisfied that Mentlex was not able to meet the costs of the arbitration, I would, in the exercise of my discretion, refuse to make the order sought. I should add that whilst the absence of current financial information casts some pall upon the financial position of
Mentlex, it would nonetheless have to be considered in the light of moneys, which A & G admits on the pleadings are owing to it. For all these reasons the application in my view is doomed to fail.

I had grave doubts as to whether it was an appropriate application in which to give leave to issue a summons returnable on short notice, but I did so with a view to ensuring that it was dealt with as soon as possible on its merits so that the parties could then know what had to be done prior to the hearing. It is totally unacceptable to contemplate a situation, and this is another reason why delay has to be taken into account, where an arbitrator has set aside four days for the arbitration and where I am prepared to assume witnesses have been required to attend for the purpose of giving evidence, which could abort that hearing. I order that the summons be dismissed.

I have given consideration to whether the plaintiff should pay the defendant's costs on an indemnity basis but, whilst I have been critical of the bringing forward of the summons for the reasons I have given, I am not satisfied that this is a case in which an order for indemnity costs should be made. I order that the plaintiff's summons be dismissed. I order the plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings. I order the exhibit be returned.
 * * * 
