

Regina versus Vallen Swanson [1997] NSWSC 151 (19 April 1997) 
REGINA versus Vallen SWANSON /95 
MONDAY 20 MAY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
ABADEE J, JAMES J, SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
ABADEE J: The appellant was indicted before his Honour Judge H H Bell at the Sydney District Court on 20 November 1995 after having elected to be tried by a judge alone pursuant to <case> of the Criminal Procedure Act. The appellant was charged with the offence of aggravated robbery pursuant to the provisions of <case> of the Crimes Act.

The appellant pleaded not guilty. On 21 November 1995 his Honour found the appellant guilty as charged. The appellant appeals against the conviction upon a number of grounds. As regards the nature of an appeal from a judge sitting without a jury and the Court of Criminal Appeal's position in relation to such, see a decision of this Court in R versus Kurtic, 26 February 1996, unreported. That decision shows that in an appeal from a judge alone trial the
Court of Criminal Appeal acts as a court of error and has no power to re-hear the issues at the trial or to make any finding which could have been made in the court of trial.

The Crown case may be summarised. On 9 July 1995 at some time close to 6.30pm the victim, a Mr Moreno, was walking through Victoria Park, Broadway, when he was knocked to the ground by a blow to the neck inflicted by a man who was walking towards him. As the victim was trying to stand he was confronted by two other men, one of whom he looked at briefly. That man was described as being of solid appearance and of Aboriginal appearance.

The victim described the man in his evidence. He claimed that he was kicked by the appellant and he was assaulted by the other men. The three assailants demanded that the victim hand over his money and jewellery, which he did without hesitation. A man described in a photograph taken on 11 July 1995 and described as being man two allegedly said to the victim, "Don't look at us".
After the crime had been committed upon the victim, the three men ran away through the park. The victim reported the matter to the police. Indeed, on 9
July he made a statement but there was a dispute as to whether or not in the course of that statement the victim made any reference to being able to identify or otherwise any one of the three men involved.

On 11 July 1995 the victim saw the appellant or the assailant that he had looked at briefly on the evening of the attack. He saw that person near a bus terminal at Central railway station. It is accepted, and it was not in dispute, that Central railway station is near Victoria Park. The victim managed to take two photographs of the alleged assailant.

On 12 July the victim and the police attended the bus shelter area where photographs had been taken on 11 July. The assailant was seen to be in the vicinity. He was spoken to and arrested. He was taken to the police station, he was interviewed by way of ERISP procedure. During that interview he denied all knowledge of the incident.

In question and answer 21 he denied having knowledge of the robbery. He claimed that he was not involved. Indeed, when it was put to him in another question that Mr Moreno had identified him both on 11 and 12 July as the person who had assaulted him on Sunday night, the 9th, the appellant responded that Mr Moreno, the victim, had been mistaken.

The appellant did not give sworn evidence at the trial. In fact, he remained silent at his trial. However, the complainant, Mr Moreno, was extensively cross-examined at considerable length on behalf of the appellant. In his evidence given in cross-examination he allegedly gave certain answers which have been suggested as being inconsistent with other matters which have been the subject of his evidence or, alternatively, which have been the subject of material given by way of statement to the police on 9 July. Of course, one also has to bear in mind that the victim was a person who had come from Peru in 1990 and as the transcript itself reveals, it appears that whilst the victim was reasonably fluent in the English language, he did appear to have some problems associated with his English language expression. Indeed, the matter of the victim's pronunciation and for his English to be followed were matters adverted to by his Honour. Indeed, the very problem that the victim had in terms of his pronunciation and of having his English followed, were matters that his Honour took into account when an issue arose as to whether on the evening of 9 July 1995 the victim had indeed said to the police or attempted to say to the police that he had recognised one or more of the assailants.

The appellant's case was conducted essentially upon the basis that he had not been in Victoria Park at any time on the evening in question, nor had he robbed or assaulted any person at any time. A carefully reasoned judgment was given by Judge Bell. It was an ex tempore judgment, however that does not alter the fact that his Honour gave a carefully reasoned decision. As the judgment itself reveals, there was no issue that Mr Moreno, the victim, was robbed and beaten at the time and at the place alleged.

The only issue that his Honour really had to deal with was essentially that of identification. Indeed, as appears from his Honour's reasons at the trial, it appears that ultimately it was conceded by defence counsel that the case was not one of an attempted identification of a total stranger.

Before turning to consider the grounds of appeal advanced in support of this appeal, it is appropriate to briefly refer to several other matters. In respect of the sole issue of identification, his Honour observed that Mr
Moreno's recognition of the appellant's face as being familiar and that his subsequent recall as to why this was so, made the Crown case a reasonably strong one. This was because the victim had seen the appellant on a number of previous occasions and was familiar with his face.

I have already referred to the concession at the trial, that the case was not one of attempted identification of a total stranger. Indeed, according to the evidence at the trial the victim had seen the appellant on three or four occasions perhaps three months before and once every month or two months. He said that he had seen the appellant at the bus terminal at Central railway station asking people for coins and cigarettes. He said that on the evening in question he had the appellant in view for perhaps five seconds or so.

The victim's opportunity to recognise the appellant or, indeed, his assailant, was a matter seriously in issue at the trial. His capacity to see was the subject of considerable debate, having regard to the prevailing lighting conditions and also having regard to a dispute as to whether or not there was a hood being worn by the appellant or assailant and if so, whether, in any event, the victim was able, in all the circumstances, to see the face of the assailant.

His Honour, inter alia, accepted as truthful the testimony of the victim including, ultimately, his insistence more or less than any hood or item of clothing that was being worn did not in fact preclude the recognition of the assailant's face. The victim also told the police that if photographs were produced he would be able to recognise in the photographs who the assailant was.

Subsequently, it appears that the victim approximately two days after the attack, on 11 July, was confident enough in his belief that he had identified who his attacker was and that it was the appellant who was his attacker, that he took two photographs of the appellant in a group in the vicinity of Central railway station. Indeed, it appears that on 11 July the victim was a passenger in a bus. The bus was proceeding in the vicinity of Central railway and near a paved garden area located near the railway bus terminal and out of the window of the bus he recognised the appellant. He left the bus and, as I have said, with a camera he took two photographs of the appellant.

The very next day, being 12 July, when the victim was accompanied by the police to the same area, the appellant was, indeed, seen in the location. The victim gave evidence before the trial judge that on 12 July he had no doubt in his mind of the identification of the appellant. He recognised him, to use his own words, "100 per cent". In cross-examination the victim denied that his memory was vague and asserted that he remembered everything. He admitted that honest people could make mistakes in identification but he said that he had not made any mistake in identifying the appellant.

In his judgment his Honour, who has to be regarded as being one of the most experienced in the District Court, was clearly alert to the dangers of identification evidence and of the dangers of convicting upon identification evidence. Indeed, his Honour's judgment reveals very considerable care being taken in relation to his embarking upon the task of determining whether, in all the circumstances, the victim's identification could be relied upon.

His Honour clearly warned himself in relation to the matter of identification and as to the adequacy of the warning, that such had to be evaluated in the context of the identification evidence in the case, see Domican versus The
Queen <case>; [(1993) 173 CLR 555.] His Honour specifically found that the victim was totally convinced of his identification from the moment he saw the appellant on 11
July.

His Honour proceeded to deal with the matters put to him casting doubt upon the victim's identification. These matters had been skilfully brought out in cross-examination of the victim by defence counsel at the trial. His Honour referred, however, and importantly so, to the victim's English as being a little difficult to follow. Indeed, that may well be the explanation as to why there was a debate as to whether or not the victim had attempted to convey to the police on 9 July that he had been able to identify the assailant. Perhaps it was the English difficulty which gave rise to the debate in relation to that particular matter.

His Honour seems to have regarded the victim as being a person who gave truthful testimony. He dealt with the arguments of principal importance raised by the defence in relation to identification. These have been referred to in extensive written submissions and, inter alia, include arguments relating to identification, what the victim said to the police on the night in question and, indeed, whether or not there was a wearing of the hood.

His Honour, in his reasons, did not overlook the need to be concerned with the possibility of what he described as being a displacement effect argument. His
Honour made a specific finding that the overall description did match the appellant and that the circumstances of the recognition did, in fact, carry great conviction.

Against this background which I have dealt with at some length, inter alia, because there is an unsafe and unsatisfactory ground, I now turn to consider the grounds advanced in support of the appeal.

The first ground is that his Honour erred in admitting the identification evidence of the victim, Moreno.

It appears that at the trial the defence counsel made an application that the evidence of Moreno should have been excluded because of its "poor quality". A number of matters were advanced in support of this assertion on the appeal.
These were listed in the written submissions and were relied upon in argument.
I do not find any necessity to detail them here. Some of the matters I have, however, already adverted to.

Ultimately, the so-called factual ambiguities or inconsistencies appear to have been not merely put to this court but also put, in a most forceful and responsible way, to the trial judge. Indeed, his Honour addressed those particular matters of ambiguities and inconsistencies in his judgment.

His Honour rejected the submission that the evidence in relation to identification was of such poor quality that he should therefore withdraw the evidence. Although not strictly relevant for the purposes of determining this particular ground, in the end result we do know what his Honour's views were in relation to the quality of that identification evidence. It was submitted here that the trial judge had a discretion to exclude the evidence by reason of it being poor quality and that his Honour had that residual discretion as being one arising under <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). I see no error in his Honour's conclusion that the evidence ought not to be excluded as a matter of discretion.

However, it was submitted that in any event, <case> apart, his Honour should have excluded the evidence pursuant to the provisions of <case> of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).
A number of authorities were cited in support of that particular latter submission. This is not the occasion to pause and analyse the provisions of s
It seems to me that his Honour did not err in deciding not to exclude the evidence.

This is not a case where the probative value of the evidence was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant. The question in the instant case was, rather, one of the Crown tendering evidence in proof of the essential issue of identification and in support of proving beyond reasonable doubt that relevant identification. In my view, I see no transgression of either ss 135 or 137, as the case may be. In my view, the various propositions said to make the identification ground have not been made good and, in the circumstances, I do not consider that the first ground has been made out.

The second ground advanced is that his Honour failed to isolate and identify matters which may reasonably be regarded as undermining the reliability of the victim's evidence.

When one considers the reasons for judgment, it is appropriate for me to observe that this ground is not made good. His Honour did subject the evidence of the victim to careful scrutiny in accordance with the principles in
Domican. He was alive to all relevant concerns and issues relating to the dangers of identification evidence. He was alert to the problems associated with the alleged inconsistencies and ambiguities which had been the subject of address to his Honour on the part of the defence counsel.

His Honour, in his reasons for decision, concluded that despite the attacks that had been made on Mr Moreno's evidence, he was a person whose evidence could be accepted. I am not prepared to find that in the circumstances of this case any relevant matter was overlooked by his Honour in relation to the identification issue. I am not prepared to conclude that his Honour failed to address the question or one of the questions argued before us arising from the alleged omission from the victim's statement of 9 July 1995 of any reference or alleged reference to the identification or non-identification of the assailant. That particular issue, I consider, has been answered in any event by his Honour's reasons on p 4 of the judgment.

In my view, his Honour considered all the relevant matters and he considered with some care the matters relevant to the issue of identification. I consider that there is no substance in the second ground and such should be rejected.

The third ground is that it was not open to the trial judge to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty of the offence or, to put it another way, that the verdict was an unsafe and unsatisfactory one. The matters relied upon in support of the first two grounds were advanced in support of this ground also.

The principles according to which an appellate court reviews the verdict are well and truly stated and do not need to be repeated. They are, in the case of a judge sitting alone trial, also referred to by the court in Kurtic's case. I say no more. Having regard to these principles and applying them to the circumstances of this case, I do not consider that the verdict was an unsafe and unsatisfactory one.

In the instant case his Honour saw and heard the victim. The victim was extensively cross-examined. His Honour recognised that there were perhaps some pronouncement problems and that the victim's English was a little hard to follow. His Honour ultimately accepted that the overall description did match the accused and his Honour said that the circumstances of the recognition carried, to his mind, great conviction. His Honour also said that he was not prepared to reject that evidence where it was uncontradicted other than by the plea and denials in the recorded interview.

In saying this I do not consider that his Honour, in any way, transgressed any of the principles discussed by the High Court in Weissenstein versus The
Queen <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 217], particularly at pp 228 and 229. Further, it is to be remembered that in this particular case the credibility and reliability of the victim is very much in issue. His Honour was clearly alive to that fact.

His Honour saw the victim, his Honour heard him. His Honour assessed his reliability and credibility and, at the end of the day, accepted him. We do not have the benefit of seeing or hearing from the victim. It seems to me, applying the relevant principles, his Honour was entitled to accept the evidence of the victim and be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant's guilt. The unsafe and unsatisfactory ground should be rejected.

The submission by the appellant that the reasons advanced jointly and severally or in the alternative support the contention that the appeal should be allowed is a submission that should be rejected.

For all of these reasons I would propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed.

JAMES J: I agree that for the reasons given by the presiding judge the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

SIMPSON J: I also agree.
 
ABADEE: We revoke formally the bail and the appellant should be taken into custody. The formal orders of the court are as follows: 
The appeal against conviction be dismissed.

The conviction and sentence confirmed.

Time served to count.

The prisoner is to be released on 18 April 1997 and the additional term imposed is to commence on 19 April 1997.

They are the orders of the court.
 * * * 
