

Seymour and Ors versus Seymour and Ors [1996] NSWSC 515 (25 October 1996) 
SEYMOUR & ORS versus SEYMOUR & ORS /93; ED 2374/89 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY ACJ, MEAGHER JA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Trusts and Trustees - Trustee as life tenant mistakenly conveys property to third party and to one of beneficiaries - No power of sale - Breach of trust - Equitable remedies for remaindermen.

Legal Practitioners - Solicitors - Duty of care to third parties - Mistaken advice - Whether action in negligence statute barred - Whether solicitor "fraudulently concealed" cause of action 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
Trusts and trustees - Appeal against trial judge's refusal to grant relief to appellants in respect of the transfer of trust property to one of the beneficiaries and refusal to award damages in negligence against solicitor -
Deed of Arrangement arising from divorce settlement whereby wife as life tenant holds properties in trust for children - Wife subsequently conveys one property to third party and transfers part of other property to son (Bruce) for nominal consideration - Breaches of trust - Trustee has no power of sale - Incorrect advice given by solicitor that wife held properties as beneficiary in fee simple - Rights and remedies in equity for remaindermen.

Legal Practitioners - Solicitors - Duty of care to third parties (appellants) where no contractual relationship - Mistaken advice to family members involved in trust regarding legal and equitable interests in land - Duty of care to beneficiaries in circumstances where solicitor acts for trustee - Whether relationship of proximity with appellants giving rise to duty of care -
Whether action in negligence statute barred - Whether "fraudulent concealment" of action such as to attract <case> [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) - Conduct of Solicitor.

Held: Appeal dismissed: 
In respect of the claim against Bruce, the Court agrees with the order made by the trial judge regarding payment of the $9,500 with interest.

The relationship of proximity was established and accordingly the solicitor owed a duty of care to the appellants. However the action in negligence became statute barred prior to the commencement of the proceeding.

The solicitor did not "fraudulently conceal" the cause of action against him such as to attract the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/).

Breskvar versus Wall (1971) 126 CLR 376; Ramsden versus Dyson (1866) 1 HL 129;
Barnes versus Addy [(1879) LR 9 Ch App 244];
White versus Jones <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ];
Baumgartner versus Baumgartner <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 137]; Hibberson versus George [(1989) 12 Fam LR 725];
Logue versus Shoalhaven Shire Council ([1979] [1 NSWLR 537]; Sheldon versus RHM
Outhwaite [[1996] 1 AC 102]; referred to.

Solle versus Butcher [[1950] 1 KB 671]; Taylor v
Johnson <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 422]; Hawkins v Clayton (1988) 164 CLR 539; Waimond Pty Ltd versus Byrne [(1989) 18 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2018%20NSWLR%20642 "View LawCiteRecord" ); applied.
 
ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY ACJ: Mr Phillip Lewis, a solicitor, was the nephew of the first respondent Mrs Seymour and the cousin of the plaintiffs and Mr Bruce Robert Seymour. The Seymour family were interested in some realty which passed to them upon the divorce of Mrs Seymour and her husband, the father of the other parties. Mr Lewis acted in relation to that realty. He made a mistake in the course of doing so: at one stage he acted upon the basis that Mrs Seymour owned the property in fee whereas she had only a life interest. That error led to the property being wrongly dealt with. Because of what was done, the plaintiffs have brought the present proceeding. 
Mr Lewis's mistake brought about three things: the maladministration of the property by Mrs Seymour; the transfer of part of the property to the third respondent; and the sale by Mrs Seymour of another part of the realty and her use as her own of the proceeds of sale. In respect of each of these the plaintiffs' rights were infringed. The proceeding has essentially been concerned with the remedies to which they are entitled.

The trial judge, Bryson J, held Mrs Seymour to account on a trust basis in respect of the property which she had wrongly dealt with: against this there is no appeal. He refused relief to the plaintiffs in respect of the property transferred to the third respondent, subject only to stipulated payments being made by that respondent; and he refused to award damages in negligence against the solicitor Mr Lewis for the error he made. The plaintiffs have appealed to this Court against the second and the third of these matters.
THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND: 
Evidence was given at the trial by the plaintiffs and the defendants. Mrs
Seymour was not represented. The evidence was not entirely consistent and the learned trial judge Bryson J made findings of fact upon disputed questions.
None of the judge's findings have been the subject of appeal and this appeal must accordingly be conducted upon the basis that such findings are correct.
The contrary has not been suggested.

However, there are several matters of relevance upon which the judge made no specific finding: no doubt he found it unnecessary to do so in order to arrive at his conclusions. In the course of argument before this Court, reference has been made to them and to the evidence relating to them. It will be necessary for this Court to form conclusions in relation to them.

In doing this, it is in my opinion proper that the Court accept that his
Honour did not find that any of the witnesses to be attempting intentionally to misstate the facts. What occurred occurred a substantial time ago and differences of recollection and interpretation are to be expected. The facts may, in my opinion, be approached on that basis.

The disputes now in question had their origin in what occurred upon the divorce of Mrs Seymour from her then husband. That divorce was made final in
As part of the divorce arrangements, Mr Seymour, the husband, made provision for Mrs Seymour and their children. The arrangements made took varying forms but, in the end, they were finalised by Deed of Arrangement of July 1968. That Deed provided that two properties (which I shall describe as "East Street" and "Broker Street") should be held for Mrs Seymour for her life and for the children as joint tenants in remainder. There were five children. One died. The interest in remainder has at all relevant times been contingently vested in the three plaintiffs and the third respondent. (I shall describe the parties by Christian names or otherwise in the manner adopted during argument).

The properties were registered under the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). In
September 1968 the father transferred them to the mother Mrs Seymour. She was registered as the owner of them in fee simple. How this came to be need not be pursued. It has been accepted that at all times she has held the properties on trust according to the interests provided by the Deed of Arrangement: cf
Breskvar versus Wall (1971) 126 CLR 376 at 385. But the fact that the properties were registered in her name as owner in fee simple no doubt contributed to what subsequently occurred.

Mrs Seymour lived in a house on the Broker Street property. In or about 1974 it was proposed that the Broker Street property be subdivided and one of the lots, Lot 2, be vested in the third respondent Bruce. I infer that Mrs Seymour approached Mr Lewis, the solicitor, and discussed the proposal with him. He communicated with, inter alia, Mrs Field and, I infer, other members of the
Seymour family. In March 1974 he wrote to Mrs Field about the proposal and in
July 1974 he wrote to Mrs Seymour recording his discussion with her concerning what was proposed to be done.

Ultimately, in late 1974 or perhaps early 1975, Mrs Seymour and the four children met with the solicitor in his office. They were then told, if they did not already know, that they had an interest in the properties subject to
Mrs Seymour's life interest. As the result of the discussion all parties agreed that the Broker Street property should be divided into two lots and that one of the lots (Lot 2) should be transferred to Bruce. It was agreed that he would pay $9,500, to be divided equally between his three siblings.

There was discussion before this Court as to what was agreed as to the date when the $9,500 should be paid. It is, in my respectful opinion, clear that the consensus was that the sum should be paid when the transaction was completed by transfer of the lot to Bruce. This, in my opinion, is the effect of the judge's findings and it is what is the effect generally of the evidence given by the parties.

It was, in my opinion, the evidence of all of the Seymour children who gave evidence that at the time of this discussion a contract of sale to Bruce was signed; some of them said so in terms and I would infer that to be the recollection of all of them. But the solicitor's evidence was that no contract was signed. His Honour accepted as accurate the recollection of the solicitor.
Accordingly, his Honour found that there was no legally binding contract at the time and no contract of sale was signed. The argument has proceeded upon the basis of that finding.

At the time, Bruce wished to use the land to be transferred to him for the purpose of a residence. There was then no house upon it. He said, and there is, I think, no reason not to accept, that he had discussed with his mother the purchase of a moveable home, its installation upon Lot 2, and ultimately his use of the house as his residence. His evidence was that, when discussing this with his mother, he said that he did not have the money to carry out such a proposal and that she suggested to him that he should, when the house was put upon the land, lease it at a rental and accumulate money in that way. I accept that a conversation generally to this effect took place.

The accounts as to the discussion at the solicitor's office to which I have referred were brief. But I infer, as a matter of probability, that at that time or at least shortly thereafter the plaintiffs were aware of what Bruce proposed to do. The consensus arrived at was, in my opinion, probably arrived at upon the basis that it was for that purpose that the land was to be transferred to him.

Subsequently, what Bruce had discussed with his mother was put into effect. In , he made a number of improvements upon what was to become Lot 2 and made them, as the judge found, "in reliance on the arrangement". In about June , having acquired a house, Bruce moved the house from Woodhill Street,
Fairy Meadow, to the lot. He let the house to a tenant for some time.
Ultimately, in about 1976, he commenced to live in the house and has lived there ever since. The improvements which he has effected upon the land are substantial. Detail was given in evidence of paving, the installation of a swimming pool and other matters. And, of course, he paid the relevant rates in respect of it.

It does not appear to have been in contest but that the plaintiffs each knew what Bruce had done in relation to the proposed Lot 2. His brother Raymond gave evidence that he had visited Bruce frequently and I infer that Bruce's sisters Mrs Field and Mrs Penno also were aware that, as contemplated by the arrangement made by them, he had moved his house onto the land, improved the land, and come to live upon it as his home.

In order that the land be subdivided and vested in Bruce, at least three things were necessary. A plan of subdivision had to be prepared; the local council had to consent to the subdivision; and the land had to be transferred by Mrs Seymour to Bruce.

His Honour accepted that the solicitor did not see the matter as requiring urgent attention and in fact it was several years before it was carried to completion. In March 1975, a survey plan was prepared. The solicitor arranged that each of the Seymour children and Mrs Seymour sign the plan. He did this, as I infer, upon the basis that each of them had a relevant interest in the
Broker Street property and that accordingly the consent of each of them to the subdivision was required.

In or about December 1977 the solicitor procured the consent of the council to the plan of subdivision. However, it was not until about April 1979 that the plan of subdivision was sent to the solicitor's law stationers in Sydney for registration.

Notwithstanding what had been done in respect of the plan of subdivision of the Broker Street property, Lot 2 was not then transferred by Mrs Seymour to
Bruce. The transfer was not registered until December 1985. The delay was not attributable to the wishes of any of the parties. I infer that, as the solicitor said in his evidence, he did not see the matter as one of urgency and did not come to preparing the transfer and having it executed and registered until that time.

It is in my opinion proper to note that, as I accept, the plaintiffs did not call upon Bruce to pay the sum agreed $9,500 prior to the registration of the transfer of Lot 2 to him. Reference was made in the evidence to conversations in relation to the sum but in my opinion there was no demand for payment.
This, I infer, was because, as part of the arrangement made in 1974, that payment was not to be made until the transaction was completed.

Prior to the registration of the transfer of Lot 2 to Bruce, Mr Lewis the solicitor made the mistake which is in question in this proceeding. He concluded that Mrs Seymour was the beneficial owner of the two properties in fee simple, that the children did not have any interest in them, and that accordingly she could deal with the properties as she wished without their consent. He so informed her and she acted on his advice. What was done was done upon the basis of that mistake.

As I have said, in or about April 1979 the solicitor sent the plan of subdivision of Broker Street to his Sydney law stationers for registration. He had prior to this been told by Mrs Seymour and had accepted that her interest in the properties was a life interest only and that the interest in remainder was vested in the children of the marriage. He had not seen the Deed of
Arrangement. In 1979 he came to investigate the position more closely. What prompted the investigation is not clear. He concluded, from what the law stationers informed him and otherwise, that Mrs Seymour owned the properties beneficially in fee simple. He was influenced in this by a memorandum of 26
April 1979 which he received from the law stationers. He formed the conclusion he did mistakenly but, in my opinion, honestly. There is no finding that he acted other than honestly in making the mistake and I would make no such finding against him. But in so concluding he acted negligently: the trial judge so held and that finding is not in question.

Later in 1979 Mrs Seymour agreed to sell the East Street property to some acquaintances of hers Mr and Mrs Walker. His Honour found that in or about
December 1979 she contracted to sell the property to them for $25,000. The
East Street property was transferred to them by her on 13 June 1980.

In acting for her on this transaction, the solicitor assumed that the children had no interest in the East Street property. He so advised Mrs Seymour. He did not communicate with the children to tell them of the sale. There is no finding that otherwise they came to know of the sale before it was completed.
Mrs Seymour, acting on his advice, disposed of the proceeds of the sale. It was suggested that some of the proceeds were made available to Mrs Field and that accordingly it was to be inferred that she knew what had happened. There was no evidence from which I would infer that Raymond or Mrs Penno were aware that Mrs Seymour had sold the East Street property upon the basis that she alone had a proprietary interest in it. However, having regard to what was said as to the family relationships, I find it difficult to accept that at the time of the sale or shortly thereafter the plaintiffs did not know that Mrs
Seymour had sold the East Street property and that she had done so without seeking their consent as remaindermen. But, however this be, the precise position in this regard was not pursued at the trial.

I return to the subdivision of the Broker Street property. On 13 December 1985
Mrs Seymour transferred Lot 2 in the subdivision to Bruce for the sum of one dollar. The solicitor acted in that transaction. At the time, Bruce asked the solicitor about the payment of the $9,500. His evidence was that the solicitor told him that he was "lucky", that his mother owned the land and that in effect it was not necessary for him to pay any sum to the plaintiffs.
Accordingly, he did not make any such payment. When an enquiry was made of him in that regard, he said that he was not obliged to pay the $9,500. He did this, I accept, only because of the advice given to him by the solicitor. If that advice had not been given to him, he would, I infer, have accepted that he should pay the sum and would have endeavoured to do so. Insofar as it may be relevant, I am of opinion that he did not intend to repudiate the arrangement made in the sense of determining to act contrary to what his obligations were in that regard. He was, I believe, content to act in accordance with the obligations, legal or otherwise, which he had assumed. He acted on the solicitor's advice in not making or attempting to make the payment.

The solicitor concedes that, having concluded that Mrs Seymour owned both properties beneficially in fee simple, he did nothing to bring to the attention of the plaintiffs that their belief that they had a remainder interest in the properties was incorrect. In particular, he did nothing to inform them that the impression which, at the 1974 meeting, he had given to them in that regard was wrong.

However, the matter was pursued by the plaintiffs soon after the transfer of
Lot 2 to Bruce was completed. On 11 April 1986, solicitors acting for Mrs
Field wrote to the solicitor Mr Lewis referring to her claim that she had a remainder interest in the two properties and inviting the solicitor's comments as to why he had done what he had done. Subsequent correspondence referred to the Deed of Arrangement and, in my opinion, Mr Lewis came to realise that he had, or may have, made an error in advising Mrs Seymour as he had.

On 2 May 1989 the present proceeding was commenced. On 29 June 1993 the amended Statement of Claim was filed for the plaintiffs. The hearing took place on 13 September 1993 and judgment was given on 5 November 1993.
THE CLAIMS PRESSED BY THE PLAINTIFFS: 
As I have indicated, the plaintiffs have pressed three main claims: a claim against Mrs Seymour for an account of her dealings with the trust property and compensation for what she has done; a claim against Bruce for return of Lot 2 to the estate or appropriate compensation; and a claim against the solicitor
Mr Lewis for damages at common law by reason of his negligence.

Orders have been made against Mrs Seymour which, in substance, remove her as a trustee, provide for an independent trustee, and require her to pay compensation to the plaintiffs for the loss caused by her improper dealing with the trust property. Those orders are not now in question. Mrs Seymour has not appealed against them and has not appeared before this Court on the appeal.

The trial judge held that it would be inequitable to direct Bruce to return
Lot 2 to the trust estate. He gave relief to the plaintiffs in relation to it only to the extent that he ordered Bruce to pay $9,500 to the plaintiffs with interest. Bruce has not appealed against such orders. The plaintiffs have submitted that in limiting their relief in this regard his Honour erred.

The plaintiffs have sued the solicitor upon a common law count of negligence.
The trial judge held that he did not owe to them a duty of care and that accordingly no tort had been committed. His Honour held that, if the solicitor would otherwise been liable to them in tort, the proceeding had not been commenced until after the expiry of the statutory period of limitation and that that period of limitation was not extended by reason of, as the plaintiffs had submitted, fraudulent concealment within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/).

It is in respect of the claims against Bruce and against the solicitor that submissions have been made in this appeal.
THE CLAIM IN RESPECT OF LOT 2 OF THE BROKER STREET SUBDIVISION: 
Prima facie the conclusion of Bryson J that it would be inequitable to require
Bruce to return Lot 2 to the estate was correct. It must be accepted that, notwithstanding what the plaintiffs and Bruce suggested in evidence, no binding legal contract was made during the 1974 discussion in the solicitor's office. What occurred was that a non-legally binding arrangement was made that
Bruce should be permitted to do what he did, that a subdivision of the land should be effected and that on completion Bruce should pay $9,500 to the plaintiffs. Bruce acted upon the basis of that arrangement. Had it not been for the advice he received from the solicitor, he would have been prepared to pay $9,500 to the plaintiffs or endeavour so to do. Subject to what I shall say, prima facie it would be inequitable to put aside what, in contemplation of the arrangement, he had done. Mr Brereton for the plaintiffs has acknowledged the effect in this regard of cases such as Ramsden versus Dyson HL 129 ; see generally Meagher Gummow & Lehane (3rd ed) pars [1715]-[1724] where the relevant cases are referred to.

Mr Brereton's submission has been that position should not obtain. He has pointed in this regard essentially to the following. The arrangement was not carried into effect for some eleven years. The plaintiffs were not guilty of laches or acquiescence in not pursuing remedies earlier: the judge so found.
When the arrangement was carried into effect in December 1985 Bruce refused to pay the sum agreed. In these circumstances, it was suggested, it was not inequitable that the position should be effectively reversed.

Without pursuing all of the variations of Mr Brereton's submissions, they have been essentially to the following effect. The claim which Bruce makes is, it is submitted, essentially based upon an equitable estoppel of the type involved in Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] and Primmer versus Mayor of Wellington [(1984) LR 9 App Cas .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281984%29%20LR%209%20AC%20699 "View LawCiteRecord" ) That equitable estoppel, in the present context, is based upon the view that it is inequitable to depart from the assumption which the parties have made and acted upon if departure from that assumption would be unconscionable: Mr
Brereton cited the Waltons Stores case at 406, 428-9; Silovi Pty Ltd v
Barbaro [(1988) 13 NSWLR 466] at 472;
Austotel Pty Ltd versus Franklins Self Serve Pty Ltd [(1989) 16 NSWLR 582] at -612; Commonwealth versus Verweyan [(1990) 177 CLR 394] at 444.
But, the submissions suggested, it is not inequitable to depart from the assumption or arrangement for two reasons: because Bruce departed from the arrangement and repudiated it by refusing to pay $9,500; and because, that repudiation apart, what Bruce had done was not, in any relevant sense, brought about by the plaintiffs.

Mr Brereton submitted that a party is not held to a representation arrangement or assumption of the relevant kind if the party claiming reliance upon it has himself repudiated it: he referred to Vinden versus Vinden [(1982) 1 NSWLR ]
at 625; Beaton versus McDivitt [(1985) 13 NSWLR 134] at 157; [(1987) 13 NSWLR 162] at 172. In this regard, he submitted, the time which had elapsed and the ultimate refusal of Bruce to pay the $9,500 indicated that it was not inequitable for the plaintiffs to seek the return of the land to the trust.

Mr Brereton's second ground called in question the conclusion that it would be unconscionable for the plaintiffs to put aside what had been done. He submitted that the submission as to unconscionability depended upon it being found that the plaintiffs had, in a sense, encouraged Bruce to do what he did, had failed to assert their adverse title so as to prevent him doing it, and had remained wilfully passive thereafter in order to profit from what he had done: he cited generally Olsson versus Dyson <case>; [(1969) 120 CLR 365] at 378-9; Ramsden versus Dyson (1866) LR 1 HL 129 at 140, 171; re Vandervells Trusts <case> at 74; cf Bismark Range (Lucknow) Gold Exploration NL versus Wentworth (Lucknow)
Goldfield NL <case>; [(1935) 35 SR 400] at 408.

In my opinion these submissions should not be accepted. The present is not a case in which the plaintiffs merely stood by and permitted Bruce to do what he did. As their evidence discloses and as I infer they believe they had actually contracted to sell the land in question to Bruce for $9,500, payable on completion. They had sold the land to him in the express contemplation that he would do things of the kind that he did. They knew what he was doing and some at least of them visited him while he was doing what he did. If Bruce had offered to pay $9,500 on transfer of the land to him in December 1995, there could, in my opinion, have been no answer to his claim; the judge's conclusion would clearly have been correct. (I am conscious in this regard, as Mr
Brereton has pointed out, that what is in question is equity and not one's ideosyncratic concept of justice or, as he indicated, "palm tree justice").

Mr Brereton has properly emphasised the delay which took place in carrying the arrangement into effect. That fact is, of course, relevant in considering what is in the circumstances equitable. But it is necessary to consider the significance in the present context of that delay.

I do not doubt that the parties, in 1974, contemplated that what was to be done in completing the transaction and paying the money, would be done within a reasonable time. They left the matter to be carried out by Mr Lewis, assuming that that would be what he would do. Indeed, as was said by Mrs
Field, they assumed that Mr Lewis was acting for them in this regard.

It may be that, had objection been taken to the delay during the eleven year period in question and had Bruce then refused or failed to carry the matter forward without further delay, different considerations would have arisen. But nothing of that kind was done. As I have said, no demand was made for payment and no steps were taken to require completion to be achieved earlier than it was. The parties were content to leave the matter to the solicitor.

But, as Mr Brereton's submissions suggest, delay was not the only matter. When the transaction was completed by transfer, Bruce refused to pay the $9,500.
This also is to be taken into account.

The Court is not concerned, as such, with whether, had there been a legally binding contract, a refusal by Bruce to pay would have amounted to a repudiation by him of his contractual obligations and so have entitled the plaintiffs to terminate the contract by acceptance of the repudiation. What is here in question is whether, given all the circumstances, it would be inequitable to set aside the arrangement and what has been done under it.
 (I do not pursue the question whether the plaintiffs have, in this regard, sufficiently offered to do equity if the arrangement be set aside and whether, if there be such an offer, they could in the circumstances offer proper reparation or compensation for what Bruce has done upon and in respect of the land. These matters have, in argument, not been pursued).

If the matter be treated as analogous to a refusal to pay under binding contractual obligations, the matter is not, I think, as clear as the plaintiffs submit it to be. It is clear that Bruce did not subjectively intend to repudiate the arrangement. Upon the basis of the advice which Mr Lewis gave to him, the parties had, in 1974, acted upon the mistaken but common assumption that the plaintiffs had proprietary interests in the land and that accordingly they should be paid. Mr Lewis's advice to Bruce and Mrs Seymour was that that assumption was wrong. The solicitor told Bruce he need not pay.
If the solicitor's view of the mother's entitlement was right, it was at least arguable that there was no legal and perhaps no moral basis for such a payment. However that be, what Bruce did was not done to repudiate an assumption but to act upon the fact that the arrangement had been made upon a fundamental common mistake.

The effect of a mistake of this kind in relation to contractual obligations has been considered in several cases: see Solle versus Butcher [[1950] 1 KB ];
Taylor versus Johnson <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 422.] These cases establish, I think, that the fact that a person refuses to perform contractual obligations does not always constitute a repudiation of the contract; circumstances are to be considered. Here what is involved is not strict legal rights but equity. In my opinion, the same position obtains. It is relevant that Mr Lewis was the person chosen by or assumed by the parties to carry out the arrangement they had made and that it was, to an extent, his delay which caused the difficulty and his mistake which prompted what Bruce did. He was not a solicitor with a specific retainer from the plaintiffs to do what was necessary to complete the arrangement. But he was the person whom they contemplated would do what was necessary to procure for them $9,500. That is a matter to be taken into account.

Bruce remains willing to pay the sum in question. He will do so with interest.
In the circumstances, I do not differ from his Honour's conclusion that equity requires an order of the kind that was made.
THE CLAIM IN NEGLIGENCE AGAINST THE SOLICITOR: 
It is accepted that what Mr Lewis did was negligent in the sense that he did not do what in the circumstances a competent and diligent solicitor would have done. He formed a wrong conclusion as to Mrs Seymour's entitlement to the properties and acted upon it. He failed to inform the plaintiffs of that conclusion and what he had done upon the basis of it.

The plaintiffs' claim is made only in tort. No claim is made upon the basis that there was a contract between the plaintiffs and the solicitor nor is any claim made upon the basis that the solicitor knowingly acted in a breach of trust by Mrs Seymour: see generally Barnes versus Addy [(1879) LR 9 Ch App .] 
In argument, the following issues arose: 
Did the solicitor owe a duty of care in negligence to the plaintiffs? (If he did) did he act in breach of that duty? (If he did) did the cause of action arise outside the ordinary statutory limitation period? and (If it did) whether the ordinary statutory limitation period is to be extended by reason of matters referred to in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/).

As I have indicated, the solicitor's mistake as to Mrs Seymour's entitlement affected what he did both in relation to the Broker Street property and the East Street property. In argument before the judge and here, the claim in negligence has been pressed, in my opinion correctly, by reference only to the East Street property. I shall deal with the matter on that basis.

It is now established that a solicitor may owe a duty of care in negligence to persons to whom in the particular transaction he is not contractually bound: see generally Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR 539; Waimond Pty Ltd v
Byrne [(1989) 18 NSWLR 642]; White v
Jones <case>; [(1995) 2 AC 207.] It has been said that the test of the existence of such a duty of care lies in "proximity": see Hawkins versus Clayton per Deane J at 577 et seq. But "proximity" is, of course, a category of quite indeterminate nature. As a term it directs attention to matters by reference to which a court may determine whether a duty of care exists. But, in the end, the determination of whether a duty of care exists will depend upon a normative judgment formed by the court in the instant case. Accordingly, Mr McClintock, for the solicitor Mr Lewis, has referred the Court to cases in which courts have considered the circumstances in which such a duty of care should be held to exist.

Mc McClintock has submitted that a solicitor who acts for a trustee does not owe a duty of care to beneficiaries who claim the trust property: he referred to Wickstead versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR 1] at 17-18; [(1993) 179 CLR 688]; Royal Brunei Airlines Sdn Bhd versus Tan <case>; [(1995) 2 AC ] at -2; cf Linley versus Kirstiuk (1986) 28 DLR (4) 485. He concedes that in some cases a solicitor who drafts a will may owe a duty of care to the then prospective beneficiaries whom the testator specified: White versus Jones <case>; [(1995) AC 207](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%202%20AC%20207 "View LawCiteRecord" ); Ross versus Caunters [(1980) Ch 297]; Van Erp versus Hill
Aust Torts Rep par 81-317 (appeal pending); Gartside versus Sheffield Young & Ellis [(1983) NZLR 35]; cf Seale versus Perry <case>; <case>; [(1989) 92 ALR 131.] 
Mr Brereton, in his submissions, referred the Court in addition to Canadian cases: Granville Savings & Mortgage Corporation versus Slevin (1992) 93 DLR ; Tracy versus Atkins (1979) 105 DLR (3) 632; Clarence Construction Ltd v
Lavallee (1981) 132 DLR (3) 153; and to New Zealand cases: Allied Finance & Investment Ltd versus Haddow [(1983) NZLR 22]; and Connell v
Odlum [(1993) 2 NZLR 257.] 
It is no disrespect to the industry of counsel that I do not pursue the detail of the authorities to which they have referred. The differing views of the members of the High Court in Hawkins versus Clayton and of this Court in Waimond
Pty Ltd versus Byrne indicate, in my respectful opinion, that there are not yet established principles or factual situations which, when applied to an instant case, compel a decision that a duty of care does/not exist. The matters referred to by, for example, Deane J in Hawkins versus Clayton: at 444 et seq; are in my opinion intended to be indications or guidelines to assist in determining whether the necessary relationship, of proximity or however described, exists in the instant case and exists in such a form as warrants a duty of care being held to exist. I shall therefore go to the main factual considerations which, in the present case, appear to be of significance.

In this regard it is important to have in mind what precisely was the act or omission which is in question. The solicitor was in error in concluding that
Mrs Seymour owned the land beneficially in fee simple. He came to that conclusion negligently: had he taken proper care and used proper skill, he would not have come to that conclusion. If he had not come to that conclusion, he would not have done what he did in respect of the sale of the East Street property or in advising Mrs Seymour that she could use the sale proceeds as her own. And it would have been clear to him, on proper reflection, that if he was wrong in his conclusion as to her entitlement and did those things, it was likely that the plaintiffs would almost certainly be damaged.

It was argued that he was negligent in that he failed to bring to the plaintiffs' attention the fact that, contrary to what he had previously told them and they believed, they had no remainder interest in the property. But, in my opinion, his failure so to inform them was not the negligence or lack of care which was in question. That was another consequence of the negligently formed opinion as to Mrs Seymour's rights. It remained that negligence which was here in question.

Accordingly, the question is whether the solicitor owed a duty of care to the plaintiffs not to make the negligent mistake that he made.

The learned trial judge concluded that no duty of care existed. With respect,
I have come to a different conclusion. There are, inter alia, two things of significance in considering whether there was a relationship of proximity between the solicitor and the plaintiffs. In this case, the plaintiffs were not merely beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries in respect of the property. They were persons who would be damaged by negligence in his assessment of Mrs Seymour's entitlement to the properties: they would almost inevitably be damaged by that negligence because, as I have indicated, the solicitor would almost inevitably do what he did. And, if he did that, they would be immediately and directly damaged: they would lose their equitable interest in remainder.

Second, the relationship between the plaintiffs and the solicitor was particularly close. It is to be accepted, as Mr McClintock emphasised, that there was no legal retainer in existence between the plaintiffs and the solicitor in the sense of a contract under which he, as a solicitor, assumed obligations to them. But the absence of a contractual retainer does not determine the present matter. The plaintiffs were related to the solicitor.
Generally, they had entrusted him with the conduct of matters for them. They had looked to him to act to carry out their arrangement for the transfer to
Bruce of part of the Broker Street property. He advised Mrs Seymour and the plaintiffs in relation to both properties. On occasions, he had acted in separate matters for one or other of the plaintiffs. He acted for Raymond in relation to the adoption of a child; he acted for Maureen's husband in relation to a minor prosecution; and he acted for Carol regarding investment of moneys. Two of the plaintiffs, Mrs Field and Mrs Penno said in terms that they relied on him, at least in respect of the Broker Street arrangement. He knew that they had received and had relied upon his advice as to their entitlements in respect of the trusts and accordingly of the Broker Street property. As I have said, he knew that if he was wrong in his conclusion that
Mrs Seymour was the beneficial owner of East Street and acted on that conclusion as he did, they would in all probability suffer loss.

Whatever be the position generally in relation to beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries, I am of opinion that, in this case, the relationship of proximity was established and that he ought to have seen the plaintiffs as so affected by what he did as to require him to take care in their interests.

I am conscious that in this area of the law there has been a substantial and important extension of the liability which solicitors must bear: this was referred to in Hawkins versus Clayton in the passages to which I have referred: see Waimond Pty Ltd versus Byrne at 659. I am conscious also that if a solicitor may be liable to third parties in this way, he cannot be sure in advance of the persons to whom he may become liable: the tests for determining his liability are, as I have indicated, so vague that, in many cases, he does not know his position until the decision of the (ultimate) court is known. I believe the law should be slow to hold a solicitor liable to persons with whom he is not directly concerned. But in this case the relationship between the solicitor and the plaintiffs was both close and special. It was one in which he should in my opinion be expected to have regard to their interests.

I have dealt with this matter upon the basis that there was no contractual relationship between the plaintiffs and the solicitor. This of course was not the plaintiffs' view. The plaintiffs, in their evidence, claimed that a contract of sale had been made in 1974 in relation to the Broker Street property, that the solicitor was carrying out the contractual arrangements then made, and that he had assumed the role of securing for them the $9,500 that was to be paid. There was no existing contractual relationship in relation to the East Street property but the question of Mrs Seymour's rights was common to each property. Their view of their relationship to him went, I think, a step beyond his mere involvement in a non-contractual arrangement.

It is not contested that, as the judge held, the solicitor failed to do what his duty to the plaintiffs required him to do. The breach was his failure to use proper care and skill in deciding what was Mrs Seymour's interest in the properties.

It is necessary to determine when the cause of action in negligence was complete. It was, of course, complete when damage first accrued to the plaintiffs. In my opinion, damage accrued when the solicitor caused the contract with Mr and Mrs Walker to be completed by transfer. The interest of the plaintiffs in the properties was - Mrs Seymour having been registered as proprietor of the land - an equitable interest in remainder. The registration of the transfer to Mr and Mrs Walker of the East Street property destroyed that interest in that property. As Mr Brereton submitted, the plaintiffs could have pursued a claim in respect of the proceeds of sale and secured relief in respect of them. But they had lost what they had had, namely the proprietary interest in the land: it had been converted into an equitable claim or interest of a different kind. That, in my opinion, constituted damage sufficient to complete the cause of action in negligence. Those things occurred in 1980. The contract was made in December 1979 and the transfer took effect on 13 June 1980. Prima facie the ordinary period of limitation commenced to run from at the latest, 13 June 1980.

It follows in my opinion that the ordinary statutory period of limitation expired prior to the commencement of the present proceeding on 2 May 1989.
Prima facie the action at law in negligence became statute barred prior to the commencement of the proceeding.

Mr Brereton has submitted that the plaintiffs are entitled to the benefit of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). That section provides: "55. (1) Subject to subsection (3) where: there is a cause of action based on fraud or deceit; or a cause of action or the identity of a person against whom a cause of action lies is fraudulently concealed, the time which elapses after a limitation period fixed by or under this Act for the cause of action commences to run and before the date on which a person having (either solely or with other persons) the cause of action first discovers, or may with reasonable diligence discover, the fraud deceit or concealment, as the case may be, does not count in the reckoning of the limitation period for an action on the cause of action by him or by a person claiming through him against a person answerable for the fraud deceit or concealment.

Subsection (1) has effect whether the limitation period for the cause of action would, but for this section, expire before or after the date mentioned in that subsection.

For the purposes of subsection (1), a person is answerable for fraud deceit or concealment if, but only if: he is a party to the fraud deceit or concealment; or he is, in relation to the cause of action, a successor of a party to the fraud deceit or concealment under a devolution from the party occurring after the date on which the fraud deceit or concealment first occurs.

Where property is, after the first occurrence of fraud deceit or concealment, purchased for valuable consideration by a person who is not a party to the fraud deceit or concealment and does not, at the time of the purchase, know or have reason to believe that the fraud deceit or concealment has occurred, subsection (1) does not, in relation to that fraud deceit or concealment, apply to a limitation period for a cause of action against the purchaser or a person claiming through him." 
The learned judge held that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) had no application in the present case. I infer that he so concluded on the ground that, for the section to apply, it was necessary that the solicitor be shown to have been involved in "moral turpitude" or the like and that that had not been shown.

Two things require consideration: what the section requires; and does it apply in the present case.

What is here in question is an allegation that Mr Lewis "fraudulently concealed" the cause of action which existed against him.

Mr Brereton relied upon, as he described them, the English line of cases. He cited: Beaman versus ARTS Ltd [[1949] 1 All ER 465],
H-468A, 469C-E, 470B; Kitchen versus Royal Air Force Association [[1958] 2 All
ER 241], 245I, 249C-E, 250B, 253F-G, 254C; Archer versus Moss [[1971] 1
All ER 747], 750F-H, 751J-752D, 753H-754B; King versus Victor Parsons &
Co [[1973] 1 WLR 29], 33-34; Tito versus Waddell (No 2) [1977] Ch 244H-245C;
Nupponen versus Hymix Quarries Pty Ltd (Supreme Court Foster J, 24 October , unreported), 3.8-4.5; Hamilton versus Kaljo [(1989) 17 NSWLR 381], 386;
Inca Ltd versus Autoscript (NZ) Ltd [[1979] 2 NZLR 700], 704-711;
Rippon versus Bradley (Supreme Court Smart J, 13 August 1992, unreported).
See also Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR 539, 590.5 (Deane J).

Mr McClintock submitted that the decision of McLelland CJ in Eq in Hamilton v
Kaljo [(1989) 17 NSWLR 381] should be followed in preference to the English authorities. McLelland CJ in Eq said: at :
 "For my own part, I would regard it as a misuse of language, and unsound, to apply the statutory expression 'fraudulently' in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s55.html) to any conduct which did not involve some form of dishonesty or moral turpitude".

Mr McClintock referred the Court to Nupponen versus Hymix Quarries Pty Ltd (Supreme Court Foster J, 24 October 1986, unreported); New South Wales v McCloy Hutcherson Pty Ltd (1993) 116 ALR 363 and CE Heath Underwriting & Insurance (Aust) Pty Ltd versus Caraway Constructions Pty Ltd (Supreme Court
Batt J, 3 August 1995, unreported).

In my opinion, the section is not confined to simple common law fraud. It extends to conduct beyond that. On the other hand, it is not, I think, sufficient merely that for the defendant to take advantage of the statute of limitations would be unconscionable or inequitable in the wide sense of these terms. Terms such as unconscionable and inequitable now are used to describe conduct which, in previous times, would not have fallen within them: see
Baumgartner versus Baumgartner <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 137] at 147 and Hibberson versus George [(1989) 12 Fam LR 725] at
Nor, in my opinion, is "fraudulently" wide enough to include everything which would fall within the description of "equitable fraud". Equitable fraud is a doctrine which depends, for this purpose, too much upon nice distinctions which have been drawn in other times: see Snell's Equity (29th ed) at 550 et seq; Meagher, Gummow & Lehane (3rd ed) at par 1208; and see the discussion in Logue versus Shoalhaven Shire Council [[1979] 1 NSWLR 537] at 553.
The history of the English legislation was recently reviewed in Sheldon versus RHM
Outhwaite [(1996) 1 AC 102:] see, eg, at 144, 153.

In my opinion, there must be in what is involved a consciousness that what is being done is wrong or that to take advantage of the relevant situation involves wrongdoing. At least, this is so in the generality of cases. (There is in this as in many things, the problem of dealing with the person who "closes his eyes to wrong" or is so lacking in conscience that he is not conscious of his own lack of proper standards.) 
How does that apply in the present case? I do not think that what the solicitor Mr Lewis did in this case falls within these categories, however they be understood. In order to characterise what he did, it is necessary to define more closely what is impugned. Mr Brereton's submissions suggested, inter alia, that after the receipt of the letter from Mrs Field's solicitors in April 1986, Mr Lewis became aware that he had been negligent. At that point, the suggestion was, honesty required that he bring this to the notice of the plaintiffs so that they could, before the expiration of the six months period in June 1986, commence proceedings for negligence against him. The suggestion was that he did not notify them in order to protect himself.

I do not think that such a finding should be made. Mr Brereton, in his detailed and comprehensive cross-examination of Mr Lewis, did not, in terms, suggest to him the kind of dishonesty to which I have referred. Nor, I think, did Mr Lewis concede such. The learned judge did not so find and I, on a review of the matter as on a rehearing, would not make such a finding against him.

In the result, I agree with the orders which have been proposed by Bryson J. I would dismiss the appeal with costs.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Mahoney ACJ.
 
ABADEE AJA: I agree with the reasons for judgment of Mahoney ACJ and the order proposed by him.
 * * * 
