

Sydney Water Corporation Limited versus Aquaclear Technology Pty Limited No.
/1995 Whether Notice provides "details" of claim [1995] NSWSC 13 (28
August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
ROLFE J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30 June 1995 #DATE 7:7:1995 #ADD 28:8:1995 
Counsel for Plaintiff:       Mr M.S. Jacobs QC 
Solicitors for Plaintiff:      Phillips Fox 
Solicitor for
Defendant:      Mr James Doyle 
Solicitors for Defendant:      Doyles
ORDER
Orders made.
JUDGE1
Introduction ROLFE
J: By an agreement in writing dated 3 March 1992, which incorporated the General Conditions of Contract (AS2124-1986), Aquaclear
Technology Pty Limited, ("the defendant"), which was the contractor, agreed to carry out certain building operations for Sydney Water
Corporation Limited, ("the plaintiff"), which was the principal. As the terms of the dispute resolution clause are central to matters to be determined I shall set them out forthwith:- "46. Disputes .1 Submission to the Superintendent
If a dispute between the Contractor and the Principal arises out of or in connection with the Contract including a dispute concerning rectification or frustration of the Contract - 
Each party shall furnish in writing to the Superintendent details of that party's claim or, where the other party is the claimant, the reasons for rejecting the other party's claim, and shall request the Superintendent to make a decision under Clause .

Within twenty eight days after receipt from each party of the information referred to in Clause 46.1(a), the Superintendent shall give each party a written decision on the dispute.

Notwithstanding the existence of a dispute, each party shall continue to perform the Contract. In particular, the Contractor shall continue with the work and the Principal shall continue to comply with Clause 42.1.
 .2 Arbitration 
If either party is dissatisfied with the decision of the
Superintendent or the Superintendent fails to make a decision within twenty eight days or the party required by Clause 46.1(a) to furnish to the Superintendent reasons for rejecting the other party's claim fails to provide the reasons within twenty eight days after a request by the other party to do so, the dispute may be referred to arbitration. Unless the parties agree upon an
Arbitrator, either party may request the person specified in the
Annexure to nominate a single
Arbitrator. If a person is not specified in the Annexure, the person to nominate an Arbitrator shall be the chairperson of the Chapter of the Institute of
Arbitrators Australia in the State or Territory referred to in
Clause 1. The request shall indicate that the nominee shall not be an employee of the Principal or the Contractor, a person who has been connected with the work under the Contract nor a person in respect of whom there has been a failure to agree by the Principal and the Contractor.

Notwithstanding Clause 42.9 the Arbitrator may award whatever interest the Arbitrator considers reasonable.

If one party has overpaid the other, whether pursuant to a
Superintendent's certificate or not and whether under a mistake of law or fact, the Arbitrator may order repayment together with interest."
Prior to February 1994 it appears disputes did arise between the parties in relation to various matters. On 20 February 1994 the defendant wrote to the plaintiff, the letter being headed for the attention of Mr Greg Watson. The letter stated the defendant had "set in place the works required to comply with your direction of 14th February 1994" and confirmed the defendant was claiming compensation for such works as were outside the contract and also costs incurred as a result of "actions/inaction's (sic) by the Board". The letter set out a number of complaints the defendant considered it had against the plaintiff in relation to building and construction matters. Commencing with paragraph 4 the letter set forth claims the defendant had upon the plaintiff and, in paragraph 5, it set forth additional costs it alleged it had incurred and for which it claimed recompense from the plaintiff. The letter concluded with a summary of the claims totalling $59,699, as to which it stated:- "The following summary represents our claim for the West Hornsby project."
On 16 March 1994 the plaintiff responded to that letter by a letter signed by Mr Watson, who identified himself as "Superintendents representative". The letter stated:- "We acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 20th February 1994 received by fax 2nd March 1994, and by mail 7th March 1994.

We believe your claims are untenable and therefore rejected."
On 26 April 1994 the solicitors for the defendant wrote to the
Superintendent of Contract No 7881, being the relevant contract, addressed to the plaintiff, 17th Floor, 115-123 Bathurst
Street, Sydney for the attention of Mr R. Spencer. It is not in issue Mr Spencer was, at that time, the
Superintendent, which role he assumed on 5 April 1994. He received the letter from the solicitors for the defendant on or about the date it bears. The letter stated the solicitors acted for the defendant and enclosed a Notice of
Dispute or Difference in relation to Contract No 7881 West
Hornsby Sewage
Treatment Plant Lime Storage and Dosing Equipment". It concluded:- "Should you have any queries in relation to this, please do not hesitate to contact us." 
The Notice Of Dispute Or Difference
A significant issue in these proceedings is whether the notice enclosed with the letter of 26 April 1994 meets the requirements for referring a dispute to the Superintendent set forth in Clause 46. It seems to be agreed on behalf of the plaintiff that the letter of 20 February 1994 did meet these requirements.
The reasons this issue has assumed importance is because in the letter of 20 February 1994 there is no reference to any claim that the plaintiff had defamed the defendant or, alternatively, engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct contrary to [ss.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s42.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) respectively "by representing to various parties in the construction industry that the Contractor had not carried out its obligations in a competent and workmanlike manner when such was not the fact".
I shall refer to these claims comprehensively as "the defamation claim".
Central to these proceedings is a submission the plaintiff has made on a number of occasions to the Arbitrator and to the Court that the defamation claim is not one which "anrises out of or in connection with the Contract" and, accordingly, is not one which can be the subject of a determination by the Superintendent. It is submitted that if the claim cannot be the subject of a determination by him, it is not a claim which, pursuant to Clause 46, can be referred to arbitration and, accordingly, that the Arbitrator has no jurisdiction to hear and determine it.
The submission has been put both on the basis of a proper construction of
Clause 46 and also on the basis that as the claim has never been made to the
Superintendent it cannot now be made in the arbitration.
The Notice of Dispute or Difference enclosed with the letter of 26 April was addressed to:- "Superintendent
Contract
No 7881
Mr R. Spencer Floor -123 Bathurst Street
SYDNEY NSW 2000".
In an affidavit Mr Spencer swore on December 1994 he deposed to being a civil engineer employed by the plaintiff as a Project Business Manager and, as
I have said, he assumed the role of Superintendent in relation to the contract on 5 April 1994 and received the letter of 26 April 1994 on or about that date.
The Notice of Dispute or Difference recited the entry into the contract and the terms of Clauses 46.1 and .2. Recital D stated:- "The disputes or differences hereinafter referred to have arisen between the Contractor and the
Principal.

NOW the Contractor hereby gives notice to the proprietor that disputes or differences have arisen between them as to:"
Sub-paragraph (a) thereunder is headed "Breaches of the Contract by the
Principal" and sets out, under the heading "Particulars", six numbered paragraphs alleging breaches of contract.
Sub-paragraph (b) is headed "Variations claimed by the
Contractor but not allowed by the Principal" and, by way of particulars, refers to a schedule annexed to the Notice.
Sub-paragraph is headed:- "Damage to the reputation of the Contractor caused by the conduct of the Principal."
Under the heading "Particulars" is stated:- "(i) The Principal has defamed the Contractor or, alternatively, engaged in conduct which is misleading and deceptive contrary to the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) or the Fair Trading Act  s.42 by representing to various parties in the construction industry that the Contractor has not carried out its obligations in a competent and workmanlike manner when such was not the fact."
This paragraph is referred to also as Paragraph "D(c)(1)".
The Notice concluded:- "E. Pursuant to the Arbitration Agreement in Clause .2 if the
Contractor is dissatisfied with the decision of the Superintendent or the Superintendent fails to make a decision within twenty eight days or the Principal fails to provide to the Superintendent the reasons for rejecting the Contractor's claim within twenty eight days of this request, then the Contractor will require that the dispute be referred to arbitration."
It has been submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that this Notice does not constitute compliance with Clause 46.1. Before considering that further I should note that on 5 May 1994 Mr Spencer, in his role as Superintendent, replied to the notice of 26
April 1994. He said:- "In order for the Superintendent to make a decision on a dispute it is firstly necessary to establish that a dispute exists under the contract. It is therefore required that, for each claim under dispute, the claimant supplies to the Superintendent:
The date of the claim, a copy of the claim and any evidence furnished to the other party (the
Principal) in support of the claim.
The date the other party (the Principal) rejected the claim and a copy of that notification."
The Superintendent was making the point, as I understand it, that the defendant had not furnished to him "details of" its claim with sufficient particularity to enable him to make a decision. However, the Superintendent seems to have gone further by requiring any evidence furnished to the plaintiff in support of the claim, which, at least prima facie, does not seem to be a requirement of Clause 46.1, and, also, the date the plaintiff rejected the claim and a copy of that notification, which, similarly, does not seem to be a requirement of Clause 46.1.
The letter continued that "the claimant" was required by Clause 46 to give notice to the other party that the Superintendent had been requested to make decisions thereunder, to furnish the other party with a copy of the notice to the Superintendent, and to request the other party to furnish the
Superintendent with reasons for rejecting the claims. I am far from certain that this is correct on a proper interpretation of Clause 46, although presumably notice would be given to the other party of the request made to the
Superintendent. In circumstances where the Superintendent is an employee of the plaintiff there seems to be little justification for requiring that further notice be given to the plaintiff and, upon that basis the plaintiff, as I understand it, is obliged to give its reasons for rejecting the defendant's claim.
The letter continued:- "Therefore I advise that, on the evidence produced by the claimant, I am not satisfied: 
That disputes exist under the Contract and, as a consequence, that the claims are justified, but if the claimant wishes to provide evidence in support of the claims, I would be prepared to consider the matter."
Accordingly, on the material placed before the
Superintendent, the decision was made to reject the claims. The fact the Superintendent reserved the right to, in effect, make a further claim, does not alter his determination or decision reject the claim made.
The letter continued:- "Further, I am of the opinion that matters referred to me at '(c)
Damage to the reputation of the Contractor caused by the conduct of the Principal' are matters outside out of the Contract and as such cannot be dealt with by the Superintendent."
Accordingly, the defamation claim, on the assumption it was rejected because of lack of particularity, was also rejected on the basis that it was "outside of the Contract" and was, therefore, one upon which the
Superintendent was not prepared to make a decision at all.
On 9 May 1994 the solicitors for the defendant wrote to Mr Spencer and, after referring to the letter of 5 May 1994, stated:- "We note that from your letter it appears that yourself and our client are in dispute as to whether or not you are in dispute.
According to our instructions there is a dispute between the parties and you have been formally advised of this dispute.
On a 'without prejudice' basis (and without affecting our client's rights) we request that you accept as the contractual notice the formal Notice of Dispute which was forwarded with our letter dated April 1994."
After referring to a requirement that the matter go to arbitration the letter stated:- "We note your argument that your Superintendent is not in a position to assess damages in relation to the loss of reputation of our client; we have taken this into account in seeking the early appointment of an arbitrator".
In his affidavit of 13 December 1994 Mr Spencer deposed that "at no stage" had he been provided with any details of the defamation claim and, accordingly, he "never considered such a claim nor have I considered whether or not a Certificate of Payment for such a claim should be issued". In paragraph 9 he deposed:- "Apart from correspondence associated with the resort by Aquaclear
Pty Ltd to arbitration no further correspondence has been received by me in connection with the claim made at Paragraph D(c)(i) of the said Notice of Dispute nor have I entered into any correspondence with any person concerning the subject of" that paragraph.
In the light of the opinion stated in the final paragraph of the letter of 5 May 1994 these statements are difficult to justify. In my opinion the
Superintendent either rejected the claim or refused to make a decision in relation to it because he took the view it could not, as a matter of contract, be dealt with by him.
 
The First
Proceedings
On 13 October 1994 Mr Brian Farmer, ("the Arbitrator"), was appointed as arbitrator and, on 16 November 1994, the first preliminary conference was held at which the plaintiff objected to the Arbitrator's exercising Jurisdiction to determine the defamation claim on the ground that the dispute did not fall within the ambit of the arbitration clause. The Arbitrator rejected this objection holding that clause was wide enough to cover that claim. The plaintiff made no other objection to the procedural way in which the matter was before the Arbitrator, and, hence, took no point that the Notice of 26
April 1994 was not a valid compliance with the procedures laid down by Clause .
On 24 November 1994 the plaintiff commenced proceedings against the
Arbitrator, as the first defendant, and the defendant, as the second defendant, by way of a Summons seeking a declaration that the Arbitrator did not have jurisdiction to hear and determine the defamation claim, and an order that the Arbitrator did not have jurisdiction to hear and determine the claims in respect of misleading and deceptive conduct. An order was sought that the
Arbitrator be restrained from hearing and determining in the arbitration either of the claims to which I have just referred and that he be "directed to hear and determine the arbitration begun pursuant to the Arbitration Agreement entered between the parties according to law". The matter came before me on 2
December 1994. I noted, in a judgment I gave on that day, that the Arbitrator had decided he had jurisdiction "to determine the issue of loss of reputation" and had consented to an application being made to the Court under [s.39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s39.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), ("the Act"), for a determination of that question. After referring to the various assertions made in the Summons I said:- "The fundamental problem with considering the Summons, which I was expressly asked to deal with on a final basis to-day, is that in the absence of any specificity as to the claims the second defendant wishes to make, it is, if not impossible, very difficult to determine whether they are claims arising out of or in connection with the contract.

The argument has proceeded before me on the basis that a claim for defamation, for example, cannot in any circumstances arise out of or in connection with the Contract. I cannot agree with that submission and I think it fails to take account of the width of those words, as to which the Court of Appeal has recently drawn attention in Ferris and Anor versus Plaister and Anor (17 August 1994 - as yet unreported)."
I suggested a "commonsense approach" would be to stand the matter over until discovery had been given and a Statement of Claim furnished so that one could consider the precise allegations made with a view to determining whether they arose out of or in connection with the contract. This course did not find favour with the parties and, therefore, I dismissed the Summons with costs for the reasons, essentially, I had given.
From this decision, which was a final one, the plaintiff sought leave to appeal to the Court of
Appeal. The view must have been taken that leave was necessary under s.101(2)(i) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/). I have some doubt about this, but the point does not seem to have been taken and the Court of Appeal dealt with the application as one for leave to appeal. The Agreed Bundle of
Documents includes the transcript of some of the argument before that Court, which took place on 12 December 1994. At p.17 of the transcript, (p.93F of the
Agreed Bundle), Mr Jacobs of Queen's Counsel for the plaintiff, which was the applicant in the Court of Appeal, and who did not appear before me at first instance, is noted as saying:- "We say upon a true construction of this clause seen against the background of all the other clauses in the agreement, what was put to his Honour Justice Rolfe is correct and that is that a defamation claim is not a claim that the parties ever intended to be adjudicated on by the Superintendent. Hence it follows that the defamation claim is not a claim that could ever have been intended to be adjudicated upon by arbitration. That is a very important point. We are dealing with a standard form of contract. It is used very often and it should be sufficient to attract.."
I have not been favoured with the balance of the transcript but I imagine the submission was that the importance of the point should be sufficient to attract the grant of leave to appeal. It was held not to be. Meagher JA, who gave the principal judgment, referred to the defamation claim and specifically to the claims for relief under the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and said:- "The parties to the building contract, at the insistence of the builder, went before an arbitrator who held that in the particular circumstances of the case, the details of which are not known to us, he had jurisdiction to arbitrate such a claim for defamation together with a claim for additional remuneration due to the builder. The claimant replied in effect by appealing to Mr Justice
Rolfe seeking a declaration that under no possible circumstances could a defamation claim be subject to the arbitration clause. It did not make a limited claim that the particular dispute between the parties was not the subject of a valid arbitration claim but rather the extraordinarily wide submission that under no possible circumstances could any claim for defamation be the subject of the arbitration clause."
His Honour was of the view that I was correct in holding that the case brought by the plaintiff was premature and that relief, of the width sought, could not have been granted. Handley JA agreed that the principal question of law identified by me and submitted for my decision was correctly decided in the circumstances of this case. That question must have been "that a claim for defamation, for example, cannot in any circumstances arise out of or in connection with the contract". Sheller JA agreed.
In my opinion the decision of the Court of Appeal, notwithstanding criticism of it made by Mr Jacobs, stands as authority for the proposition that one cannot say, in the absence of particularity as to the defamation being alleged, that a claim for defamation is not one susceptible of arbitration because it is not one that arises out of or in connection with the contract. The consequence of this must be, in my opinion, that the Court was saying that in appropriate circumstances a defamation claim and, for completeness at this stage, I would add a claim under the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) or the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), could arise out of or in connection with the contract. That is what I had said and leave to appeal against my decision was refused.
Were it otherwise the broad submission made by Mr Jacobs, which I have quoted, would have attracted leave to appeal.
To this stage it was not suggested by the plaintiff that matters of building and construction should not be the subject of arbitration. As
I have said the critical complaint by the plaintiff was the adjudication upon the defamation claim.
 
The Agreement Of 18 January 
One may have been forgiven for thinking that the decision of the Court of
Appeal put the jurisdictional question the parties were anxious to agitate to rest. It did not. On 9 January 1995 the Arbitrator gave certain directions.
They are not before me but, in paragraph 15 of the Interim Award of the
Arbitrator dated 1 May 1995, he stated he directed that the arbitration continue and:- "My only caution to the parties (and particularly to Aquaclear) was the risk that judicial intervention at a later time on the matter of the Arbitrator's jurisdiction might have time and cost implications."
Perhaps because of this the defendant was prepared to enter into the agreement of 18 January 1995. It recited the position of the plaintiff; the directions made by the
Arbitrator on 9 January 1995; the plaintiff's contention that certain of those directions relating to discovery "are null and void in that they were made by the Arbitrator in excess of his jurisdiction"- the wish of the defendant to enforce the directions; and the agreement of the defendant before doing so "to have the preliminary question of the Arbitrator's jurisdiction decided by the
Arbitrator pursuant to [s.23"](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s23.html) of the Act. [Section 23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s23.html) provides, unless a contrary intention is expressed, that the Arbitrator may make an interim award.
The agreement noted that subject to the jurisdictional points "hereinafter identified the arbitration was validly constituted and that subject to Clause 2.1 the Arbitrator may, once the jurisdictional points are finally determined, "proceed to determine the issues raised by Aquaclear as identified in its Notice of Dispute or Difference of 26 April 1994, its Points of Claim of 10 November, 1994 and Outline of Argument of 11 November, 1994".
Clause 2.2.2 noted that for the sake of the clarity the defendant would record with sufficient particularity the defamation claim "so that the jurisdiction point can be properly adjudicated".
This claim was particularised, and such particularisation was accepted by the plaintiff as compliance by the defendant with its obligations to do so, in the following terms:- "during the currency of the contract the Water Board, the
Superintendent or their agents or representatives made or circulated false and adverse reports (verbal or written) to various parties or persons in the construction industry that the performance by Aquaclear of its contract works was not in accordance with its contractual obligations and/or below standard, or defective or not in accordance with proper workmanship or not carried out competently and/or that Aquaclear made unreasonable claims or administered the contract unreasonably or lacked capacity or skill in any area or was late or slow in performing any works or rectification or lacking in skill or reasonableness in liaison with the Principal or Superintendent or their agents or representatives or lacking in financial, management or technical expertise or tenders of Aquaclear were not appropriate and/or that tender evaluation reports were unfavourable or negative to
Aquaclear and/or other statements to similar effect." .
It is convenient to return to the agreement, Clause 3.1 of which stated:- "The only jurisdictional challenges which Sydney Water makes are those identified in this agreement; all other jurisdictional challenges which Sydney Water has or may have are hereby waived.

The Arbitrator's jurisdiction is limited to the determination of the issues raised by Aquaclear in its letter of 20 February addressed to Sydney Water Board for the attention of Greg
Watson.

The Arbitrator does not have jurisdiction to determine any matters referred to in the Notice of Dispute or Difference of 26
April 1994 but for those matters specifically referred to the
Superintendent pursuant to Clause 46.1 of the Building Contract in
Aquaclear's letter of 20 February 1994."
In itself this clause left room for debate as to what was in issue.
However, Clause 3.2 tended to narrow the ambit of this by stating that the grounds the plaintiff would advance to the Arbitrator in support of the contention in Clause 3.1 were:- "(a) Upon a proper construction of Clauses 46.1 and 46.2 of the
Building Contract, disputes or differences are not arbitrable unless they have first been submitted to a decision of the
Superintendent and either party is thereafter dissatisfied with his decision (the irrelevant portions of Clause 46.2 have not been repeated herein).

The only matters referred to the Superintendent by Aquaclear which are of relevance herein are those contained in Aquaclear's letter of 20 February 1994.

The issues raised in Paragraph D(c)(i) of the Notice of
Dispute or Difference were not raised in the letter of 20 February .

The only disputes or differences in respect of which the
Arbitrator was appointed to determine are those arising from the
Superintendent's decision on the issues raised in Aquaclear's letter of 20 February and no other issues.

Upon a proper construction of Clause 46, the issues raised in
Paragraph D(c)(i) of the Notice of Dispute or Difference (as particularised in the documents referred to in paragraph 2.2.2 above) are not arbitrable."
It will be seen there are two threads running through the submissions proposed to be made by the plaintiff. In the end, I have no doubt, they are both designed to achieve the same result, namely to preclude from consideration by the Arbitrator the defamation claim. None-the-less they are distinct and, in submissions before me, they were treated as such. One thread is that the Arbitrator could only consider the matters referred to in the letter of 20 February 1994 which, presumably, is accepted by the plaintiff as a sufficient compliance with Clause 46.1. It was submitted that the Notice of April 1994 was not a sufficient compliance with
Clause 46.1 notwithstanding no such claim had before been raised before the Arbitrator or the Court. The second submission is that the Arbitrator has no jurisdiction to determine the defamation claim, because the Notice of 26 April 1994 did not comply with
Clause .1, and because, as a matter of construction, the defamation claim was not comprehended by the dispute resolution procedure. The first point, in my opinion, was not open to be argued having regard to the terms of Clause .1. The second point, in my opinion, was not open to be argued before the
Arbitrator by dint of the decision of the Court of Appeal and/or my decision.
By that I mean that each point should, in my view, have been determined adversely to the plaintiff by the Arbitrator, for the short reasons I have given.
Clause 4 of the agreement noted the agreement that the jurisdictional challenge be determined by way of an interim award "in accordance with this
Agreement", and Clause 5 noted the parties agreed the Arbitrator had jurisdiction to determine the matters referred to in Clause 3.1. It continued:- "Each party acknowledges the right of the other to such curial review of the Arbitrator's Interim Award on the jurisdiction points as is provided for in [ss.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s38.html), [42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html), [43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s43.html) and [44](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s44.html) of the Act."
The agreement dealt with a number of other matters. The hearing of the "jurisdictional issue", which the parties by their agreement had now committed to the decision of the Arbitrator, took place on 30 and 31 January 1995. As the agreement obviously envisaged matters of jurisdiction are, normally, not matters for the determination of the Arbitrator. However, the parties having agreed to refer the matter to him for determination by way of an Interim
Award, they also agreed that the only challenge was to be via the sections of the Act to which reference is made in Clause 5. Even in the absence of such latter agreement, the former agreement would seem to lead inevitably to that result.
 
The Interim Award
On 1 May 1995 the Arbitrator published his Interim Award.
In the first twelve paragraphs he set out the history of the matter up to the time I gave my judgment and, thereafter, to the reference of the matter to the Court of
Appeal and to the directions the Arbitrator gave on 9 January 1995. He set forth portion of the terms of the agreement of 18 January 1995 and his entry upon the hearing of the jurisdictional issues on 30 and 31 January 1995. He turned to consider the submissions made by Mr Jacobs and he held that the loss of reputation and consequential damages claim "clearly does arise out of the
Contract - without the Contract there would have been no claim". He reinforced this view by stating that there was no embargo on the bringing of a defamation claim and he held:- "In my view, there is no legal impediment to the arbitration of a
defamation matter that 'arises out of or in connection with the
Contract'.

I have already acknowledged however, that this is an unusual type of claim to be arbitrated and while I still have confidence that this is an arbitral matter, I have previously given the Water
Board the opportunity of obtaining a contra-view through the
Courts. The Water Board have not yet been able to convince either the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal of its view in this matter."
There can be no doubt, in my mind, the Arbitrator directed his mind to the correct issue. He noted a submission of Mr Jacobs that even if the
Superintendent had power to adjudicate upon a damages claim for defamation, such a claim was never put to him and, unless that is done first, the
Superintendent cannot determine the matter. This submission pre-supposed that claim was not put to the Superintendent in the Notice of 26 April 1994, notwithstanding the agreement in Clause 2.1 of the agreement of 18 January as to the issues identified in that Notice. The Arbitrator found that the claim was made in the Notice of 26 April 1994. This, in my opinion, was correct.
The Arbitrator was of the view that there is nothing in the contract which would impede or prevent the Superintendent assessing a defamation claim and, in his opinion, none of the provisions would limit his ability to do so.
He concluded that the
Notice of 26 April 1994 met the requirements of Clause .1 (a) and that the response of 5 May 1994 "was to state in effect that the claim was not a claim". He concluded that by that Notice the defendant referred its disputes to the Superintendent for determination and, either that the Superintendent rejected the claim or failed to make a decision within twenty eight days of the giving of the
Notice, as to which the defendant was dissatisfied with his decision.
The Arbitrator held that whatever had happened prior to 26 April 1994, the Notice of Dispute of that date was the defendant's "firm statement that a dispute existed", and the plaintiff "sought to reject the claim by its letter of 5 May 1994". Thereafter the defendant did not withdraw its claim. The
Arbitrator rejected a submission by Mr Jacobs that the Notice of Dispute of 26
April 1994 had no standing in the procedural mechanics set by Clauses .1 and .2, and that it was totally misconceived. He said he agreed in principle it was not the Superintendent's function to determine what the defamation claim was, that it was his function to make a decision and, if the defendant was dissatisfied with the decision or the Superintendent failed to make one there was a dispute referable to arbitration.
At the conclusion of paragraph 22 of the Interim Award the Arbitrator said:- "I must state that these arbitration proceedings to date still have not addressed the merit of the defamation claims themselves.
I cannot tell, nor have I addressed the question of substance of the defamation issue. This will come later in the substantive proceedings of this arbitration, if and when they take place."
It is obvious to me that the Arbitrator considered, correctly in my view, that the matter had not advanced beyond the position as it existed when the first proceedings were brought. As I understand it the Arbitrator was saying he would have to consider each part of the defamation claim to determine whether it could be said that it arose out of or in connection with the
Contract. In a subsequent written submission
Mr Jacobs, in my respectful opinion, misconceived what the Arbitrator had said. The submission was:- "The point that the Arbitrator must decide for himself, which of all the aspects of the defamation claim fall within his jurisdiction, overlooks the fact that he decided that he has overall jurisdiction in respect of the whole 'defamation' claim as particularised, even over those aspects which cannot, by any stretch of the imagination, be held to arise out of the contract.

As he has held that he has jurisdiction to determine the entire loss of reputation claim, he has committed an error of law, even if it is held by this Honourable Court that the arbitration clause is wide enough to cover some, but not all of the aspects of the claim for loss of reputation."
I have suggested this submission is misconceived because the point before the Arbitrator, relevantly, was whether he had jurisdiction over, i.e. whether it was permissible for him to hear, the defamation claim. The Arbitrator had to decide, firstly, whether he was able to hear any such claim. If he answered that in the affirmative the further question will arise, in the context of the arbitration, whether any, and if so which, facts sought to be adduced in evidence are relevant to the claim made by the defendant as arising out of or in connection with the contract. Therefore the Arbitrator will receive such evidence on the defamation claim as he thinks fit and, having done so, he will decide the dispute committed to his decision by the submission to arbitration.
The Arbitrator considered submissions made in relation to estoppel, waiver, and res judicata and he said:- "While I am aware of the complex issues of law involved in estoppel, the facts make most of the argument irrelevant in that
I have determined that the provisions of Clauses 46.1 and 46.2 have been satisfied. Mr Jacobs tacitly agrees that if the clause requirements have been satisfied (and I have ruled that they have been), then the questions of estoppel and res judicata probably need no further consideration ..."
The Arbitrator considered certain submissions to the effect that the parties did not contemplate that the defamation claim would be determined in the arbitration proceedings and then proceeded to deal with the question of costs, with which I shall deal separately.
By his Award he ruled he had jurisdiction to hear matters in dispute between the parties arising out of or in connection with the contract, which he identified with specificity, "and which matters 'include the 'loss of reputation and consequential damages' or 'defamation' claim". He held, accordingly, that his jurisdiction was not limited to the determination of the issues raised in the letter of 20 February 1994, and included a determination of any matters referred to in the Notice of Dispute or Difference of 26 April
His findings make even clearer, if that were necessary, the view I have just expressed as to what the Arbitrator was deciding.
 
The Second Proceedings
By a Summons issued on 23 May 1995, which was amended subsequently, the plaintiff seeks leave to appeal against the Interim Award or, alternatively, that it be remitted to the
Arbitrator "for further and/or better reasons". The question of Jurisdiction having been committed to the Arbitrator by the parties' agreement, the plaintiff recognised, correctly in my opinion, that to obtain leave it must satisfy the requirements of [s.38](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s38.html) and, particularly, [s.38(5).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s38.html) The first issue was whether the claim as particularised in paragraph
D(c)(i), as read with the particulars provided on 18 January , fell within the scope of the arbitration clause such that the Arbitrator had jurisdiction to determine them. It was contended that in so holding the Arbitrator committed a manifest error of law on the face of the Award, or there was strong evidence that he made an error of law and that the determination of the question may add, or may be likely to add, substantially to the certainty of commercial law. The Arbitrator's finding in this respect was also attacked, in the Summons, on the basis there were inadequate reasons in law and a failure to make "critical findings of fact", with the consequence that the matter should be remitted for further and better reasons.
Secondly, the point was taken whether the Arbitrator committed a manifest error of law on the face of the Award in finding the Notice of Dispute of 26
April 1994 and "more particularly paragraph D(c)(i) thereof' complied with
Clause46.1(a).
Altematively, it was submitted that [s.38(5)(b)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s38.html) applied.
The plaintiff's contentions repeat that the defamation claim does not arise out of or in connection with the contract and that, in holding it did, the Arbitrator made the errors to which I have referred. Nextly, the plaintiff contends compliance with the provisions of Clause 46.1 constitutes a pre-condition to any dispute being submitted to arbitration under Clause 46.2, that the defamation claim is not arbitral under the arbitration clause, such that the Arbitrator lacks jurisdiction to determine it, and that his decision to do so was in error.
The Amended Summons also raised the issue as to whether the Arbitrator was entitled to award indemnity costs.
 
Did The Notice Of Dispute Or Difference Dated 26 April 1994 Constitute A
Sufficient Notice Under Clause ?
I think it convenient to deal with this point first, and, in doing so, I shall assume the agreement of 18 January 1995 does not preclude the matter being litigated. It was, as I have said, one of the matters committed for the
Arbitrator's decision. He decided the Notice did constitute compliance with clause 46. The first question is whether, in so deciding, there is a manifest error of law on the face of the Award. In my view there is not. The applicable principles have been laid down by the Court of Appeal in Promenade
Investments
Pty Limited versus State of New South Wales [(1992) 26 NSWLR 203] and Natoli versus Walker (Court of Appeal - 26 May 1994 - unreported). In my view the question as to whether the Notice complies with the clause requires one to construe it and the information it contains, in the light of the clause, and to determine whether it amounts to a furnishing in writing to the Superintendent of details of the claim. That question is to be judged by reading the Notice and determining whether the information contained therein constitutes "details" of the claim. I do not consider, in cases where particulars of the claim are given, that the question as to whether "details" have been furnished amounts solely to a question of law. In my view it is a question of mixed fact and law. The party to whom the decision has been committed must look at the particulars furnished and ask whether they constitute "details". I do not think the matter can be tested by saying that "details" have not been furnished because on no basis would the other party be precluded from requesting further particularisation of the claim. If that were so the claim would not only have to set out far more than is normally comprehended by "details". I do not consider this is the meaning to be given to the word "details" but, more importantly, I am of the view that the determination by the Arbitrator has not been shown to be a manifest error of law and, essentially for the same reasons, I am not satisfied there is strong evidence that the Arbitrator made an error of law.
I do not consider, upon a proper construction of the Notice, that it does not constitute a request for the Superintendent to make a decision. Paragraph
E states, at least impliedly, that if the defendant was dissatisfied with the decision or if the Superintendent failed to make a decision within the specified time it required the dispute to be referred to arbitration.
It seems to me that one could only say there was a manifest error of law, or strong evidence of an error of law if, on no reasonable interpretation of the Notice, could the Arbitrator have come to the view that it compiled with Clause 46.1.
In my opinion that cannot be said.
Mr Jacobs submitted that compliance with the provisions of Clause 46.1 is a pre-condition to triggering the arbitration clause, with which I would agree. He referred to the decision of Cole J in Pine Creek Gold Fields
Limited versus GEC Diesels Australia
Limited (29 March 1990 - unreported). His
Honour noted the submission that the dispute resolution clause specified a step as being a "pre-condition" to proceeding to arbitration and he said:- "So much may be accepted."
However, in that case, arguably, there was no compliance with the giving of notice because the notice was given to an engineer, who had not in fact been the superintendent under the contract for two and a half years prior to the giving of the notice. In my view Cole J, with respect, was accepting that a pre-condition must be met. I would not seek to disagree. I would merely state that the issue before the Arbitrator, which he has found in favour of the defendant, was whether the notice met the "pre-condition".
Mr Jacobs referred nextly to the decision of Giles J in ABB Power Plants
Limited versus Electricity Commission of New South Wales trading as Pacific Power (5 August 1994 - unreported).
In that case his Honour found, on the facts before him, that the correspondence did not amount to "any clear communication from the contractor answering the description in Clause 46.1(a), that is, a furnishing in writing to the superintendent of details of the contractor's claim and a request to the superintendent to make a decision ..". That poses the issue for determination in this case and, in my respectful opinion, tends to point up that the issue is, at least, one of mixed fact and law.
Reference was nextly made to part of what his Honour said at p.9, which was said by him in the context of determining whether the parties had entered into an arbitration agreement. He noted, once again correctly in my respectful opinion, that it depended in each case upon the particular provision, its construction and the contractual intention found. And he concluded that Clause evinced a contractual intention that the provisions set out the means upon which the parties had agreed for the resolution of disputes and the means which they had agreed they would use. He said, once again correctly in my respectful opinion, that Clause 46.1 "quite clearly expresses the first step" to be taken. It is not difficult, in my opinion, to accept, as the Court of
Appeal did, the correctness of these views expressed by his Honour. The
Arbitrator had to decide whether that step had been taken.
The submissions on behalf of the plaintiff then suggest that the Notice of 26 April 1994 does not amount to the furnishing of details of the claim and does not seek a resolution of the defamation claim. On the face of the Notice
I disagree with both of these submissions, in so far as that is relevant, and, more accurately, I am not satisfied that the decision of the Arbitrator amounted to either a manifest error of law or an error of law. It also seems to me that a fair reading of the agreement means that in addition to the particulars of the defamation claim given in the Notice of 26 April 1994, the
Arbitrator was bound to have regard to the further particulars furnished pursuant to the agreement of 18 January 1995, which were accepted by the plaintiff as discharging the defendant's contractual obligation.
Mr Jacobs drew my attention to the decision of Connelly J in
Cairns-Mulgrave Water Supply Board versus Watts Construction Division Pty Limited BCL 332 in which his Honour held that identifying the dispute did not satisfy the terms of the clause before him, which required "details of particulars in writing of each such dispute or question which it decides to have so referred under distinct and separate headings and specifying the amount, if any, claimed by him under each head".
The particularity of this clause and of the clause
Wood J considered in
Eden Constructions Pty Limited versus Eurobodalla Shire Council (1985) 1 BCL 375 at , which required "detailed particulars", has to be contrasted with the words used in the present case, namely "details". Other words used, in contra-distinction to those in the present case, are "full detailed particulars in writing of each such claim": Sundell versus Queensland Housing
Commission (No 1) [(1955) StRQd 12] at p.27.
In the result I am not satisfied that any error justifying the grant of leave to appeal has been demonstrated in so far as it is submitted there is either a manifest error of law, or strong evidence of an error of law. Mr
Jacobs further submitted that the second limb of [s.38(5)(b)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s38.html) had also been satisfied. disagree. Each notice will, in my opinion, call for individual consideration and, in the absence of evidence that a particular form of notice is universally or frequently used in the industry, I do not see that any determination on the construction of this Notice will meet the test required by the second limb.
 
Is The Defamation Claim Arbitrable?
I think I have now cleared the way to consider the question whether the defamation claim is arbitrable. On one view it can, in my opinion, be answered very shortly. The Court of Appeal held in the first proceedings that it was not open to hold that, as the matter then appeared, the Arbitrator did not have jurisdiction to determine the defamation claim. What, in my opinion, their Honours were suggesting was that each individual claim would have to be considered to determine whether it arose out of or in connection with the contract. As the Arbitrator pointed out, quite correctly in my view, the position before him had not really been advanced by the furnishing of the additional particulars.
Therefore, just as the Court of Appeal was not able to say and I was not able to say that the Arbitrator was deprived of jurisdiction in relation to the defamation claim, nor was the Arbitrator able to make that decision on the information before him. The additional particulars, whilst constituting details of the claim, did not enable him to determine, as in my view he is bound to determine by virtue of the attitude taken to this claim by the plaintiff in its letter of 5 May 1994, whether the particular claims arose out of or in connection with the contract. It will be necessary for him to hear the matter and determine whether the defamation claim, or any part of it, arises out of or in connection with the contract conformably with legal principle. I have quoted the passage from the Interim Award and I am not satisfied that it discloses any manifest error of law or strong evidence of an error of law. Rather, so it seems to me, it follows the law as stated by the
Court of Appeal in the first proceedings.
I have been referred to various decisions by Mr Jacobs in support of his submission that the defamation claim is not one which is arbitrable. In my view those decisions do not support the submission.
In Kianta Osakeyhtio versus Britain and Overseas Trading Company Limited LLR 569 Devlin
J was confronted with the question as to whether a particular dispute arose "out of the interpretation or the fulfilment of this contract". After the dispute had arisen under the contract the parties entered into a compensation agreement, which his Lordship found did not, either expressly or by implication, incorporate the arbitration clause 'in the original agreement. In these circumstances his Lordship held that the dispute arose not out of the interpretation of the original contract, but rather out of the construction of the compensation agreement and, further, that the entry into the compensation agreement had broken the causal nexus between the original agreement and the dispute. However, at p.575, he expressed the view that if the compensation agreement had been expressed as supplemental to the first principal agreement, a case might well have been made out for saying "that it was to be read as if it is as one with the principal agreement and that the arbitration clause was to be treated as if the parties had expressly said that it was to be incorporated therein". His Lordship dealt with various reasons for concluding that it was "impossible to hold that the arbitration clause can be read into the compensation agreement". He then considered whether the dispute under the compensation agreement arose out of the fulfilment of the first principal agreement. He said, and Mr Jacobs put emphasis upon this, at p.575 that the matter was a comparatively short point of construction and:- "In one sense, of course, it does arise out of the fulfilment of the original contract; but it is plain that those words 'arising out of' are to be given a meaning they always are given in clauses of this sort which covers only something sufficiently close to establish an ordinary causal connection between the two events that are being considered. One can, of course, go on forever in one sense. The judgment which I am now giving arises out of the contract of August 1937, because it would not have been given if that contract had never been made. But that plainly is not enough.
There must be some closer connection than that, and I think one applies the ordinary principles of causation in order to determine whether the dispute which has arisen really arises in the legal sense out of the first contract or whether it is too remote."
The question his Lordship posed was whether there was a causal connection between the event of which complaint was made and the contract and, that was to be decided by reference to the ordinary principles of causation. He concluded this was broken by the compromise agreement and he adopted the test that there is a distinction between a dispute that would never have arisen but for the contract, and a dispute that arises out of the contract. He considered, in this case, the first was the appropriate description.
The High Court has now laid down, for the purposes of Australian law, the relevant tests as to causation: March v Stramare (E and M H) Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506] Each of those cases was concerned with liability in tort and in March v
Stramare it was held that causation is essentially a question of fact to be answered by reference to commonsense and experience and one into which considerations of policy and value judgments necessarily enter. The "but for" test was held not to be a definitive test of causation.
What this seems to raise, to my mind, is that unless it be correct to say, upon a construction of the contract, that the defamation claim is not one the parties have agreed by their contract to submit to arbitration, the facts have to be looked at by the tribunal of fact, in this case the Arbitrator, to determine whether they can, conformably with authority, be said to arise out of or in connection with the contract. This, in my opinion, will depend upon the precise terms of the defamation alleged, which, the parties in this case by their agreement, did not require to be specified in the further particulars furnished pursuant to the agreement of 18 January 1995. Therefore, to take an example, let it be assumed that the defamation alleged is that a representative of the plaintiff, in the course of his/her employment, said to a third person that specified work under the contract was not carried out in a proper and workmanlike manner. Depending upon the defences raised to that claim, so may depend the answer to be given. But let it be assumed that a defence raised is that notwithstanding that the words were used they were true, it being remembered that the particulars say the assertions were false.
The issue would then be whether they were true and the determination of the primary facts, upon which that will be established, has been committed, firstly, to the Superintendent and, if there is dissatisfaction with his decision or with a failure by him to make a decision, to the Arbitrator. I think, arguably, that dispute can be said to arise out of or in connection with, which latter words it was agreed must add to "out of", the contract.
Similarly, and perhaps with more force, the same considerations would apply in relation to a claim for misleading or deceptive conduct.
What I have just said, however, does nothing more than point up the possibility, which it seems to me the decision of the Court of Appeal in the first proceedings recognised, that there may be circumstances in which the defamation claim, or part thereof, can be said to arise out of or in connection with the contract. I have suggested Kianta provides support for this and the next authority to which Mr Jacobs referred, namely the decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal in Kaverit Steel and Crane Limited et al versus Kone
Corp et al [(1992) 87 DLR(4th) 129], supports this view. A distributorship agreement provided that any dispute "arising out of or in connection with this agreement shall be finally settled without recourse to the courts" and, in effect, by arbitration. The distributor commenced an action in Alberta alleging, inter alia, a breach of the agreement by the licensor. The licensor sought a stay of the reference to arbitration, which was refused at first instance on the grounds that some of the issues in the action fell outside the scope of the arbitration clause and that some parties to the action were not parties to the arbitration agreement. An appeal to the Alberta Court of Appeal was allowed.
The headnote states that it was held that the fact that the action raised issues that were not arbitrable was not a sufficient ground for declining to enforce the arbitration clause or for declaring it "inoperative", and that all issues between the licensor and the distributor that rested upon the existence of the contract should be stayed and referred to arbitration.
The judgment of the Court was delivered by Kerans JA. His Honour noted that the arbitration question was complicated by certain parties not being parties to the arbitration clause and, secondly, by the distributor's claim containing allegations beyond simple breach of contract. At pp.
-134 his Honour said:- "The extra claims also include allegations against all the defendants of conspiracy to harm all plaintiff's. Mr Redmond for the distributor says that this pleading relies on tort, not contract, and offers two alternatives: conspiracy to harm by unlawful acts and conspiracy to harm by lawful acts. Are either caught by the submission? The learned
Chambers Judge, no doubt because he did not need to give his view of the case, did not deal with this issue separately. I must." 
Reference to "the submission" is obviously a reference to the submission to arbitration.
His Honour continued that the mere fact that a claim sounded in tort did not exclude arbitration, which he concluded by reference to the International [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/). After dealing with that he turned to an interpretation of the submission to arbitration and he said, at pp. 134-135:- "The submission before us limits itself to disputes 'arising out of or in connection with' the contract. I agree with the comments of Evans
J in Overseas Union Insurance versus A.A. Mutual (1988) 2 LLR at p.67. He first described a narrower form of submission, typically using only the words 'under the contract' where only rights and obligations created by the contract can be referred. He contrasted that to the form of submission before us when he said, at p.67: 'Conversely, if the parties agree to refer disputes arising "in relation to" or "in connection with" their contract, a fortiori if the clause covers disputes arising "during the execution of the contract" (The Damianos (1971) 1 LLR 502 ..) or in relation to "the work to be carried out hereunder", a common form in construction contracts, then both as a matter of language and of authority some wider category may be intended.' 
In my view, this submission extends beyond rights and duties created by the contract. A dispute meets the test set by the submission if either claimant or defendant relies on the existence of a contractual obligation as a necessary element to create the claim, or to defeat it. Thus, the pleading here that relies upon a claim of a conspiracy by unlawful means to harm the distributor meets the test. This is because a breach of the contract is relied upon as the source of the 'unlawfulness'.
That dispute should be referred to arbitration." (My emphasis.)
So, in the present case, it is at least arguable that the existence or nonexistence of a breach of the contract will be relevant in a determination of the defamation claim. Whether the defamatory statements were true or false, or were made in circumstances where they are privileged, may well depend on the existence of a contractual obligation.
His Honour then went on to consider an unparticularised claim and said, at p.136:- "In the absence of particulars, I can only say that the claim in question must be and is referred to arbitration if it relies upon the existence of a contract between the parties. If a claim can be made out free of that reliance, it can go to trial. The risk lies with the plaintiff. In effect, I read down the pleading to add the prefatory words: 'apart from any contract or contractual obligations and without reliance upon them ..'. I should add that
I am sceptical that the plea, so adjusted, discloses a cause of action. But that, as I have said, is for another day." (His
Honour's emphasis.)
He continued:- "I cannot say that a dispute arises out of or in connection with a contract unless the existence of the contract is germane either to the claim or the defence. It is not enough to say that the events that give rise to the claim also give rise to a claim for breach of contract. One must be able to say that the other claim relies on the existence of the contractual obligation."
At pp.137-138 he said:- "I therefore agree in part with the learned Chambers Judge that some of the non-contractual issues cannot go to arbitration. I am, however, of the view that the claim by the distributor for conspiracy to harm by unlawful acts, because the unlawful acts are alleged to be unlawful breach of contract, must go to arbitration.
Claims of interference with competition not based upon the existence of the contract may proceed in Alberta."
His Honour made clear that in respect of some claims he was able, by reference to the pleadings, to determine the parts which should and the parts which should not proceed to arbitration. In respect of the unparticularised claims, however, he was confronted with the very difficulty which has bedevilled this case of not being able to say, definitely, that the claim was not one which could go to arbitration.
Mr Jacobs referred nextly to the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Empresa Exportadora de Azucar versus Industria Azucarer Nacional SA (The "Playa
Larga" and "Marble Islands") (1983) 2 LLR 171. Ackner LJ, in whose reasons
Stephenson LJ, and Sir Sebag Shaw presumably, agreed, was concerned with an arbitration clause relating to any controversy "that might arise from this contract". At p. 1 82 his Lordship noted the submission that those words meant, and only meant, "a dispute giving rise to a contractual cause of action". He noted the Arbitrators rejected the submission and continued:- "It seems to me that the claimant must show either that the resolution of a contractual issue is necessary for a decision on the tortious claim (as in Astro Vencedor versus Mabanaft [(1971) 2 QB )] or, that the contractual and tortious disputes are so closely knitted together on the facts that an agreement to arbitrate on one can properly be construed as covering the other; as in Wolf v
Collis Removal Services [(1948) 1 KB 11], and the 'Merita' ."
His Lordship held that whilst the contract formed part of the narrative of events leading up to the claim, "it need not be asserted when the cause of action comes to be pleaded", and:- "Moreover, although the claims in contract and conversion are closely associated, it is hard to see how the assertion of a contractual claim which was (ex hypothesi) invalid could generate a jurisdiction in tort which would not otherwise have existed."
After referring to what had been said at first instance, and a submission that it contained two propositions, which were not reconcilable, Ackner LJ said:- "We do not agree. To our minds the learned Judge having concluded that lansa had failed to show that the resolution of a contractual issue was necessary for a decision on the tortious claim, was nevertheless satisfied that they had passed the alternative test, namely that they had established that the contractual and tortious disputes were so closely knit together on the facts, that an agreement to arbitrate on one can properly be construed as covering the other. If that was his view, we agree with it."
He continued that it was necessary to construe the written submission to arbitration according to its language and in the light of the circumstances in which it was made and, at p. 183, he said:- "The words 'all disputes arising out of this contract' are less precise than they look. In strictness, disputes arise not out of a contract but out of conflicting views taken by the parties to the contract (per Lord Sumner in Produce Brokers Co Limited versus Olympia
Oil and Coke Co Limited [(1916) AC 314] at p.328'. There are two stages which must be gone through in order to achieve a solution.
The first is to consider what is the nature of the dispute and the second is whether that dispute is within the scope of the arbitration clause." .
He then referred to the function of pleadings as defining the dispute and to the pleadings in that case, and, having analysed them, he said:- "The dispute thus related to the contract and in particular to something done or not done under that contract.
As pleadings on both sides stood, the contract was not an item of past history leading up to the claim. It was central to the whole dispute. The commonsense of the situation was that a trader who had bargained and paid for a quantity of sugar, in the contemplation that he would receive physical possession of it, had had that sugar snatched away by the vendor just as it was about to be delivered to him. Having regard to the nature of the defence, to suggest that the resultant dispute as to whether the trader had a remedy and if so for how much, was not a dispute arising out of the contract, seems to us to be commercially quite unrealistic. Unless constrained by authority we would not so find."
Once again this decision does not, in my respectful opinion, provide any authority for the proposition that the defamation claim cannot be pursued in these proceedings. Rather, it will be necessary to look at the pleadings and the facts led in support of them and to determine, in accordance with the tests laid down in the authorities, whether the defendant has established an entitlement to have the matter determined by arbitration, as being one arising out of or in connection with the contract.
Similar principles were, as I understand it, applied by the Court of
Appeal in the "Angelic Grace" (1995) 1 LLR 87. At p.89 Leggatt LJ said:- "The question in a nutshell is whether the relevant claims and cross-claims arise out of the contract. It is common ground that the question must be answered in the light of 'The Playa Larga' ..., in which this Court upheld the dictum of Mr Justice Mustill that a tortious claim does 'arise out of a contract containing an arbitration clause if there is a sufficiently close connection between the tortious claim and a claim under the contract. In order that there should be a sufficiently close connection, as the 
Judge said, the claimant must show either that the resolution of the contractual issue is necessary for a decision on the tortious claim, or, that the contractual and tortious disputes are so closely knitted together on the facts that an agreement to arbitrate on one can properly be construed as covering the other."
Mr Jacobs submitted that the English authorities should be viewed in the light of what he referred to as "one stop litigation". He elaborated upon this by saying it meant that cases should be determined, where possible, in the one forum. However, with respect to that submission, I think the decisions go beyond that point and set out, relevantly for present purposes, the circumstances in which proceedings may arise out of or in connection with a contract.
Mr Jacobs placed reliance upon the decision of Beaumont J in Allergan
Pharmaceuticals Inc and Anor versus Bausch and Lomb Inc and
Anor (1987) 3 BCL 61.
His Honour was there concerned with an application for a stay of proceedings and, in the course of considering the words "arising out of or relating to the agreement", he said they were capable of the widest construction: Heyman v
Darwins Limited [(1942) AC 356] at 629. However, his Honour then had to consider whether it could be said that the claims that the several provisions of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) had been contravened were referable to arbitration. He concluded they were not because they fell outside the purview of that clause because:- "In my view, causes of action in the form of contraventions of [ss.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), [53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s53.html)(a), [53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s53.html)(d) or [53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s53.html)(g) arise exclusively from the statutory provisions themselves.

It is trite to say that causes of action under the general law, whether in contract or otherwise, arise independently of these provisions. In the absence of any substantive nexus or connection between the contract sued upon and the contraventions of the several provisions of [Part V](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p5) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) alleged, and, in my view, none exists here, the latter causes of action cannot be referable to arbitration pursuant to s.xix.

In my opinion, it is not enough for this purpose to point to the contract as part of the background of these alleged contraventions. As has been said, the statutory causes of action now sued upon exist independently of contracts. They are consumer protection provisions which in no way depend upon any private agreement for their source. Conduct of the kind proscribed by [Part
V](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p5) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) will be established, if at all, irrespective of the contractual relations of the immediate party.
Nor could any contract inter partes constitute a defence to any alleged contravention of such legislation. In short, an alleged contravention of [Part V](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p5) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) is not, as a matter of characterisation, a 'controversy or claim arising out of or relating to (the) agreement' for the purposes of s.xix of that contract."
In my opinion it is essential, in considering his Honour's decision, to give due weight to his Honour's statement that in the absence of any substantive nexus or connection between the contract sued upon and the contraventions of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), as to which he found none existed in that case, the latter causes of action could not be referable to arbitration. It is necessary, in every case, to analyse the way in which the case is pleaded. One can, in my respectful opinion, see the possibility of a nexus where statements are made in trade or commerce as to the quality of work carried out by a builder under a contract, which may be misleading or deceptive. Whether or not they are may well depend upon a determination of the contractual rights of the parties and, nothing his Honour said, as I would understand it, denies the possibility of such a nexus. What his Honour was saying, quite correctly in my respectful opinion, is that it is necessary to have regard to each individual case.
All the authorities to which I have referred emphasise this and, at the risk of unnecessary repetition, the same view was expressed by the Court of
Appeal in the first proceedings.
Mr Jacobs also argued that one could not construe the submission to arbitration, against the background of which the contract was entered into, as including defamation claims. He said it could never have been the intention of the parties that these should be litigated by way of arbitration. Prima facie that submission has an attraction. However, one must return to the matters the parties decided were to be determined by arbitration, namely those arising out of or in connection with the contract. If, on a proper analysis of the claim made, the defamation claim or some pan of it falls within those words then, it seems to me, one does not say the defamation claim may not be pursued, simply because it is unusual for it to be pursued in arbitration proceedings. It may be equally unusual to pursue a claim 'in arbitration proceedings for rectification or frustration, but the contract expressly provides for this. Mr
Jacobs relied upon this provision to show that if there had been any intention to include, within the submission to arbitration, the defamation claim then that would have been stated together with the words "rectification" and "frustration".
On the other hand the Arbitrator took the view that as words excluding the defamation claim were not used there that was no reason why it should be excluded. It seems to me that the proper approach is that rectification and frustration are both issues which go to the terms of and the existence of the contract, and Mr Jacobs seemed to agree with my suggestion they were used to put aside any doubt created by some authorities that the
Arbitrator may determine those points. However, both the words are related to the terms of or the applicability of the contract in the particular circumstances. Once that matter is determined one can then decide what matters arise out of or in connection with the contract as, for example, so rectified.
Obviously if the contract is frustrated, or at least prima facie obviously if the contract is frustrated, that will have certain other consequences.
All of the matters to which I have referred tend to confirm, conformably with Promenade and Natoli, there is no manifest error of law on the face of the Award. The law, in my opinion, favours the decision to which the
Arbitrator came, provided it is constantly borne in mind that once the case is pleaded or otherwise particularised in the way the Arbitrator requires, what he must decide, as he has shown he appreciates fully, is whether the defamation claim, or any part of it, arises out of or in connection with the contract. As I have said the matter has not really progressed further by the various proceedings the parties have taken since the first proceedings were determined by the Court of Appeal.
In my opinion there is neither a manifest error of law nor strong evidence of an error of law. Even if there were strong evidence of an error of law I would not be satisfied that the determination of that issue in the present context, namely without some determination as to whether the particular factual situation arose out of or in connection with the contract, would meet the test laid down by the second limb of [s.38(5)(b)(ii).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s38.html)
Mr Jacobs also complained that the Arbitrator had given insufficient reasons as to why he concluded he had jurisdiction and,
I think the submission also went to the question of the sufficiency of the notice. I disagree. The reasons, in my view, are totally adequate for the purpose of disclosing the reasoning process in which the Arbitrator engaged. The purpose and function of reasons has been referred to frequently by the High Court and the Court of
Appeal and I find it unnecessary to repeat what has been written.
It is sufficient, in my view, to hold that the Arbitrator has acquitted himself of his obligation to give reasons in this regard.
I would, accordingly, dismiss the Summons in so far as it seeks relief in relation to the Notice of Dispute dated 26 April and the challenge to the right of the Arbitrator to hear the defamation claim.
 
The Order For Indemnity Costs
I must say
I feel great sympathy for the Arbitrator in relation to this aspect. He appears to have taken the view, and I think the fair inference is that he did, that there was absolutely no merit in the plaintiffs continuing to argue the jurisdictional point and, once again,
I think he took the view that the two days of argument before him in the light of what transpired previously was a waste of time and should not have occurred. The Arbitrator referred to the large amount of material which had been placed before him on and January 1995. Unfortunately, however, the Arbitrator did not say either expressly or by reasonable implication why he was making the order for indemnity costs. Whilst I think I can guess at it, that is not good enough to uphold his decision. Mr Doyle, on behalf of the defendant, submitted that the
Arbitrator was clearly of the view there was no merit in the claim being pressed by the plaintiff and so much is clear from what he said. Unfortunately
I disagree with that. Whilst, as I have said, I think that is perhaps the proper inference to be drawn, I am also of the opinion that a party to an
Award is entitled to have reasons, which enable the party to know why a particular order has been made, so that a decision can be made as to whether the result was arrived at correctly or incorrectly.
The reasons in this case do not fulfil that criterion. In my view the matter should be remitted to the
Arbitrator to state reasons as to why he ordered indemnity costs, having regard to the principles upon which costs of that nature are generally awarded in cases which do not involve any question of an offer of compromise or a payment into Court or matters of that sort. I have no doubt that when the matter is referred back to the Arbitrator he will be referred to the relevant authorities on that aspect.
 
Exercise Of
Discretion
It must be remembered that in Natoli versus Walker Mahoney JA paid particular attention to the exercise of discretion in the consideration of an application for leave to appeal. Although his Honour was there concerned with the amount of money involved if, as his Honour indicated, discretion can be considered, this is a case in which, in the exercise of my discretion, I would refuse to interfere to grant leave. The plaintiff has had every opportunity to ventilate the main complaint, which has now been argued before me, arguably for a second time. It has had no success in so doing and, in my opinion, nothing has happened since the decision of the Court of Appeal, which would stimulate any prospect of success in its mind if proper consideration were given to the matter.
There is a reasonable case, even at this stage, for concluding that many of the building and construction issues, which will inevitably be decided by arbitration, will be relevant to a consideration of such parts of the defamation claim as are shown to arise out of or in connection with the contract. This makes it desirable for the factual issues to be determined by the person to whose decision the parties, by their contract, agreed.
Although, for reasons I shall state shortly, I do not think that any issues of waiver or estoppel apply to this case, I do consider that, in the exercise of my discretion, it is relevant to have regard to the opportunities the plaintiff has had to press these claims before both this Court and the
Arbitrator and the lack of success it has encountered.
All these considerations lead me to the view that, in the exercise of my discretion, I should refuse the applications for leave to appeal. I note this is an additional and independent reason for doing so.
 
Waiver and Estoppel
I do not consider the legal elements of waiver have been made out. At a factual level the plaintiff has waived nothing. There may have been estoppel arising out of the first proceedings if they amounted to a final judgment on the critical point. However, the effect of that was over-come, in my opinion, by the subsequent agreement of the parties to refer the matter afresh to the
Arbitrator. I do not think in those circumstances the defendant can now raise questions of estoppel of the res judicata, issue estoppel and Anshun estoppel type.
 
General Observation
I do not propose to depart from this case without observing that it is a matter of great regret to the Court that an arbitration, which was put in train as long ago as October 1994, has not proceeded past the point the present arbitration has reached. In saying that I am in no way being critical of the Arbitrator, who has obviously made great efforts to determine the matter. For some reason the parties seem determined, notwithstanding the prior determinations of this Court, to bring about a situation where far from litigating the merits of the dispute they wish to fight the matter on a far narrower and less productive basis.
The other matter to which I wish to draw attention is that after the hearing concluded my Associate received a letter from Mr Jacobs dated 30 June , stating that he would be "very grateful if you will kindly request of his Honour whether or not it is in order for me .....".
The request then made reference to making available certain further material and making "the following additional short points, which I should have made in reply". The points were then stated and the letter concluded:- "A copy of this letter and the annexures hereto, duly highlighted and flagged, is being sent to Aquaclear's solicitors."
The letter makes clear that a submission was being made to me without those representing the defendant aware of that fact or of the terms of the submission. Mr Jacobs confirmed this when I had the matter re-listed for mention this morning. It seems to me that if counsel wish to make submissions after the submissions have apparently closed it should only be done with the consent of the other side and after they have had the opportunity of considering the submissions. If consent is not forthcoming an application can be made in open Court to re-open the submissions.
 
Orders
I order that the claims made in the Amended Summons for a grant of leave to appeal against the decision of the Arbitrator be dismissed. I order that the Interim Award be remitted to the Arbitrator pursuant to s.43 of the Act for him to re-consider the question of indemnity costs and, in the event of his being satisfied indemnity costs should be award, for him to state his reasons for that.
The hearing of the Summons was essentially taken up with a determination of the first two issues. The issue as to indemnity costs took but a small part of the hearing. In my opinion the appropriate costs order is that the plaintiff pay ninety five per cent (95%) of the defendant's costs of the proceedings and I so order.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/13.html  
