

R J Van Zeggeren versus S J Borg [1996] NSWSC 263 (9 July 1996) 
Robert John VAN ZEGGEREN versus Stephen John BORG /93; DC4859/89 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER JA, SHELLER JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS: DECEIT-necessity to prove loss-interest entitlement.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: The appellant, who was the defendant in proceedings before Herron DCJ, alleged, when sued by the respondent for the balance of purchase price payable under an agreement for the sale of shares, that the respondent had been guilty of fraud. There were two categories of fraud alleged. The first was that the respondent had induced the appellant to enter into the agreement for sale of the shares in a business which conducted a real estate agency by overstating assets and understating liabilities. Loss was said to be occasioned thereby. Those allegations of fraud were not established and there was no challenge to that finding on appeal. The second category of fraud was that respondent had induced entry into the agreement by representing that he was in ill health such as to make it necessary that he retire from the business, and that he would not in the future be engaged in real estate business in opposition to the appellant, except in so far as he may be employed by others as a real estate agent. That allegation succeed before Herron DCJ. However, Herron DCJ held that the appellant had not established any consequential loss. Noentheless his Honour awarded nominal damages of $200 for the plaintiff's "breach of the contract by reason of his fraud". The result thus was that the plaintiff respondent was successful and obtained a judgment in the sum of $26,285 being the balance of purchase price for the shares plus interest of $17,496 on his claim. The appellant was successful on the cross-claim which alleged fraud, obtaining a judgment of $200. Each party was ordered to pay his own costs. 
On appeal the appellant has submitted that the trial judge erred "in failing to find a verdict for the defendant on the plaintiff's claim and in failing to award the defendant an amount at least equal to the amount paid by him to the plaintiff". The appellant defendant had paid $6,000 and transferred a vehicle worth $10,000.

The allegations of fraud were raised both as a defence to the plaintiff's claim, and by way of an amended cross-claim. Regarding the defence, the appellant has submitted that: "In view of his Honour's findings as to fraud and the repudiation of the agreement by the defendant, his Honour erred in failing to find that these matters constituted a complete defence to the plaintiff's claim and enter a verdict for the defendant." 
However, his Honour did not find that the defendant had "repudiated" the agreement. Nor did he find that the defendant had rescinded the agreement.
Indeed the letter from the appellant's solicitors said to constitute the repudiation was in fact an affirmation of the contract. In that letter dated 4
April 1989, after asserting that the appellant entered into the agreement on the basis of the health and non-competition representations to which I have referred, Messrs Westgarth Middletons wrote: "In all the circumstances out client believes that the amount which has already been paid for the transfer of the shares is a fair price for the shares and that therefore no further payment will be made in respect of the transaction." 
There was thus no "repudiation" or recission of the agreement, but rather it was affirmed with knowledge of the fraudulent representations found by the trial judge. Having reaffirmed the agreement the appellant was liable on that agreement in accordance with its terms, subject to any cross-claim based on deceit in consequence of entering into the agreement as the result of the established fraudulent representations.

As I have said, on that cross-claim Herron DCJ found that the agreement had been breached "by reason of his fraud" and awarded nominal damages of $200.
However his Honour also found: "I do not think that he has shown that he suffered any damage as a result of this undoubtedly dishonest conduct on the part of the plaintiff which is the only fraud on the part of the plaintiff which I find the defendant has established. I do not think that the agreed purchase price of the shares can be attacked. The measure of damages here would be any loss to the defendant, that is the amount by which the value of the shares might have fallen short of the price that he agreed to pay for them by reason of the plaintiff's fraud.
The defendant has failed to prove there was any loss. ... There is no doubt that the defendant would not have entered into the agreement if the plaintiff had made known his true intentions but I am not persuaded that the price agreed upon was not a proper one. The defendant has proved no actual loss as a result of the fraudulent misrepresentations of fact made to him by the plaintiff."[1] 
In a claim based upon the tort of deceit grounded on misrepresentations inducing a contract , no damages are payable unless they are proved. There was no basis upon which nominal damages of $200 could be awarded. As Connor J said in Holmes versus Jones, damage is an essential factor in the cause of action.[2] 
It was contended that Herron DCJ erred in finding no actual loss as a result of the established fraudulent misrepresentations. The loss was said to be the sum of $6,000 paid to the respondent and the delivery of the motor vehicle worth $10,000. Those sums would have been recoverable had the agreement been repudiated but the concomitant would have been that the shares acquired by the appellant and his wife from the respondent would have been retransferred to the respondent. As I have said, the appellant affirmed the contract with knowledge of the fraud which was proven. Loss not having been established in the cross-claim in deceit, no damages should have been awarded to the appellant. However there has been no cross-appeal against the award of $200 damages on the cross-claim and accordingly this Court should not interfere with that aspect of the judgment.

It was put in oral argument on appeal that as his Honour found fraud and his
Honour found that the fraud induced entry into the contract there should have been a finding that the value of the shares was nil. In truth that asks this
Court to disturb a finding of fact made by the trial judge which is not the subject of any ground of appeal. In any event his Honour found that the agreement for the sale of the shares was entered into at a time when the appellant in fact had knowledge of the true financial siutation concerning the business.

The remaining matter argued on appeal related to interest. It was contended that, having found dishonesty and fraud, although the plaintiff respondent was found entitled to $26,285 balance of purchase price for the shares, interest should not have been awarded. Having found the primary entitlement of the plaintiff, the trial judge said: "I assume that the plaintiff is entitled to interest and this will have to be added". It was left to the parties to agree on the calculation. Presumably that was done. It having been found that the plaintiff was entitled to recover the balance of purchase price, having been deprived of that sum from the date of due payment until judgment, the plaintiff had a prima facie entitlement to interest on that sum. As this Court has said, whilst the power to award interest under s.83A(1) [District Court
Act 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) is discretionary, circumstances in which a claim for interest can be refused are rare.[3] 
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

Meagher JA: I agree.

Sheller JA: I also agree.

Meagher JA: The order of the Court, therefore, is appeal dismissed with costs.
 [1] Appeal Book, p.213C-K.
 <case>; [(1907) 4 CLR 1692] at 1709; see also Toteff versus Antonas (1942) 78 CLR at 650; Gould & Anor versus Vaggelas & Ors [(1985) 157 CLR 215]; Wardley
Australia Limited versus Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] at 530, 535. Kinzbeau Pty Limited versus W G & B Pty Limited Anor <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 281] at 291.
 [3] Faulkner versus Bourke (1990) 19 NSLWR 574.
 * * * 
