

Regina versus Paul Richard Moody [1997] NSWSC 102 (1 April 1997) 
REGINA versus Paul Richard MOODY /96 
Tuesday 1 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, HUNT CJ at CL, HIDDEN J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW- robbery - trial by judge alone - whether verdict unsafe - identification evidence - appellant seen by witnesses in telecast news after the event - displacement effect - significance of descriptions of offender given by witnesses immediately after event - conviction quashed.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
The appellant was convicted of aggravated robbery after a trial in the
District Court by judge alone. The case turned upon the reliability of evidence identifying him as the offender. The victim had been approached by three men, one of whom robbed her of her handbag.

The appellant, a forensic patient, had absconded with two other inmates from
Morisset Hospital the day before the offence and, at the relevant time, the three were in the general area where the offence took place. The appellant was wearing very distinctive clothing. His arrest the following morning received television publicity, including footage showing him in that clothing. An eyewitness to the robbery saw that telecast later on the day of the arrest.
The victim herself saw the relevant television footage in another televised news item about a month after the robbery. More than a year after the offence she identified the appellant from photographs shown to her by the police.

At the trial, the victim and the eyewitness gave evidence tending to identify the appellant as the offender. Such descriptions as the victim had given to the police, prior to seeing the television footage, referred to clothing nothing like that which the appellant was wearing. There was no evidence that the eyewitness had given any description to the police prior to her seeing the telecast on the day of the appellant's arrest. Descriptions of the three men provided by another eyewitness, who had not seen either telecast, made no reference to the appellant's distinctive clothing and, if anything, tended to exclude him. Uniformed police who attended the scene of the robbery prepared reports containing descriptions of the three men. These descriptions were not attributed to any person but, again, none of them referred to the appellant's clothing.

On appeal it was argued that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Held: 
In determining whether a verdict is unsafe, the test is not relevantly different whether the trial was by jury or by judge alone. In either case the
Court of Criminal Appeal must make its own independent assessment of the sufficiency and quality of the evidence to determine whether the tribunal of fact ought to have had a reasonable doubt about the accused's guilt: Reg v
Kurtic [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57] applied.

The weight to be afforded the evidence identifying the appellant as the offender was significantly weakened by the fact that the victim had given descriptions inconsistent with his appearance before she saw him in a telecast, and the absence of evidence of any description provided by the eyewitness before she saw the telecast on the day of the appellant's arrest.
The evidence may well have been affected by the displacement effect described in Alexander versus The Queen <case>; [(1980-81) 145 CLR 395] at 409. In the circumstances, evidence of the victim's identification of the appellant from photographs much later was of little or no weight.

Notwithstanding the advantage enjoyed by the trial judge of seeing and hearing the witnesses in the prosecution case, an independent assessment of the evidence led to the conclusion that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory: M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at 494.

Observations on the need to carry out the investigation of a crime where the prosecution case relies upon identification evidence without delay: in particular, the need for investigating police to obtain descriptions of an offender from eyewitnesses and to prepare statements by those eyewitnesses, and by the police themselves, promptly.

JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: Paul Richard Moody appeals against his conviction following his trial before his Honour Judge Christie QC, sitting without a jury, at the
Sydney District Court, upon charges of robbery with the use of corporal violence and, in the alternative, simple robbery. The trial took place in July and, on 31 July, his Honour found the appellant guilty of the aggravated offence. On 29 August, his Honour sentenced the appellant to a fixed term of months penal servitude to date from 31 August 1995. Leave to appeal against that sentence is not sought, and it was passed as a result of unusual circumstances which do not concern us for the purpose of this judgment.

It was the Crown case that the victim of the offence, a woman in her 60's, was walking down Wylde Street, Potts Points, towards Woolloomooloo, at about 11.45 pm on 28 April 1994. She was approached by three men, one of whom was in front of the other two. This man was shorter than the other two and had long blond hair. Initially, the victim thought that he was a girl. As that man passed her, he snatched her bag. There was a struggle and the strap of the bag broke.
The contents of the bag fell to the ground and the victim herself fell, breaking her hip. The men ran away. The incident took place near the naval installation at HMAS Kuttabul and part of it was witnessed by some officers there. I shall have more to say about their evidence shortly. One of those officers phoned the 000 emergency line and an ambulance and the police arrived. The victim was taken to hospital where she was admitted for about two weeks.

The uniformed police who attended the scene were Constables Lee and Ash.
Inexplicably, neither of them made a statement in relation to the matter, or was called to give evidence at any stage of the proceedings against the appellant. Two women, Chris Visser and Margot Thomas, were in a car in the vicinity immediately after the incident. They were later spoken to by the detective in charge of the enquiry but, as they had not seen the incident itself, statements were not taken from them either.

According to the victim, she gave a description to police at the hospital of the man who had seized her bag: about 25 years old, short, stocky, ruddy complexion, long blond hair. She described him as casually dressed, wearing possibly a football jersey. Whether that description was given to Constables
Lee and Ash is not clear. In any event, no police officer at the appellant's trial gave evidence of an early description by the victim of the man who had attacked her. She made a statement to police on 16 May, more than two weeks after the incident, in which she said that her assailant was shorter than the other two men, of average build, and wearing light coloured clothes.

Two naval officers at HMAS Kuttabul gave evidence of observing the immediate aftermath of the incident. Leading Seaman Helena Hales saw two men running up
Wylde Street towards Kings Cross, one in front of the other. They had their backs to her, but she was able to see that the man in front was shorter than the other and it appeared to her that he was holding a bag in one hand whilst rifling through it with the other. She went to the victim's assistance. At the trial she gave a description of this man, to which I shall return.
Significantly, however, she said that she provided no description at the time.
According to her, the uniformed police who attended the scene did no more than obtain her particulars.

Able Seaman Douglas Bruce saw three men running up Wylde Street, the man in front being shorter than the other two. It was he who rang the emergency number. He could not recall whether he had given a description of the men to the uniformed police at the scene. He made contemporaneous notes of his observations, although he did not think that he had written any detailed description of the men in those notes. He no longer had the notes at the time of the trial. He did not make a statement to police until 18 May, almost three weeks after the event, although he used his notes to refresh his memory when he did so. In that statement he described the shorter man as 5'6" tall, medium build, with short hair, wearing long pants and a lighter coloured close fitting top. In evidence, he thought that that man's hair was dark. Both of the other men he described as being 5'8" tall. Of one, he could say only that he was of medium build. Of the other, he said that he was also of medium build, unshaven, with long brown hair, wearing a light coloured loose fitting shirt and dark trousers.

At 1.10 am on 29 April, shortly after the incident, Constables Lee and Ash prepared a report of occurrence about the matter. Also on 29 April, probably at some later time, they prepared a crime information report. Both documents were produced at the trial on subpoena. Neither was tendered but oral evidence was given of part of their contents. The report of occurrence referred to two offenders, both male. The first was described as mid to late twenties, 185 cms tall, of olive complexion with dark, short hair, wearing a white singlet, shorts and runners. The second is described as mid to late twenties, of
Caucasian appearance, dark shoulder length hair, unshaven, wearing a white baggy shirt and dark jeans. The crime information report refers to three men.
The first, who was said to be in front of the other two, was described as having shoulder length blond hair, a thin face, wearing jeans and possibly a checked top. It was this man who was said to have grabbed the victim's handbag. The second was described as being in his late twenties, 165 cms tall, olive complexion, short dark hair, wearing sneakers, shorts and a beige shirt.
The third was described as being in his mid to late twenties, Caucasian appearance, dark brown shoulder length hair, with stubble on his face, wearing a white shirt and dark trousers. Neither report identified any person as having given any of these descriptions.

At the relevant time the appellant was confined at Morisset Hospital as a forensic patient. On 27 April, the day before the incident, he absconded from the hospital with two other inmates, Paul Antoniodis and Michael O'Connor. A document prepared by the nurse in charge of the ward where the appellant was contained described him as 158 cms tall, blond haired, fair complexion, with a tattoo of a green leaf between his eyebrows. The document discloses that, at the time of his escape, he was wearing a dark singlet, shorts and orange football socks. Police records contained descriptions of the man Antoniodis as cms tall, with black hair, olive complexion and medium build, and of
O'Connor as 173 cms tall with brown hair, fair complexion and thin build.

At about 8.40 am on 29 April, the day after the incident, the appellant and
Antoniodis were arrested at Hyde Park by Constables Gilroy and Goodman. The appellant was seen to be wearing clothing of the type described at the time he absconded from the hospital. The officers observed a prominent tattoo between his eyebrows, which was in fact a marijuana leaf. His description, including the clothing he was wearing at the time of his escape, had been circulated to police.

That night, there was an item on the Channel 10 news relating to the arrest of the appellant and Antoniodis. That item contained some brief footage taken by a security camera at Darling Harbour in which the two men can be seen. The appellant is wearing a dark coloured singlet with a prominent design on its front, dark shorts, striped football socks and dark coloured shoes. Clearly, this is the clothing which he was wearing when he absconded from the hospital.
Antoniodis is considerably taller than the appellant, with long brown hair, wearing a white T-shirt with short sleeves and dark trousers. 
That evening, Leading Seaman Hales saw a trailer for the Channel 10 news which contained some of the footage obtained at Darling Harbour. She gave evidence that one of the men depicted was wearing clothing almost identical to the shorter man she had seen running away after the assault on the victim. In particular, she thought that the football socks were similar, although her recollection was that the man she had seen the previous night was not wearing shoes. She inserted a blank videotape into her video cassette recorder and recorded the news item when it was presented. The videotape became an exhibit at the trial.

She also made a statement to police on 18 May. That document was not in evidence but, from oral evidence, it appears that she gave a description of the shorter man which omitted any reference to the socks. In evidence at the trial, she gave a description of the man broadly consistent with the appearance of the appellant in the news item although, as his back was to her, she made no reference to the design on the front of the singlet.

I have already observed that the victim gave a description of the man who attacked her to police officers at the hospital, and to the officer in charge of the investigation in a statement made on 16 May. While those descriptions accord with the height, build and hair of the appellant, her description of the clothing worn by the offender is markedly different from that seen to be worn by the appellant in the film shown on Channel 10. However, on 27 May, the victim saw a news item on Channel 7 which was not related to the arrest of the appellant, but which showed a brief excerpt from the Darling Harbour security camera footage which had been seen on Channel 10. She believed that the appellant was the man who had attacked her and, apparently, believed also that
Antoniodis was one of the men who had been with him. She wrote a note that evening, part of which read as follows: "This blond guy when I saw him walking towards me on TV looked the spitting image of the guy I saw, even to the way he was walking towards me. I only hope it could be them and know that they are in custody." 
She gave evidence that she did not get a good look at the two men who were with her attacker, and could say only that they were a lot taller than him and had dark hair. She contacted the police and made a further statement on 31
May.

The appellant was not spoken to about the robbery until he was interviewed at the prison hospital at Long Bay on 15 August by Det Snr Const Nancy Warren, who was in charge of the investigation. He denied any involvement in the offence. He admitted having absconded from Morisset Hospital with Antoniodis and O'Connor. He said that they went to Kings Cross at about 6.00 pm where they visited a couple of clubs. O'Connor went his own way and the appellant remained with Antoniodis for some time. Later they separated, and he met
Antoniodis again as the sun came up the next morning. While it is not entirely clear from what he said, it would appear that he was speaking of their movements on the night of 28th and the early morning of 29 April. He said that he and Antoniodis went to the Mathew Talbot Hostel and thence to Darling
Harbour. He declined to take part in an identification parade.

On 14 June 1995, Det Warren showed the victim eleven photographs of men, which included one of the appellant. The victim looked through the photographs and put aside two of them, one of which was that of the appellant. She looked again through the remaining photographs and then returned to the two which she had put aside. After examining both of them further, she selected the photograph of the appellant as that of the man who had attacked her. Nothing in the evidence explained why this identification procedure was undertaken so long after the appellant had become a suspect.

On 29 June 1995, Det Warren and other police went to Long Bay Hospital where the appellant's room was searched and a pair of black, orange and white football socks were found. The appellant was taken to Maroubra police station and charged.

The appellant gave evidence at the trial in a manner which suggested that he was not then entirely free of mental illness. It is sufficient to say that he maintained the account of his movements at the relevant time which he had given to police in August 1994, and denied any involvement in the offence.

In giving reasons for his verdict, the learned trial judge acknowledged the need to scrutinise carefully the identification evidence, saying that he was conscious of the many matters raised by the appellant's legal representative at the trial. He acknowledged the varying descriptions contained in the documents prepared on 29 April by Constables Lee and Ash. He noted that the victim did not refer, in her description of her attacker, to the prominent tattoo between the appellant's eyebrows. However, he considered it significant that both the victim and Ms Hales, upon seeing the televised news items, were immediately confident that the appellant was one of the men they had seen that night. In saying so, his Honour was mindful of the possibility that the recollection of those witnesses thereafter may have been tainted by those telecasts. Finally, his Honour found some circumstantial corroboration of the identification evidence in the admitted fact that the appellant was in the
Kings Cross area that night, in the company of two men whose appearance was not dissimilar from such descriptions as there were of the two men seen in the company of the offender.

The Appeal.
 
The only ground argued is that his Honour's verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory. Whilst his Honour gave reasons for his verdict, so that it was not shrouded in the inscrutability of the verdict of a jury, the test to be applied is not relevantly different from that required when it is a jury's verdict which is challenged. In Reg versus Kurtic [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57],
Hunt CJ at CL expressed it in this way (at 60): "..... it is the duty of this Court - whether the appeal is from a jury trial or a judge alone trial - to make its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence, in order to see whether the jury (or judge trying the case alone) ought to have a reasonable doubt or whether this Court itself experiences such a doubt or is persuaded that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted." 
His Honour referred, at that point, to relevant pages from the judgments of the High Court in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487], and of this Court in Reg versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333], both cases dealing with appellate review of a jury's verdict.

Making the independent assessment which the authorities require, I find a number of disturbing features of the evidence, some of which were not referred to in his Honour's reasons. Of greatest significance are what might be termed the contemporaneous descriptions of the attacker: those contained in the report of occurrence and crime information report prepared by Constables Lee and Ash, and that given by the victim at the hospital. The two men described in the report of occurrence do not resemble the appellant at all. Of the three men described in the crime information report, one of them, the man said to have seized the victim's bag, is described as having hair similar to that of the appellant, but the clothes said to have been worn by that man (jeans and possibly a checked top) are completely different from the distinctive clothing worn by the appellant. As earlier observed, the description given by the victim, both at the hospital and in her statement of 16 May, was consistent with the physical appearance of the appellant but, again, the clothes described by her are nothing like those which he was wearing.

It is for that reason that the victim's confidence that the man she saw depicted in the Channel 7 telecast on 27 May was her attacker must be viewed with circumspection. Equally, the weight to be given to Ms Hales' description of the attacker in her statement of 18 May and in her evidence, which to a greater or lesser extent was consistent with the physical appearance and clothing of the appellant, is weakened by the lack of evidence of any description from her before she saw the Channel 10 news item on 29 April. I have earlier observed that the descriptions contained in the reports prepared by Constables Lee and Ash were not attributed to any source. Despite her evidence to the contrary, I would find it most surprising if she were not a source of at least some of that information. If that be so, the absence of any reference in the reports to the type of clothing worn by the appellant is telling indeed.

Of course, nothing in what I have said is intended to cast any doubt upon the honesty of Ms Hales or, for that matter, of the victim. However, it is trite to say that evidence tending to identify a person as an offender may be given with the utmost conviction by patently honest witnesses, and yet be completely wrong. There is a very real danger that, in their evidence, the victim and Ms
Hales displaced such image as they might have retained of the attacker on the night in question with that of the appellant in the telecasts which they saw.
The "displacement effect", described by Stephen J in Alexander versus The Queen <case>; [(1980-81) 145 CLR 395] at , is one of the hazards of identification evidence which the courts have long recognised. As to the evidence of Ms Hales, it may be significant in this context that the Channel 10 news item reported that the three men, having absconded from the hospital, had "a night on the town" and that the third escapee, O'Connor, had been arrested at Kings Cross.

I should say that I do not see any importance in the fact that no-one described the marijuana leaf tattoo between the appellant's eyebrows. Of the various people who saw the attacker on the night, only the victim saw his face. Given the circumstances, it is entirely understandable that she might have failed to notice the tattoo, prominent as it was.

The inference that the displacement effect was at work in the evidence of the victim and Ms Hales is strengthened when the evidence of the other naval officer, Mr Bruce, is examined. Mr Bruce did not see either telecast. I have earlier set out the descriptions he provided to police in his statement of 18
May of the three men he saw. None of those descriptions fitted the physical appearance of the appellant and, again, there was no reference to his distinctive clothing.

There are other aspects of the evidence which cause concern. That a statement was not obtained from the victim until 16 May may be explained by her being in hospital. There appears to be no explanation, however, for the fact that statements were not obtained from Ms Hales and Mr Bruce until 18 May.
Thereafter the pace of the investigation became even more leisurely. The appellant was not interviewed about the matter until 15 August. More importantly, the victim was not shown the photographs for the purpose of identification of the appellant until 14 June 1995, long after the appellant had become a suspect and over a year after the incident itself. It is perhaps not surprising that the victim's selection of the photograph of the appellant was not without considerable hesitation. Given the long delay, and the displacement effect referred to above, that evidence was of little or no weight.

That statements were never obtained from Constables Lee and Ash is simply reprehensible. I consider, also, that statements should have been obtained from the two women who came upon the scene immediately after the incident, Ms
Visser and Ms Thomas, even if they had little to contribute to the investigation. The case highlights the need for investigating police to obtain and record witnesses' descriptions of an offender promptly, and to obtain signed statements from those witnesses as soon as possible after the event. It is equally important that the police officers who obtain those descriptions prepare statements themselves, without delay.

For these reasons, I am of the view that his Honour ought to have entertained a reasonable doubt about the appellant's guilt. Whilst acknowledging the advantage his Honour had in seeing and hearing the witnesses, I consider that there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted:
M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at 494. I would propose that the appeal be allowed, the conviction quashed, and verdict and judgment of acquittal be entered.

GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Hidden J, I agree with the orders proposed by His Honour and with his reasons for those orders.

HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Hidden J, for the reasons which he has given.
 * * * 
