

Coshott versus Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and Ors [1996] NSWSC 461 (3 October 1996) 
COSHOTT versus ROYAL SOCIETY FOR THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS & ORS /95 
Thursday 3rd October 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The late Margaret Aldritt died on 17th December 1994. Probate of her last will dated 18th April 1989 was granted to the plaintiff Robert Coshott on 13th March 1995. It appears that her estate is worth about $2.6 million. The will gave some particular legacies amounting to around $22,000.00, and also gave a life estate in a house worth around $367,000.00. The residue of the estate was dealt with in cl.4(iii) of the will, which is in the following terms:-
I GIVE DEVISE AND BEQUEATH the whole of my real and personal estate of whatsoever kind situated unto my Executor and Trustees UPON TRUST to sell and realise and after payment thereout of all just debts funeral and testamentary expenses and all State and Federal Duties of whatsoever kind and after payment of the above legacies.

TO STAND possessed of the balance and deal with same as follows: ...
 ...
 (a) to divide the residue between the following charities, and such other charities as to my executor seem appropriate: 
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.

The Actors Benevolent Fund; 
The Salvation Army; 
Any charity providing musical education for persons intending to become opera singers; 
The Royal Blind Society of New South Wales (Black and White Committee); 
The Royal New South Wales Institute for the Deaf and Blind Children; 
The Spastic Centre of New South Wales; 
The New South Wales Society for Cripped (sic) Children; 
The Deaf Society of New South Wales; 
The Guide Dog Association of New South Wales.

Alternatively, and in the sole discretion of my executor, to pay the whole or remainder of the residue to any person or body for the purpose of making gifts from time to time to charities listed above and any other charities.

The plaintiff proposes to set up a trust, of which he will be the trustee, to give effect to the purposes of cl.4(iii)(b). The central provision of the trust is found in cl.3 of the proposed trust deed, which is in the following terms:- 
The Trustee shall hold the trust fund and the income thereof upon trust for such of the following objects as shall be exclusively charitable and in such shares and proportions as the Trustee shall think fit that is to say for the benefit of the Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children or such other charitable institution or institutions as the Trustee shall from time to time think fit with power (but without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing) to apply the whole or any part or parts of the trust fund or income thereof in or towards the establishment of any charitable institution or organisation and the following provisions of this deed shall take effect subject to and only so far as consistent with such objects.

The ten institutions named in cl.4(iii)(a) of the will contend that this course is not authorised by cl.4(iii)(b); that cl.4(iii)(b) is in fact invalid; and that the plaintiff is bound to divide the residue of the estate equally among the eleven classes set out in cl.4(iii)(a) and such other charities as the plaintiff may select.

SUBMISSIONS 
Mr. Emmett QC, who appeared for the plaintiff, submitted that the executor had a choice whether to proceed under par.(a) or (b), or both.

On the construction of par.(a), he submitted that the words "such other charities as to my executor may seem appropriate", and also the whole of the provisions of par.(b), showed that it was the deceased's intention to give a very wide discretion to the executor. The circumstance that the executor had the power to select additional charities to benefit under par.(a), and also (if he chose to proceed under par.(b)) had the very wide discretions indicated by par.(b), strongly suggested that there was no requirement under par.(a) of equality of distribution among the eleven specified classes plus whatever other classes the executor might create; and since it would be absurd to suggest a requirement that a nominal amount be give to some of these classes, this was a strong indication in turn that the executor was not required to give a benefit to every one of these classes. Mr. Emmett also pointed to the absence of any indication in par.(a) that equality was required.

Turning to par.(b), Mr. Emmett submitted that, given the wide discretions which the will gave to the executor, it would be extraordinary if the executor were the only person in the world who could not be the person or body to whom the residue was paid for the purpose of making gifts from time to time. He submitted that the purposes of the proposed deed, set out in cl.(3) of the deed were within the terms of par.(b), and in particular within the words "any other charities" appearing in that paragraph.

On the question of when and by whom the other charities referred to in par.(b) should be identified, Mr. Emmett submitted that this was clearly to be the person or body to whom the residue was paid. It was that person who decided what gifts were to be made "from time to time", and it would be contrary to the scheme envisaged by that paragraph that all possible recipients of those gifts had been identified once and for all by the executor at the time when the residue was paid to this person or body. Mr. Emmett submitted that if that paragraph did give rise to any perpetuities problem, then it could be saved, because a general charitable purpose was disclosed, and a cy pres scheme could be devised.

Mr. Hely QC for the named institutions submitted that it would be wrong to interpret par.(a) as if it said "to divide the residue between such of the following charities and such other charities, and in such proportions, as to my executor may seem appropriate". The use of the words "divide", "between" and "and" (rather than "or") strongly indicate that what was contemplated was a sharing among all the classes and indeed an equal sharing.

Mr. Hely referred me to the case of Re Braddock <case>; [(1947) SASR 329.] In that case, it was held that a direction that certain property "shall be divided among my relations at my wife's discretion" required that a share be given to every one of the persons who fell within that direction. Mr. Hely also referred me to the case of Re Cossentine [(1933) 1 Ch. 119.] In that case, the gift required division of certain property between a named society and "the heirs of my brothers and sisters". There were three people who fell within that latter description, and it was held that the gift required a division into four equal shares.

Turning to par.(b), Mr. Hely submitted that this was either invalid, or did not justify the setting up of the proposed trust. Mr. Hely submitted that par.(b) contemplated a payment of property to a person who in turn had the power to make payments to other persons for purposes which might be charitable. He submitted that this did not amount to the immediate creation of a trust for charitable purposes. He referred me to Tudor, On Charities, 8th
Ed., p.135 for a statement to the effect that a power to make charitable payments without a binding trust for that purpose will not render the gift charitable. Next, he submitted that par.(b) was void because of uncertainty as to the repository of the power to nominate the additional charities referred to in the paragraph. He submitted that the paragraph was void as breaching the rule against perpetuities.

Finally, he submitted that a payment of residue to the proposed trust would not satisfy par.(b), even if par.(b) was valid. He submitted that par.(b) contemplated a payment by the executor of the residue; and it would not be a payment if the executor simply retained the residue on the basis of some trust which was set up. Secondly, he submitted that, in order to comply with the requirements of par.(b), the person or body receiving the residue should be obliged to make the payments from time to time to the charities set out in par.(b) and additional charities, rather than being given a complete and unfettered discretion to make payments to such one or more charities as this person or body might select.

DECISION 
Before addressing the particular submissions, it seems to me that there are two general points which are relevant.

The first concerns the fact that the gifts in this will are not made expressly in terms of charitable purposes, but rather are made to ten named institutions, and to "other charities". As set out in Jacobs, Law of Trusts in Australia, 5th Ed., par.1005, charitable trusts are trusts for purposes, not persons. However, it is also clear that a bequest made in such terms as "to such charitable institutions as my trustee may select" will be interpreted as a gift for charitable purposes, and will be a valid charitable trust: see
Smith v. West Australian Trustee Executor & Agency Co. <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 320.] Furthermore, since a gift in those terms can be given effect to according to its terms, there is no need for a cy pres scheme. What the trustee in such cases must do is to select institutions whose constitutions require the application of moneys received for charitable purposes, or who otherwise become trustees to use the moneys received for charitable purposes: see 81 CLR at 325 for Fullagar, J.; cf. Montefiori Homes v. Howell & Co.
[(1984) 2 NSWLR 406.] 
The second point is that charitable trusts seem to require the actual application of property for charitable purposes. That is, the trust property should be in the hands of a person or institution which is actually giving effect to charitable purposes, or is at least progressing towards giving effect to charitable purposes and the property in question should be part of the property which in a general sense at least is being held or used for those purposes. Of course, persons or institutions actually carrying out charitable purposes may need reserves or investments to ensure that they will continue to be able to do so, and I do not question that property in those reserves or investments is being held or used for charitable purposes. And I accept that property held by a person or institution, which is actually setting out to give effect to charitable purposes in the not-too-distant future, can be regarded as being held on a charitable trust.

However, I do not think there is a charitable trust in the full sense of the term where money is held by a person or institution which is not itself giving effect to charitable purposes, merely because that person or institution has the power at some indefinite time in the future, as a matter of discretion, to apply it for charitable purposes, or to pay it to another person or institution which is itself actually carrying out charitable purposes.

This latter point is really the main problem I see with cl.4(iii)(b). The person or body to whom the whole or remainder of the residue may be given under that clause is not itself carrying out any charitable purposes, and is not itself holding money with a view to carrying out charitable purposes in the not too distant future; it is merely a repository of property from which, from time to time, and with no limit as to when then may be done, will make gifts to institutions which are carrying out charitable purposes. In my view, until the property gets into the hands of institutions which are actually giving effect to, or propose to give effect to, charitable purposes, there is no vesting for the purposes of the rule against perpetuities: cf. Monds v.
Stackhouse <case>; [(1948) 77 CLR 232] at 248-250. It is not enough for vesting that the property be held by a trustee, which is not otherwise pursuing charitable purposes, but which has the power to pay (at times of its choosing, that may be outside the perpetuities limit) some or all of that property to charities.

For that reason, it does not seem to me that the particular machinery proposed by par.(b) is valid. However, in my opinion, par.(b) does clearly indicate an overriding general charitable purpose, and for that reason it does not fail completely: it just cannot be given effect to in accordance with its strict terms.

As regards the other questions concerning par.3(b), I do not think there is any uncertainty about the person who has the power to select other charities: in my opinion, for the reasons put by Mr. Emmett, it is the person or body to whom the amount is paid. I do not think there is any perpetuity problem arising from the possibility of money being ultimately used for non-charitable purposes: I think the specification of ten charitable institutions and the use of the words "any other charities" do sufficiently limit the purposes to which moneys can be applied, to charitable purposes. However, for the other reason I indicated, I do not think par.(b) can take effect according to its terms.

If I am wrong on that point, I am also of the view that the presently proposed deed is not adequate to give effect to par.(b). I think par.(b) does disclose a purpose for which the power given by par.(b) is to be used, namely a purpose of benefiting charities including the ten named charities; and I think that any trust which purports to give effect to that purpose should make it clear that the power is to be used for that purpose. To ignore that purpose, and treat the will as if it gave an absolute discretion to select one or more different charities and completely ignore the ten selected charities, would, if given effect to, amount in my opinion to a fraud on the power: cf.
Lutheran Church of Australia South Australian District v. Framers Co-
Operative Executors & Trustees <case>; [(1969-70) 121 CLR 628] at 652-3. I am also inclined to think that, for the reasons given by Mr. Hely, there has to be a payment; and that that does mean that the person or body should be someone other than the executor.

Turning to par.(a), there is an indication in the whole of pars.(a) and (b) that the executor does have quite a wide discretion; but in my opinion, there is also a strong indication that the deceased intended to benefit the ten specific charities which she had gone to the trouble of selecting and setting out in the will. For that reason, as under par.(b), there is at least the possibility of a fraud on the power if the discretion given by par.(a) is not exercised having regard to this purpose of benefiting a number of charities including the ten named ones.

However, on the whole, I am inclined to think that the intention disclosed in par.(a) does go further than that. If par.(a) had not included the words "and such other charities as to my executor seem appropriate", I think the intention that the eleven named classes shares equally would have appeared clearly, as in the case of Re Cossentine. The addition of those words make that conclusion less clear; but on the whole, I think that the intention is disclosed, having regard to the use of the words "divide", "between" and "and", that there should be an equality of division between the classes named and such other charities as the executor may select.

Mr. Hely submitted that, were I to find that par.(b) could be saved only on the basis of a cy pres scheme, then that should be regarded as a last resort, and the executor should in effect be required to apply the residue in accordance with par.(a). That may ultimately be the correct conclusion, but I do not think I can reach this conclusion now. In my opinion, the executor may choose simply give effect to par.(a), or he may choose to seek a cy pres scheme under par.(b): such an application would require the involvement of the
Attorney-General. Were such an application to be made, it may be that the appropriate result would be that there be no cy pres scheme, because of the existence of a viable alternative under par.(a). However, as I foreshadowed, I do not think that is the conclusion I should come to now, but it would be a matter rather to be considered if such an application were to be made.

One other question that I believe is raised by the terms of the summons is the way in which additional charities may be identified. I think it follows from what I said before, and the cases to which I referred, that a direction in a will to pay money to charities will be satisfied if it is paid to an institution whose constitution requires that its funds be devoted exclusively to charitable purposes; and I think it may also be satisfied if it is paid to an institution, or perhaps even an individual, which is actually carrying out charitable purposes, and which constitutes itself a trustee of money paid to apply that money exclusively for charitable purposes. Rather than adopt any of the categories suggested in the summons, I would prefer to define the appropriate recipients in those terms or similar terms.

I think I have now dealt with all the questions raised in the summons.

I will ask the parties, and specifically the plaintiff, to bring in short minutes giving effect to these reasons. Those short minutes may provide that the costs of the parties be paid out of the estate.

I would add that, if it appears to the plaintiff that my decision in relation to par.(b) was made on a basis which was not fully argued, I would give leave to the plaintiff within 7 days to provide additional written submissions on that aspect; and if the plaintiff does that, the defendant may reply to them within a further 7 days. In that event, I would not be making any orders until
I have re-considered that question on the basis of the additional submissions.

The matter may be re-listed by arrangement with my Associate for short minutes. If written submissions are provided, then I will consider those submissions and supply a supplementary judgment as soon as possible after receiving them.
 * * * 
