

Liao versus Zhu [2008] NSWSC 28 (30 January 2008) 
Last Updated: 12 February 2008 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Liao versus Zhu <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S):  of 2005  
HEARING DATE(S):  January 2008  
JUDGMENT DATE:  January 2008  
PARTIES: 
Shao Qiang Liao (Plaintiff) 
Peter Tao Zhu (First Defendant) 
Australian Chinese Sports Connections Pty Limited (Second Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Windeyer J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
M Sneddon (Plaintiff) 
No Appearance (Defendants)  
SOLICITORS: 
Raymond Lee & Associates (Plaintiff) 
No Appearance (Defendants)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACTS - oral agreement for commissions to sub-agent - head agency contract wrongfully terminated - substitute agreement either oral or written for percentage of judgment sum in accordance with share entitlements in the second defendant - plaintiff had no shares and accordingly no claim.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CATEGORY: 
Principal judgment  
CASES CITED:  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Order that plaintiff's claim be dismissed.  
JUDGMENT:  - 4 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
WINDEYER J  
WEDNESDAY 30 JANUARY 2008  /05 SHAO QIANG LIAO versus AUSTRALIAN CHINESE SPORTS CONNECTIONS PTY LIMITED & ORS  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: In this matter the plaintiff sues two defendants both involved with the sale of tickets to the 2000 Olympic Games held in Sydney. It is clear enough from the material before me that the plaintiff has done work on the basis of what can be best described as indefinite arrangements with the defendants, which was to bring about the sale of Olympic club memberships for the Olympic Games. The original basis being that those memberships would be sold for $8,000 each and the plaintiff would receive 10 per cent of that amount for each membership sold.
 There was litigation in this Court between the first defendant and the
Sydney Organising Committee of the Olympic Games, (SOCOG), as a result of which the first defendant obtained a substantial verdict ultimately upheld in the High Court of Australia. Because SOCOG, or another body on encouragement from SOCOG, had terminated the contract which Mr Zhu had for the sale of the memberships, the agreement for the 10 per cent, which would have favoured the plaintiff, was of no value. The plaintiff was concerned about the work he had done and, according to paragraph 9 of the Statement of Claim, an agreement was entered into under which the first defendant would sue SOCOG and the second defendant would pay to the plaintiff "an amount equal to 20 per cent x 40 per cent of the proceeds of such proceedings", and that the plaintiff would forego his claim to commission, namely, the 10 per cent commission to which I have referred. It is claimed that there was an implied term that the first defendant would pay the specified amounts of the proceeds of the court proceedings to the second defendant, to allow the second defendant to give effect to this because it was the second defendant with which the plaintiff claims to have entered into the original contract, albeit Mr Zhu had the contract with SOCOG.
 Under the terms of the judgment in favour of the first defendant, the sum of $4,234,319 was paid, thus the pleaded claim is for 20 per cent of 40 per cent of the amount recovered, namely, $338,745.52. It is admitted that this amount has not been paid to the plaintiff.
 In the defence, in paragraph 12, the defendants admit that the first defendant has not paid the sum of $338,745.52 to the second defendant and that the second defendant has not paid that amount to the plaintiff, but say that the first defendant has paid an amount exceeding the sum of $338,745.52 to the second defendant. It is on that basis that the plaintiff claims a judgment against the second defendant for that amount.
 When the problem with SOCOG arose and the plaintiff found that Mr Zhu was the only plaintiff in the proceedings against that body, he was unhappy about this. He discussed it with Mr Zhu, who said that when the court case was successful, then he, the plaintiff, would get at least 10 per cent of the amount of compensation received. The plaintiff did not accept that, but later there was a further meeting when the plaintiff said to Mr Zhu that the 10 per cent promised was too low, and Mr Zhu said to him, "increase to 20 per cent, then the amount of compensation obtained from SOCOG will be distributed according to the share allotments in the company. The money will be paid to the company and then distributed between us." The plaintiff asked whether this was proper and Mr Zhu said that it was a matter concerning the internal management of the company and he would call a directors' meeting to make the decision and that "when the company receives compensation, you will have 20 per cent of the amount according to share allotment", to which the plaintiff said, "that sounds fine to me".
 The plaintiff asked for a confirmation letter and Mr Zhu said the company will hold a meeting and he would give him a letter. The plaintiff said, naturally enough, that he did not care how he got it but he wanted 20 per cent of the money, which I add is more than he now seeks. Some weeks later he was given a document signed by Mr Zhu on the letterhead of the Australian Chinese
Sports Connections which, among other things, said: 
The requirements for Mr Liao Shao Qiang to receive 20 per cent of the shares from Zhang Zhao Ming are: . Mr Liao Shao Qiang will organise the work on the promotion and public opinion within the ethnic Chinese community and to organise for as many ethnic Chinese community organisations as possible to participate together in the press conferences.
 . To obtain support from the ethnic Chinese community for our company in this proceeding.
 . To obtain support from the ethnic Chinese parliamentarians and councillors.
 . To mediate and negotiate for our benefits.
 . After the implementation of this decision, the original 10 per cent will be void." 
The document went on to say that shareholders and directors absent would be notified of the decision, if they did not agree, they could raise it in writing, otherwise their consent would be deemed given. It also said that the holding of the meeting was decided 15 days ago and that all the directors had been notified of the contents of the meeting.
 Mr Zhang, according to the evidence, holds four out of 10 shares issued in the second defendant, Mr Zhu holds the other six. Mr Zhang is not shown to be a director, but whether he was a director at the time of these discussions is not established. On the basis of the evidence before me, he was a shareholder who would have been required to be advised of the meeting, as his rights would have been affected by it. In any event, there is no way that his 40 per cent shareholding in the company could be altered without his knowledge and, for that matter, without his consent, which was not given.
 What is really put on behalf of the plaintiff is that he had an oral agreement for 20 per cent of the judgment sum, although what he sued for is, eight per cent of the judgment sum. The difficulty with all of this is, that, if there were an oral contract made which in any way bound the parties, it was for distribution in accordance with share allotments or entitlements in the company and the plaintiff holds no shares. It follows the plaintiff has not established any claim under the contract upon which he sues.
 This is, in many ways, an unfortunate result, albeit that it appears that any judgment would be difficult, if not impossible, to enforce, but the fact is that the claim sued upon has not been made out. This is a matter being heard in the absence of the defendants and must be heard strictly according to the claim made, which fails. The proceedings, therefore, must be dismissed.
 Order that the proceedings be dismissed.  
LAST UPDATED:  February 2008 * * * 
