

Ivymere Pty Ltd (Receiver and Manager Appointed) versus Cooloombla Pty Ltd (No ) Matter No 3315/97 [1997] NSWSC 328 (25 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 `

IVYMERE PTY LTD (RECEIVER & MANAGER APPOINTED) versus COOLOOMBLA PTY LTD (NO 2)` ` 3315/97` `25 August 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application to set aside orders that I made on 18 August 1997 after a short hearing. The plaintiff is the mortgagor and the defendant is the second mortgagee of certain land. The second mortgagee had obtained an order for possession in respect of the land against the mortgagor in the Common Law Division. The first mortgagee then appointed a Receiver and Manager, and then commenced these proceedings for possession in the name of the mortgagor. 
I held on 18 August 1997 that there was no right in the mortgagor to get possession against the second mortgagee and ordered that the proceedings be dismissed with indemnity costs. The next day, counsel for the plaintiff sought leave and I granted leave to file a notice of motion to set aside the order and for leave to amend the summons to add the first mortgagee as a plaintiff and seek orders in its favour for possession. That motion was made returnable before me today and I prevented further action on the reasons for judgment given on 18 August 1997.

Mr Mendel, for the second mortgagee, says that the court should not grant the application. He relies on decisions in the High Court and this court to the effect that whilst there is jurisdiction on a court to re-examine matters which have been found by it, where an order has not been formally taken out, that jurisdiction is only to be exercised in the exceptional case. In
Wentworth versus Woollahra MC <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 672] at 684 the High Court said that: "Generally speaking, (the jurisdiction) will not be exercised unless the applicant can show that by accident without fault on his part he has not been heard." 
That was applied in Autodesk Inc versus Dyason (No. 2) <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 300] at 302 and, indeed, Mason CJ built on it by saying at 303: "What must emerge, in order to enliven the exercise of the jurisdiction, is that the Court has apparently proceeded according to some misapprehension of the facts or the relevant law and that this misapprehension cannot be attributed solely to the neglect or default of the party seeking the rehearing." 
Mr Mendel also refers to the judgment in this court of Santow J in Wentworth v Wentworth 27 June 1994, unreported where his Honour said that the principle that the court should only re-open cases in exceptional situations applied a fortiori in this court where there is an appeal to the Court of
Appeal. See also the decision of Rolfe, J in New South Wales versus Coya
Pty Ltd 23 November 1995, unreported.

I am always wary of looking at other decisions on the exercise of a discretion when I am exercising that discretion myself. Other decisions must be a guideline and the court must always remember that it is a collegiate court and that a judge, when considering what is just, should pay close regard to what other judges have said rather than rely on his or her own inner feelings. But, having said that, it remains that the discretion is to be exercised in order to achieve a just result in this particular case.

In my experience in this Division, the power has been exercised in a proper case far more broadly than perhaps the words of Autodesk encompass. There have been many instances, particularly where the court is dealing with a long and heavy list, where things have happened in cases which ought not to have happened. Sometimes the accident has come about through busy counsel making a mistake, other times with the pressure of the list. It has been the practice in such a situation to allow a matter to be re-opened, so that a just result can be obtained in the litigation notwithstanding that it could be said that it was the fault of a party, or his or her legal representatives, which has brought about the problem.

That way of dealing with the matter is in accordance with the spirit of [s.63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s63.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), which requires the court to avoid multiplicity of legal proceedings and in the one proceedings to decide finally all legal and equitable claims.

In the present case, it seems that what happened is that the solicitor for the plaintiff made an error in that he must have thought that a Receiver, appointed by a first mortgagee suing in the name of the mortgagor, had a greater right than he had. That was a mistake and, what is more, it was a deliberate mistake because the defendant had pointed out his error in correspondence and, indeed, I gave fairly strong pointers, I thought, in the same direction during the oral hearing. However, as Mr Robinson, who appears as counsel for the plaintiff today, points out, often one's research in technical areas of the law such as this gains such hold on one that one proceeds on without heeding the warning signs especially when the warning signs are put up by the opponent.

The plaintiff intended that the contest should be between the first mortgagee and the second mortgagee but that is not the way in which the suit was set up.
By that deliberate approach, there was a verdict found for the defendant. If the judgment is not set aside then the question arises whether the real plaintiff, having made that election, is now estopped from bringing proceedings in the name of the real plaintiff. (See Barakot Ltd versus Epiette
Ltd [[1997] 1 BCLC 303] noted [(1997) 71 ALJ 600).] Probably that is not the case because in an action for ejectment the court tries each action by considering who is entitled to possession at the date of the filing of the initiating process. So it is rare for any estoppel, even an Anschun estoppel, to arise from previous ejectment proceedings.

Mr Mendel avoided saying whether he would, if fresh proceedings were instituted, rely on an Anschun estoppel or not. This led Mr Robinson to say that, as the argument was not disowned, it would be unjust not to set aside the judgment because of a technical error made on the part of the plaintiff.
The real question, that is, the ability of the first mortgagee or the second mortgagee to control mortgage property, would be set at nought.

It seems to me that one must always focus on the ultimate justice of the situation and not allow technicalities, even technicalities brought about by the deliberate mistake of lawyers, to get in the way of the court doing that.

Although I have paid heed to the warnings given by the courts in the authorities I have discussed, I consider that I should set aside the decision made by me on 18 August 1997 and I so order. The order for costs, however, made on 18 August 1997 is not sought to be set aside and that remains in place.
 oooOooo 
Counsel addressed on the application to amend the summons by adding a second plaintiff.

HIS HONOUR: The applicant seeks to amend these proceedings by adding a further plaintiff. The application is virtually to substitute plaintiffs. This application has been resisted by the defendant on the basis that this either cannot or should not be done under [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p8) rule of the Supreme Court Rules.

The basic proposition is that the court cannot or should not substitute a new plaintiff with a new cause of action for an old plaintiff whose cause of action is no longer maintainable. The authority for that proposition is the decision of Bryson CJ in Equity in Knight versus McCann-Erickson Advertising Pty
Ltd 26 August 1991, unreported. That case, however, deals with a completely different situation to the present and involves liquidators seeking to recover preferences.

The present case is more akin to the situation where the wrong plaintiff has been selected by a mistake, albeit a deliberate mistake. Under the old procedures, that would have been fatal. (See Clay versus Oxford [(1866) LR 2 Ex ).] However, the decisions on the current rule when read together with Part 8 rule 9 show that such a substitution is possible.

So far as the cause of action is concerned, it seems to me that the cause of action is the same with the new plaintiff as with the former plaintiff, because the issue in ejectment is who had the better right to possession as at the date the summons was filed. It is true in the sense that a different person is claiming that right but if this were a vital distinction, the more modern cases cited in note [8.8.9] to the Supreme Court Practice would have turned out differently.

Nothing has been said about the amendment causing prejudice to the defendant other than the prejudice which obviously flows from converting a winning case, perhaps, into a losing case. Accordingly, in view of the policy of granting all such amendments as are necessary in the interests of justice, I should allow the amendment to add Trust Bank ARBN 052 531 567 as a plaintiff and give leave to amend the summons in accordance with the document which is now filed in court.
 * * * 
