

Sharjade Pty Ltd versus RAAF (Landings) Ex-Servicemen Charitable Fund Pty Ltd [2008] NSWSC 1003 (8 October 2008) 
Last Updated: 9 October 2008 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Sharjade Pty Ltd versus RAAF (Landings) Ex-Servicemen Charitable Fund Pty Ltd <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Equity Division - Commercial List  
FILE NUMBER(S):  of 2006  
HEARING DATE(S):  , 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 23 and 24 July 2008  
JUDGMENT DATE:  October 2008  
PARTIES: 
Sharjade Pty Ltd (Plaintiff) 
RAAF (Landings) Ex-Servicemen Charitable Fund Pty Ltd (First Defendant) 
The Commonwealth of Australia (Second Defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Bergin J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff - Mr M Akbarian (director of plaintiff) 
First defendant - Mr J Simpkins SC with Mr N Owens 
Second defendant - Mr M Speakman SC with Mr D Moujalli  
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff - not applicable 
First defendant - Gadens Lawyers 
Second defendant - Blake Dawson  
CATCHWORDS:  [CONTRACT] - Contract to develop land into retirement village - lengthy process of preparation - land to be purchased from the Commonwealth - whether
Commonwealth entitled to make demands on first defendant - whether first defendant entitled to terminate Heads of Agreement with plaintiff when
Commonwealth purported to terminate agreement with the first defendant - whether Commonwealth and first defendant conspired to terminate plaintiff's agreement with first defendant - whether Commonwealth interfered with a contractual relationship between first defendant and the Commonwealth.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/)  
CASES CITED: 
Ankar Pty Ltd versus National Westminster Finance (Australia) Ltd <case>; <case> 
Handley versus Gunner <case> 
Hong Kong Fir Shipping Co Ltd versus Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha Ltd <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 385] 
Lumbers versus W Cook Builders Pty Ltd [(2008) 232 CLR 635] 
Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd versus Paul <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 245] 
Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd versus Luna Park Ltd (1938) 38 SR 632  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
Plaintiff's case against first defendant for wrongful termination is made out. 
Other claims to be dismissed.  
JUDGMENT:  - 1 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
COMMERCIAL LIST  
BERGIN J  OCTOBER 2008  OF 2006 SHARJADE PTY LIMITED versus RAAF (LANDINGS) EX-SERVICEMEN CHARITABLE FUND PTY LIMITED & ANOR 
JUDGMENT The parties to this litigation fell into dispute after trying to take advantage of the burgeoning market in the development of retirement villages.
Theirs was a special plan to provide a retirement environment for ex-service personnel including members of the Royal Australian Air Force Association in affordable but stylish accommodation. The parcel of land to be developed was 11.87 hectares at 440 Bobbin Head Road Turramurra, a northern suburb of Sydney (the Land). It was owned by the Repatriation Commission and purchased by the Commonwealth in 1996. It was adjacent to the western boundary of the Lady Davidson Hospital (then operated by the Commonwealth Department of
Veterans Affairs) which provided rehabilitation services to war veterans. The
Land was also adjacent to the Ku-ring-gai National Park, in which there were some endangered species of both fauna and flora. One of the species in the latter category was a plant known as Darwinia Biflora.  The planning of the development commenced in 1992. The sole director and shareholder of the plaintiff, Sharjade Pty Ltd, is Mohsen Akbarian, who at that time utilised Kezarne Pty Ltd (Kezarne) as the vehicle for the development. Another of Mr Akbarian's companies also involved in the early planning stages was Nubra Constructions Pty Limited (Nubra). The then
President of RAAFA was Air Commodore GG Michael AO OBE AFC. RAAFA incorporated a wholly owned subsidiary, Darwinia Estate Pty Limited (Darwinia) (later to become the first defendant, RAAF (Landings) Ex-Servicemen Charitable Fund Pty
Limited), to act as the vehicle for the development.  In March 1993, Australian Construction Services (ACS) a business unit in the
Commonwealth Department of Administrative Services wrote on behalf of RAAFA to
Kezarne advising that it was the preferred developer and invited it to further expand its proposal for the development. Kezarne was at this time working with
Turnbull & Partners Ltd and the two were described as the "Development
Consortium". Between 1993 and October 1995 Kezarne expanded its proposal to the construction of 200 x 2 bedroom units, 100 x 3 bedroom units, a 60-bed hostel, a clubhouse and bowling green. Kezarne was asked to submit proposals on the assumption that RAAFA would have title to the Land at the commencement of the development. At this time Australian Estate Manager (AEM) managed the
Land for the Commonwealth. The proposal in relation to the purchase of the
Land changed from time to time partially as a result of changes of Ministers and government policies. It was not until 29 August 1995 that AEM made an offer to RAAFA which involved the grant by the Commonwealth to RAAFA of a 99 year lease of the Land "subject to it undertaking to purchase the land and making full payment to the Commonwealth within seven years from the date of exchange of contracts for the land" at a "sale price" of $5.8 million.  
Heads of Agreement - 18 October 1995  On 18 October 1995 Kezarne entered into "Heads of Agreement" (the Agreement) with Darwinia to develop the land into a retirement village. That Agreement was in the following terms: 
This Heads of Agreement dated this 18th day of October 1995 has been entered into between the Darwinia Estate Pty Limited a duly incorporated company having its registered office at Suite 1101, 11th floor, 222 Pitt
Street Sydney (hereafter called "Darwinia") and a developer consortium comprising of Kezarne Pty Limited (ACN No 003 417 089) and its financial advisers Turnbull & Partners Limited (ACN No 003 267 427) hereafter referred to as ("the Developer Consortium").
 . Pursuant to a tender process undertaken by Royal Australian Air
Force Association (hereafter called "RAAFA") in 1993, the Developer Consortium was selected as the successful tenderer on 2 March 1993. Since that date RAAFA together with the Developer Consortium and the Department of Veterans'
Affairs, Sydney have been negotiating with the Australian Estate Management ("AEM"), part of the Department of Administrative Services of the Commonwealth of Australia ("Commonwealth), to acquire the land known as the Lady Davidson
Hospital site in Bobbin Head Road, North Turramurra for the erection of a
Retirement Village to be occupied by members of RAAFA and other ex-service persons.
 . RAAFA has caused to be incorporated a wholly owned subsidiary
Company Darwinia Estate Pty Limited to enter into this agreement.
 . Under the terms of a Contract for Sale to be entered into between Darwinia and the Commonwealth, Darwinia has been granted an option for a period of up to 12 months from exchange of contracts, to purchase the site which comprises part of Lot 1 in Deposited Plan 441749, totalling approximately 12 hectares and situated at the rear of the Lady Davidson
Hospital in Bobbin Head Road, North Turramurra. In the event that Darwinia elects not to proceed with the development, then the option will expire without any penalty to Darwinia, subject to both sides bearing their own costs up to that date.
 . The terms of the Contract are detailed in the attached letters from the Minister for Administrative Services dated 19 September 1994, the
Deputy Secretary, Department of Administrative Services dated 16 June 1995 and the General Manager, Department of Administrative Services dated 29 August
These letters inter-alia provide for RAAFA to occupy the site under a 99 year lease with an irrevocable obligation to purchase the land at any time but in any event within 7 years from the date of the commencement of the Option period. The purchase consideration of $5,800,000 (Five million eight hundred thousand dollars) is to be guaranteed by a Bank acceptable to AEM.
 . The terms of the purchase provide for interest to be paid on the purchase consideration outstanding on an annual basis, but for the calculation and payment of interest to be deferred for a period of 12 months from the date of the Contract. The interest payable thereafter to be calculated at a rate equivalent to approximately 9.5% pa, being equivalent to a margin of one percent above the 5 year Commonwealth Bond rate applicable at the date of the
Contract.
 . Subject to Clause 3 hereof Darwinia Estate Pty Limited or its nominee will exercise the option and exchange contracts with the Commonwealth for the purchase of the land and will proceed with the development of the
Retirement Village project with the Developer Consortium in accordance with this Heads of Agreement.
 . Pursuant to the selection process completed in 1993, the
Developer Consortium was appointed to undertake the development, financing, and on-going management of the Retirement Village on the understanding that
Darwinia will own the Village at all times and prevail upon members of the
RAAF Association to purchase the residential Self Care and Hostel units to be developed on the site. Darwinia also accepts that it will have no financial recourse to the Developer Consortium if at the expiry of the 12 month option period that the Developer Consortium decides that it cannot proceed with the development of the Retirement Village for the reasons that it will disclose to
Darwinia, but primarily expected to be on account of refusal of or inability to obtain Development Application approval from the Local Council on reasonable terms or its inability to obtain finance for the development on acceptable terms.
 . Darwinia hereby formally confirms the appointment of the
Developer Consortium to undertake the development of the Retirement Village on the following terms and conditions: 
That the Developer Consortium will be responsible for: a). undertaking the overall development of the Village in accordance with the requirements of the Local Council and other approving authorities requirements, that of the parties hereto and of the financier(s) of the development.
 b). obtaining the necessary planning and regulatory authorities approvals to the development of a Retirement Village and associated facilities.
 c). arranging the financing for the development of the Village including the provision of the purchase guarantee to the Commonwealth.
 d). the overall and detailed planning process for the development including the project and construction management in accordance with the costs and assumptions detailed in pages 1 to 5 inclusive of the Financing Plan annexed hereto.
 e). the overall and detailed marketing arrangements for the Village in accordance with the sales prices detailed in the annexed Financing Plan.
 f). the long term management rights to the Village subject only to satisfactory performance and the management fees being acceptable and within industry norms. It is understood however that the manager of the Village will liaise closely with Darwinia from the outset to ensure that Darwinia's role and obligations to its members is clearly preserved at all times.

That a Project Management Group ("PMG") be established comprising of representatives from Darwinia, the Developer Consortium and the financier(s) of the development with a representative from the Department of Veterans'
Affairs invited to attend.

That the PMG will meet at least monthly, and more frequently if so desired by the parties, at which it will review the progress of the development and assign responsibilities as appropriate. Kezarne Pty Ltd will provide the PMG with a monthly progress report which will form the basis of the monthly meeting of the PMG. The Chairman of the PMG will be selected by
Darwinia and the Developer Consortium.

That Darwinia and RAAFA will actively promote and assist the Developer
Consortium in effecting the sale of the Self Care and Hostel units to its members as a key priority and will commit to achieving pre-sales of up to 40 per cent of the Self Care Units (80 Self Care Units) in the proposed development by the end of the 12 month option period and prior to execution of the lease for the land. RAAFA also undertakes to encourage its members to attend sales presentations relating to the development and in distributing promotional and other material to its members.

In accordance with the Contract of Sale entered into with the
Commonwealth, Darwinia will have the exclusive right to effect the sale of
Self Care and Hostel units to its members of RAAFA and members of other ex- service organisations within the first 3 years from date of exchange of contracts. Darwinia will also have the right within the first 2 years from date of exchange of contracts to limit the sale of Self Care and Hostel units to members of the RAAFA only if it so chooses.

That at the end of 3 years from commencement of the exchange of contract that the Developer Consortium may sell the remaining Self Care and
Hostel units to members of the general public, provided that all efforts to sell the units to members of RAAFA and the other ex service organisations has been carried out.

The Developer Consortium will retain an on-going involvement in the further development of the Retirement Village on identical terms to that detailed herein including the on-going management of the Retirement Village.

The Developer Consortium undertakes that in the event that it effects a sale of any Self Care or Hostel units to members of the general public at a price exceeding $335,000 (Three hundred and thirty five thousand dollars), indexed from date of exchange of the option and contract arrangements, that it will reimburse to the Commonwealth such surplus.

That Darwinia will provide either directly or through others up to $175,000 (One hundred and seventy five thousand dollars) towards the initial costs that the Developer Consortium will incur in completing the detailed planning of the Retirement Village. The monies to be incurred, which will be subject to approval by the PMG, will include the costs incurred in obtaining
Development Application approval and in developing promotional material to assist Darwinia in marketing the development to members of the RAAFA and that of other ex-service organisations, if it so chooses, to obtain the required pre-construction sales commitments.

That Darwinia, as the owner of the Village, will do all things to assist the Developer Consortium in its efforts to develop the Village and accepts that it will have no claim to any of the finances in the development, until such time as the initial sale of all the Self Care and Hostel Units in the Retirement Village have been completed and the financing obligations incurred by the Developer Consortium have been met in full. Darwinia will then be entitled to receive a share of the profits of the development as detailed in Clause 11 hereunder.

That RAAFA has established a special purpose wholly owned subsidiary company known as Darwinia Estate Pty Limited to undertake the development on its behalf.

The Developer Consortium agrees that any residual profits from the initial sale of the Self Care and Hostel units, after meeting all costs involved with development and sale of the units, will be shared in the proportions of 85:15 to the Developer Consortium and Darwinia respectively, subject to achievement of a development profit of at least $8,000,000 (Eight million dollars) or greater sum. In the event that a lower than $8,000,000 (Eight million dollars) development profit is realised, the profits will be then be shared as follows: 
Amount of Profit 
Developer Consortium 
RAAFA  ---  (% share) (% share)  &lt;$1m .0 .0  &gt;1m but less than $4m .0 .0  &gt;$4m but less than $5m .0 .0  &gt;$5m but less than $6m .0 .0  &gt;$6m but less than $7m .0 .0  &gt;$7m but less than $8m .5 .5  &gt;$8m .0 .0  
It is further agreed between the parties that security arrangements to be entered into by the Developer Consortium with the selected
Bank will encompass the following: a).A Loan Agreement covering the advance and repayment of monies to finance the construction of the Village as agreed including the payment of interest to the Commonwealth when due.
 b).First Registered Mortgage over the land by Darwinia to the selected financier c).A Bank Guarantee from an Australian Bank, in a form acceptable to the
Commonwealth for the purchase consideration of $5,700,000 (Five million seven hundred thousand dollars) or such other sum as may be agreed .
 d).A Village Management Agreement which will detail the scope of the services to be provided, the amount of the payment for such services and the arrangements for payment thereof.

It is also agreed between the parties that subject to the project proceeding, as determined in the 12 month option period, that Darwinia will enter into a Form of Loan and Licence Agreement with the incoming residents.
The licence will grant security of tenure to the incoming residents and will detail the conditions of lifetime occupancy of their unit in the Village. The detailed agreement will incorporate the following: a).That the full purchase consideration payable by the incoming resident is to be denominated as a loan.
 b).That the residents' entitlement to occupation under the terms of the
Licence to be granted will incorporate lifetime occupancy or earlier exit if desired.
 c).That a Deferred Management Fee arrangement (ie the amount to be retained from re-sales of units) will apply, which will entitle Darwinia to retain up to 25% of the resale value of an individual unit, or lesser amount as may be agreed from time to time, for on-going capital and maintenance works in the Village.
 d).That the Agreement will detail the services to be provided by the
Manager of the Village which are to be covered by the management fee and those which are to be charged to the residents on an user pay basis.

This Agreement is conclusive and supersedes all other Agreements that may have been entered into by the parties prior to this date.
 Air Commodore Michael signed the Agreement for and on behalf of Darwinia and
Mr Akbarian signed for and on behalf of Kezarne. The novation of the benefit and burden of the Heads of Agreement from Kezarne to Sharjade occurred on 24
April 1998 from which time Turnbull & Partners ceased to be involved in the Consortium and the development.  
Option Agreement - 24 October 1995  On 24 October 1995 the Commonwealth and Darwinia entered into an Option
Agreement in the following terms: 
This Option Agreement dated this 24th day of November 1995 has been entered into between the Commonwealth of Australia ("Commonwealth") and
Darwinia Estate Pty. Ltd. ("Darwinia") a duly incorporated company having its head office at Suite 1101, 11th floor, 222 Pitt Street, Sydney.
 
The parties acknowledge that at the date of execution of this option agreement Darwinia is a wholly owned subsidiary of the Australian Flying Corps and Royal Australian Air Force Association, New South Wales Division
Incorporated ("RAAFA") within the meaning of the Corporations Law. Darwinia warrants that during the period of this option agreement, and in the event of the exercise of this option, during the period up to completion of the purchase of the land (described below) Darwinia will remain a wholly owned subsidiary of RAAFA. In the event that Darwinia ceases to be a wholly owned subsidiary of RAAFA the Commonwealth may terminate this option agreement or the Contract of Sale as the case may be without compensation.
 
The Commonwealth has agreed to sell to Darwinia an area of vacant land comprising approximately 11.87 hectares, being part of the land described in a proposed plan of subdivision of Lot 1, in DP 441749, which is situated at the rear of the existing Lady Davidson Hospital, in Bobbin Head Road, North
Turramurra in the State of New South Wales, ("the land").
 
The purchase price of the land is $5,800,000 (five million eight hundred thousand dollars) with Darwinia, in the event it exercises the option, being required to purchase the land any time up to but in any event not later than 7 years from the date hereof.
 
To enable Darwinia to complete a feasibility study into the viability of its proposed retirement village on the vacant land, the Commonwealth hereby agrees to grant Darwinia an option for a period of up to 12 months from the date of execution of this option agreement ("the option period"), to determine whether it wishes to proceed with the purchase of the land. It is understood that the option period will be used by Darwinia to complete and seek approval to a detailed Development Application with the Kuringai Council which has the overall planning responsibility for the proposed development and to satisfy itself that the development will generally accord with the needs of RAAFA members.
 
In the event that Darwinia decides to proceed with the purchase of the land either during the course or at the end of the option period, the Commonwealth and Darwinia will then enter into a Contract of Sale for the sale of the land to Darwinia. The Contract of Sale will provide that Darwinia will have a period of up to but not exceeding six years from the date of execution of the
Contract of Sale, within which Darwinia will be required to pay the full purchase price of $5,800,000. To ensure that Darwinia will have the capacity to make such payment it will provide to the Commonwealth an irrevocable and unconditional bank guarantee from a bank approved by the Commonwealth, undertaking to make payment, if Darwinia fails to do so, of the full purchase price or that part that is outstanding 6 years after the date of execution of the Contract of Sale.
 
Concurrent with the execution of the Contract of Sale, the Commonwealth agrees to enter into a lease of the Site to Darwinia for a period of up to 99 years. The lease is intended to give Darwinia security of tenure pending payment of all monies due to the Commonwealth pursuant to the Contract of
Sale.
 
In consideration for the Commonwealth entering into this option agreement, the Contract of Sale and the Lease, Darwinia undertakes to pay to the
Commonwealth, an amount by way of interest on the purchase price of $5,800,000 or such lesser amount that is outstanding from time to time until payment in full of the purchase price of $5,800,000 has been made to the Commonwealth.
 
The interest rate will be the rate established at the date of execution of this option agreement and will be a rate equivalent to 1% above the 5 year
Commonwealth Bond Rate advised by the Reserve Bank of Australia the day prior to the execution of this option agreement. The interest payments will be made annually in advance with the first such payment due to the Commonwealth on the first anniversary of this option agreement.
 
In consideration for the Commonwealth entering into the Lease Darwinia undertakes to pay to the Commonwealth an annual rental of $1 (one dollar) for such period as the lease is in existence.
 
If prior to the expiry of this option agreement, Darwinia advises the
Commonwealth that it does not wish to proceed with the execution of the
Contract of Sale and Lease, then each party acknowledges that any costs incurred by it in that period will be for its own account and without any recourse to the other.
 
In further consideration for the Commonwealth agreeing to enter into this option agreement, the Contract of Sale and the Lease, Darwinia undertakes to observe and carry out the following: . To pay all rates and outgoings including stamp duty relating to the purchase and lease of the land from the date of execution of the Contract of
Sale and the Lease.
 . To meet all the costs incurred in undertaking the feasibility study and in obtaining the necessary development approvals in accordance with relevant State building and planning legislation. Darwinia may not rely upon or require the Commonwealth to give Darwinia the benefit of an immunity the
Commonwealth has from State law. Nevertheless, the Commonwealth undertakes to provide any documents or records to Darwinia and its advisers which may assist in obtaining any approvals and consents from any Commonwealth, State or Local
Government Departments or Authorities.
 . Not to sell any self care villas or hostel units in the development to any purchasers who do not qualify as members of the ex-service community as broadly defined by the Department of Veteran Affairs during the first 3 year period from the date of commencement of this option agreement. In the event that completion of the purchase of the land occurs less than three years from the date of execution of this option agreement this condition shall continue to bind the parties until the expiration of the three year period. In the event that Darwinia disposes of the land it must ensure that any purchaser comply with this restriction until the expiration of the three year period.
 . In the event that any self care or hostel units are, subsequent to the expiry of the period of 3 years from the date of this option agreement, sold to the general public then Darwinia will reimburse to the Commonwealth the amount in excess of the market value of the units. The market value is deemed to be $335,000 per unit and indexed, from the date of the option agreement, by that part of the Consumer Price Index, as published by the
Australian Bureau of Statistics, that is applicable to housing costs in New
South Wales.
 . To observe all normal lease conditions, such as a prohibition on transfer and sub-letting except by way of sub-lease to purchasers of the self care and hostel units in the development, without the prior approval of the
Commonwealth.

Development Application - 15 March 1996  It is clear that Mr Akbarian moved very promptly to retain the appropriate consultants to take the necessary steps towards the preparation and submission of the relevant documentation to the Council for Development Consent. The
Development Application was lodged on 15 March 1996. A Project Management
Group was established in October 1995 and met on a regular monthly basis. It dealt with a number of enquiries raised by the Council and various other authorities including the New South Wales National Parks and Wildlife Service regarding the environmental impact of the development on threatened species such as the Red Crowned Toadlet and the Giant Burrowing Frog. There were also concerns raised in respect of the proximity of the development to the National
Park and the threat of bushfires. All of these matters caused resistance from the local residents and it was necessary to deal with various objections raised by them in the Council.
 It is obvious that during the period up to the granting of development consent the plaintiff/Mr Akbarian worked tirelessly in dealing with all the matters raised by the Council, coordinating various consultants and responding to issues both environmental and otherwise to meet the requirements of the
Council.  
Development Consent- 18 March 1998  Two years later, on 18 March 1998, the Council consented to Darwinia's
Development Application on various conditions including a condition that the
Project be commenced by 18 March 2000.  
Extensions of the option period  The delay that was caused by the Council's various requirements and residents' resistance to the development meant that Darwinia had to seek an extension of the option period from the Commonwealth. Those extensions were granted, the final one of which was to expire on 24 December 1998.  
Option exercised - 23 December 1998  On 23 December 1998, by letter wrongly dated 23 December 1999, Darwinia exercised its option to purchase the Land. On 14 January 1999, the Department of Finance and Administration wrote to Air Commodore Michael advising that the
Domestic Property Operations Group acknowledged the exercise of the option to purchase the Land. It also advised that all files had been sent to its solicitors, Black Dawson Waldron (BDW), "for the preparation of the contract for sale".  
Finance Proposal - 13 January 1999  On 13 January 1999 ING Bank provided Darwinia with a draft of the proposed terms and conditions for a loan facility of $28.5 million for the development.
Although the letter was addressed to Darwinia, this proposal had been "arranged" by the plaintiff pursuant to its obligations under clause 8(1)(c) of the Heads of Agreement. The letter advised that the proposal carried the support of the National Manager Commercial Property Finance and, if ratified by the local credit committee, it was to be sent to ING's Regional Office in
Singapore for a decision. Air Commodore Michael reviewed the draft, made some minor changes and signed it on 1 February 1999.  
Proposed Contract terms  On 16 February 1999 the then solicitors for Darwinia, Solomon Garland
Partners, wrote to BDW (Ms Anne Banks) enclosing proposed terms of the
Contract for the Sale of the Land. That document noted that the date for exchange of Contracts would "depend on purchaser's finance" and the Completion
Date would also "depend on the terms of the purchaser's finance (approval pending)". Ms Banks, by letter dated 8 March 1999, requested advice from
Solomon Garland Partners as to whether Darwinia had received a response from its financier and if not, the likely estimate of the timing of a response. On March 1999 Solomon Garland Partners by letter signed by Rita Ibrahim, wrote to Ms Banks at BDW as follows: 
I am instructed that the financier has verbally approved finance the purchase of the site however the letter of approval setting out the terms and conditions of the finance has not been issued yet. Mr Moss Akbarian, my client's joint venturer, has informed me that he hopes to receive the approval letter today.
 The solicitors with the carriage of the matter for Darwinia at Solomon
Garland Partners were Rita Ibrahim and Stephen Healy.  
ING offer of finance - 11 March 1999  On 11 March 1999 ING and its associated company Mercantile Mutual Life
Insurance Company Limited (MML) made an offer to the plaintiff for a total facility of $30 million, with ING providing a facility for $22.5 million and
MML providing a facility for $7.5 million. Settlement of the facility was conditional upon the provision of certain security and the satisfaction of certain conditions precedent. The security included a first registered third- party mortgage from Darwinia over the Land; a registered first fixed and floating charge from Darwinia and the plaintiff over their assets and undertakings; unlimited joint and several guarantees by Darwinia and Mr
Akbarian and his associated companies; and a registered first charge over the shares in the plaintiff. That offer also provided that upon acceptance of the terms and conditions a "non-refundable fee of $70,000" ($15,000 of which the plaintiff had already paid) was payable. There was also a fee of $415,000 (which included the $70,000) payable on the initial drawdown of the facility.
 On 29 March 1999, Ms Banks requested details of the Finance proposal from
Mr Healy but by this stage Mr Healy had decided that there were a number of issues that needed to be resolved before responding to ING or the
Commonwealth's request.  
Discussion of issues - April 1999  Mr Healy wrote to Air Commodore Michael on 12 April 1999 in relation to issues that he regarded as necessary for resolution, a number of which arose as a consequence of the conditions in the ING offer as they related to the proposed contract with the Commonwealth. Mr Healy was concerned about the stamp duty payable by Darwinia if the duty were to be imposed on a more recent valuation of the land at $14 million rather than the purchase price of $5.8 million. Other questions raised for consideration were how Solomon Garland
Partners' fees were to be paid and by whom and who was acting for the plaintiff. Mr Healy was also concerned about the nature of the title of the
Land and whether the loan term, which was 18 months, was sufficient.
 On 15 April 1999 a meeting took place between Mr Healy and Ms Ibrahim and
Air Commodore Michael and two other representatives of RAAFA. Mr Akbarian was not present at this meeting. The minutes of that meeting noted that RAAFA wanted to allow 18 months to obtain 100 sales with the right to settle early with the Commonwealth. It was noted that GST on the Land purchased and on pre- sale contracts would need to be covered with Mr Akbarian. It was also noted that the plaintiff was to be responsible for Solomon Garland Partners' fees and that Mr Akbarian was to advise who was acting for the plaintiff.  
Alternative finance  On 14 April 1999 Mr Akbarian met with Neil Wilson, a director of Sakkara
Pty Limited (Sakkara) in relation to its possible involvement in the development, in particular, in relation to the funding of the development. Mr
Wilson advised that he had discussed the development in broad terms with
Balmoral Corporation Ltd (Balmoral) and that there was "keen interest".
 On 15 April 1999 Sakkara wrote to the plaintiff advising that it had met the previous evening with the Chairman of Balmoral and confirming "in the strongest possible terms our interest in working with you on this exciting project". Sakkara then put a proposal to the plaintiff for Balmoral to provide $400,000 for marketing in April 1999; $5.8 million for the Land in June 1999; and a further $1.3 million for acquisition and other costs in July 1999. A condition of the proposal was that the funds were to be secured by first registered mortgage and part assignment of the development agreement. Other conditions included joint review of the "product" and establishment of a marketing and sales strategy; the negotiation of a building contract with completion guarantee with Bovis or a similar company; that proceeds from the sale of the development would be used to repay the debt and share 50/50 between the plaintiff and Balmoral; and that the plaintiff would pay a monthly management and RAAFA liaison fee.
 This offer was pursued further between the plaintiff, Sakkara and Balmoral until Balmoral made a final offer on 20 April 1999 for funding of $8 million with a profit share of two thirds to the plaintiff and one third to Balmoral.
Mr Akbarian advised Balmoral the terms were generally acceptable subject to a
Deed being entered into between the parties. Negotiations between the plaintiff and Balmoral continued with a number of draft deeds and proposals for various amendments.  
Meeting - 11 May 1999  On 11 May 1999 Mr Healy met with Mr Akbarian. The notes of this meeting record that the Heads of Agreement were to be turned into a Joint Venture
Agreement. It was also noted that Mr Akbarian was to be responsible for
Solomon Garland Partners' fees and that Mr Akbarian thought that Solomon
Garland Partners could act for both parties (except in relation to the joint- venture). It was decided that Mr Healy was not to write to ING yet and that "[a]ll of the finance requirements will be dealt with in the Joint Venture
Agreement which is to be prepared immediately". It was also noted that Mr
Akbarian's entities' profit share through the joint venture was to be secured by a second mortgage.  
Joint Venture Agreement  On 18 May 1999 Mr Healy forwarded a draft Joint Venture Agreement to Mr
Akbarian. This was a proposal in which a new company, controlled by Mr
Akbarian, would enter into a joint venture with Darwinia to develop that Land on the basis that the Commonwealth would sell the freehold title of the Land to Darwinia, a matter that Mr Healy intended to pursue with Ms Banks. There were subsequent discussions and meetings in relation to the draft Joint
Venture Agreement and Mr Akbarian responded in writing suggesting some amendments to the agreement. The last letter Mr Akbarian wrote to Mr Healy suggesting amendments was dated 12 November 1999. There was no response to this letter.  
Response to ING - 19 May 1999  On 19 May 1999 the plaintiff wrote to ING confirming that it was happy to provide the balance of the commitment fee of $55,000 immediately upon the receipt of confirmation that ING agreed to the amendments proposed in the executed letter of offer. The plaintiff advised that it needed four months from the date of payment of the balance of the commitment fee in order to comply with the requirements regarding pre-sales. Later events overtook this offer and it ultimately lapsed.  
BDW request response  On 23 May 1999 Ms Banks wrote to Mr Healy requesting: a report on the progress of obtaining finance; comments on the revised Terms Sheet for the contract of Sale of the Land; and an indication on the timing of the sale for the Commonwealth to consider. Ms Banks noted that from the Commonwealth's perspective, the matter was "becoming protracted" and that it would like to see that Darwinia would be in a position to make "real progress with the sale" as from 21 June 1999.  
BDW advice - 30 June 1999  On 30 June 1999 Ms Banks wrote by e-mail to her client summarising a telephone conversation with Mr Healy on that day. Ms Banks advised that RAAFA had been negotiating "the Joint Venture arrangements with the developer" and it was hoped that this would be finalised that week. The e-mail noted that there was tension between RAAFA and the developer with the developer wanting the right to sell the units to the general public and RAAFA wanting the
Commonwealth to hold firm and require units to be sold to ex-servicemen. The e-mail also referred to RAAFA wanting confirmation that the Commonwealth agreed to proceed on the basis of freehold title. Ms Banks noted her understanding that this was acceptable provided there was an earlier settlement date. Ms Banks then referred to RAAFA's request for the transaction to proceed by an Option Agreement conditional on 100 sales being achieved, and if achieved with a relatively short settlement date; and if not achieved with the Commonwealth retaining the Land. It was suggested that this option period would give elderly people a comfortable time to sell their homes. Ms Banks noted a number of issues arising out of this proposal including the length of time the Commonwealth was willing to hold the price at $5.8 million, and whether interest was payable on the purchase price.  
Freehold Proposal - 7 July 1999  On 7 July 1999 a meeting took place at BDW's office attended by Mr Healy and Ms Banks. Subsequent to that meeting a document entitled "RAAFA's Freehold
Proposal" was prepared by Ms Banks and settled by Mr Healy. That document noted RAAFA's aim to simplify the transaction by dispensing with the Lease so that freehold title was to be transferred immediately. It was proposed that the option agreement would be conditional upon Darwinia achieving 80 unconditional pre-sales to ex-servicemen by a particular date. The
Commonwealth indicated that it would like certainty by the end of 1999 with an "absolute drop dead date" by 30 June 2000. The document also referred to a
Deed being entered into between Darwinia, Mr Akbarian, the builder, the bank and the Commonwealth in relation to the development. The document noted Mr
Akbarian's proposal that the two periods of three years in the ex-servicemen's covenant be reduced to 18 months.

Marketing presentation   In mid-July 1999 the plaintiff, Darwinia and the architects Cox Richardson, were making plans for a presentation in August to prospective purchasers in the development. On 19 July 1999 Cox Richardson advised the plaintiff that presentation materials including: current schematic staging plans; typical cluster plans; typical unit plans; and schedules of finishes/appliances needed to be prepared. Cox Richardson advised that such materials could be available within a two-week period on the condition that $10,000 was paid before they commenced work. On 21 July 1999 the plaintiff wrote to Cox Richardson advising that it had already delivered the $10,000 the previous day and that a program had been agreed with one of the architects in order to ensure presentation to people on the waiting list by 23 August 1999.
 On 9 August 1999 the plaintiff sent a copy of the marketing documents to
Air Commodore Michael for his approval prior to it being sent to RAAFA members on the waiting list. The plaintiff advised that the architects were ready to make 120 copies of the packages as soon as they received the letter from Air
Commodore Michael that was attached to the plaintiff's letter. The plaintiff also advised that upon receipt of Air Commodore Michael's letter, the marketing package would be bound with the coloured perspective on the cover followed by the Air Commodore's letter and the rest of the package. That letter include the following: 
Following our telephone discussions last week, I thought that we could perhaps ask your members to put a deposit equivalent to one percent of the price of the unit they intend to purchase. The deposit will obviously be put in a trust account and is refundable should any of the members decide not to proceed with the purchase of the units. This will of course provide your members with an opportunity to secure their units with minimum deposit at no risk to themselves.
 
We will also need to reserve the location of the meeting which as you suggested could be in The Lady Davidson Hospital. You have kindly undertaken to discuss this matter with the manager of the hospital. I am aware of your busy schedule and would be very happy to pursue the booking of a place for the meeting myself should you wish me to do so. In our meeting with [the architect], you indicated that you could be available for this meeting on
Saturday, 21st August 1999, and it was agreed that the meeting should take place at around 3.00 pm to avoid any clash with people's busy schedule for
Saturday mornings. Depending on your availability, we could have the meeting either on Saturday 21st of August 1999 or Saturday 28th August 1999. This will mean that we will have to send these packages to the members on the waiting list by Wednesday or Thursday this week in order to give them time to program for it.
 
As mentioned above, the architects are aware of this timetable and are ready to produce and bind the packages immediately upon the receipt of your letter.

Further Sakkara negotiations  It is clear that in the meantime Mr Akbarian continued to negotiate with
Sakkara, which was becoming rather impatient with the lack of progress on achieving agreement. On 15 July 1999 Mr Wilson wrote to Mr Akbarian noting they had been negotiating for some months and observing that it was difficult to see how there could be any remaining issues that would prevent the signing of the proposed agreement. Mr Wilson also noted that any further delay would mean that the impact of the GST, to take effect from July 2000, would add to the cost of housing with the possible adverse impact on the number and rate of pre-sales. Mr Wilson asked Mr Akbarian to "act quickly".
 Air Commodore Michael's affidavit evidence was that Mr Akbarian sent him a copy of this letter from Mr Wilson on that date. In the meantime Mr Wilson had been making direct approaches to RAAFA/Darwinia. Mr Wilson, with two other representatives of Sakkara, met with Air Commodore Michael on about 4 August
Air Commodore Michael's affidavit evidence was that he could not recall what was said at this meeting, however on 10 August 1999 he received a letter from Sakkara/Mr Wilson with a proposal for its involvement in the development on the basis of "one-third RAAFA, Sharjade and Sakkara/Glenwish". This appears to be the first time that any suggestion was made to Darwinia that it could increase its share of the profit from the development from its 15% (maximum) that it had agreed with the plaintiff in the Heads of Agreement.
 Although it is not detailed in the evidence, it is clear that on 12 August , Air Commmodore Michael and Mr Akbarian had a conversation arising out of
Mr Wilson's approach to Air Commodore Michael. On 18 August 1999 Mr Akbarian wrote to Air Commodore Michael advocating the plaintiff's commitment to the development and setting out some of the history and difficulties that had been experienced in obtaining development approval and referring to the specific features of the development that made if difficult to obtain finance. That letter urged Air Commodore Michael to proceed with the planned presentation to members as soon as possible because of the approaching peak season for marketing residential developments.  
Freehold Proposal rejected - 3 August 1999  On 3 August 1999 Ms Banks advised Mr Healy that the Freehold proposal was "clearly outside the terms of the Option Agreement of 24 November 1995" and that the "Commonwealth was not in a position to proceed otherwise than in accordance with the terms of the Option Agreement".
 On 13 August 1999 Ms Banks asked Mr Healy for confirmation that RAAFA was able to proceed on the terms set out in the Option Agreement of 24 November
On 18 August 1999 Mr Healy responded to Ms Banks advising that RAAFA was able to proceed by way of Lease and Contract but asked whether it was possible for there to be an Option to purchase for the purpose of deferring the payment of stamp duty.

Commonwealth review  The officer in charge of the divestment section in the Commonwealth
Department of Finance and Administration (DOFA) during the period January 1999 to 25 June 2001 was Mark Anthony Mannion. He reported to the branch manager of the property group of DOFA, Kathryn Campbell. He gave evidence that it was in about August 1999 that he reviewed the file relating to the Land. He was not able to identify the trigger that caused him to review the file, however I think it is probable that Mr Wilson's approach to RAAFA was a cause of this review process.  In any event, Mr Mannion noted that the option had been exercised in
December 1998 and the documentation for the Contract of Sale had not yet been finalised. In his statement of evidence made on 13 June 2008, he said that his view at the time was that RAAFA and Darwinia showed no signs of obtaining the finance with which to purchase the Land and to provide the bank guarantee which he understood was required by the Option Agreement to secure payment of the purchase price. He considered a number of options to move the matter along but decided that it would be best to apply pressure to Darwinia to comply with the existing agreement.

First draft of Contract for Sale  On 10 September 1999 Ms Banks forwarded three copies of the draft of the
Contract for Sale to Mr Healy, requesting that he treat it as "very much a first draft" and subject to any amendments proposed by the Department. That
Contract incorporated a 99-year lease to be entered into on exchange of the
Contracts. Ms Banks asked for Mr Healy's comments within two weeks and also requested a draft timetable for the period to exchange of the contracts.
 That draft contract included the following Special Conditions: 
CHAPTER 3 - PRICE AND SECURITY . PAYMENT OF PRICE .1 Price payable on Date for Completion 
The balance of the Price is payable on the Date for Completion. In consideration of the extended completion date Purchaser must: pay to the Vendor interest under special condition 2 of this Chapter ; and give to the Vendor on the Contract Date the Unconditional Undertaking referred to in special condition 3 of this Chapter 3.
 .2 Reductions in unpaid balance of Price 
The Purchaser may at any time prior to the Date for Completion reduce the unpaid balance of the Price by making payments to the Vendor. Any payment must be $100,000 or a multiple of $100,000.
 . INTEREST ON BALANCE OF PRICE .1 Interest payable 
The Purchaser must pay the Vendor interest on the unpaid balance of the
Price from the Contract Date until payment in full to the Vendor.
 .2 How interest is calculated 
Interest is calculated at the rate of 8.92% per annum on the unpaid balance of the Price as at: the Contract Date; and each following anniversary of the Contract Date.
 .3 Time when interest payable 
The Purchaser must make the interest payments annually in advance to the
Vendor [ any particular place ] with the first payment being payable on the
Contract Date and then on each following anniversary of the Contract Date.
 .4 Failure to pay interest 
If the Purchaser fails to make an interest payment within 14 days of the due date, then the Purchaser will be deemed to be in default of an essential provision of this contract and the Vendor can terminate this contract.
 . SECURITY FOR VENDOR .1 Provision of Unconditional Undertaking 
It is an essential term of this contract that the Purchaser gives the
Vendor an Unconditional Undertaking securing the Obligations.
 .2 Terms of Unconditional Undertaking 
The Unconditional Undertaking must: be issued by a bank: licensed to carry on business as a bank in Australia; previously approved by the Vendor; contain an unconditional undertaking to pay the Vendor, on demand, and any other terms previously required by the Vendor; and not expire earlier than 6 months after the Date for Completion.
 .3 Unconditional Undertaking not provided 
If the Purchaser does not comply with special condition 3.2 the Vendor may in its absolute discretion terminate this contract and the Lease immediately by written notice.
 .4 Claim on Unconditional Undertaking 
The Vendor may present the Unconditional Undertaking for payment: if the Purchaser does not pay the balance of the Price on the Date for
Completion; or if the Purchaser does not remedy a default under this contract within days of the Vendor giving notice to the Purchaser of such default.
 .5 Vendor's expense 
Any expense incurred by the Vendor if it presents the Unconditional
Undertaking will be considered to be a debt payable to the Vendor by the
Purchaser.
 .6 Right to claim not affected 
The Purchaser acknowledges and agrees that: the Vendor can present, and the issuing bank will be entitled to make payment under, the Unconditional Undertaking without reference to the
Purchaser and despite any objection, claim or direction by the Purchaser to the contrary; and the Vendor's rights under this contract in respect of the
Unconditional Undertaking are cumulative and do not exclude any rights or remedies provided by Law.
 .7 Release of Unconditional Undertaking 
The Vendor must return the Unconditional Undertaking to the Purchaser upon Completion and after the payment of the whole of the Price by the
Purchaser to the Vendor.
 .8 Payment of Price 
Any reference in this contract to the payment of the balance of the
Price will be deemed to be a reference to the payment of the whole of the
Price.
 . SECURITY FOR PURCHASER .1 Grant of Lease 
It is an essential term of this contract that on the Contract Date the
Vendor grants a lease of the Land in the form of the Lease and the Lessee accepts the lease on the terms contained in the Lease.
 .2 Preparation of the Lease 
Prior to the Contract Date: the Vendor's solicitor must: prepare the Lease in the form of the Lease; and submit the Lease to the Purchaser for signing and stamping; the Purchaser must: sign the Lease and have it stamped by the Office of State Revenue; and deliver the stamped Lease to the Vendor for signing; and the Vendor must sign the Lease.
 .3 Completion of the Lease 
On the Contract Date: the Vendor must produce the signed Lease; and the Vendor's solicitor and/or the Purchaser's solicitor are authorised to complete the Lease by inserting: the Commencing Date in Item (G)2, being the Contract Date; the Terminating Date in Item (G)3, being 99 years after the Contract
Date; the date of the Lease, being the Contract Date.

The Vendor's solicitor is authorised to make such additions or alterations to the Lease as may be necessary to comply with any requisition of the Land
Titles Office.
 the Vendor's solicitor must give the Purchaser and any mortgagee of the Lease an undertaking to promptly: lodge the Lease and any mortgage of the Lease in the Land Titles
Office for registration; notify the Purchaser and any mortgagee of the Lease of any requisitions made by the Land Titles Office in relation to the Lease or the mortgage of the Lease; deliver the Purchaser's copy of the Lease to the Purchaser (or if the Lease has been mortgaged, to deliver the Lease and the mortgage of the
Lease to the mortgagee of the Lease) following its return to the Vendor's solicitor after registration.
 .4 Registration of the Lease 
Promptly after the Contract Date the Vendor's solicitor must lodge the
Lease for registration in the Land Titles Office together with any mortgage of the Lease that the Purchaser may have granted subject to the Purchaser paying all registration fees.
 .5 Purchaser's acceptance of Lease 
Inspection by Purchaser 
The Purchaser acknowledges that it has read and is aware of the terms of the Lease before it entered into this contract and satisfied itself in respect of all matters in the Lease and related to the Lease.

Purchaser cannot Object 
The Purchaser cannot Object because of any matter disclosed in the Lease.
 .6 Default under Lease 
If the Purchaser is in default under the Lease in an essential respect, then the Purchaser will be deemed to be in default of an essential provision of this contract and the Vendor can terminate this contract.
 The "Unconditional Undertaking" was defined in the definition section of the draft contract as "an unconditional bank guarantee given under special condition 3.2".

Marketing Presentation Delayed  There were a number of factors that appear to have delayed the marketing presentation. A wife of one of the RAAFA members was asked for her comments in relation to the finishings of the various units. That took a little time and was not provided until early September 1999. Another factor that delayed the presentation was the apparent illness of Air Commodore Michael. Mr Akbarian had been advised that Air Commodore Michael was recuperating at home and that
Darwinia/RAAFA could not proceed in his absence.
 However on 15 September 1999 Mr Healy sent the draft contract for the Sale of Land forwarded to him by Ms Banks to Air Commodore Michael and sought his instructions.
 Mr Healy and Ms Banks had a telephone discussion prior to 3 October 1999 in which Ms Banks advised Mr Healy that the Commonwealth was "looking for an exchange of contracts by 31 December 1999". Ms Banks asked for the draft timetable for progression to exchange of contracts on that basis.
 
Meeting - 3 October 1999  Mr Healy and Mr Akbarian gave evidence that they met on 3 October 1999 with
Air Commodore Michael at which there was discussion in relation to a range of issues relating to the development. By this time Mr Healy was a partner of
Gadens Lawyers. The agenda for the meeting included reference to finance with questions such as: the identity of the financier; what the financier required as to pre-sales; the bank guarantee; and interest on the purchase price. There was also an item entitled Joint Venture Agreement with the question, "are the terms of this agreed". The agenda also noted that it was necessary to provide a timetable to the Commonwealth. It is apparent that the date of this meeting was a little later than 3 October 1999 because of a conversation between Ms
Banks and Mr Healy referred to below. It is also apparent that Mr Healy drafted a letter to Air Commodore Michael on 6 October 1999 advising that he had been trying to contact him for some time but understood that he was unwell. It is probable that the meeting took place after 3 October 1999, (probably on 19 October 1999) but obviously before 21 October 1999 when Mr
Healy wrote to Ms Banks, as referred to below, enclosing the proposed draft timetable.  
Telephone Discussion - 6 October 1999  On 6 October 1999 Mr Healy and Ms Banks had a telephone discussion.
Although the detail of that conversation was not the subject of separate evidence, Ms Banks wrote to Mr Healy on 14 October 1999 in the following terms: 
I refer to our telephone conversation on 6 October 1999.
 
I note that the earliest that you are able to meet with Geoff Michael is on October 1999. Following your meeting, please let us have a draft timetable showing progress to an exchange of contracts by 31 December 1999.
 
I refer to our discussion about the structure of the transaction.
 
The 1995 option agreement provides that concurrent with the exchange of the contract for sale the Commonwealth and Darwinia are to enter into the 99 year lease to secure the unpaid purchase price of $5.8 million.
 
On payment of the $5.8 million Darwinia is entitled to the freehold of the property on the giving of which the lease will merge.
 
As discussed, co-incidentally the lease gives the ex-servicemens covenant stronger protection.

A New Timetable - 21 October 1999  On 21 October 1999 Mr Healy wrote to Ms Banks enclosing a timetable and advising that whilst he appreciated that the date for exchange of contracts did not achieve the Commonwealth's desired result of an exchange by 31
December 1999, but rather was 30 April 2000, such date was necessary to enable time to complete the steps that had to be completed before exchange of contracts was possible. Mr Healy requested the Commonwealth's indulgence for a further extension to 30 April 2000 for exchange of contracts.
 By this time the marketing presentation meeting was planned for 16 November and Mr Healy advised Ms Banks that at such time interested purchasers would put down a holding deposit and reserve a unit. He requested whether the
Commonwealth would be willing for completion of a contract to occur on practical completion of stage 1, approximately 100 units, and registration of the strata plan.  The timetable, a copy of which was sent to Air Commodore Michael and to Mr
Akbarian, was in the following terms: 
TIMETABLE . 22 October 1999 - Moss Akbarian to provide Steve Healy with an architect's brochure and to prepare a price list for stage 1.
 . 22 October 1999 - Geoff Michael to call a meeting of interested
RAAFA members for 7 pm, Tuesday, 16 November 1999. The letters advising of the time, date and venue of the meeting will also advise interested purchasers that there will be a right on the night to reserve a selected unit at the price on the price list.
 . 9 November 1999 - Steve Healy to prepare: an information memorandum advising parties on what is being sold and about the development generally; a non-binding document to be signed by interested parties reserving a particular unit and paying a refundable holding deposit.
 . 13 December 1999 - The number of reserved sales will be reviewed by RAAFA and Sharjade, if not all pre-sold prior to that date.

Assuming there is sufficient interest, Moss Akbarian of Sharjade will then finalise plans and specifications for lodgment of a building application and various other matters.
 . 31 January 2000 - Building application to be lodged with Ku-Ring-gai
Council, finance approvals to be finalised and tenders called for building price.
 . 31 January 2000 - Preparation of formal binding contracts for sale of units to be completed for forwarding to parties who have reserved units.
 . 29 February 2000 - Interested members who earlier reserved units to exchange. If formal contracts have not been entered into by that date RAAFA may offer the units to other interested parties on the waiting list.
 . 31 March 2000 - BA consent to be obtained from Ku-Ring-gai
Council.
 . 30 April 2000 - Building contract to be entered into by Sharjade and finance approval to be unconditional.
 . 30 April 2000 - Exchange of contracts with the Commonwealth.
 On 26 October 1999 the plaintiff made application to the Council for an extension of the development consent for a further 12 months.
 On 2 November 1999 Mr Healy forwarded to Mr Akbarian and Air Commodore
Michael a question and answer sheet for their approval and inclusion in the package of materials for the marketing presentation.
 "Getting out" of the Option Agreement  On 4 November 1999 an officer of DOFA, Damien Hall, sent an email to Mr
Mannion with a copy to Ms Banks in the following terms: 
Having spoken to Ann regarding Lady Davidson, I provide the following for your information and comment:  The RAAFA are meeting on 16 November 1999 with the ex-servicemen/women to explain the proposed development and ask those who are interested to put a holding deposit on their place in the retirement village.
  If the response is favourable the developer will spend the $300,000 required to obtain the BA.
  The RAAFA's lawyers have advised that the earliest that exchange can occur is the end of April 2000, thereby putting in real jeopardy completion before 30 June 2000. Even if we exchange before the end of April the RAAFA may not settle immediately - the option agreement allows for them to pay the balance of the purchase price over 6 years.
  In the meantime Ann is seeking advice from Geoff Goldberg (Contract lawyer) as to DOFA's possible alternatives in relation to the option agreement and whether we can get out of it.
  Until we meet the RAAFA (following their meeting with members) we will not know RAAFA's formal position.

Your comments would be appreciated.
 On 8 November 1999 Mr Mannion responded to Mr Hall's email in the following terms: 
Let me know just what our legal position is on this. This is going on forever. Can we get out of the option or force the timing. While we may not do it I wish to brief the Minister on the current status and the options. Press
BDW for an urgent response.
 On 9 November 1999 Ms Banks reported by email that she had met with Mr
Goldberger the previous day to review the transaction. She advised that there were a couple of alternatives for a strategy that could be implemented to extricate DOFA from the transaction by 31 December 1999. Ms Banks advised however that given the past history of the matter RAAFA would use its contacts to try and "save" the transaction. That email continued: 
This is not a legal issue. In the circumstances, does the Property Group wish to brief the Minister saying that RAAFA has been given a lot of leniency, it has indicated that it does not expect to be in a position to exchange contracts by the end of the year, there is a strategy to bring matters to a head but this course can be expected to give rise to political considerations.

Presentation Meeting cancelled  The marketing presentation meeting planned for 16 November 1999 was cancelled, apparently by reason of Air Commodore Michael's inability to attend, and was rescheduled for 17 December 1999.  
Project Control Group - 18 November 1999  On 18 November 1999 a Project Control Group meeting was held at RAAFA's offices in Sydney. Apart from Mr Akbarian there were a number of members of
RAAFA present including Air Commodore Michael and Wing Commander R Craigie.
There were also representatives from the Department of Veterans Affairs and the architects present at the meeting. The Minutes of that Meeting included the following: . REPORT ON FINANCIAL NEGOTIATIONS 
Mr Akbarian reported that the offer from ING Bank which was approved has lapsed, and suggested getting pre-sales confirmed before re-opening the finance. An expression of interest would be most beneficial to get the loan underway.

Mrs Falicity Barr recommended using alternative sources of Finance eg. Macquarie Bank to get the project moving along. Mrs Barr reported that
Neil Wilson of Sakkara Pty Ltd, John Walker of Macquarie Bank and another gentleman had a meeting with her. They had claimed that this meeting was arranged with Mr G Michael who would also be there. Mr G Michael denies this.
She will recommend any contacts if appropriate.

Mr G Stonehouse suggested a list of monies outstanding used on the project to date. MA to provide list of outstanding fees.

Mr G Michael mentioned wanting to have a detailed discussion with M
Akbarian regarding finance. This will be arranged in the near future.
 . LEASE OPTION 
Mr G Michael mentioned that the project has reached a stage to write to the Commonwealth Solicitors to release the land and set a timetable for the commencement of the work.
 . UNIT DESIGN PLANS 
Mr P Grause had prepared individual unit plans with summarised room dimensions. Mr G Michael has instructed Mr P. Grause to organise 150 design plan copies for the glossy brochures. This should also include bus services to
Lady Davidson Hospital, club facilities, garbage disposal, registered club facilities level access etc...
 . GENERAL BUSINESS 
Mr G Michael to confirm stamp duty and legal expenses with Gadens
Lawyers, and how this will affect the selling price of the units.

Mr P Grause stressed the urgency of renewing the DA with Council which will be lapsing beginning of next year.
 As a result of the information provided to Mr Akbarian at this Project
Control Group Meeting in relation to Mr Wilson's direct approach to the
Commonwealth Departments there was subsequent heated discussion between Mr
Wilson and Mr Akbarian in which Mr Akbarian alleged that Sakkara was seeking to undermine the plaintiff. On 25 November 1999 Mr Wilson wrote to Mr Akbarian denying these allegations and suggesting that he would be happy to meet with
Mr Akbarian to constructively discuss the development.

Legal Advice - 16 December 1999  Mr Mannion requested advice from Mr Goldberger in relation to the "current status of the legal relationship between the Commonwealth and Darwinia and, whether, in light of all relevant facts and circumstances that relationship is contractual". Further advice was sought from Mr Goldberger that "if a contract does exist in relation to the subject property, what are its terms and in what circumstances would the Commonwealth be entitled to terminate such contract".
Mr Goldberger provided that advice by letter dated 16 December 1999 addressed to Mr Mannion which included the following: 
In this advice we have identified three fundamental obligations of
Darwinia consequent upon the exercise of the option on 23 December 1998, namely, to exchange contracts within a reasonable period, to deliver a bank guarantee and to pay interest on the sale price outstanding. We have also indicated that although the Commonwealth has so far refrained from relying upon these obligations its conduct in this regard does not involve any final abrogation or waiver of its rights.
 Mr Goldberger also advised that he was of the view that when the option was exercised on 23 December 1998 an immediate contract came into existence for the sale of the Land. He advised that Darwinia then became the subject of obligations: (a) to act in good faith and cooperatively to settle the terms of the formal contract and proceed to an exchange without delay; (b) to immediately provide the Commonwealth with an irrevocable unconditional bank guarantee for the purchase price; and (c) to immediately commence payment of interest to the Commonwealth on the outstanding amount of the purchase price.
 One of the matters of concern raised by Mr Goldberger was that the Option
Agreement did not have any specific time requirement for the exchange of the
Contract for the Sale of the Land. Mr Goldberger was not provided with a copy of the draft contract that had been forwarded to Mr Healy by Ms Banks on 10
September 1999.

Marketing Presentation - 17 December 1999  The presentation meeting finally occurred on 17 December 1999 at Gadens' offices. It appears that about fifty people attended the meeting at which Air
Commodore Michael gave an introduction followed by a presentation from the architects. It would appear that the presentation was greeted with a "standing ovation". Air Commodore Michael sent a list of interested members to Mr
Akbarian with their phone details. That list included approximately 32 names.
On 12 January 2000 Mr Akbarian sent to Mr Healy seven names of people who had made "bookings" for the units in the development.  
Meeting with GDK - 21 December 1999  Neither Air Commodore Michael nor Mr Healy gave evidence in their statements or affidavits in relation to a meeting with GDK on 21 December
However a memorandum from Wing Commander Craigie to Air Commodore
Michael dated 23 January 2000 (referred to later) made reference to it in the following terms:  
It is known that at the meeting at GDK HQ on 21/12/2000 when McLeod was using the white board, talking about a total scheme of $100M, and suggesting that the stage 1 profit could be in the vicinity of $16M, he suggested that
RAAFA and GDK would each get $8M and there was no variation from this position.
 The reference to "McLeod" is a reference to an officer of GDK. It is clear that the date "21/12/2000" was an error and should have been "21/12/1999". Air
Commodore Michael claimed in his statement that the meetings with GDK were between 13 January 2000 and 24 January 2000 and that Mr Akbarian knew about these meetings (par 246). However it is clear that Mr Akbarian did not know about GDK's involvement until he was asked by a representative of GDK introduced to him by Mr Healy and Air Commodore Michael at a meeting on 28
January 2000 (referred to later), to accept $300,000 to exit from the development.  
GDK's Proposal - 14 January 2000  On 14 January 2000 Hayden Lewis from GDK wrote to Air Commodore Michael in relation to the development. That letter included the following: 
Over the course of the last two months we have, as you are aware, been in close consultation to understand properly the aims and aspirations of the RAAF
Association in the development of this project and the proposed provision of services to its members.
 ...
 
GDK Financial Solutions proposes to undertake to raise equity from investors to commence construction and completion of the Village. We suggest timing is of the essence given the need to submit both the BA and the need to immediately request the extension of the development approval beyond the deadline of March 30.
 
It is proposed that GDK Financial Solutions Pty Ltd and RAAFA will enter into a Joint Venture with regards to the ongoing development and management of the village on a 60/40 basis.
 
We propose that we raise $11M-$20M dollars, approx 20% of completed value of the village excluding costs of the transaction. The village will be built on behalf of the Investors and managed for 50 years with an additional option to extend the management by the Joint Venture between the RAAFA and GDK
Financial Solutions Pty Limited.
 ...
 
By utilising our proposal we are able to importantly quarantine RAAFA from any risk associated from the development of the Village, whilst all the time providing the opportunity for RAAFA to share in 40% of the proposed development profit.
 Mr Akbarian cross-examined Air Commodore Michael about a note that he had made on the side of the letter, "Moss A". Air Commodore Michael said that he made that note because he wanted to know whether Mr Akbarian knew about the
GDK proposal because he, Air Commodore Michael, was not aware of it until he read the letter of 14 January 2000 (tr 525). Mr Akbarian also cross-examined
Mr Healy about this letter. He asked him whether he was aware that GDK had, as it claimed in its letter, been involved in discussions with RAAFA/Darwinia for the previous two months. Mr Healy gave evidence that he did not know that GDK had been involved for that period of time and he also claimed he was unaware of the letter of 14 January 2000 (tr 381-383).

A Better Profit Share - Meeting 17 January 2000  A number of members of the RAAFA/Darwinia including Air Commodore Michael and Mr Craigie met with Mr Healy on 17 January 2000 and discussed the possible profit share that RAAFA may be able to achieve with GDK accepting the financing risk. Needless to say Mr Akbarian was not present at this meeting. A further meeting with GDK was planned for 24 January 2000.

Meeting - 19 January 2000  On 19 January 2000 Mr Akbarian attended a meeting with Mr Healy and Air
Commodore Michael at the offices of Gadens. During that meeting Mr Healy advised Mr Akbarian that he would try to arrange a meeting with some of his clients who may be interested in investing in the development. It was during this meeting that Mr Healy advised Mr Akbarian that he had looked at the documentation and could only find finance approval from ING for $22.5 million.
Mr Akbarian advised Mr Healy of the additional facility from MML for $7.5 million.

Draft Notice - 21 January 2000  On 21 January 2000 Mr Goldberger wrote to Mr Hall enclosing a draft "Notice to Perform Contractual Obligations". That Notice alleged that the exercise of the option brought an immediately binding contract of sale into existence between the Commonwealth, as vendor, and Darwinia, as purchaser, and that the "Sale Contract" contained an express fundamental term that Darwinia would provide the unconditional bank guarantee and pay the interest. The draft
Notice also included a requirement that Darwinia provide the unconditional bank guarantee and the amount of interest within 28 days of service of the notice. Mr Goldberger advised that the notice should be sent to both Darwinia and to its solicitors.

Wing Commander Craigie's Memo - 23 January 2000  On 23 January 2000 Mr Craigie wrote to Air Commodore Michael in terms that included the following: 
You will notice that there is some suggestion of movement from the position proposed by GDK about the profit on the development. One view is that the 55 GDK/45 RAAFA split is probably the best you could negotiate with them, having regard to the various circumstances. SH [Mr Healy] has said you could possibly achieve 50/50 from someone else in the same situation as GDK as you have a real potential source of customers. It is not known if SH has someone else clearly in mind and more importantly can they match GDK in every way but on 50/50. It may well be that if RAAFA were to dig its heels in and insist on % if GDK would let the deal go away. On the other hand they do have an air of deep interest in the project with the 60/40 being posed as a negotiating point.
 
It is known that at the meeting at GDK HQ on 21/12/2000 when McLeod was using the white board, talking about a total scheme of $100M, and suggesting that the stage 1 profit could be in the vicinity of $16M, he suggested that
RAAFA and GDK would each get $8M and there was no variation from that position.
 Mr Craigie then referred to a document enclosed with his memo in which there was a suggestion that GDK give RAAFA an indemnity in respect to the 'existing' developer consortium. The memo continued: 
This appears necessary as MA [Mr Akbarian] has not come up with a viable alternative and GDK say they will happily talk to MA; it is assessed that this in fact will be with a cheque book...It may well be that the discussion between GDK and MA should take place before RAAFA gives MA a list of the requirements of financial capacity required by the Commonwealth in the proposed contract for sale, in the first instance, eg paras 2 (deposit $1,000.00), 11 (interest), 12 (bank guarantee to secure balance of purchase moneys), 15 (need indemnity in case of default and terms and conditions suggested in the letter of SH to you of 15/09/99).
 The attached document was a draft Joint Venture - Heads of Agreement between GDK and RAAFA/Darwinia providing for a 50/50 profit sharing agreement with an appropriate nominee of GDK. It also included the following: . GDK to indemnify RAAFA from any or all claims arising from RAAFA having had dealings in connection with the proposed village and in relation to the development approval with Moss Akbarian and/or his company, Kezarne Pty
Limited or by novation Sharjade Pty Limited as part of a developer consortium referred to in writing dated 18/10/95.

Meeting - 28 January 2000  A further meeting took place on 28 January 2000 between Mr Akbarian, Mr
Healy and Air Commodore Michael. At this meeting Air Commodore Michael asked
Mr Akbarian what he had done about the building application. Mr Akbarian advised him that he had instructed the architects to prepare the documentation for the BA three weeks prior to that meeting. Mr Healy then asked Mr Akbarian to provide "proof of that". He also asked him once again about the finance approval from ING suggesting that it was only for $22.5 million. Air Commodore
Michael said he could not remember how much it was for and Mr Akbarian then arranged for the documentation to be sent over from his office to Mr Healy's office to prove that what he was saying was true. When Mr Akbarian re-joined the meeting after making those arrangements the following conversation took place: 
Air Commodore: We have arranged a meeting with this fellow today. Rod
Craigie and Steven Healy know him. Apparently his company has a lot of money and is prepared to start building the project without pre-sales. I want you to listen to what he has to say carefully.

Akbarian: Geoff, other major companies have also approached me but I am happy to listen to this guy. My only concern is that a lot of people will approach you with all kind of offers as they think that they can get their hands on a lot of easy money now that all the hard work is done.

Air Commodore: Moss, believe me we have no intention of going behind your back or abandoning your company for others. I have only spoken to this guy because I thought you asked me to help find alternative finance for you.

Healy: Moss, we are just introducing this company to you. We have not made any deals with them.
 Shortly after this discussion a representative of GDK Financial Solutions came into the meeting. Mr Akbarian could not recall this gentleman's name at the time that he gave his evidence, however he recounted the following conversation (which is not in issue): 
Akbarian: I understand your company is involved in retirement villages.

GDK Rep: Yes, we are.

Akbarian: And you are going to invest in building this project without pre- sales? 
GDK Rep: We will discuss these matters with RAAFA.

Akbarian: But if you are interested in going into partnership with us, you have to discuss these matters with me.

GDK Rep: We are not interested in partnership with you. I have studied the project documents and my company is prepared to offer you $300,000 to get out.

Akbarian: You can't be serious. The land alone is worth $9 million more now.

GDK Rep: That is our offer. You can take it or leave it.
 
Akbarian: I can assure you that I am not interested.
 The GDK representative left shortly after that conversation. After Air
Commodore Michael left the meeting Mr Akbarian informed Mr Healy that he was very offended by the meeting and that it appeared to him that a deal had been done in his absence. Mr Akbarian then asked Mr Healy whether he had received the fax from his office. Mr Healy said that he had received it and that Mr
Akbarian was right and the finance from ING (including the facility from MML) was for $30 million.

Pressure from within - 31 January 2000  On 31 January 2000 Wing Commander Craigie wrote to Air Commodore Michael in relation to the meeting with Mr Akbarian and GDK on 28 January 2000 in terms that included the following: 
I have been made aware of the significant events at that meeting and have come to the conclusion that the progress toward the objective is not slowed down but has stopped; much the same situation as at the conclusion of our meeting with [the plaintiff] on 13 January last at RAAFAHQ.
 ...
 
To my mind the halt to RAAFA's progress must be removed. In all of the circumstances this can be achieved if RAAFA adopts the position put forward by me following the meeting of 13 January 2000, with the reservation that the strategy should be released by solicitors and, preferably, actually written by them. This is significant because in any of the fireside chat or more formal sessions, the [plaintiff] has not once suggested or accepted an implied invitation to have his legal adviser present. Indeed he has asked RAAFA's solicitors to look after him; eg drawing up a joint venture agreement.
Mercifully, the solicitor reaffirmed his position of acting for RAAFA and not otherwise. Interestingly, it appears that he holds little confidence in the binding effect of the Heads of Agreement on RAAFA; alternately he finds the same agreement beyond his capability.
 
Accordingly, the approach to be approved and executed promptly is that two letters be written and delivered to the [plaintiff] as follows; they will need to be fine tuned by the lawyers: 
FIRST - Open - Omitting formal parts 
We have been advised that as a matter [of] fact and law that you are in fundamental breach of your obligations under the Heads of Agreement of October 1995 and that as a result we are discharged from any further obligation under it. 
In view of the previous goodwill that has been a feature of our dealings in the past we are prepared to continue our dealings with you if within the next seven days you provide us with bank guarantee for $5.5M and other documents for your performance of your obligations under the Heads of
Agreement and the proposed Contract of Sale of the land to Darwinia Estate Pty
Limited as contemplated by the Heads of Agreement.

Your inability to supply us with the documents and perform these obligations by that date will require us to find alternate help because of the very critical position we find ourselves in with the impending expiry of the
Development Application and the requirement of the Commonwealth for the project to be started and completed. 
SECOND - without prejudice - omitting formal parts - 
Notwithstanding our letter of even date we are prepared to: . pay verified expenses; . consider you as a preferred tenderer in the construction; and . pay you the sum of $300,000.00. 
With this second letter the author should get in touch with Robert Coulter and Heydon Lewis from GDK to obtain the correct wording and formalise the implied undertaking of GDK to meet the cost of that offer if it is accepted.

Letter of Demands - 31 January 2000  On 31 January 2000 Mr Healy wrote to Mr Akbarian in the following terms: 
We refer to our meeting held on Friday, 28 January, 2000. Would you please provide us with: . A copy of the correspondence with Ku-ring-gai Council in relation to the extension of the DA.
 . Details of your proposed marketing campaign for the property.
 . Your confirmation that you have instructed the architects, Cox
Richardson, to prepare plans and specifications and other documentation required to make application for a building consent together with details of the anticipated date for lodgement and the approximate cost.
 . Your suggestions or proposals as to what should occur between yourself and Darwinia if it is not possible to achieve the level of pre-sales upon which your funding offer (now expired) was based upon. As indicated to you, it is important that our client has these suggestions or proposals within days of our meeting (ie: 11 February) to ensure that the development progresses in a manner sufficient to satisfy the Commonwealth.

Further Letter of Demands - 4 February 2000  Notwithstanding that Mr Healy had given Mr Akbarian until 11 February 2000 to respond, at least in relation to the matters referred to in paragraph 4 of that letter, he wrote again to Mr Akbarian on 4 February 2000. That letter was in the following terms: 
Following our recent meetings and correspondence we write to formalise the position between Darwinia Estate Pty Limited ("Darwinia") and your company.
 
In accordance with its obligations under the Heads of Agreement dated 18
October 1995 between Darwinia and your company Kezarne Pty Limited (subsequently novated to Sharjade Pty Limited), Darwinia has used its best endeavours to promote and assist your company to effect pre-sales of units in
Stage 1 of the development to its members.
 
Despite everybody's best efforts and the significant attendance at the presentation of the village held on Friday 17 December 1999, it has not been possible to obtain the level of expressions of interest hoped for. As at this date there are only 7 expressions of interest by RAAFA members to purchase units accompanied by holding deposits.
 
This number is well short of the number of commitments (80) required by your offer of finance (now expired) from ING Bank/Mercantile Mutual.
 
You have always stated that your finance is dependent upon a high level of pre-sales and accordingly, it appears that you are unable to obtain finance on acceptable terms to allow the development to proceed on this basis.
 
At your meeting with our Mr Healy on Wednesday 19 January 2000 and the subsequent meeting on Friday 28 January 2000 with Air Commodore Geoff Michael and our Mr Healy, you were requested to suggest alternative financing structures or proposals which could allow the development to proceed on a different basis without delay. This request was formally put to you in writing by letter dated 31 January 2000 from Gadens on behalf of RAAFA requesting a response by Friday 11 February 2000.
 
No response has been received to date and our client is concerned given your statement to Mr Healy at the meeting (prior to sending of the letter of January 2000) that you would not be responding and indeed had no obligation to do so.
 
There are several matters that make immediate action by our client imperative including: . The existing development consent expires on 18 March 2000 and obviously there is no prospect of substantial commencement being effected by that date as no plans and specifications have been prepared to allow a building application to be lodged.

On the advice of Council no formal application has been lodged and no fees paid.
 . The timetable of events agreed between your company and Darwinia and supplied to the Commonwealth on or about September 1999 has not been met.
It is critical that there be an operative DA at all times and that finance is in place as soon as possible to ensure that the Commonwealth does not lose confidence in the ability of Darwinia to progress the development and withdraw its offer to sell the land at the discounted sale price.

The joint venture cannot proceed on the basis initially contemplated of financing based on pre-commitments from RAAFA members.
 
We are now instructed to formally put you on notice that Darwinia requires your company within seven days to make an election as to whether it wishes to proceed with the development and on what basis.
 
If the response is that your company does wish to proceed, Darwinia also requires within 7 days you or your company to: 
Deliver a bank guarantee in favour of the Commonwealth of Australia for $5,800,000.00; provide an unconditional finance approval to fund all of the costs of development of Stage 1 including interest for 2 years on the balance of settlement monies required under the contract for sale; confirm you have delivered to Ku-ring-gai Council an application for an extension to the expiry date of the development consent including payment of appropriate fees and copy of all correspondence; confirm that you have instructed Cox Richardson Architects to prepare plans and specifications for the lodgment of a building application for Stage 1 of the development including details of costs to be incurred, evidence of ability to finance payment of such costs and advice as to the expected lodgment date; make payment to Gadens of outstanding fees set out in our letter of 21 December 1999 and reimbursement to Darwinia of an amount of $3,677.50 also set out in that letter.

Failure to respond to this letter or to comply with all of the items (i) to (v) inclusive will mean the Heads of Agreement is terminated and all obligations between the parties will be at an end.

Plaintiff Responds - 7 February 2000  On 7 February 2000 Mr Akbarian responded to Mr Healy's letter of 31 January
He enclosed the copy of the letter to the Council dated 26 October 1999 that sought the 12 month extension of the Development Consent. He set out the detail of the marketing plan. He confirmed his instructions to the architects.
He referred Mr Healy to the timetable that had been prepared and reminded him that the meeting of members on 16 November 1999 had to be rescheduled because of Air Commodore Michael's unavailability. That letter also confirmed that Mr
Akbarian would be happy to enter into negotiations with GDK with a view to finding a speedy agreement which was commercially fair and acceptable, including a profit share agreement based on their level and conditions of investment in the development. That letter also enclosed a cheque for $5,695.20 in favour of Gadens bringing the total amount paid to it, or at least to Mr Healy, to $11,661.20.
 On 8 February 2000 Mirvac approached Mr Akbarian suggesting it was interested in exploring possible participation in the development. On 10
February 2000 Mr Akbarian forwarded Mirvac's letter to Mr Healy. Mr Akbarian advised that he would be holding further discussions with Mirvac to explore the possibilities and then organise a meeting with RAAFA with a view to obtaining the best possible options. On the same day Mr Akbarian forwarded a report from Cox Richardson to Mr Healy advising that the Council had confirmed that it has all the documents necessary "demonstrating good cause" for an extension of the Development Consent and that it was to be placed before the
Council for approval the following Tuesday.  
Proposed joint venture with GDK - 9 February 2000  On 9 February 2000 Wing Commander Craigie forwarded to Mr Healy a pro forma draft Development Agreement for a proposed joint venture between GDK and
Darwinia. On 14 February 2000 Mr Craigie noted that the next meeting with GDK was on 17 February 2000. He suggested that Darwinia instruct Mr Healy to prepare and send an appropriate acknowledgement that Darwinia recognised that the plaintiff was unable to fulfil the expectations of the development and that it would have to look elsewhere for assistance in achieving its objective in creating the retirement village.

Development Consent Extended - 24 February 2000  On 24 February 2000 the Council advised that it had approved the extension of the Development Consent to 18 March 2001.

Freehills Letters  On 18 February 2000 Mr Akbarian's solicitors, Freehill Hollingdale &
Page (Freehills), wrote to Mr Healy in response to his letter to the plaintiff of 4 February 2000. Freehills dealt with each of the matters raised by Mr
Healy and observed that there was no provision in the Heads of Agreement for the plaintiff to deliver a bank guarantee for $5.8 million within 7 days of the letter, nor was there any provision for "unconditional finance approval".
Freehills suggested that the recent treatment of the plaintiff/Mr Akbarian was unfair and that the plaintiff was concerned about the threat made to terminate the Heads of Agreement. Freehills drew attention to the fact that Air
Commodore Michael had said that Darwinia had no intention of abandoning the plaintiff in favour of any other company and advised that GDK's offer of $300,000 to remove the plaintiff from the development was also of great concern to the plaintiff, because GDK would stand to benefit substantially as a result of the plaintiff's work on the development to date. That letter concluded by suggesting that the parties should work co-operatively to ensure the success of the development.  On 28 February 2000 Freehills wrote to Gadens advising that the Council had extended the period of the Development Consent by twelve months and enclosed the letter from the Council dated 24 February 2000. Cox Richardson had provided the plaintiff with a new proposal and timetable, developed after a meeting with the various consultants. Freehills advised that such proposal included a new programme for lodgement of an application for a construction certificate and subject to RAAFA's attitude, the plaintiff was intending to instruct Cox Richardson to proceed with the documentation and lodgement of the application. Freehills also dealt with the marketing campaign that was necessary for the sale of the units and its letter included the following: 
As contemplated by the Heads of Agreement our client requires your client's cooperation in the campaign. In particular, it requests your client's cooperation in the following areas:  provision of relevant information in relation to RAAFA's members as well as supporting letters to allow a mail out of marketing brochures to all relevant members;  participation in marketing meetings when required;  support in establishment of a sales office in Lady Davidson Hospital (no financial input required) and/or support in obtaining the Commonwealth
Government's approval for establishment of a sales office on the site; and  general support of the marketing campaign.

Our client will require a short establishment period after your client's approval and then anticipates a 12 week sale and marketing campaign. This should allow an exchange of contracts with the Commonwealth by 31 July 2000.
 . Other proposals 
As contemplated by the Heads of Agreement, our client intends to proceed with financing of the construction of the project upon achieving the required number of pre-sales. In addition, our client is exploring alternative possibilities to finance the project.
 
It is currently discussing with financiers a separate facility to allow the purchase of the land from the Commonwealth prior to 31 July 2000 independently of the achievement of pre-sales. This would allow the land to be secured and, among other things, allow our client to construct sample units on site after obtaining building approval, in order to enhance the marketing campaign. Our client is also continuing negotiations with potential joint venture partners.
 Freehills' letter went on to propose a timetable of ten weeks for Cox
Richardson to lodge an application for a construction certificate and a 12 week sale and marketing campaign. The letter continued: 
The above will hopefully allow an exchange of contracts with the
Commonwealth by 31 July 2000. We are instructed that although this represents a delay of 3 months on the originally proposed timetable, the delay was not caused by matters within our client's control. The original timetable given to the Government envisaged a meeting of RAAFA's members on 16 November 1999.
This meeting did not happen until 17 December 1999, immediately prior to the new year break. This meant that serious marketing to members could not commence until February 2000. Further, recent events, your recent correspondence and your client's discussions with GDK have further disrupted the timetable.
 Freehills requested confirmation from Gadens that RAAFA agreed to proceed with the timetable as outlined in its letter.
 On 13 March 2000 Mr Healy was instructed by Darwinia to send a letter to
Freehills giving Mr Akbarian time to conduct the marketing campaign and obtain finance subject to the Commonwealth's approval, with an expiry date of 30 June
However on the same day Ms Banks telephoned Mr Healy and advised that the Commonwealth had instructed her to give Darwinia 28 days to provide a bank guarantee and exchange contracts. Ms Banks advised Mr Healy that the matter had been referred to the Minister's office and the action was coming from quite a high level. In those circumstances it was decided not to offer the plaintiff the three months for the marketing campaign and obtaining finance.  
Further Demands - 15 March 2000  On 15 March 2000 Gadens responded to Freehills' letters of 18 February 2000 and 28 February 2000. This letter was most argumentative. However it did commence with faint praise. It suggested that RAAFA did not deny that the plaintiff was committed to the project and had devoted considerable time and effort to the project which "has been appreciated". The letter went on to suggest that finance had not been arranged as required; pre-sales had not been achieved; the time limit in the letter of 7 February 2000 was reasonable having regard to previous delays; and Mr Healy stood by his allegation that Mr
Akbarian said that he would not be responding to the previous letter as he had no obligation to do so. There was also a further allegation that Mr Akbarian had said that he intended to approach the Commonwealth to purchase the Land and proceed with the development without Darwinia. The letter included the following: 
The delay in sending letters to parties who had expressed interest in the project was due to the fact that Air Commodore Michael (quite properly in our view) did not wish to set a date for the presentation to interested parties until detailed plans were available to be shown at the presentation. It clearly was not in the interest of any of the parties to proceed to invite members to a presentation and then have insufficient detail to gauge expressions of interest. Despite several delays eventually Mr Akbarian authorised some plans to be prepared by the architects and the meeting proceeded in December 1999.
 After dealing with other matters raised in the Freehills letter and claiming that the plaintiff continually ignored the issue of finance, the letter continued: 
It appears that despite all the parties best endeavours the project cannot proceed in the manner contemplated. While the Heads of Agreement did not at any time link finance to pre-sales, it was always our client's understanding that your client was obtaining finance on this basis and had no objection to this given its confidence (unfounded as it turned out) in obtaining a high level of expressions of interest.
 
The failure to obtain the expressions of interest means that for the project to continue, finance must be sourced in a different way. If your client is unable to obtain finance there appears little option other than to terminate the heads of agreement and seek another party to assist with the project.
 There was also a claim that in respect of the proposed timetable, RAAFA would respond in due course but "subsequent matters may have overtaken this".
Gadens then disclosed that on 13 March 2000, the solicitors for the
Commonwealth had advised Gadens that the Commonwealth had instructed them to serve a notice giving Darwinia 28 days to exchange the Contract for Sale and
Lease and provide a bank guarantee together with interest for the first year.
The letter also advised that a formal notice in this regard was being prepared. The letter concluded as follows: 
Accordingly, we are instructed to advise that unless by 5.00 pm Thursday March 2000 Darwinia receives from your client: 
An unconditional bank guarantee in favour of the Commonwealth of
Australia for $5,800,000.00 and an unconditional finance approval to fund all costs of development of Stage 1, including interest for 2 years on the balance of settlement monies required under the contract for sale; we are instructed to terminate the Heads of Agreement.

Notice - 17 March 2000  On 17 March 2000 the Commonwealth served a Notice to Perform Contractual
Obligations on Darwinia (the Notice) in the following terms: . By an Option Agreement dated 24 November 1995 ("Option
Agreement") the Commonwealth of Australia ("Commonwealth") granted to
Darwinia Estate Pty Limited ("Darwinia") an option to purchase an area of vacant land described in a proposed plan of subdivision of lot 1, in DP 441749 at the rear of the existing Lady Davidson Hospital, in Bobbin Head Road, North
Turramurra in the State of New South Wales ("Option").
 . The period during which the Option was capable of being exercised was twelve months from the date of execution of the Option
Agreement. The option period was extended by the Commonwealth from time to time and was ultimately extended to 24 December 1998.
 . The purchase price for the land as stated in the Option
Agreement was $5,800,000.00 ("Purchase Price").
 . By letter dated 23 December 1998, Air Commodore Michael on behalf of Darwinia exercised the Option.
 . The exercise of the Option brought into existence an immediately binding contract of sale ("Sale Contract") between the Commonwealth as vendor and Darwinia as purchaser upon and subject to the terms and conditions contained in the Option Agreement.
 . The Sale Contract contained, amongst others, the following express fundamental terms: that Darwinia would provide to the Commonwealth an irrevocable and unconditional bank guarantee from a bank approved by the Commonwealth to secure the payment of the Purchase Price upon the expiry of the period referred to in the Sale Contract.
 that Darwinia would pay interest to the Commonwealth on the amount of the Purchase Price outstanding from time to time at a rate equivalent to 1% above the 5 year Commonwealth Bond Rate advised by the Reserve bank of
Australia on the day prior to the date of execution of the Option Agreement.
 . The Commonwealth now requires Darwinia within 28 days after the date of this notice: to provide an unconditional bank guarantee in the manner contemplated by the Sale Contract; and to pay to the Commonwealth the sum of $2,069,440.00 representing interest outstanding on the Purchase Price as determined in accordance with the Sale Contract.
 . A failure by Darwinia to comply with its contractual obligations as required by paragraph 7 of this Notice will be treated by the Commonwealth as a repudiation by Darwinia of the Sale Contract entitling the Commonwealth at its election to terminate that Contract.

Letter - 12 April 2000  On 12 April 2000 Air Commodore Michael wrote to the then Minister for
Finance and Administration in the following terms: 
I refer to previous correspondence in respect of lease of land adjacent to
Lady Davidson Hospital, Bobbin Head Road, North Turramurra to this Association for the purpose of building a Retirement Village for ex-servicemen/women.
 
Although we were in a position to advise you that financial backing for the project was forthcoming, the would-be financiers and our preferred developer were not able to come to a satisfactory arrangement which would in turn meet this Association's and the Government's requirements.
 
Further negotiations have now taken place and I am pleased to advise that the Mirvac Group has indicated its desire to be the "facilitator" for the project to proceed, however, it has requested a period of three months from this date to put to us a financial, management and construction program.
 
The discussions we have had with Mirvac Group Management have been very heartening and I am sure that the project will be able to proceed in the near future. Mirvac is currently drawing up proposed Heads of Agreement.
 
In view of the above, I respectfully request that a further six month extension of the Government offer be granted to the Association.
 
I am, of course, aware of the previous requests we have made, however, on this occasion I believe our dealings with the Mirvac Group will be beneficial and conclusive.

More Legal Advice - 28 April 2000  In April 2000 the Commonwealth briefed Mr B W Rayment QC to advise whether
Mr Goldberger's letter of advice was correct and whether the Commonwealth could rely upon the Notice that had been served on 17 March 2000 and to terminate the contract with Darwinia after the expiry of the 28 day period on April 2000. Mr Rayment provided his opinion on 28 April 2000 that on the proper construction of the Option Agreement, the obligation to provide a bank guarantee was dependent for its performance upon the agreement of the
Commonwealth to the proposed bank. Mr Rayment said that the Commonwealth could indicate in advance that it would, for example, agree to a bank guarantee from any licensed banker. However he expressed the view that this would not suffice to make the obligation one which was immediately enforceable. Rather he took the view that such obligation was concurrent with the obligation to enter into a Contract for the Sale of Land and the Lease for 99 years. Mr Rayment's opinion was that the bank guarantee must be provided together with the
Contract of Sale and at the same time as the Lease is entered into and that "indeed the subject matter of the Bank guarantee will be payment of the purchase price under the Contract of Sale". Mr Rayment also expressed the view that because the obligations were concurrent the Commonwealth must tender a
Contract of Sale and a Lease before calling for the guarantee. He also expressed the view that the Option Agreement impliedly required a Contract of
Sale and Lease to be settled between the parties and if not settled, the Court could settle it for them.
 Mr Rayment suggested that the liability for the payment of interest was less clear. He observed that it was not clear whether the obligation to pay interest was concurrent with the obligation to enter into a Contract of Sale and Lease. He also remarked upon the possible effect of the extension of the option period creating uncertainty because the consideration for the obligation to pay interest was expressed to be "the Commonwealth entering into the Option Agreement, the Contract of Sale and the Lease". He expressed the view that it may be that the obligation to pay interest would not arise unless and until the Contract of Sale and the Lease had been entered into. He was not prepared to advise that there was no risk of an action for damages for wrongful repudiation if the Commonwealth were to terminate for non-payment of interest without at least tendering a Contract of Sale and a Lease prior to making time of the essence for the payment of the money in question.

Advice - 5 May 2000  On 5 May 2000 Blakes wrote to Mr Mannion providing advice on the legal consequences of DOFA granting an extension of time for the provision of the bank guarantee and the payment of outstanding interest as required by the
Notice. Blakes advised that "the most effective strategy" for the Commonwealth was to "immediately terminate the existing Contract and then proceed to offer
Darwinia a new Contract based broadly on similar terms but requiring an exchange within 3 months from the opening of negotiations".  
Termination Notice - 24 May 2000  On 24 May 2000 the Commonwealth served a notice on Darwinia purporting to terminate the Option Agreement (the Termination Notice) in the following terms: . By an Option Agreement dated 24 November 1995 ("Option") the
Commonwealth of Australia ("Commonwealth") granted to Darwinia Estate Pty
Limited ACN 071 088 929 ("Darwinia") an option to purchase an area of vacant land described in a proposed plan of subdivision of lot 1, in DP 441749 at the rear of the existing Lady Davidson Hospital, in Bobbin Head Road, North
Turramurra in the State of New South Wales ("Option").
 . The Option was exercised on 23 December 1998 and as a result an immediately binding contract of sale ("Sale Contract") was brought into existence between the Commonwealth as vendor and Darwinia as purchaser upon and subject to the terms and conditions contained in the Option.
 . By Notice to Perform Contractual Obligations dated 16 March 2000 ("Notice") the Commonwealth required Darwinia, within 28 days after service of the Notice, to perform those obligations of the Sale Contract set out in paragraph 7 of the Notice.
 . Darwinia failed to comply with the Notice.
 . Darwinia by its failure evinced an intention to be no longer bound by the Sale Contract and repudiated that Contract.
 . The Commonwealth now accepts that repudiation and terminates the
Sale Contract.
 . The Commonwealth otherwise reserves its rights to seek damages from Darwinia in respect of its wrongful repudiation of the Sale Contract.
 
Side Letter - new arrangements  On the same day, 24 May 2000, Kathryn Campbell, the branch manager of the
Portfolio Management Branch of the Property Group of the Department of Finance and Administration wrote to Air Commodore Michael referring to Air Commodore
Michael's letter of 12 April 2000. The letter included the following: 
As you are aware the Department cannot agree to your request and the existing contract of sale has now been terminated. However, the Commonwealth is prepared to enter into negotiations for a new agreement with Darwinia on essentially the same favourable terms as in the original contract but with more defined time periods and terms. It is the Commonwealth's intention that any new contract of sale exchanges within a reasonable period. This is consistent with the Commonwealth's concern that any further delays in this matter would be against the best interests of the taxpayer.
 
As the first step in this new process we wish to outline and clarify the essential terms of the new contract to provide you with time to consider the issues prior to entering into negotiations. They are as follows:  The interest under the terminated contract will be preserved in the new contract as it is a debt due and payable to the Commonwealth. This will be achieved by capitalising the interest so that the price in the new contract is $5.8 million plus the capitalised interest (the revised price).
  Payment of the revised price ($5.8 million plus the capitalised interest) over six years with interest accruing on the same basis as the original contract from the date of exchange;  In the initial three year period only ex-service personnel can purchase units in the retirement village; and  That Darwinia will reimburse to the Commonwealth the amount in excess of the market value of the units as per the terminated agreement.

The interest accrued on the original contract is quite substantial.
However, it is not the Commonwealth's intention to impose onerous and unreasonable conditions on Darwinia. Consequently we will only seek payment if the sale proceeds to contract.
 
The documentation will also contain GST provisions.
 
While the original Contract was for a 99 year lease the Commonwealth is certainly open to, and willing to facilitate alternative arrangements such as a freehold sale if such an arrangement more effectively meets Darwinia's objectives, provided the fundamental objective of sale to ex-service personnel can be adequately protected.
 
An exclusive negotiating period of four months from the date of this letter is granted. At the expiration of the four months (unless extended by the
Commonwealth) if a contract has not been exchanged the Commonwealth will be free to sell the property to any other party.
 
No offer will be binding on the Commonwealth until the terms of any agreement have been reduced to writing, executed by the Commonwealth and exchanged.
 
If you have any queries please do not hesitate to contact Mr Mark Mannion on [phone number provided]. In the meantime the Commonwealth's legal advisors,
Blake Dawson Waldron are preparing a new draft contract of sale, which will be forwarded to Darwinia's solicitors for their consideration in the near future.
 On 26 May 2000 Mr Mannion wrote to Air Commodore Michael requesting an appointment to "discuss the way forward" with the sale of the Land to RAAFA.
Mr Mannion's letter stated that he wished to discuss, in particular, the terms of the new agreement the Commonwealth would like to reach with RAAFA. He advised that the Department would accommodate RAAFA's aim in developing the site and that it would be on "similar favourable terms as the original agreement".
 On 6 June 2000 Mr Mannion and Ms Janette Tate an officer of the property group of the DOFA met with Air Commodore Michael and Mr Healy. The file note of that meeting included the following: 
Mark Mannion opened the meeting by stressing that the Commonwealth wishes to move forward with this sale and in order to do so he would like to discuss contract structures and timeframes. He said that the Commonwealth was particularly interested to hear RAAFA's reaction to past events, ie the termination of the previous agreement.
 
Mr Mannion went on to stress that it was the Commonwealth's intention that any new agreement would be on the same terms and conditions as the original agreement. He then went on to discuss the contractual form of the new agreement. Mr Mannion said that he (sic) may be possible to do other options, ie a different form of title-subject to the clarification of Blake
Dawson Waldron. The original agreement was based on sale of a long-term lease.
 
Air Commodore Michael responded on the question of terms by indicating that he was very supportive of the long-term lease arrangement because it maintained the link with the Commonwealth and gave RAAFA a sense of security.
He acknowledged that developers are not necessarily comfortable with a lease because of the difficulty of raising finance. However, Steve Healy from Gadens advised that this issue had been overcome with the engagement of Mirvac as a joint venture partner. Mirvac have a finance facility. RAAFA undertook to clarify with Mirvac their preference, ie lease as opposed to freehold title.
 
The discussion then moved on to the management of profit levels and the payment of interest. Mr Mannion acknowledged that Mirvac needed to make a reasonable profit but not excessive and that the purpose of the transaction was the provision of retirement accommodation for ex-servicemen. This was acknowledged by those present.
 The file note went on to refer to the fact that the Commonwealth would require the new agreement to be signed by the end of December 2000. Mr Healy raised the covenant that in the first three years of the agreement sales were only to be made to ex-servicemen and asked whether the Commonwealth was prepared to be flexible with this provision. The file note continued: 
Mr Mannion indicated that the Commonwealth would be prepared to consider alternative arrangements. However, Air Commodore Michael indicated that he was confident that there is an adequate market from ex-service personnel and that
RAAF would like to stick with this provision. Mr Healy stressed that RAAFA would only look at open market sale if the ex-servicemen model is exhausted. A suitable provision in the new agreement was discussed.
 
Mr Mannion said the Commonwealth would draft a new agreement. The essential terms of the new contract were discussed and are as follows:  New agreement executed by 31 December 2000;  Provision to shorten the covenant if not sufficient market of ex-service personnel to make the project feasible;  Right of Darwinia to pass title at the end of Stage 1 to reduce interest;  Address the freehold option;  Revise the dollar value for housing currently in the agreement; and  Address the payment of interest.
 On 7 June 2000 the then Minister for Veterans' Affairs, Minister Assisting the Minister for Defence, the Honourable Bruce Scott MP wrote to Air Commodore
Michael in terms that included the following: 
I understand DOFA wrote to you on 24 May 2000 and explained that although they cannot agree to your request and have terminated the existing contract they are prepared to enter into negotiations for a new agreement on essentially the same favourable terms as in the original contract but with more defined time periods and terms.
 
I believe this approach meets the DOFA requirements and will enable your project to progress with no disadvantage to RAAFA. I understand you are satisfied with this outcome and will shortly be meeting with DOFA representatives to finalise the new agreement.
 
I am pleased with this outcome and look forward to hearing of further developments towards the establishment of your retirement complex.
 On 21 June 2000 the solicitors for the Commonwealth wrote to Mr Healy advising: 
The Commonwealth will act in good faith to facilitate the successful conclusion of a sale contract at the price of $5.8 million plus capitalised interest on the basis that the objective of ensuring sales to ex-service personnel can be adequately protected.
 
However if at the end of the exclusive negotiating period of 4 months an agreement cannot be reached, then the Commonwealth will be free to sell the property on the open market without any restraint.

Termination of Heads of Agreement - 27 June 2000  On 27 June 2000 the solicitors for Darwinia wrote to the solicitors for
Sharjade enclosing the Notice of Termination. That letter was in the following terms: 
We enclose a copy of a notice of termination from the Department of
Finance and Administration dated 24 May 2000 advising of termination of the contract for sale of land.
 
Accordingly we are instructed to notify Sharjade Pty Limited of termination of the Heads of Agreement dated 18 October 1995 between Darwinia Estate Pty
Limited and Kezarne Pty Limited which was novated by Kezarne Pty Limited in favour of Sharjade Pty Limited.
 
Darwinia reserves its rights against Sharjade Pty Limited and Mr Akbarian should the Commonwealth seek damages from Darwinia Pty Limited.
 On 28 July 2000 the plaintiff wrote to Air Commodore Michael expressing surprise at the receipt of the Notice of Termination from Gadens without any prior communication from Air Commodore Michael. Mr Akbarian referred to an agreement with Paltrust Pty Limited to "fund" the project and enclosed a letter from Paltrust indicating that it wished to meet with representatives of
RAAFA and the plaintiff so that it could confirm "our acceptability plus arrange the monies necessary to get on with the project". The letter from Mr
Akbarian to Air Commodore Michael included the following: 
Geoff I am going to lose substantial amounts of money and reputation in my industry should this project not proceed. Irrespective of my position, this project is too good not to proceed. I know it will be successful, but unfortunately the financiers get frightened by the conditions imposed by the
Commonwealth. A number of your members have contacted us and made enquiries regarding the project. They all are extremely supportive of this project. As recently as this morning...
 ...
 
Geoff, I know you have been very supportive to your own detriment and I know you have put a lot of unpaid work in this project, but I would like to plead to you to give this company an opportunity to meet with you. I did not write to you prior to this because I was trying to prepare a letter for the
Minister as well which I will be more than happy to provide to you as soon as it is prepared by our solicitors. I look forward to hearing from you regarding your response to my request for a meeting with Paltrust Pty Ltd.
 On 14 August 2000 the plaintiff wrote to the then Minister for Finance and
Administration setting out the history of the dealings between the plaintiff and RAAFA and providing detailed material in relation to the proposed development. That letter included the following: . Finance i) The original financiers to our consortium lost interest in the project due to delays in the council (arising from the Commonwealth's intervention) and in negotiations with the Commonwealth for the price of the land. However we proceeded with obtaining alternative finance based on the presale of the units to RAAFA members pursuant to the terms of our Heads of Agreement with RAAFA.
We successfully obtained the finance but had to go through a lengthy process of investigations including a new valuation required by the bank due to the unusual conditions included in the option agreement. The finance approval was obtained on 11th March 1999.

It was however impossible to achieve the required number of presales within the limits in the finance approval. We therefore proceeded with the preparations for presale marketing to RAAFA members. This was done in full consultation with RAAFA. A copy of marketing documents is Annexed and marked [S 14.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) 
The Marketing program commenced by a presentation to the members of RAAFA which received full and enthusiastic support by the members. Shortly after the commencement of the marketing program we received expressions of interest from ten members of whom eight placed a deposit with RAAFA's solicitors. Whilst our company considered the response of the members very encouraging given the feedback received by our company and the New Year holidays we were advised by
RAAFA's solicitors that we needed to provide the finance for the land immediately. This resulted in a forced change of direction by our company to obtaining finance for the purchase of the land prior to the presale to RAAFA members although our company was not obliged to do so under the Heads of
Agreement with RAAFA.

At the same time we also received a number of verbal and written joint- venture proposals from Mirvac who requested and were provided with copies of contractual documents. Mirvac also requested to be introduced to RAAFA which we organized. Sometime after receiving all the information and meeting with
RAAFA Mirvac decided not to proceed with the project giving no reasons.
However we have agreement with another partner who [is] ready to proceed with the project as soon as the are approved by RAAFA.
 . Termination 
The Commonwealth's purported termination of the Sale Contract is unlawful for a number of reasons including:  Finalisation of sale contract: The Option Agreement required the parties to enter into a Contract for Sale upon exercise of the option. A draft contract was prepared by the Commonwealth's solicitors and Darwinia provided its comments on the draft. Despite this a final version was not provided by the Commonwealth or its solicitors. We still await the supply of the final version of the proposed contract.
  Invalidity of Notices: the purported "Notice to Perform Contractual
Obligations" and Termination Notice were invalid for various reasons. In particular, they relied on an incorrect interpretation of the Option Agreement and required the payment of monies Darwinia was not required to pay. The first notice required Darwinia to pay interest calculated from the date of the
Option Agreement (i.e. prior to the exercise of the Option). Darwinia was not obliged to do so: - the obligation was to pay interest on so much of the purchase price as was outstanding from time to time - no purchase price could be outstanding at a time when the option was not exercised; interest is payable annually in advance with the first payment due on the first anniversary of the Option Agreement if interest were payable from the date of execution of the Option Agreement then the first payment of interest "in advance" would be due on the date of the Option Agreement not its first anniversary.

Clause 2.3 of chapter 3 of the contract for sale of the land drafted by the solicitors for the Commonwealth provides for the interest payment on the contract date which had not occurred.
  Delay by Commonwealth: the delays to the project were of the
Commonwealth's own making as discussed above.
 RAAFA/Darwinia ultimately decided to proceed with the development with
Rosecorp Pty Limited a company controlled by Mr Wilson who had made the approach via Sakkara. Balmoral was also involved in this joint venture. The
Bank of Adelaide funded the project and Darwinia changed its name to the name of the present defendant. Once again there were problems with the Council and it was necessary to go to the Land and Environment Court to appeal from the refusal of the development application submitted by Rosecorp on behalf of the defendant. The Court ultimately approved the project and the village was completed and was fully operational by June 2008 with 160 dwellings constructed and approximately 125 sold and occupied. The fourth and final stage of the development was proceeding at the time of trial.

Proceedings Commenced - 2006  The plaintiff was unable to obtain any agreement from Darwinia or the
Commonwealth for its continued involvement in the development. It commenced these proceedings in 2006. The plaintiff makes claims for damages against
Darwinia for wrongful termination of the Heads of Agreement and for breach of contract and for tortiously conspiring with the Commonwealth to wrongfully terminate the Heads of Agreement. The plaintiff also makes claims against the
Commonwealth that it conspired with Darwinia to wrongfully terminate the Heads of Agreement and knowingly induced Darwinia to breach its contract with the plaintiff. During the trial of the matter the plaintiff made application to amend its pleading to include a quantum meruit claim and an estoppel claim.  
Hearing July 2008 - liability only  The hearing of the matter was limited to liability (order made 30 May ) and proceeded on 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 21, 23 and 24 July
Final written submissions were filed on 11 August 2008. Mr Akbarian represented the plaintiff, Mr J Simpkins SC leading Mr N Owens, of counsel, appeared for Darwinia and Mr M Speakman SC leading Mr D Moujalli, of counsel, appeared for the Commonwealth.  
Construction of the Option Agreement  Much will depend upon the construction of the Option Agreement, in particular, the timing of Darwinia's obligations to provide the bank guarantee and to pay interest on the purchase price. Darwinia submitted that the development of the Land was a commercial arrangement and it was necessary for the business efficacy of the arrangement that the parties would comply with all their obligations "within a reasonable time". In support of this submission Darwinia cited the following passage of Campbell JA's judgment in
Handley versus Gunner  <case> at <case>: There are various statements in textbooks to the effect that generally, where a contract does not specify the time for performance of an obligation, that obligation must be performed within a reasonable time (eg JW
Carter, et al, Cases and Materials on Contract Law in Australia, 5th ed
LexisNexis Butterworths, par [28-04]; Chitty on Contracts, 29th ed (1999) Sweet & Maxwell, par [21-020]). Such statements are empirical generalisations, not propositions of law - it well may be that in all or practically all contracts such an implication would be made, but that is because the tests for implication of the term are satisfied in relation to each particular contract.
 Darwinia also relied on Dixon J's (as his Honour then was) statement in
Reid versus Moreland Timber Company Pty Ltd <case>; [(1946) 73 CLR 1] at 13 that "[a]n implication of a reasonable time when none is expressly limited is, in general, to be made unless there are indications to the contrary". This proposition is not controversial. The real question is whether and if so, in what respect, it is applicable in the circumstances of this case. Obviously the implication of such a term is not applicable where a contract provides for the time at which the obligation is to be performed.
 Darwinia was not obliged to provide the bank guarantee until certain pre- requisites had been satisfied. The first of those was Darwinia's decision to proceed with the purchase of the Land. That was satisfied on 23 December 1998 when Darwinia notified the Commonwealth of its intention to exercise the option. The second pre-requisite was the entry into of the Contract for Sale of the Land (including the Lease) and including the term stipulated in the
Option Agreement that Darwinia would have a period of up to but not exceeding six years from the date of execution of the Contract of Sale, within which it would be required to pay the full purchase price of $5.8 million. That pre- requisite was not satisfied.
 I am satisfied that the provisions in the Option Agreement: (a) that after
Darwinia decided to purchase the Land, the Commonwealth and Darwinia would then enter into a Contract for the Sale of the Land to Darwinia for the purchase price of $5.8 million; (b) that Darwinia had up to six years to pay the "full purchase price"; and (c) that the guarantee was to ensure that
Darwinia had the capacity to make "such payment"; evidence the parties' intention that the guarantee was to be provided at the time of the entry into (or exchange) of the Contract for the Sale of the Land and the Lease. Another aspect of the Option Agreement that supports such a conclusion is the reference to the "execution of the Contract of Sale".
 If this were an agreement pursuant to which the Contract of Sale was to come into force on the notification of Darwinia's intention to proceed with the purchase, there would have been no need for the provision that the parties would "then enter into" the Contract of Sale nor would there have been the need for the provision for the execution of the Contract of Sale. It is clear that by the use of the word "then" in the Option Agreement, the parties intended that the Contract of Sale would be entered into and executed closely proximate to the time that Darwinia notified its intention to proceed, but that was something that the parties - the Commonwealth and Darwinia - had to effect. It was not an automatic or deemed entry into or execution of the
Contract of Sale.
 The provision in the Option Agreement in relation to the payment of interest was an undertaking by Darwinia to pay interest on the purchase price of $5.8 million in consideration for the Commonwealth entering into the Option
Agreement, the Contract of Sale and the Lease. The trigger for the payment of interest was the entry into the three agreements. In other words the
Commonwealth had to enter into the Contract for Sale of the Land and the Lease with Darwinia before interest started to accrue. As I have said, the parties envisaged that the Commonwealth and Darwinia would enter into these latter two agreements in close proximity to the notification to the Commonwealth by
Darwinia that it wished to proceed with the purchase of the Land. The provision that the first interest payment was "due" on the first anniversary of the Option Agreement supports that conclusion. However the parties delayed that process and indeed did not enter into or execute the Contract for Sale or the Lease. Darwinia's liability to make the payment of interest on the purchase price was therefore never triggered.  Although the Commonwealth had Mr Rayment QC's advice that it should proffer a Contract to Darwinia for execution, it failed to do so. The
Commonwealth abandoned the process of agreeing to final terms in October 1999 after it chose not to respond to Mr Healy's letter of 21 October 1999 and pursued the path of finding ways to "get out of" the Option Agreement. I am of the view that the Commonwealth was not entitled to demand the provision of the bank guarantee from Darwinia or the payment of interest without having "then" entered into a Contract for the Sale of the Land or at the least proffered the Contract to Darwinia for execution.

Wrongful Termination  The letter dated 27 June 2000 purporting to terminate the Heads of
Agreement simply referred to and enclosed the Commonwealth's Notice of
Termination of the Option Agreement of 24 May 2000 and then, by the use of the word "accordingly", suggested that the inevitable consequence of that termination was the termination of the Heads of Agreement. There was no suggestion in that letter that the termination was based on any breach of the
Heads of Agreement by the plaintiff, however at trial Darwinia sought to justify its termination on the basis that the plaintiff was in breach of the
Heads of Agreement by reason of its failure: (a) to obtain finance for the costs of the development and the interest on the purchase price; and (b) to provide an irrevocable and unconditional bank guarantee for $5.8 million.
 The plaintiff submitted that: (a) Darwinia was not entitled to terminate the Heads of Agreement by reason of the termination of the Option Agreement; and (b) at the time of the purported termination the plaintiff was not in breach of the Heads of Agreement.
 Darwinia submitted that it was entitled to terminate the Heads of
Agreement on a number of grounds: (1) that the plaintiff had breached a fundamental term of the Heads of Agreement; (2) that the plaintiff had repudiated its obligations under the Heads of Agreement; (3) that there had been a failure of a contingent condition; (4) that it was entitled to terminate pursuant to an implied contractual right to terminate; and (5) that it was entitled to terminate by reason of the frustration of the Heads of
Agreement.

Breach of a Fundamental Term  Darwinia submitted that the Heads of Agreement imposed a number of obligations on the plaintiff with respect to financing the development: (cl 7, (1)(c), 8(13)(a) and (c)). It was submitted that the plaintiff's failure to obtain the required finance would have been fatal to the development and therefore went to the very heart of the contract and was a fundamental term of the contract, a breach of which entitled Darwinia to terminate the Heads of
Agreeement: Tramways Advertising Pty Ltd versus Luna Park Ltd (1938) 38 SR at 642; Hong Kong Fir Shipping Co Ltd versus Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha Ltd  <case>; [[1962] 2 QB 26]; Ankar Pty Ltd versus National Westminster Finance (Australia)
Ltd <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 549.] I agree with the submission that it was a fundamental term of the Heads of
Agreement that the plaintiff would arrange the finance for the development, including finance for the provision of the purchase guarantee to the
Commonwealth. However the issue is whether those obligations had been triggered at the time of the termination of the Heads of Agreement. There was no finance in place for the development at the time of the termination of the
Heads of Agreement nor had the plaintiff arranged the finance for the bank guarantee at that time. Darwinia emphasised that this was some four and a half years after the execution of the Heads of Agreement, and more than a year after the option for the purchase of the Land had been executed. It was submitted that this failure clearly constituted a failure to obtain the required finance within a reasonable time.  On 10 September 1999, the Commonwealth's solicitors had sent to Darwinia's solicitors a draft contract asking them to treat it "very much as a first draft" and subject to any amendments requested by the Department. The
Commonwealth's solicitors asked for Darwinia's solicitors' comments on the draft within two weeks and also requested a draft timetable for the period to exchange of contracts. The response took a little longer than two weeks but by letter dated 21 October 1999, Darwinia's solicitors suggested a number of amendments to the draft contract and provided a draft timetable in which an extension of time for exchange of contract to 30 April 2000 was sought. One of the questions raised in Darwinia's solicitors' letter of 21 October 1999 was whether DOFA wanted to approve the plans and specifications because it was anticipated that work on the plans and specifications for submission to
Council with the building application would take place from "approximately mid-December". The special conditions of the draft Contract for the Sale of the Land reflected the Commonwealth's then position that the bank guarantee was to be provided on exchange of the Contracts for the Sale of the Land (SC
Chapter 3, 3).
 It appears that the Commonwealth's solicitors did not respond to
Darwinia's solicitors' letter of 21 October 1999. The process of settling the agreed terms of the Contract for the Sale of the Land stalled at this stage because of Mr Mannion's desire to work out what the Commonwealth's legal position was and whether it could "get out of" the Option Agreement. Mr
Goldberger's advice and draft Notice deflected the process from one in which the Contract for the Sale of the Land was being finalised to one in which the
Commonwealth was considering making demands for the provision of the bank guarantee and the payment of interest.
 The plaintiff was obliged under the Heads of Agreement to arrange the finance for a bank guarantee from an Australian Bank for the "purchase consideration" in the amount of $5.7 million (cl 13 (c)). The difference of $100,000 between this provision and the $5.8 million mentioned earlier in the
Heads of Agreement (cl 4) and in the Option Agreement is somewhat of a curiosity but was not the subject of any detailed submissions. In any event, the use of the expression "purchase consideration" in the context referred to above lends further support for the conclusion that the guarantee was to be provided at the time of exchange of the Contract for the Sale of the Land, rather than at the time Darwinia notified the Commonwealth it wished to proceed with the purchase.
 The first demand Darwinia made on the plaintiff to provide a bank guarantee of $5.8 million was by Darwinia's solicitors' letter dated 4
February 2000. It was not a demand under the Heads of Agreement but one of a number of pre-conditions to a purported offer to the plaintiff, available for acceptance within 14 days, to elect to proceed with the development on some new, yet to be identified, basis. It was an ill-conceived letter that developed out of the draft letter that Wing Commander Craigie had suggested, which Mr Healy was not willing to adopt.  The second demand made on the plaintiff to provide a bank guarantee was by
Darwinia's solicitors' letter to Freehills dated 15 March 2000. In that letter
Darwinia claimed that the Commonwealth's solicitors had advised that a Notice was to be served giving Darwinia "28 days to exchange the contract for sale and lease and provide a bank guarantee together with interest for the first year". The threat was then made that "accordingly", the Heads of Agreement would be terminated unless by 23 March 2000, the plaintiff provided an unconditional bank guarantee in favour of the Commonwealth for $5.8 million and "an unconditional finance approval to fund all costs of development of
Stage 1, including interest for 2 years on the balance of settlement monies required under the contract for sale".  The Commonwealth did not make the demand as heralded. There was no demand to exchange Contracts for the Sale of the Land, rather there was a claim that a contract for the sale of land had come into existence on 23 December 1998 immediately when Darwinia notified the Commonwealth of its intention to proceed with the purchase of the Land with the immediate obligation to provide the bank guarantee. The Commonwealth was not entitled to make this demand for the reasons I have given above. Darwinia was not obliged to provide the bank guarantee without the exchange of the Contract for the Sale of Land and once
Darwinia received the flawed notice from the Commonwealth there was no proper basis for demanding the guarantee from the plaintiff. The demand made on the plaintiff was also flawed because it included the demand for the provision of an "unconditional finance approval" which was not a requirement under the
Heads of Agreement.  There seems to me to have been a misapprehension of what was happening in relation to the raising of finance. The plaintiff had secured a facility for $30 million from ING (and MML). Both the plaintiff and Darwinia decided that pre-sales would be obtained for the purposes of obtaining or pursuing further finance because the ING loan facility had lapsed. RAAFA and Darwinia agreed to "actively promote and assist" the plaintiff in effecting the sales in the proposed developments by the end of the twelve month option period. I am not satisfied that Darwinia and RAAFA complied with that obligation. Once Mr
Wilson, through his company Sakkara, started making approaches to Air
Commodore Michael and once Wing Commander Craigie started discussing matters with GDK, very little was done to actively promote and assist the plaintiff in effecting the sale of the units.
 It was not suggested to Air Commodore Michael that he had been dealing with GDK prior to 14 January 2000. It appears that Wing Commander Craigie was the person who was dealing with GDK in the two months prior to 14 January 2000 and that he brought GDK into the meetings with Air Commodore Michael and Mr
Healy in January 2000. GDK had been dealing with RAAFA since early November without the knowledge of the plaintiff or Mr Akbarian. If it were the case that RAAFA/Darwinia were truly motivated to "assist" Mr Akbarian with obtaining finance, then there was absolutely no need to keep from him the fact that meetings were obviously taking place from November 1999 to 28 January
GDK's representative's offer of $300,000 to Mr Akbarian to get the plaintiff out of the development was hardly assisting the plaintiff to obtain finance for the development.  In his statement of evidence Mr Healy denied that he knew the GDK representative prior to the meeting on 28 January 2000 at which the $300,000 offer was made by GDK to the plaintiff. Mr Healy's statement also included the following (par 28): 
I was aware, however, that Mr Craigie, a RAAFA representative, had spoken to GDK in relation to the possibility of providing finance to assist Mr
Akbarian.
 Mr Craigie's approach was hardly to "assist" Mr Akbarian. Mr Healy knew that GDK was a prospective joint venturer with RAAFA/Darwinia. He knew that Mr
Craigie was promoting GDK as a prospective joint venturer. The memorandum from
Mr Craigie indicated that Mr Healy had suggested that RAAFA/Darwinia might be able to do better than the 60/40 profit share that GDK had proposed.
 It is true that the plaintiff agreed to the timetable that planned an exchange of contracts with the Commonwealth at the end of April 2000. However
I am satisfied that the tactics adopted by Darwinia caused delay and distraction such as to cause the timetable to be quite unworkable. The added difficulty of the Commonwealth's flawed approach of demanding a bank guarantee and interest without providing any security, that is, the Lease for the Land and exchange of Contracts, meant that any demand by Darwinia on the plaintiff to provide a guarantee and interest without any security was quite unjustified.  I am not satisfied that the plaintiff was in breach of a fundamental term and I am satisfied that Darwinia was not entitled to make the demand that it did on the plaintiff to produce a bank guarantee for $5.8 million within 14 days of 4 February 2000 or within eight days of 15 March 2000 or to terminate the Heads of Agreement for non-compliance with these demands.

Repudiation by the Plaintiff  It is true that a contract may be repudiated by a party demonstrating inability, as opposed to unwillingness, to perform: Foran versus Wight <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 385]; Sunbird Plaza Pty Ltd versus Maloney <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 245] at 263-4; Shevill versus Builders Licensing Board <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 620] at 626.  Darwinia relied on exactly the same submissions in relation to the failure by the plaintiff to provide the bank guarantee and the payment of interest to submit that the plaintiff was unable to obtain the necessary finance for the development, amounting to a repudiation which Darwinia was entitled to accept.
It was submitted that consequent upon that acceptance Darwinia was entitled to terminate the Heads of Agreement for such repudiation.
 The plaintiff had proposed to the Project Control Group Meeting on 18
November 1999 that it would be better to approach a lending facility with a number of pre-sales. The marketing presentation had been delayed by Darwinia.
The August marketing presentation meeting could have gone ahead and did not.
The November meeting could have gone ahead and did not. The final proposal, put forward by Darwinia, for the marketing meeting to take place on 17
December 1999, a week before Christmas involving prospective retirees, seems to me to have been commercially naive. Notwithstanding Mr Akbarian's concerns and requests in July 1999 that the marketing meeting be held at the peak time for such meetings, Darwinia chose to put this meeting at probably the worst time of the year. That adversely affected the plaintiff's capacity to obtain the pre-sales for the development. I am also satisfied that the distractions of January 2000 and February 2000, including springing an offer on the plaintiff to get out of the development without prior notice, had the inevitable consequence of delaying the pre-sales and the process of obtaining finance.
 There were then the quite unreasonable demands in Mr Healy's letter of 4
February 2000. I have absolutely no doubt that the reasons Mr Healy wrote the letter of 4 February 2000 included that: (a) Mr Akbarian did not accept GDK's offer of $300,000 to get out of the project; and (b) Mr Craigie was pressuring
Mr Healy to write the letter. Indeed Mr Healy said in his oral evidence that he felt pressured by Mr Craigie (tr 434). The other factor driving this conduct, at least from the point of view of RAAFA/Darwinia, was that it had the opportunity to get a better profit arrangement than the 85/15 split to which it was bound with the plaintiff. If it went forward with GDK it could achieve a 60/40 split with a prospect (apparently realistic) of a 50/50 split.
 I am satisfied that this change in attitude towards the plaintiff and Mr
Akbarian was probably caused by the search for a better profit arrangement. At no stage prior to January 2000, when the negotiations with GDK became more intense, had there been any suggestion that Mr Akbarian was other than open and honest with RAAFA/Darwinia. There is no doubt that during the meetings in late January 2000 it was suggested that Mr Akbarian was not telling the truth in relation to the obtaining of finance and in relation to the application for extension of the development consent. To suggest to him that he had to prove to RAAFA/Darwinia that such had been done came from the hostile attitude engendered by Mr Craigie's memoranda to Air Commodore Michael, copies of which were sent to Mr Healy. Mr Akbarian told the truth about the finance and also about the application for development consent. It was not the plaintiff or Mr
Akbarian who caused the delay in the marketing presentation meeting. The plaintiff had done everything necessary to have the materials ready for the presentation in August 1999. There was no reason to delay it further. However it was decided that a wife of one of the RAAFA members would look at the finishings. That was done by early September and the meeting could have taken place immediately thereafter. The architects had prepared the package and Mr
Akbarian had prepared an appropriate covering letter for Air Commodore
Michael. Still the meeting did not take place. Late suggestions by
RAAFA/Darwinia for models and other things caused the delay until December, on the eve of the Christmas holiday season. This was disastrous timing for marketing of residential property and within three days of that presentation
RAAFA/Darwinia was conducting further meetings with GDK.
 The steps taken by RAAFA/Darwinia from January 2000 through to 13 March deflected the plaintiff away from the actions it could have taken to have the development move forward. In the meantime Mr Akbarian was pressing on with surveys and the like and asking Darwinia for proper instructions in relation to preparing the site for the development.
 The plaintiff secured finance for $30 million in March 1999.
Notwithstanding that this offer of finance had expired by the time of the purported termination, it was not correct to claim that the plaintiff had been unable to secure finance for the development. As late as 18 November 1999 the
Project Control Group Committee, on which the plaintiff and both defendants were represented, endorsed delaying application for finance until pre-sales were secured. Darwinia's conduct in January and February 2000 was antithetical to its contractual obligations to assist the plaintiff to effect the pre- sales.  I am not satisfied that Darwinia has demonstrated that the plaintiff was unable to perform its obligations under the Heads of Agreement. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's conduct amounted to a repudiation of the Heads of Agreement and I am satisfied that Darwinia was not entitled to terminate the Heads of Agreement on such a basis.

Failure of Contingent Condition/Implied Contractual Right  Darwinia submitted that the Heads of Agreement were subject to a contingent condition, namely, the continued existence of a binding Contract for the Sale of the Land. It was submitted that such condition is necessarily implied in order to give the Heads of Agreement business efficacy. It was submitted that it was obvious that the development could not be carried out without the Land and that the development was tied to the particular Land.
Darwinia also submitted that an alternate way of putting this aspect of its case was that the Heads of Agreement conferred a right upon both Darwinia and the plaintiff to terminate the Heads of Agreement in the event that a Contract for the Sale of the Land "fell over". It was submitted that the parties must be taken to have intended that if, for whatever reason, the contemplated purchase of the Land "fell over" the Heads of Agreement would end or could be brought to an end. Accordingly it was submitted that the Heads of Agreement impliedly provided that upon non-fulfilment of that condition, the agreement was at an end or, Darwinia and/or the plaintiff had the right to terminate the
Heads of Agreement.
 I am not satisfied that the circumstances of this case justify the termination of the Heads of Agreement, simply because the Option Agreement was purportedly terminated. The Heads of Agreement anticipated that there would be a Contract for the Sale of Land between the Commonwealth and Darwinia, so that
Darwinia could purchase the Land and Darwinia and the plaintiff could develop it. The Commonwealth always intended that Darwinia would have a contract to purchase the Land on the same favourable terms as that which the Option
Agreement anticipated, but for the Commonwealth having the capacity to fix the timeframe within which the Land would be purchased so that it had more control over the finalisation of settlement than it did under the Option Agreement.
When the Option Agreement was terminated, the side letter made it abundantly clear that the Land was still available for Darwinia to purchase at the same price with interest capitalised. Not only did Darwinia achieve that agreement from the Commonwealth but it also achieved an agreement with the Commonwealth, set out in the side letter, that if the sale did not proceed the Commonwealth would not require any interest payment.
 Performance of the Heads of Agreement was still possible because the
Commonwealth was willing to sell the land to Darwinia, albeit under a different contract. The Land was still available and Darwinia had not decided to abandon the development. There was no failure of a contingent condition and
Darwinia was not entitled to terminate the Heads of Agreement on this basis.

Frustration  Darwinia also submitted that the termination of the Option Agreement frustrated the Heads of Agreement.
 I am not satisfied that the inevitable consequence of the termination of the Option Agreement was the frustration of the Heads of Agreement. As I have said above the obligations under Heads of Agreement were able to be performed because the Commonwealth was willing to provide Darwinia with the Land pursuant to the other agreement referred to in the side letter.
 I am satisfied that Darwinia was not entitled to terminate the Heads of
Agreement. The plaintiff has succeeded in establishing that Darwinia wrongfully terminated the Heads of Agreement.

Inducing Breach of Contract  The plaintiff claims that the Commonwealth either directly or indirectly interfered with the plaintiff's contract with Darwinia. The plaintiff claimed that the Commonwealth knowingly or recklessly procured or induced the wrongful termination of the Heads of Agreement by Darwinia. In the particulars provided prior to trial, the plaintiff claimed that by its conduct in resolving with
Darwinia to terminate the Option Agreement for the purpose of Darwinia terminating its contractual obligations with the plaintiff, the Commonwealth interfered directly with the contractual relationship between the plaintiff and Darwinia. There are a number of problems with this claim. There is no basis in the evidence that the Commonwealth "with Darwinia" resolved to terminate the Option Agreement for the purpose of Darwinia terminating its contractual obligations with the plaintiff. The Commonwealth took its own course because of its concerns that the process of the sale of the Land had become so protracted. There is nothing in the evidence that establishes that there was any combination or agreement between the Commonwealth and Darwinia to facilitate Darwinia terminating its Heads of Agreement with the plaintiff.
 The side letter seems to have inspired suspicion in the plaintiff that such combination existed. At no stage during the evidence was it established that the side letter was anything other than the Commonwealth positioning itself so that it could have a better arrangement whereby it could control the date upon which settlement of the sale of the Land would occur. There were political sensitivities at work in respect of the provision of retirement accommodation to ex-service personnel. The evidence discloses that DOFA officers were concerned that if the Commonwealth terminated the Option
Agreement there may be some political backlash against it. One of the reasons that the side letter was provided was so that Darwinia understood that the
Commonwealth was keen to provide the Land at the then discounted price ($5.8 million compared to the valuation of $14 million) to Darwinia so that it would not complain. This was not a sinister plot to get rid of the plaintiff. It was a way in which the Commonwealth could extract itself from a contract that did not provide the stringent timelines that it wished to have in a contract. It was not an act that had the inevitable consequence of terminating the Heads of
Agreement. Accordingly the plaintiff's claim of direct interference with the contractual relationship fails.
 The plaintiff made the alternative claim that the interference was indirect. Although the claim outlined by Mr Akbarian was a little unclear, I am assuming that the plaintiff claims that Darwinia terminated its contract by reason of an unlawful act by the Commonwealth, being the termination of the
Option Agreement. To succeed in this claim the plaintiff would have to establish that: (a) the Commonwealth did something which procured the breach by Darwinia; (b) the Commonwealth had sufficient knowledge of the Heads of
Agreement; and (c) the Commonwealth had the intention to bring about a breach or to interfere with the performance of the Heads of Agreement. The plaintiff needs to establish all of these matters: Independent Oil Industries Ltd v
Shell Co of Australia Ltd <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1912) 15 CLR 148] at 155, 156, 161) Street J said at 203: ...[I]n every case I think that it must be shown that the defendant deliberately intervened between the contracting parties, either with the express desire of depriving the plaintiff of the benefit of his contract, or under such circumstances that he must have known that the effect of his intervention would be to deprive the plaintiff of that benefit.
 There was no suggestion in Mr Rayment QC's advice that there would be any impact upon the developer. There was no suggestion in Ms Banks' letter of 24
May 2000 that there would be any impact on the developer. The Commonwealth's focus was on achieving a situation in which Darwinia would still purchase the
Land, and it was a matter for Darwinia as to with whom it contracted for the development. The Commonwealth was seeking to have more stringent timeframes within which to complete the sale of the Land.
 The termination of the Heads of Agreement was not the inevitable or necessary consequence of the termination of the Option Agreement by the
Commonwealth for the reasons I have outlined earlier. The fact that the
Commonwealth offered the side letter to Darwinia is indicative of a desire to ensure that the sale of the Land proceeded. Even though I am satisfied that the Commonwealth was not entitled to demand the bank guarantee and the interest from Darwinia at that time and in the circumstances that it did and was therefore not entitled to terminate the Option Agreement on the basis of
Darwinia's non-compliance with those demands, the plaintiff has not established that the Commonwealth had any intention to bring about or interfere with the Heads of Agreement. There is a further problem for the plaintiff. It is true that Ms Banks was aware of the identity of Mr Akbarian and the plaintiff and that there was some sort of arrangement between Darwinia and the plaintiff to develop the Land. However the plaintiff has not established that the Commonwealth knew of the terms of the Heads of Agreement.
In all those circumstances the plaintiff's claim against the Commonwealth of indirect interference must fail.

Conspiracy  The plaintiff's claim against Darwinia in conspiracy must fail because the plaintiff has failed to prove any agreement or understanding between Darwinia and the Commonwealth that the Commonwealth would terminate the Option
Agreement to enable Darwinia to terminate the Heads of Agreement. The closest the plaintiff came to establishing any discussion between the Commonwealth and
Darwinia in relation to the plaintiff was Mr Mannion's evidence that during his meetings with Darwinia prior to March 2000, he was led to believe that
Darwinia was considering terminating the plaintiff's contract. The letter from
Air Commodore Michael to the Minister for Finance and Administration on 12
April 2000 seeking an extension of time to enable the Contract for the Sale of the Land to be completed, seems to me to weigh heavily against any conclusion that the Commonwealth and Darwinia were in agreement that the Option Agreement should be terminated so that it could rid itself of the plaintiff.
 I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has discharged the onus of establishing any agreement or arrangement between the Commonwealth and
Darwinia amounting to a conspiracy. Accordingly the plaintiff's claim against
Darwinia in conspiracy will fail.
 The plaintiff made a claim against the Commonwealth in conspiracy. The
Commonwealth did not conspire with Darwinia to get rid of the plaintiff. Mr
Mannion made an error of judgment in taking his notes that he had made in a journal with him when he left the Commonwealth Department and went to work for the ACT Government. That journal no longer exists. Had that journal been available I have little doubt that it would have been most helpful to determine what happened at those meetings. In those circumstances Mr Mannion was trying to recall some eight years later what had occurred at two meetings, possibly three, with Darwinia prior to the time that the Commonwealth served its Notice to Darwinia. Mr Mannion claimed, and I believe him, that it did not matter to him (or the Commonwealth) whether Darwinia maintained its development contract or arrangement with the plaintiff or with any other developer. He claimed, and I believe him, that the Commonwealth was interested in bringing the sale of the Land to a conclusion irrespective of the identity of the developer. It is true that Mr Mannion was informed by Darwinia that it was having some difficulty with the developer obtaining finance and that he got the "impression" that Darwinia was considering terminating its relationship with the plaintiff. However the Commonwealth did not agree with
Darwinia that it would terminate the Option Agreement so that Darwinia could terminate its agreement with the plaintiff. The plaintiff failed to establish that any of the Commonwealth officers were aware of the terms of the Heads of
Agreement.  The conspiracy claim against the Commonwealth fails.

Application to amend  Although the plaintiff was represented by solicitors in the year 2000 and from time to time apparently had access to persons who were legally qualified,
Mr Akbarian represented the plaintiff at trial. On the second day of the trial
I asked Mr Akbarian whether the plaintiff sought the payment of any money on a quantum meruit basis. It was not until the seventh day of the trial that Mr
Akbarian provided a draft pleading that contained a form of quantum meruit claim. That draft pleading claimed reimbursement of all the plaintiff's costs, including a reasonable margin for overhead and profit, on the basis that as a result of the wrongful termination of the Heads of Agreement the plaintiff lost its right to have the benefit of the Heads of Agreement.
 Although the application was not decided during the trial the plaintiff proceeded to cross-examine Darwinia's witnesses on the basis that a quantum meruit claim could be made. Mr Akbarian cross-examined Air Commodore Michael in relation to the work and services that had been provided by the plaintiff and its predecessor Kezarne and Mr Akbarian in preparation for the development. Air Commodore Michael gave evidence that the plaintiff and Mr
Akbarian did "a lot of work" with AEM; that the plaintiff was involved with the survey; that it met and effectively lobbied the Department of Veteran
Affairs; that they travelled to Canberra to meet with the Department and to negotiate for the purchase of the Land; that they travelled to Perth to visit retirement villages; that they co-ordinated and provided services necessary for the lodgement of the development application; that they met with architects and members of the Environmental Protection Authority and the
National Parks and Wildlife Service; they made presentations to the local residents and attended planning control meetings; they negotiated with Mirvac; they obtained finance from ING and met with various other financial institutions; they got in the proposed construction costs; obtained valuations; attended meetings with banks; obtained development approval from the local Council; arranged for the preparation of the marketing material; attended the marketing presentation meetings and other meetings required by
Darwinia. Air Commodore Michael gave the following evidence (tr 554): 
Q. But was it your understanding that I was going to get paid sometimes for the work that I did? 
A. That's quite right.

Q. And that is why I had an agreement with your organisation? 
A. (No verbal answer).
 
Q. Is that why I had an agreement with your organisation? 
A. I think the agreement we had was drawn up and it was acceptable to both parties and a very happy relationship.
 On the ninth day of the trial Mr Akbarian provided a further proposed amendment and on the 11th day of the trial a final pleading was provided. It claimed that from 18 October 1995 to 27 June 2000 the plaintiff performed work and services in relation to the development of the Land with the knowledge of and at the request of Darwinia. That claim includes the following: . It would be unjust for the First Defendant to retain the benefits conferred on it by the performance of the work and services without paying to the Plaintiff reasonable reimbursement and remuneration for the costs and benefits of such work and services.
 . The reasonable reimbursement and remuneration for the costs and benefits of such work and services include: a share in the increased value of the Land as a result of the
Plaintiff's performance of works and services; labour costs for time spent on the development of the Land by the
Plaintiff, its servants, employees and agents; and actual costs of disbursements paid for by the Plaintiff, including, but not limited to, payment of Council fees relating to the development of the
Land and payment by the Plaintiff of part of the First Defendant's legal costs.
 That proposed amendment also included a claim in estoppel based on a common assumption that the plaintiff would perform work and provide services in relation to the development of the Land and that the plaintiff would be reimbursed and remunerated for the work and services it performed. The claim alleges that the plaintiff performed work in relation to the development of the Land in reliance upon the common assumption including increasing the value of the Land and incurring labour and other costs. It is alleged that Darwinia has resiled from the common assumption by refusing to reimburse or remunerate the plaintiff and that it has suffered loss and damage.
 The plaintiff has a number of problems with the application to amend. A significant problem in relation to the quantum meruit claim is that there is no claim that the Heads of Agreement were ineffective. The whole of the plaintiff's case is based upon an effective and binding contract the terms of which are contained in the Heads of Agreement. In those circumstances there is "neither occasion nor legal justification for the law to superimpose or impute an obligation or promise to pay a reasonable remuneration": Pavey &
Matthews Pty Ltd versus Paul <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 221] per Deane J at 256; Lumbers versus W Cook Builders Pty Ltd <case>; <case>;
Coshott versus Lenin  <case> at <case>.
 The other problem the plaintiff faces in relation to the quantum meruit claim is the limitation period of six years: [s (a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). In a quantum meruit claim time runs from when the defendant received the benefit that gave rise to the obligation to make restitution: Coshott versus Lenin per
Mason P at [17]. The plaintiff filed its Summons on 3 March 2006. Any work or services conferring a benefit on Darwinia after 3 March 2000 would be the subject of a claim, if it were available. It seems to me that even if the plaintiff could overcome the problem outlined above in relation to the Heads of Agreement, there was no work or services performed by it after 3 March 2000 that conferred a benefit on Darwinia.
 The plaintiff also has problems in relation to its proposed estoppel claim. The pleading is very deficient in that it makes no proper allegation as to how the common assumption was reached, other than, of course, the reference to the Heads of Agreement. In any event the Heads of Agreement contained a most attractive commercial arrangement for the plaintiff in that it was to have 85% of the profit from the development. Far from evidencing a common assumption that the plaintiff would, along the way, be paid for the services it provided to Darwinia, the parties intended that the plaintiff would have the benefit of the profit share to compensate it for any cost it may have incurred during the development of the Land.
 It would be very difficult for any defendant to know when the alleged common assumption arose and on what basis the common assumption arose as the matter is presently pleaded.
 I am satisfied that the plaintiff's application to amend its pleading should be dismissed.

Conclusion  The plaintiff's case against Darwinia for wrongful termination is made out. The plaintiff's case against Darwinia in conspiracy fails. The plaintiff's case against the Commonwealth for inducement of breach of contract fails. The plaintiff's case against the Commonwealth in conspiracy fails. The plaintiff's application to amend is dismissed.
 As this matter has proceeded on liability only, it will be necessary to plan for the trial on quantum. The parties are to prepare Short Minutes of
Order reflecting these findings on liability together with any agreed order as to costs. If the parties are unable to agree on an order for costs of the trial on liability, I will hear argument in due course. The parties are to confer for the purpose of preparing a timetable for the preparation of the trial on quantum and/or any arrangements they may wish to make to have the matter referred to mediation. The matter is listed at 9.30 am on 16 October to finalise the liability aspects and to list the matter for hearing on quantum.  
LAST UPDATED:  October 2008 * * * 
