

Regina versus Van Thanh Huynh [1996] NSWSC 328 (2 August 1996) 
REGINA versus Van Thanh HUYNH /94 
Monday 13 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, LEVINE J, DOWD J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The appellant was convicted, at each of two successive trials before Shadbolt DCJ and a jury, of conspiracy to supply heroin. The first trial took place in September and October 1992. The second trial took place between February and March 1993. Following his convictions the appellant was sentenced on 23 April 1993 in respect of the offences the subject of both trials.

We have before us in the present matter an appeal against the convictions which were the subject of the first trial. There is also an appeal against the conviction the subject of the second trial but, by agreement of the parties, that matter, together with applications for leave to appeal against the sentences in relation to all convictions, will be dealt with at a later date.
Of course, if the present appeal succeeds no question will arise as to the sentences in respect of the convictions following the first trial.

At the trial with which we are presently concerned, the appellant was convicted of two offences of conspiracy to supply heroin. The charge the subject of the first conviction alleged a conspiracy between the appellant and a man named Phan. The charge the subject of the second conviction concerned a conspiracy between the appellant and a man named Moc, another named man and persons unknown. Moc was also tried and convicted at the same time as the present appellant.

At the second trial, which is not the subject of the present appeal, the appellant and a co-accused, Lee, were both convicted of conspiracy to supply heroin. An appeal by Lee was heard and determined in 1994 (R versus Lee [(1994) 76
A Crim R 271]).

The charges arose out of an extensive surveillance operation which took place over a number of months, and which involved a large number of investigators.
The appellant and his associates apparently knew that they were under some degree of observation, but not the extent of it. There is reference in conversations to their observations of surveillance vehicles. In secretly recorded conversations they spoke in somewhat guarded and cryptic language, frequently using slang expressions, said to be the argot of the drug trade, but from time to time they slipped into more revealing dialogue. For example, what was allegedly heroin was often referred to by a word which was translated into the English word "stuff", but there were occasions when they referred explicitly to heroin.

The principal evidence against the appellant consisted of the contents of the secretly recorded conversations, together with police evidence about observations of movements of the appellants and others.

In relation to the first charge, which concerned the alleged conspiracy with
Phan, the police actually recorded the making of what the Crown said was the relevant conspiracy. In relation to the other charge, the Crown case was that the recorded conversations left no doubt that what was being overheard was evidence of a conspiracy to supply heroin on a very large scale.

The conversations which were secretly recorded were in either Cantonese or
Vietnamese, and the contents of the tapes of the conversations were translated into the English language.

In one tape there was recorded a lengthy conversation between the appellant and a Vietnamese male in which the appellant discussed both his recent and past experiences in relation to drug dealing. The following is a brief extract from that conversation: "MALE: But normally, how much do you sell? Every month, would you take in 5 kilos, 5 coups or not? 
HUYNH: Not that much. If 5 coups, it would have been 2, 3 million dollars.
 
MALE: 1 coup is that much? 
HUYNH: Yeah, ... that much.
 
MALE: That's why I want to bow my head to you.
 
HUYNH: But I don't do anything. I didn't do anything. I just sit here. There would be someone to collect the money for me. I have people to handle everything for me. And, let me see, each coup I would make, each coup.
 
MALE: Excluding all the expenses.
 
HUYNH: After deducting everything, I would make 300,000 dollars.
 
MALE: That much.
 
HUYNH: That was while I sleep.
 
MALE: But the capital had to be one million.
 
HUYNH: But the capital. If I were the one that supplied the capital, and if
I handled everything by myself, I would have collected over a million for each coup.
 
MALE: Is that so? 
HUYNH: Yeah. But this way, it has been divided up, divided into four parts.
 
MALE: Coupled with your capital, it would be an incredible amount.
 
HUYNH: No. If you operate that way, you end up a goner.
 
MALE: Would someone kill us? 
HUYNH: No, it is not that someone would kill us.
 ......................

MALE: But, you must at least have some small capital? 
HUYNH: Sure, must have some capital.
 .......................

HUYNH: To what extent can one afford to be careless. One needs to have a network (for protection) to do that.

MALE: I know that.

HUYNH: They by (?) got arrested as soon as he came back.

MALE: Is he the skinny chap? 
HUYNH: No, (but) there is a skinny guy, a Chinese.

MALE: Yes, the skinny Chinese guy who is reasonably old.

HUYNH: I'm not sure if he was the one (that got arrested). But as soon as he got back, they had the papers to arrest him. He just got arrested today. There was not much involved! Only more than two kilograms.

MALE: Over two kilograms would be a few million (dollars).

HUYNH: Over two kilograms can't be a few million (dollars), grandpa.

MALE: Heroin here (question was not completed due to interruption by Huynh).

HUYNH: It wouldn't be a few million (dollars). Over two kilograms .. five, six hundred thousand (dollars).

MALE: Oh! a kilogram is that cheap? 
HUYNH: Not cheap! You would get more ... But here you sell it wholesale! 
MALE: Yeah.

HUYNH: Retail selling it out in the street, fuck the mother, you would get ,000 (dollars) for one kilogram, no half a kilogram. One kilogram would bring one million (dollars). It is possible to add sugar to it when retail selling it. We don't do like that, we only ...

MALE: I say, for the whole year I haven't seen anything going on ..." 
In another recorded conversation to which Huynh, Moc and Lee were parties the following exchange occurred: "LEE: How much can you dispose of in a week? 
HUYNH: It depends.
 
LEE: (unintelligible).
 
HUYNH: About 10 units.
 
LEE: How much? 
HUYNH: Ten units.
 .....................

LEE: Each client takes two to three deliveries.

HUYNH: Three units, 5 units 
LEE: Would it be a lapse of a month between deliveries? 
HUYNH: It all depends on the prevailing prices.

HUYNH: In 10 days I have disposed of 10 odd units; the price was really cheap." 
In a conversation between Huynh and Phan the following exchange occurred: "PHAN: Do you retail? 
HUYNH: Why ask? You plan to sell? 
PHAN: Yes.
 
HUYNH: Can you sell? 
PHAN: Give me, I will sell.
 
HUYNH: What? 
PHAN: Give me some.
 ...................

PHAN: The unmixed, how much? 
HUYNH: What? 
PHAN: The unmixed, how much? 
HUYNH: Seven thousand around that price. Seven thousand is the cheapest price already ... also unmixed.

HUYNH: What? 
PHAN: Is it unmixed? 
HUYNH: Are you going to do it yourself? 
PHAN: Next week ... My friend does it. I don't do it. My friend he smokes.

HUYNH: When are you coming? Tuesday or Thursday? 
PHAN: Saturday.
 ................

PHAN: Saturday I will give back nine.

HUYNH: When do you pick (it) up? Already to pick up at any time? 
PHAN: Yes.
 ...............

HUYNH: Anyhow I have kept back approximately two of them so as to sell them slowly." 
There is a recording of conversation in which Huynh refers to Moc as his "disciple" or "best disciple", and there are other conversations referring to "chiefs" and "underlings". These reveal the hierarchal relationship that existed between parties to conversations, or people spoken about, and the relatively high standing of Huynh in that hierarchy.

There is a great deal of discussion about prices, values at a wholesale or street level, measurements and quantities, and mixing or dilution of the primary substance which is for sale.

In his remarks on sentence, Shadbolt DCJ observed that, although a lot of time was occupied at the trial objecting to, and testing, evidence about voice identification, ultimately there was no issue as to the people who were the main parties to the secretly recorded conversations. In his unsworn statement the appellant sought to explain away the conversations on the basis that they were not about heroin, or any illegal drug, but about other commodities.
Shadbolt DCJ said that the defence case took on a "risible" quality as the appellant gave attempted explanations of what he was talking about by reference to subject matters and commodities other than drugs. The jury were entitled to regard the appellant's explanations as not only unconvincing but absurd.

After the transcripts, and translations, of the secretly recorded conversations had been tendered in evidence, the Crown called, as expert witnesses, two persons with long experience in investigation of illicit drug trafficking. One witness, Mr So, was, at the time of the trial, an officer of the Independent Commission Against Corruption in Hong Kong. The other witness,
Detective Brennan, was an Australian police officer with extensive experience in drug investigation. Those witnesses, over objection, expressed opinions as to the meaning of some of the expressions used in the conversations, which they said they recognised as argot of the drug trade, and as to what the parties were referring to when they spoke of such things as "stuff" or "units".

Mr So was asked a series of questions about price, quantities, and values, which he related to his knowledge and experience of the market in illicit drugs, and in particular, heroin. He said, in relation to discussions about prices and specific quantities of "stuff", that the figures given were in accordance with his knowledge as to heroin prices.

He gave the following evidence: "Q: In the context of those passages are you able to express an opinion as to what the word `stuff' meant when they were talking about it in these passages? 
A: In this context the word `stuff' in my opinion relates to narcotics, drugs and heroin." 
Detective Brennan gave similar evidence. For example, she was taken to a particular conversation in which there was discussion about "stuff" and mixing it with sugar, and then gave the following evidence: "Q: Now in the context of that material are you able to indicate from your experience an opinion as to what they are referring to when they refer to the word `stuff'? 
A: Heroin.
 
Q: Now with respect to the second page, page 52, `If leaving it for a few more years, often it is not possible with that stuff. You mixed a heap of sugar in it, how can it be sold?' Are you able to express an opinion as to whether or not that refers to any particular drug? 
A: Yes, heroin.
 ..........................

Q: Can I take you to page 58 please which is the new material and then to page
At the bottom of the first page, page 58 this statement appears, `How many packets do you want? What?' And then it goes over on to page 59, `Sell (by) giving it to Tu. Mixed as yet, paternal grandfather'. `Not mixed yet!' `The unmixed, how much?' `What?' `The unmixed, how much?' `Seven thousand around that price. Seven thousand is the cheapest already, paternal grandfather, also unmixed'. Now in the context of the material here are you able to express an opinion as to whether or not they are talking about any particular drug? 
A: Yes, they are.

Q: What drug? 
A: They are talking about heroin.

Q: What do you base that opinion on? 
A: The price.

Q: Which particular price? 
A: The $7000 being cheap for pure - an ounce of pure heroin.

Q: Did that relate to any particular amount of heroin in 1990? 
A: Yes, one ounce." 
An objection to such evidence forms the subject of a ground of appeal, which it is convenient to consider first.

The trial judge left it to the jury to make up their own minds as to what the parties to the tape recorded conversations were discussing, but in that connection he told them that the evidence of Mr So and Detective Brennan was available for them to consider. By the time the jury came to deliberate the appellant had given his version of what was being discussed, and so, in a practical sense, the issue had been narrowed. The appellant did not suggest, for example, that he had been discussing the sale in Australia of some drug other than heroin. However, the Crown had to prove, in its case, not merely that the appellant was talking about drugs but also that the drug he was talking about was heroin. That was the point of this evidence.

In R versus Al Kahair (CCA, 20 June 1994, unreported) this court held that such evidence was admissible. The leading judgment was that of Priestley JA, with whom Wood J and I agreed. To like effect was a decision of the Western
Australian Court of Criminal Appeal in R versus Marinovich [(1990) 46 ACrimR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281990%29%2046%20ACrimR%20282 "View LawCiteRecord" ). In the latter case it was held that the evidence of police officers based on their accumulated experience combining personal observation with information received concerning characteristics, prices, packaging, terminology and availability of heroin by comparison with other illicit drugs was relevant and admissible.

What the witnesses did here was to relate what was said about price, quantity, and other aspects of the substance under discussion to their knowledge of the illicit heroin trade, and to express an opinion, based on that knowledge, that the parties to the conversation, who were shown by other parts of the conversations to be drug dealers, were talking about heroin. This is a proper field for expert evidence. At the time the evidence was led, it was not known what the defence case was going to be as to the subject matter of the secretly recorded conversations. There was, however, ample material in the conversations which revealed that the participants were experienced in the drug trade. As was noted above, in some of the tapes there was specific reference to heroin. All that material was in evidence before Mr So and
Detective Brennan came to give their opinions. However, the Crown had to prove, amongst other things, that, in some parts of the conversations, where the parties used either non-specific or code terms, the particular drug they were discussing was heroin as distinct, for example, from cocaine. Opinion evidence called from persons expert in the trade in illicit drugs was a legitimate means of proving that.

It was argued for the appellant, relying on R versus David and Gugea (CCA, unreported, 10 October 1995) that, even if it were open to the witnesses to give evidence that in their opinion the parties to these conversations could have been referring to heroin, it was impermissible to lead from them opinion evidence that the parties were in fact talking about heroin. That is a distinction which was regarded as important in that case. There, however, it does not seem, so far as appears from the judgment, that there was all the background material, including discussions of weights, measures, quantities and the like, and specific discussion of drug dealing and heroin, that existed in the present case. At the most it could be said that the people whose conversations had been intercepted could have been drug dealers. Here the evidence, apart from the opinion evidence, showed that the appellant was a dealer in heroin.

The evidence was admissible. This ground of appeal must fail.

It is argued for the appellant that there has been a miscarriage of justice resulting from the refusal of the trial judge to order separate trials of the appellant and the accused Moc, and of the counts in the indictment.

The principal complaint in this connection derives from the fact that, in a record of interview, Moc, when confronted with the tape-recorded conversations, admitted that he was talking to the appellant about heroin. He also made various other admissions. At the time that evidence was given, and again in his summing-up, the trial judge directed the jury that such evidence was admissible only against Moc and could not be used against the appellant.
He said such evidence as "hermetically sealed".

There is nothing unusual about such a situation, and there is no reason to believe that the jury would not have been able and willing to comply with the directions that were given.

Even allowing for the admissions by Moc, the Crown case against the appellant was at least as strong as the case against Moc. The tape recordings of some of his conversations with Phan, to which Moc was not a party, were damning. His attempts to put an innocent complexion upon them were, was the trial judge said, risible.

It was proper that these matters should have been tried together. The charges concerned a number of drug dealers, exposed by a common surveillance operation, who were caught in the act of arranging heroin supplies. There was no miscarriage of justice resulting from the refusal to order separate trials.

Counsel for the appellant developed an argument, the point of which was not entirely clear, based upon the form of the second count in respect of which the appellant was convicted. The charge was as follows: "That Van Thanh Huynh and Quoc Luong Moc between 1 September 1989 and 5
August 1990 at Sydney in the State of New South Wales did conspire together and amongst themselves and with Be Tho Huynh and other persons to supply a prohibited drug, namely heroin, which was not less than the commercial quantity prescribed by the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) in respect of such drug." 
The nature of such a conspiracy was considered in R versus Lee (above), a case also involving the appellant.

Counsel's argument began with an assertion of fact, disputed by the Crown, that the evidence on the tapes did not go so far as to prove that Be Tho Huynh was a party to any supply arrangements, or to the alleged conspiracy.

As was noted, the Crown contended, and the jury were entitled to conclude, that the tapes showed that the appellant was the leader of a group, and that
Moc was his "best disciple". (The first charge arose from the fact that the surveillance happened to provide specific evidence of an express agreement between the appellant and Phan). Another of the alleged disciples was Be Tho
Huynh.

From the evidence concerning the tapes, and in particular master reel 19, together with the police evidence as to observations of promises, the jury were entitled to infer that the Crown had proved Be Tho Huynh to be part of the conspiracy. But even if the Crown did not prove that, it does not follow that the charge had to fail. The count contained particulars of the alleged conspiracy, but the Crown, in order the succeed, did not have to establish all those particulars.

There was abundant evidence in the tapes of a conspiracy, of the kind alleged, involving the appellant and Moc. Far from being unsafe and unsatisfactory in that respect, the verdict, especially after the jury heard the appellant's attempts to explain away what he said, was almost inevitable. What is set out earlier in this judgment is only a small fraction of the incriminating material available to the jury.

Nor has there been shown to be any error in the way in which the trial judge directed the jury in relation to these matters or, in particular, in connection with the way in which the two counts were related to each other.

It is contended that the trial judge failed to direct the jury as to the mental element in conspiracy. His Honour told the jury that conspiracy is an agreement between two or more persons to do something which is contrary to law. It was, he said, the agreement that lay at the heart of the offence. By that he said he meant a meeting of minds, an agreement, to supply heroin. He went on to explain how such an agreement may be proved.

It is complained that his Honour did not adequately convey to the jury that here had to be an intention to carry out the agreement. In my view he adequately conveyed that idea, having regard to the nature of the evidence and the issues in the case. This was not a case where one party to an agreement was asserting that he never really intended to perform it. The directions were sufficient, having regard to the way the case was fought.

His Honour's directions to the jury on character are the subject of a ground of appeal. His Honour told the jury that the appellant's good character (the absence of prior convictions) should be taken into consideration by them as a relevant fact when they came to consider the central issue at the trial, ie whether or not he would have committed the crimes charged. He said it should also be taken into account in considering whether they believed his statements to them and to the police. I see no error in the directions on character.

It is contended that certain of the tapes (master reels 21, 27, 30 and 33) were irrelevant and inadmissible.

Master reel 27 records a conversation between the appellant and a Vietnamese male. A good deal of the conversation is taken up with reminiscences by the appellant as to illegal activities, including drug activities, in Vietnam in the 1970's. Some of it, however, is within the period the subject of the charges. The conversation first quoted in this judgment comes from this tape.

Between pages 31 and 42 of the summing-up there is a summary by the trial judge of some of the most significant evidence on the tapes. Reference is made, for example, on page 43 to master reel 33.

All of the tapes were relevant and admissible, although some of them, if considered on their own, would not have advanced the Crown case very far.
That, however, is not the test. Indeed, had the Crown been more selective in tendering the tapes it would probably have been criticised on that score. This ground of appeal is not made out.

As was noted above, the original conversations were in Cantonese and
Vietnamese. The trial was conducted on the basis that interpreters listened to the tapes (which were in evidence) out of court for the purpose of translating them into English. The trial judge refused a request to have the original tapes played to the jury. This is a subject of a ground of appeal. The jury would not have been able to distinguish the expressions used in these tonal languages. (cf Butera versus Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic) <case>; [(1987) 164 CLR 180], 197). It is also said that his Honour refused to allow certain cross-examination, which was on an issue as to whether certain words appeared at one reference number or at another reference number. There was in fact cross-examination on the point, and playing the tape to the jury would not have been of assistance to them.

Even if these criticisms had been valid, they would not have involved any miscarriage of justice.

It is argued that the trial judge did not adequately warn the jury against using Moc's record of interview in the case against the appellant. In truth, however, a clear and sufficient warning was given.

On master reel 53 there is recorded a discussion by the appellant about the fact that Than had been arrested the previous evening. There is a lot of very critical comment about the way he conducted himself leading to his arrest. A ground of appeal contends that the trial judge was in error in admitting evidence as to the arrest of Than and of the search of his flat. Such evidence was admissible. It was evidence to show the relationship between the appellant and Than, and it also helped identify the appellant as the speaker on the tapes.

Complaint is made that the summing-up did not put the case for the appellant adequately or properly. This complaint is not justified. The appellant's case, such as it was, was fairly put.

The learned trial judge adequately directed the jury as to the approach they should take to the issues as to the inferences available from the tapes. It is complained that his Honour should have given a specific direction on circumstantial evidence, and that what he said at one part of the summing-up was inconsistent with what he said at another. He told the jury that they should first decide what the conversations meant. He gave adequate directions as to the onus of proof, and as to the nature of the case the Crown had to prove in relation to each conspiracy. This ground of appeal is not made out.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.
 
LEVINE J: I have read in draft the judgment of the Chief Justice. I agree with the proposed orders and his Honour's reasons therefor.
 
DOWD J: I have read the judgment in draft form of Gleeson CJ. I agree with the proposed order and reasons stated.
 
EVIDENCE - OPINION EVIDENCE 
The appellant and others were the subjects of a lengthy surveillance operation and were subsequently charged with, and convicted of, conspiracy to supply heroin. Tape recordings of conversations between the alleged conspirators were tendered. These showed that the appellant was a drug dealer. They also, on occasion, referred specifically to heroin. On other occasions the appellant spoke more guardedly, using code language or language that was non-specific, but in a context referring to weights, measures, quantities and prices. The
Crown needed to prove; not just that the conspiracy related to drugs, but that it related, in particular, to heroin. Police officers with experience in the market for illicit drugs gave evidence that in their opinion, based on their knowledge of the market, and of the prices and quantities mentioned, the appellant was referring to heroin - HELD - Such evidence was admissible.

R versus Marinovich [(1990) 46 ACrimR 282]; R versus El
Kahair (CCA, unreported, 20 June 1994), followed; R versus David and Gugea (CCA, unreported, 10 October 1995) distinguished.

O R D E R S 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
 
REGINA versus VAN THANH HUYNH /94 
Friday 2 August 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SHELLER JA, GROVE J, IRELAND J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW & PRACTICE - CONSPIRACY - DRUG TRAFFICKING - R v
LEE [1994 76 A CRIM R 268] FOLLOWED - SENTENCE - HELD MINIMUM TERM 18 YEARS ADDITIONAL TERM 6 YEARS TO BE SERVED
CONCURRENTLY FOR THREE SEPARATE CONSPIRACIES ENTERED BY MAJOR DRUG DEALER
WITHIN THE DISCRETIONARY RANGE OF TRIAL JUDGE 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: We now propose to give judgment in this matter and I will ask
Grove J to give the first judgment.

GROVE J: The appellant seeks the quashing of a conviction for conspiracy to supply heroin. In the alternative he seeks leave to appeal against sentence.

It is convenient to chronicle some background and other circumstances. The appellant was tried on two counts of conspiracy to supply heroin before
Shadbolt DCJ and a jury in a trial extending from September to October 1992 and convicted on both counts. The first of these counts concerned a co- conspirator named Phan and the second a man named Moc and others. An appeal against these convictions was heard in this Court on 29 March 1996 and judgment dismissing the appeal was delivered on 13 May 1996 (Gleeson CJ,
Levine and Dowd JJ).

The present conviction followed the trial of the appellant and a co- conspirator Lee before Shadbolt DCJ and a jury, extending from February to
March 1993. They were jointly indicted on a single count in these terms: "Van Thanh Huynh and Albert Kam Chuen Lee stand indicted by those names for that they between the first day of January in the year 1990 and the fifth day of August in the year 1990 at Sydney in the State of New South Wales, did conspire with each other and with other persons unknown to supply a quantity of a prohibited drug, namely heroin, which was not less than the commercial quantity prescribed by the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) in respect of that prohibited drug." 
An appeal by Lee, who was also convicted, was heard on 6 October 1994 and dismissed in a judgment delivered on 6 December 1994 (Gleeson CJ, Powell JA and Smart J). Leave was granted for Lee to appeal against the severity of his sentence of minimum and additional terms of nine and three years respectively but the appeal against sentence was also dismissed. It is appropriate to note that Lee received a discount for reasons akin to those considered in R v
Cartwright [1989 17 NSWLR 243.] 
Shadbolt DCJ sentenced the appellant in respect of all three offences on 23
April 1993. He imposed concurrent sentences on each of a total of 24 years imprisonment divided into minimum and additional terms of 18 and 6 years respectively.

The appellant was arrested after an extensive surveillance operation lasting many months. The Crown case was that he occupied a principal position in major drug trafficking activity. The evidence upon which the Crown primarily relied was detailed in the leading judgment of Gleeson CJ when dealing with the appeal of Lee and is found in (1994) 76 A Crim R especially at pp 272-279. His
Honour included extracts from transcripts of the product of listening devices which had been installed pursuant to warrants granted under applicable legislation.

There is no need to reproduce for present purposes what can be read in that reported judgment. Indeed, that judgment and the earlier judgment concerning the present appellant are resources upon which I am grateful to be able to draw. The grounds now relied upon have to a large extent been canvassed in those appeals.

As filed, the notice of appeal contained 10 grounds challenging conviction. At the commencement of this hearing counsel informed the Court that no additional argument would be presented in relation to grounds numbered 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 but he wished to preserve his position in the event that there was application to review any decision of this Court at a higher level. It was conceded that these grounds had been determined in the earlier appeals which I have mentioned. Grounds 1, 2, 4 and 6 were in these terms: "His Honour erred in law ......in not directing a verdict of acquittal.
......in misdirecting and/or failing to direct the jury as to conspiracy.
......in misdirecting and/or failing to direct the jury as to circumstantial evidence and in particular in respect of the conspiracy between the appellant and Lee.
The verdict of the jury was unsafe and unsatisfactory thereby resulting in a substantial miscarriage of justice." 
It is convenient to deal with them together. In combination they differ little from the contentions advanced and rejected in Lee's appeal. As was pointed out therein, the jury had made express inquiry about the nature of the conspiracy and the learned trial judge had given the directions which are reproduced in A Crim R at 281.

The evidence that the appellant had conspired with the man known as Ah Shek to distribute heroin was indisputable. The direction specified the Crown case as leading to no other conclusion than that they - the appellant and Lee - had agreed with each other to dispose or deal in heroin. It was not left to the jury to convict on the basis that it was sufficient to uphold the Crown case to find that each of the then accused had independently engaged in a conspiracy with Ah Shek.

Complaint is made that his Honour failed to invite the jury to consider any possible reasonable inference that the matters talked about were innocent. The defence case conducted at trial was exactly that, namely, that when seemingly cryptic remarks were passed about some materials, the references were said to be to watches and abalone.

A submission was made that there was no evidence that any dealings occurred within the period of the conspiracy alleged. The thrust is a little obscure having regard to the essence of the crime charged, being the agreement rather than any actual dealing. However, the evidence is that the recording of inculpatory conversations were made between February and April 1990 and the period specified in the indictment is between 1 January and 5 August 1990.
Nothing relating to the specification of dates appears to have been raised at trial and I would reject this submission.

The strength of the Crown case is abundantly demonstrated by the argument that it failed to negative a hypothesis consistent with innocence of the offence charged when it is fleshed out to reveal that the hypothesis is that the appellant and Lee were possibly simply two drug dealers chatting about their separate business plans and exchanging gossip about their common source of supply.

In oral argument supplementing written submissions counsel contended that the evidence may have manifested a supply of drug rather than a conspiracy so to do. This was neither the case nor the way in which the issues were left to the jury for deliberation.

We were taken to the conflict in the evidence of the translators, Mr So and Ms
Lam. We were invited to look at the evidence for the purpose, as I understand it, of preferring that of Ms Lam and therefore concluding that the verdict of guilty was unsafe. The jury must have accepted Mr So. I see no basis for their acting to the contrary, nor any reason for this Court not acting upon his evidence.

These grounds of appeal cannot be sustained. My own assessment of the evidence emphatically rejects the proposition that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt about the guilt of the appellant.

Ground 3 is that his Honour erred in failing to direct the jury as to the mental element in conspiracy.

The element referred to is the intention to carry out the object of the conspiracy. It is not obligatory for a judge to give a direction to that effect in every case but in an appropriate case. This was not such a case.
Whether those accused intended to carry forward an unlawful purpose was not an issue raised at the trial, but an issue was whether it was possible that any agreement related to a lawful purpose of trading in watches and abalone.
Leaving aside the identification of the object, there appeared no challenge to the evidence that some agreement was being implemented. The suggested direction would have been in this case surplus, and his Honour did not err.
The appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

I turn to the application for leave to appeal against sentence. The appellant was sentenced on the basis that he had involved himself in conspiracy to supply a large commercial quantity of heroin, thus exposing himself to potential liability of a sentence of life imprisonment: [Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) [section (3).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s33.html) 
The aggravating circumstance was not charged in the indictment. It should have been: Lee at pp 282-290. What was breached, however, was a rule of practice and not a rule of law. Intervention will be provoked if a miscarriage of justice can be discerned.

The criminality of the appellant's conduct is appropriately summarized in his
Honour's remarks on sentence. He found the appellant to be an organizer and principal in these conspiracies. Of his role he said: "On the evidence before the jury it is not hard to determine that Huynh was the principal amongst several other gangsters. His boasting, his direction of the others, particularly Moc, the deference accorded him, all point to this being so. It is he who commands the conversation, who talks of his underlings, who gives advice and delivers admonishments.

It is also he who seems most concerned when payment is either overdue or short. He appears to be receiving and on-selling heroin from a local supplier and to be in receipt of what he refers to as his own stuff, heroin which no doubt he had some part in importing." 
On subjective matters he set out what he described as the little he knew of the prisoner before him. He said: "Huynh is Vietnamese. He is 41 years old and an associate of the criminal classes. He is married with three children. He has no criminal convictions in this country. He has said in his statement that he worked in a factory. If he has I have seen no evidence of it and would not accept his assertion in this regard.

It is said on his behalf that he lives in rented premises and shows no sign of unexplained wealth. That is in strong contradistinction to his own admissions on the tapes of having several houses and money overseas. Further admissions would lead me to the view that although he has no convictions recorded against him in this country, he has not been for several years a man of good character.

Since he has been in prison he has performed well, according to the report of the prison Governor Mr Schubert, a person whose views I would accept without hesitation." 
The Crown supports the sentences imposed and points out that his Honour further found that the appellant demonstrated neither remorse nor contrition.
He assessed the appellant's cases to fall within the band of worst cases. I understand him to have reached that conclusion in the light of the cumulation of the three offences. He stressed the element of general deterrence in these terms: "Only punishment then which is severe and seen to be so will punish the guilty, deter from continuing those who doubtless have taken these prisoners' places, and assure the community at large, whose apprehension regarding the drug trade grows daily, that these Courts will deal appropriately and severely with the drug merchants when they are apprehended." 
He then added: "These reasons in my view provide special circumstances which would preclude me from departing from the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/)".

My initial and continuing feeling is that this observation is misprinted. It is the absence of special circumstances which inhibits departure from the formula mentioned in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).
Subject to this matter I see no error in his Honour's approach or assessment of sentence. The appellant was shown to be a major figure in the drug trafficking scene, and the circumstance that he immured himself from being conspicuous is no reason to treat him otherwise. A total term for the three offences of 24 years is within the range of a sound exercise of discretion. R v Savvas <case>; [(1991) 58 A Crim R 174]; [1995 69 ALJR 564] provides a useful comparison where the Court dealt with a principal drug trafficker convicted of conspiracy.

There has been in my view no miscarriage. The appellant was always focussed upon very large quantities of heroin. It is not to the point to seek to analyse the evidence to determine delivery of actual amounts. The scope of the agreement clearly inculpated the appellant in intended major dealing. The evidence is in an understanding of the words spoken by him and captured by the listening devices.

It is said that a remark by his Honour that the appellant was, in relation to one conversation, to receive five units of heroin was wrong and that the appellant should be understood to be rejecting that amount. In isolation this error, if such it was, is of no consequence; nor is it of consequence in relation to the criminality of the appellant. His Honour was not dealing with an allegation concerning any particular parcel of drug. The Crown has pointed to words of the appellant which amply justify the findings made by his Honour, and it is to be observed that the appellant did not seek to dispute any of the facts by giving evidence in the sentencing proceedings.

The sentence structured by his Honour provided an additional term of six years during which the appellant might be released to parole. Actual release would follow determination by the Offenders Review Board in the discharge of its statutory function.

I am unable to perceive any rehabilitative purpose served by specifying a longer additional term than six years. If his Honour's approach be regarded as tainted by error by reason of the matter earlier mentioned, I would not in any event intervene because on re-assessment I would reach exactly the same conclusion. In my view the appellant fails to demonstrate any special circumstances within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

I propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed, that leave to appeal against sentence be granted and that appeal also dismissed.

SHELLER JA: I agree.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

SHELLER JA: The order of the Court will be that the appeal against conviction is dismissed, leave to appeal against sentence is granted, the appeal against sentence is dismissed, time served to count.
 * * * 
