

Regina versus Tam Thanh Ngo [1996] NSWSC 550 (15 November 1996) 
REGINA versus Tam Thanh NGO /96 
Friday 15 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, ADAMS AJ 
SENTENCING - CROWN APPEAL - CULPABLE DRIVING 
The respondent pleaded guilty to culpable driving causing the death of a pedestrian whom he struck in a pedestrian crossing. The respondent was sentenced to a minimum term of one year and an additional term of four months. The sentencing judge found that the respondent was not keeping a proper lookout, and that, although he had not been shown to be exceeding the speed limit, his speed was excessive in the circumstances. There was no question of alcohol or drugs involved - HELD - The Crown had not made good its challenge to the findings of fact made by the sentencing judge and the appeal should be dismissed.

O R D E R S 
Crown appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a Crown appeal against what is said to be the inadequacy of a sentence imposed upon the respondent by his Honour Judge JB Phelan in the District Court of Campbelltown on 15 August this year.

The respondent pleaded guilty to a charge that on 9 March 1995 he drove a motor vehicle in a manner dangerous causing impact and the death of Carlos
Vallejos.

The circumstances of the case may briefly be summarised as follows. At about .30pm on 9 March 1995 Carlos Vallejos, who was then aged eleven years and five months, was crossing a pedestrian crossing in Polding Street near the
Stockland Shopping Complex at Weatherill Park. It is not entirely clear whether the victim was actually walking and pushing his bike or riding his bike or half walking or half riding, but there is no suggestion that he was in any way at fault or that his conduct in any way contributed to the accident.
As he was crossing the pedestrian crossing a motor car driven by the respondent collided with him and killed him. The respondent, who has a bad record, fled the scene of the accident in his car. The circumstances in which he later came to be apprehended by the police are, in a number of respects, unclear but Judge Phelan accepted, on the basis of some information in a record of interview, that the respondent initiated the contact with the police.

The area in which the fatal collision occurred was described in a statement of
Detective Constable Bradley as follows: "Advisory signs warn eastbound drivers about the marked pedestrian crossing.
The first sign, situated on the northern footpath, just prior to Conrad
Street, was about 90 metres from the crossing. A second sign, again situated on the northern footpath was about 3 metres from the crossing. Two bright yellow cylinders fixed to the median strip, marked with a black arrow on a reflective white background, also denote the pedestrian crossing.
 
For drivers travelling east, sight distance to the pedestrian crossing is excellent. Between Conrad Street and the pedestrian crossing a tree and bus shelter occupy some space on the northern footpath, but do not block view of the crossing. The weather was fine. The road surface was dry. I arrived at the scene on dusk and street lighting was on." 
His Honour was also asked to take into account two offences on a Form 2 schedule. One offence related to the fact that at the time of the collision the respondent had no licence to drive the motor vehicle. The other related to an entirely unrelated matter which was concerned with a matter involving the possession of a small amount of heroin after the date of the fatal accident.

The respondent was originally charged with manslaughter and he pleaded not guilty to that offence. When the respondent offered to plead guilty to the offence of culpable driving under s52A of the Crimes Act, the Crown agreed to accept that plea of guilty in full satisfaction of the charge. I emphasise that, because certain submissions that were made by the Crown to Judge Phelan on the sentencing proceedings, and certain submissions that were made in this
Court, create an impression that the Crown may have repented, or half repented, its decision to accept the plea of guilty to a charge of culpable driving and not to press on with the charge of manslaughter. Indeed, the written submissions that the Crown placed before Phelan DCJ in the sentencing proceedings contained material that seems to have been calculated to invite his Honour not to accept the plea of guilty, that is, the plea which the Crown had indicated it would accept, but to put the respondent upon trial for manslaughter.

The primary arguments which the Crown has advanced in support of the present appeal are arguments which seek to challenge certain findings of fact made by
Phelan DCJ in the respondent's favour. Once again, some of the arguments that have been advanced on behalf of the Crown on those factual issues, if they were accepted, might indicate that the respondent was guilty, not of culpable driving, but of the gross negligence that would sustain a charge of manslaughter. I say that to emphasise that what is before this Court is an appeal against the sentence imposed in respect of the offence of culpable driving. It is far too late at this stage of the matter to view the way in which the respondent has been treated as though he were, in truth, guilty of the crime of manslaughter.

It is important at the outset to make clear the nature of the present proceedings. This Court is not sitting here for the purpose of considering afresh the sentence which ought to be imposed upon the respondent. The principles that we are to apply in dealing with a Crown appeal against sentence have been stated categorically by the High Court on a number of occasions. They have also been stated by other courts including this Court.
The leading cases on the subject are Everett versus The Queen <case>; [(1984) 181 CLR 295] and Griffith versus The Queen (1976/77) 137 CLR 293. The principles have recently been summarised in R versus Alpass CCA unreported, 5 May .

This Court would not interfere with the sentence imposed by Phelan DCJ simply because we thought the sentence was less than the sentence that we would have imposed if we had been dealing with the respondent at first instance. In order to persuade this Court to intervene, the Crown needs to demonstrate that
Phelan DCJ made some material error of fact or law, that he misunderstood or misapplied proper sentencing principles, or that he wrongly assessed some salient feature of the evidence. We may also intervene if we were to come to the conclusion that the sentence was not merely inadequate but inadequate to such a degree as implied error on the part of the sentencing judge. If we were to intervene and resentence the respondent ourselves, we would ordinarily resentence him to a sentence somewhat less than the sentence we thought he should have received at first instance, to take account of the double jeopardy that is involved in a Crown appeal against sentence.

Recognising that the nature of the appeal is, as I have described, and that the Crown was obliged to demonstrate some error either of law or material fact, the Crown made as its primary submissions in this appeal challenges to certain findings of fact made by Phelan DCJ. It is appropriate that I should deal with those at the outset.

In order to understand the nature of the challenges which the Crown has made to Phelan DCJ's findings of fact, it is necessary to say something more about the circumstances of this fatal accident. The culpability that is involved in the crime of culpable driving, where it is alleged that the driving caused death, arises out of a combination of two factors. The first factor is the objective conduct of the offender. The second factor is the consequence of that conduct which, by hypothesis, is the death of a human being. The death of a human being is regarded so seriously by the law that serious penal consequences can flow to someone who causes such death even as a result of momentary inattention.

Most negligence or inattention on the part of drivers produces no consequences at all; but sometimes it produces serious and even fatal consequences. When that occurs, the nature of the consequence is itself part of the objective character of the offence. The other part of the objective character of the offence is the nature of the conduct of the driver whose driving caused the death in question. It is because of that aspect of this offence that it has been said frequently by the courts that the range of seriousness of the conduct involved in culpable driving may vary widely. That is because the degree of negligence or other wrongful driving conduct which causes death may vary widely. It may vary from a most extreme case of reckless or drunken driving, driving at a high speed in a built up area and conduct of that nature, to inattention or inadvertence. It was therefore important for Phelan
DCJ in sentencing the respondent, bearing always in mind the overall consequences of his driving conduct, to make an assessment of the degree of seriousness of his misconduct as a driver.

Section 52A identifies three forms of driving misconduct which may bring the section into play. The first is driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or of a drug. There was no evidence and no finding that this was a case of that kind. The second is driving at a speed dangerous to another person or persons. That was not the aspect of the section upon which the Crown applied.
The third is driving in a manner dangerous to another person or persons. That is the aspect of the section which was relevant to the present case.

The Crown at the sentencing proceedings set out to demonstrate to Phelan DCJ that there were two aspects of driving in a manner dangerous which applied to the conduct of the respondent. The first aspect was clear beyond argument. The respondent must have been failing to keep a proper look-out. There is not any suggestion that he deliberately drove his car at the victim. The skid marks at the scene make it obvious that he only saw the victim at a very late stage.
The description which I have already read of the surroundings of the location demonstrate that, if the respondent only saw the victim at a very late stage, he must have been failing to keep a proper look-out. Therefore, it was clear that he was driving without keeping a proper look-out.

There was, however, a vigorous debate at the sentencing proceedings as to the speed at which he was driving. The speed limit in the area was 60 kilometres per hour. The Crown set out to seek to prove that the respondent was driving at more than 60 kilometres per hour. The Crown failed to prove that. Phelan
DCJ was not prepared to find that the respondent was driving in excess of the speed limit, although he was driving at a speed that was excessive having regard to his proximity to the pedestrian crossing and to the lack of a proper look-out. The primary challenge which the Crown seeks to mount on this appeal is that the judge erred in not finding that the respondent was exceeding the speed limit at the time of the accident.

A number of persons were present in the vicinity at the time of the fatal collision. As might be expected, they were not particularly concentrating on either the progress of the respondent's motor vehicle or the progress across the pedestrian crossing of the boy who was killed. Those witnesses attempted to reconstruct, as best they could, certain views or opinions about the speed at which they thought the respondent must have been travelling or might have been travelling, but nobody professed to be able to make an accurate estimate of his speed based on personal observation. An expert witness was called to attempt to draw inferences from the skid marks that were found on the road but that evidence was inconclusive, partly for the reason that there was considerable uncertainty as to whether the respondent actually brought his vehicle to a halt at the point where the skid marks ended. In the result,
Phelan DCJ made the following finding. His Honour was not prepared to find that the respondent was travelling in excess of 60 kilometres per hour, but he said: "I conclude that he was travelling too fast in the circumstances. He was also not keeping a proper look-out or he would have seen the boy before he did." 
Counsel for the Crown has developed a challenge to his Honour's finding of fact in this regard by reference to the evidence of the witnesses including the expert witnesses but, in my view, this challenge to his Honour's finding has not been made out. I am not persuaded that it has been demonstrated that
Phelan DCJ was in error in not finding that the respondent was exceeding the speed limit.

A number of other relatively less important challenges were made to certain aspects of his Honour's finding. It is convenient to deal with them at this stage. A criticism was made of his Honour's finding in relation to the circumstances in which the role of the respondent in the matter was drawn to the attention of the police. As I mentioned earlier, this finding was based on some material that was contained in a record of interview. In my view it was open, on the material before him, for his Honour to make that finding.

A criticism was addressed to one minor aspect of the way in which his Honour dealt with the subjective circumstances of the respondent. His Honour made a number of findings adverse to the respondent in relation to the question of the subjective features of the case but of course no challenge is made to them but it suffices, for present purposes, to say that these adverse findings were well warranted by the circumstances. In particular, his Honour was completely justified in pointing out that the conduct of the respondent manifested a disregard for the law. His Honour, however, said that he took into account that the respondent was on certain reporting conditions during a period that he was on bail. The Crown has submitted that that involved an error of law on his Honour's part. I do not understand Phelan DCJ to have been saying anything more than that he noted that as a fact, for what it was worth, and I do not understand him to have thought it was worth very much. This seems to me to be a very minor point.

The second major aspect of the Crown's challenge to his Honour's decision is based upon the ultimate result to which his Honour came. It involves a submission that there was at least an implied error of law on the judge's part in failing to give sufficient weight to the objective circumstances of the case in the light of the maximum penalty which the law provides for this offence.

Phelan DCJ sentenced the respondent to penal servitude for a period of sixteen months made up of a minimum term of twelve months and an additional term of four months. He expressly declined to find that this was a case involving special circumstances justifying an adjustment of the proportion between minimum term and total term. That is not a matter that is in question in this appeal.

The maximum penalty for this offence was penal servitude for ten years. This offence was committed in March 1995 and the maximum penalty for the offence was increased from five years to ten years in December 1994. Phelan DCJ was aware that the maximum penalty was ten years. He had been reminded about that by the Crown in the Crown's submissions. Phelan DCJ in the course of his remarks in sentence said this: "These matters are objectively serious and I have had occasion to study a number of other sentencing precedents which have led me to the view that the prisoner must face a full time custodial sentence. It seems to me that in the circumstances, comparing his case with a number of other cases, that an appropriate sentence is 12 months penal servitude." 
There was considerable discussion on this appeal as to the relativity of this sentence to other sentences that have been imposed for persons who had been convicted of culpable driving. Counsel for the Crown conceded, and conceded correctly, that a review of other sentences imposed for culpable driving shows, subject to one qualification which I will mention in a moment, that the sentence imposed upon the respondent was well within the range of the kinds of sentence that have in the past been imposed on other offenders for culpable driving. The qualification, which is an important qualification, is this, in the case of Regina versus Savka CCA unreported, 26 August 1996, Sully J emphasised the importance of the fact that the legislature had increased the maximum penalty for this offence from five years to ten years with effect from
December 1994.

In considering the remarks on sentence of Phelan DCJ in the present case, I have been troubled about the question whether his Honour paid due regard to the importance of that matter. It is not a subject that is specifically discussed in his Honour's remarks on sentence. For that matter it is not a subject that was specifically discussed in the written submissions of the
Crown that were put to his Honour for his consideration. As I mentioned earlier, his Honour was under no misapprehension about the maximum penalty. He was expressly told it was ten years. There does not, however, appear to be any argument addressed to his Honour in the course of the sentence proceeding about the significance of the fact that Parliament had increased the maximum penalty.

When Parliament increases the maximum penalty in relation to an offence such as this, that is a signal to the courts that Parliament intends that the courts should respond. The fact that a judge does not mention a point in his remarks on sentence does not necessarily mean he overlooked the point. Remarks on sentence usually contain findings and observations that reflect the arguments that were addressed to the sentencing judge, and it frequently happens that a judge does not mention a particular matter because there was no argument put before him about that matter. As I have said, I can see no argument in the Crown's submissions about the significance of that aspect of the case. Although it is an aspect of the matter that, as I say, I find troubling, I am not persuaded that Phelan DCJ overlooked the change in the maximum penalty which had taken place in December 1994 and the significance of that change for sentencing judicial officers. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that the Crown has demonstrated any error of fact or law on the part of Phelan
DCJ.

It has been argued on behalf of the Crown that even accepting that his Honour made no error of fact or law of an express kind, the sentence that he imposed was so out of line with the maximum penalty provided by the legislature, having regard to the objective and subjective circumstances of the case, that this Court should impute error to his Honour. That argument needs to be evaluated in the light of a matter to which I referred earlier, that is to say that, within the range of offence covered by this maximum penalty, there are greatly varying degrees of what might be referred to as driving misconduct, and the degree of driving misconduct which the trial judge found on behalf of the appellant is as I have earlier described it. The primary argument advanced on behalf of the Crown, of course, was an attempt to challenge the finding as to the degree of driving misconduct but, as I have indicated, I am not persuaded that that challenge has succeeded.

For my part, whilst I appreciate the force of the Crown submissions as to the relationship between the sentence in the present case and the maximum penalty provided by law, I am not persuaded that this is a case in which the Court should intervene. In that respect, I am strongly influenced by a consideration
I mentioned at the outset. If this Court were to intervene, it would resentence the respondent to a sentence somewhat less than the sentence that should have been imposed, or might have been imposed, on him at first instance because of the consideration of double jeopardy. I do not consider that the difference between the sentence that Phelan DCJ imposed and the sentence that
I consider should be imposed, if this Court were to intervene, is sufficiently great to warrant appellate intervention.

In those circumstances I would propose that the Crown appeal should be dismissed.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice.

ADAMS AJ: I also agree.
 * * * 
