

Regina versus M Srey [2002] NSWSC 1308 (22 August 2002) 
REGINA versus MINA SREY /95 NOVEMBER 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by his Honour Judge O'Reilly of Queen's Counsel.

The applicant pleaded guilty before his Honour to the commission of two offences: armed robbery; possession of a shortened firearm.

For the offence of armed robbery, <case> provided for a maximum penalty of penal servitude for twenty years. For the offence of the possession of a shortened firearm, the [Firearms
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fa102/) provided for a maximum penalty of ten years.

For the armed robbery offence, the learned judge imposed a sentence of ten years penal servitude consisting of a minimum term of seven years and an additional term of three years. For the firearms offence, the applicant was sentenced to a fixed term of twelve months penal servitude to be served concurrently with the sentence for the more serious offence.

The facts shortly stated are that on the night of 23 August 1994 the applicant went with a number of other offenders to the residence of an elderly couple.
There were at least two, and possibly three, guns carried by members of the party and for his part the applicant was carrying a .22 calibre shortened firearm. A female offender was instrumental in the party gaining entry to the premises when the victims acceded to her request to be allowed to use the telephone. This offender claimed that her car had broken down. The victims were threatened with violence. The male victim was struck on the head with the butt of a firearm and another offender placed a firearm against the cheek of the victim demanding money or else threatening to kill him. The sum of $25,000 was removed from the premises. The victims' son became aware of what was happening and he obtained help from his brother who lived nearby. The offenders fled when the brothers intervened but the applicant fell in the course of his flight and was apprehended a short distance from the victims' premises lying beside his shortened firearm.

The sentencing judge did not find that the applicant was one of those who attacked the male victim or who threatened the two victims inside the house.
The judge approached the matter on the basis that the applicant knew what was going on, in the sense that he knew there would be likely to be some violence inside the house and some restraint of the occupants, but that his role was that of a cockatoo only, and that he did not participate in the attack on the victims or enter the house. There was no evidence that the weapon in his possession was loaded.

A number of grounds have been argued by the applicant on this application: the disparity between the sentences of the applicant and a co-offender,
Carmady; that the sentence was manifestly excessive; that the judge did not give an adequate discount for the plea of guilty and he did not consider the subjective circumstances.

It is convenient to consider (ii) and (iii) together.
 
Disparity between sentences 
The offender Carmady had some involvement in the events giving rise to the charge against the applicant, but Carmady's role was significantly less than that of the applicant. He drove the car in which the principal offenders travelled to the scene of the crime. There are, however, marked differences to be found on a comparison of Carmady's case and that of the present applicant: 
Carmady was not charged with armed robbery under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fa102/s97.html) Rather he was charged with robbery in company, and the judge accepted that Carmady knew nothing about the use of guns, or the intended use of guns, and he knew nothing about the use of any balaclavas; 
Carmady did not leave the car at any time during the crime; his role was limited to being what the judge described as "the wheel man"; in Carmady's case, unlike the applicant's case, the judge found what he described as "very compelling subjective factors". Carmady was assessed as being a young man of nineteen, of previous excellent character. He was thus to be contrasted with the applicant to whose record I shall presently refer.

It was the same judge who sentenced both these offenders. His Honour clearly had the sentence he had imposed upon the applicant in mind when he sentenced
Carmady. Indeed, he said as much: "It is very plain from the record of interview that you [Carmady] knew nothing about guns. The man Mina Srey I sentenced to a very long term of imprisonment.
He was a man who had a very bad criminal record. In fact, I think the offence so far as he was concerned involved a breach of parole from Queensland for a very similar matter. So, the actual result in Mr Srey's sentencing is really of no assistance to me at all in your case. Your involvement was that which is colloquially known of as that of being the `wheel man'. You were recruited to drive the car and also to obtain the services of a lady to knock on the door.
I am satisfied that you did not alight from your vehicle at all during this enterprise, you knew nothing of what was going on inside the premises, which was a brutal assault and robbery of innocent citizens." 
His Honour then went on to consider the subjective circumstances in Carmady's case which he found to be so compelling.

The sentence imposed upon Carmady was indeed a very lenient one. Reflecting upon the distinctions in the two cases and the remarks of the sentencing judge in each case, I would not be disposed to disturb the applicant's sentence by reference to the principles in Lowe versus The Queen ((1984) <case>; [154 CLR 606).]
However, I have reached a different conclusion as to the outcome on the next ground raised by Mr Green, to a consideration of which I now turn.

That the sentence was manifestly excessive 
Unquestionably this was a severe sentence but the crime in which the applicant participated was a grave one. He participated in a robbery which involved the use of firearms and the invasion of an elderly couple's home. The crime was of a type which this court has repeatedly emphasised warrants stern punishment, and which called for severe punishment in the case of this applicant.

Nevertheless the question arises as to whether the sentence was too severe in the sense of being outside the appropriate discretionary range. In the course of argument the Court was referred to sentences imposed in other cases which have come before this Court: Rafter (23 September 1994), Filipo (25 March ); Jenkins (19 September 1994); Achurch (8 July 1994); Kelly (2 June ); Mackenroth (3 March 1994); Pettit (9 March 1994); Rogers (7
October 1993); Broadbent (8 December 1994); Gordon (30 October 1995);
Napier (25 November 1994). Mr Green argued by reference to those cases indicate that a total sentence of ten years was appropriate only where there was more than one offence to be considered.

The Crown was unable to refer the Court to any case of a single offence of this nature attracting a total sentence of ten years and the sentencing statistics provided by the Judicial Commission do not present any such case either. That, of course, is not to say that no single crime in this category could ever warrant a total sentence of ten years penal servitude. Great caution must be exercised in considering statistics, and every case has to be considered in the light of its own particular circumstances, which, of course, involve not only an assessment of the objective features but the subjective features.

In the present case there are particular subjective features which Mr Green submitted operate in the applicant's favour.

The applicant has a very disadvantaged background. He was born on 7 March 1974 in Cambodia. His disturbed upbringing is described in considerable detail both in the report of the social worker and the report of the psychologist placed before the sentencing judge. The applicant was a member of a family that endured considerable hardship under the Pol Pot regime in Cambodia before the applicant fled with his father and his siblings to Thailand. There he lived again in conditions of great hardship in a number of refugee camps. Eventually the applicant migrated to Australia with his father and his stepmother in
Here he experienced difficulty with his schooling and he did not achieve any formal qualifications at school. Having left school he found difficulty in obtaining work. Moreover he lived in a family environment where there was violence in the home. In 1990 the applicant's father and his stepmother separated and at the same time the applicant lost contact with his siblings who went with his stepmother. A year or so after that separation, the applicant left home and lived on the streets. He began to use drugs and alcohol.

The applicant has a criminal record in this State although for the offences committed here prior to the subject offences he was dealt with either by way of a monetary penalty or by way or a recognizance. However in July 1993 he came before the Brisbane District Court on offences of break and enter a dwelling house, unlawful wounding and stealing with violence whilst armed. In respect of these offences he was sentenced to an aggregate term of imprisonment of four years but the sentence was suspended after service of two months. The significance of this sentence in Queensland is that at the time of the commission of the subject offence the applicant's Queensland sentence was a current one.

That there was such a current sentence is a significant aggravating feature of this case to be considered adversely to the applicant, but on the other hand due regard must be paid to those other features in the applicant's background to which I have referred. The applicant was also entitled to consideration for his early plea of guilty in this case.

In all the circumstances of this case I have come to the conclusion that the sentence imposed upon the applicant for the offence under <case> of the Crimes
Act was outside the appropriate range. In my opinion the applicant should be given leave to appeal and his sentence on the first count should be quashed.
In lieu thereof I would propose a total sentence of eight years. The learned sentencing judge made a finding that there were special circumstances for the purposes of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) having regard to the opinions of the psychologist and the social worker and in so finding his Honour was, to my mind, correct. The applicant's circumstances are such as to warrant a departure from the normal proportions in the structure of his sentence in the interests of his rehabilitation. With this in mind, I would propose that for the offence of armed robbery the applicant be sentenced to a minimum term of five years six months to commence on 23 August and to expire on 22 February 2000 and an additional term of two years six months to commence on 23 February 2000 and to expire on 22 August 2002. I would specify 23 February 2000 as being the first date upon which the applicant would be eligible for release on parole.

I would not disturb the sentence imposed for the second count concerning the possession of the shortened firearm.

HIDDEN J: I agree with the orders proposed by Studdert J for the reasons his Honour has given.
 * * * 
