

Fine Real Estate Network Pty Ltd versus Howell (No 2) Matter No 4707/94 [1997]
NSWSC 627 (9 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 `

FINE REAL ESTATE NETWORK PTY LIMITED versus HOWELL (NO 2)` `4707/94` `9 December 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Today's debate arises out of the matter reserved in my judgment of 4 December 1997, that is, the issue of possible specific performance of the promise made, on the plaintiff's case, that the defendant would consent to a charging order being made by this Court. That promise appears to have been noted by the Federal Court of Australia on 19 February 1997, when that Court was considering the defendant's bankruptcy and it re-occurred on 18 July 1997, again in the Federal Court, where an order was made by that Court to that effect. 
The plaintiff says that where there is such a promise with respect to the execution of a judgment of this Court, that it is appropriate to enforce that promise by motion in the original proceedings. The defendant says that if it has to be enforced, it should be enforced in a new suit.

There have been a number of cases decided as to the procedure when it is alleged that proceedings in the Court have been settled. The general rule is that as the settlement of proceedings does away with the existing rights and substitutes a new set of rights under the contractual regime for settlement, that fresh proceedings should be commenced. As the new set of rights does not arise before settlement, the rule is consistent with one of what might be called the sacred rules of procedure in this Court, that is, the rule in
Baldry versus Jackson [[1976] 2 NSWLR 415.] Under that rule, a plaintiff cannot plead a cause of action that has arisen after the commencement of those proceedings.

Mr Parsons, for the plaintiff, says that there are at least three reasons why the defendant's contention should be discarded as being unmeritorious. First, he says that the whole tenor of Parts 42 to 48 of the Supreme Court Rules is that proceedings for enforcement of the Court's order are dealt with in the original proceedings, notwithstanding that for most purposes the Court has become functus. Secondly, he says that the authorities show that there is jurisdiction to deal with even settlements of proceedings within the original suit. Thirdly, he says that in this particular case, the specific performance would, at least ultimately, involve making an order in this suit.

The first of these points is clearly right, but the real question is whether, if the judgment debtor makes a promise in bankruptcy proceedings with respect to enforcement, the matter is one which this Court can then deal with when working out the method of enforcing its original order. I have difficulty with that concept. It seems to me that the matters in Part 42 and following of the
Rules deal with the usual writs of execution and have got nothing to do with a promise made in another Court which may impinge upon the modes of execution in this Court. It may be that in some situations the Court could deal with such a promise. For instance, if in the bankruptcy court there was a promise by the creditor that he would not pursue garnishment action then this Court may very well take cognisance of that promise in not permitting the garnishment procedure to take place, but I think the present situation is too far removed from the ordinary processes of enforcement.

I also believe that it is not necessarily so that when the rules or decisions of the Court contemplate that particular matters of enforcement can be dealt with in the existing suit, that that necessarily means that all subsequent methods of enforcement can be so dealt with.

The second matter is <case> of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), 1970, which requires the Court to grant all such remedies in the proceedings so that all matters in controversy between the parties may be completely and finally determined. One might have thought that that obligation ceases with the decision in the proceedings, but the learning on procedures to enforce settlements would seem to indicate that it goes further.

As I have said, as a general rule, one cannot sue to enforce a settlement of an action in the same proceedings because if that contention is right, the original proceedings have gone and the original causes of action have gone and new causes of action which have sprung up since the suit began have come into existence. However, the rules that judges now apply are that if there are decisions of a Full Court anywhere in Australia which justify a course of action then a single judge of this Court should follow those decisions, even though he or she might think that they are quite contrary to principle.

Applying that rule, there are two decisions of Full Courts, namely, Roberts v Gippsland Agricultural and Earth Moving Contracting Company Pty Limited <case>; [[1956] VLR 555] and Darling Downs Investments Pty Limited versus Ellwood [(1988) 18 FCR 510], which say that there is jurisdiction to deal with an agreement to settle proceedings that has been made since the inception of those proceedings. These were decisions of the Full Supreme Court of Victoria and the Federal Court of Australia, respectively. In the latter, the Court said at 522 to 523 that the trend of authority since 1956 has been to support what was said in Victoria. That gave a result "which is plainly more convenient and communally responsible" than the converse rule. Moreover, the opposite view would encourage litigants to renege on settlements and put their opponent to great expense.

However, even those who wholeheartedly support the decision in the Darling
Downs case say that there are some limitations on the principle; not limitations which go to jurisdiction, but limitations which really go to discretion.

The authorities were reviewed by McLelland J in Philips versus Walsh [(1990) 20
NSWLR 206.] At 210, his Honour said that the authorities presented a confusing picture, but - "It is sufficient for present purposes to say that, although there is some arguable support for the proposition (although it is far from clear) that the
Court might on motion in the present proceedings enforce a particular term of the agreement...which came within the ambit of the proceedings as originally constituted, it would not be proper to do so where substantial matters are involved beyond the ambit of the proceedings as originally constituted, or where, in the interests of justice, disposition of the matter on summary application is inappropriate".

From that, I take the guiding principle to be that it is open to this Court to deal with a suggestion that there has been settlement of the whole proceedings, but it would not be proper to do so where the matters involved are beyond the ambit of the original proceedings or otherwise if the judge does not think it is convenient or in everybody's interest or in the interest of justice.

Accordingly, in the ordinary case where proceedings have not come on for hearing, but one party suggests, when they are called on for hearing, that they have already been settled, it is usually appropriate on motion to consider whether there has been a settlement and if the Court finds there has not been a settlement, then to hear the original proceedings.

However, in the instant case, we are not dealing with a situation where there has been any alleged settlement of the whole proceedings. The Court made orders in the original proceedings and there has been an appeal to the Court of Appeal. In collateral proceedings before the Federal Court of Australia to enforce the judgment of this Court, a promise was allegedly made. That promise constituted a new cause of action, but the original judgment of this Court is left in place. The enforcement of that promise was, to my mind, beyond the original ambit of the suit. Mr Parsons argues to the contrary because he says anything that deals with agreements relating to execution of the Court's original order must be within the ambit of the previous proceedings. I do not favour that submission. Accordingly, it does not seem to me that the situation laid down by the two appellate court decisions covers the present case and what I might call the ordinary rule applies.

Thirdly, the mere fact that the order for specific performance of the promise, if it was made, would concern these present proceedings is not of itself a sufficient connecting factor with this suit. This is so even if, ultimately, were specific performance ordered, it would mean that the defendant would be subject to a charging order to be made in this suit. It seems to me that it is mere chance that this suit is connected with a promise. If there was a promise to deal with a motor car or a piece of land, or what have you, the subject matter of the promise would have no effect whatsoever on the Court in any proceedings in which the action would be brought to enforce the promise.

Generally, I have some sympathy for the position that the suit has already been started and that matters dealing with the execution could, without expense and delay, be dealt with in the one proceedings. However, I have already in my judgment of 4 December 1997 dealt with matters going to execution, which could legitimately be dealt with in this suit, and have found against the plaintiff on those matters. I doubt whether in any new suit the procedure would be any more expensive or complicated and indeed, in a new suit the plaintiff may go far beyond seeking mere specific performance of the promise as forecast at present.

Finally, the principles in Baldry versus Jackson seem to preclude me from giving way to any sympathy that I might feel. Just because a single judge thinks it may be more convenient or communally responsible to act in a certain way is no reason to set matters of principle to one side. Accordingly, I do not favour dealing with the specific performance aspect of the matter in this motion.

It follows from what I said on 4 December 1997 that the notice of motion filed by the plaintiff on 24 October 1997 should be dismissed with costs. There is an existing injunction and that injunction should be dissolved as from today and the defendant should have liberty to apply to a Master for an inquiry as to the damages caused by that injunction, provided that such motion is filed no later than 23 December 1997. If the document marked "9712B" was ever filed as a notice of motion, it is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
