

Nrma Insurance Limited versus NSW Grain Corporation NSW Grain Corporation v
Jamieson Nos. Ca40598/94 and 40609/94; Dc 13449/91 [1996] NSWSC 2 (5 January )
 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
PRIESTLEY(1), CLARKE(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 15 November #DATE 8:12:1995 #ADD 5:1:1996 
Counsel for NSW Grain Corp:     C Gee QC and W Roche 
Solicitors for NSW Grain Corp:
Graham Goldberg Partners 
Counsel for NRMA Insurance Ltd:   J Maconachie QC and L Williams 
Solicitors for NRMA Insurance
Ltd  Abbott Tout Russell Kennedy 
Counsel for Jamieson:        P Semmler QC and S Kops 
Solicitors for Jamieson: 
Carroll and O'Dea
ORDER
Appeals dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
PRIESTLEY JA I agree with Clarke JA.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA On May 1990 Gordon Robert Jamieson (the plaintiff) was injured in the course of his employment with the New South Wales Grain Corporation (the defendant). Subsequently the plaintiff sued the defendant to recover damages alleging that his injuries had been caused by the negligence of the defendant. For its part the defendant joined the NRMA Insurance Limited (the insurer) seeking indemnity in respect of any damages which it was required to pay to the plaintiff. The proceedings were heard by Mahoney DCJ who, on 22
September 1994, found a verdict in favour of the plaintiff in the sum of $201,401.77. In the third party proceedings his Honour found a verdict in favour of the defendant 'because I am of the view that the area and nature of the loss sustained by the defendant falls squarely within the four corners of the policy issued under the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) to it by the third party'.
The insurer has appealed from the decision in the third party proceedings and has argued that the claim made against it fell outside the ambit of the policy of insurance, properly construed.
A summary of the facts in a report prepared by Mr Simpson in evidence in the proceedings is, I think, reasonably accurate and provides the necessary factual basis for the determination of the question before the court. I gratefully adopt that summary which reads: "At approximately 8am on 17
May 1990 the plaintiff and another employee of the defendant, Mr Gary Hamer, were instructed to take a grain elevator (large auger) from the Rankin Springs silo where it was located to Yenda where it was to be unloaded.

To this end a truck and trailer was provided and upon reaching
Yenda the unloading process was commenced.

The system of work that had been previously followed, and which was attempted on this particular occasion, was for a bob cat or front end loader type tractor machine to be used as a crane to lift the base of the grain elevator and to then pull the grain elevator off the rear of the trailer.

The elevator was chained to the bucket of the bob cat once the base of the elevator was positioned into the bob cat and Mr Hamer then slowly backed the bob cat away from the trailer, dragging the grain elevator with it.

At a point during this process the elevator is said to have jerked suddenly which then caused the grain elevator to commence to topple in the direction of Mr Hamer. In order to push the grain elevator away from Mr Hamer the plaintiff stepped into the bucket of the bob cat but was unable to control the movement and as a result of that the plaintiff is said to have been pinned by the legs between the grain elevator and the bob cat bucket as the grain elevator fell."
At the trial his Honour accepted that the system of unloading the grain elevator from the trailer was negligent and accordingly found a verdict in favour of the plaintiff. He also found, as I have indicated, that upon these facts the defendant was entitled to indemnity under its third party policy of insurance, which had been issued in respect of the truck and trailer. The major issue at the trial was whether this latter claim was correct and the same issue arises in the appeal.
The form of third party policy insuring the truck and trailer appears in schedule one of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) ("the Act"), the relevant parts of which came into force on 1 July 1989. It is a short policy containing only two clauses of which the first is relevant for present purposes and reads: "1. The insurer insures the owner of the motor vehicle and any other person who at any time drives the vehicle (whether or not with the consent of the owner) against liability in respect of the death of or injury to a person caused by the fault of the owner or driver of the vehicle in the use or operation of the vehicle in any part of the Commonwealth (whether or not on a public street)."
Although there may be difficulties in the application of this policy to the facts of borderline cases its meaning is, in my opinion, relatively clear.
In the circumstances, while I appreciate that light on the meaning of the policy may come from the provisions of the Act, it is convenient, initially, to consider the policy without reference to the text of the Act.
In my opinion, the test by which it is determined whether indemnity is afforded under the terms of the policy involves three separate inquiries - 
Whether it has been established that the owner or driver of the vehicle is at fault - that is, to adopt the definition in [s 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s3.html), whether the evidence establishes that the owner or driver was negligent or had committed another tort? (I have adopted the definition in [s 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s3.html) because the parties agreed that this should be applied in the construction of the policy and, in my opinion, there is nothing in the text of the relevant sections of the Act or the policy which indicates a legislative intention that 'fault' should have some other meaning in the policy.) 
If the first question is answered "Yes", whether the fault of the owner or driver caused the death of or injury to the person who has claimed? and 
If the answer to the two preceding questions is "Yes", whether the fault of the owner or driver was 'in the use or operation of the vehicle' the subject of the policy?
Obviously it is not any fault of the owner or driver which will enliven indemnity under the policy. It is only fault in the use or operation of the vehicle which will give rise to a right to indemnity.
It was argued by Mr Maconachie QC, senior counsel for the insurer, that the phrase 'caused by' where it appears in the text of the insurance policy provides a narrower test than is imposed by a phrase such as 'caused by or arising out of and required the court to characterise the fault (negligence).
If it is 'in the use of a vehicle' then the insurer will be bound to indemnify. If, however, the correct characterisation is that of liability as an employer for providing an unsafe system of work then the negligence is not to be regarded as 'in the use of the vehicle' and there will be no liability to indemnify under the policy.
I am unable to accept this submission. It is, in my view, much too wide.
In particular I do not agree with the proposition that because it is proper to characterise the negligence as a failure to employ a safe system of work that that means that it is not negligence 'in the use of a vehicle'. Where, for instance, the unsafe system is in the manner of tying down a load so that it breaks free while it is actually being transported then, generally speaking, I see no reason why indemnity would be denied to an owner who became responsible in damages for personal injury as a consequence of that negligence. In other circumstances the employment of an unsafe system of work which incidentally involved the unloading of a vehicle may lead to a different result. In this respect I agree with what was said by the Court of Appeal in Queensland in
Curtain Bros (Qld) Pty Ltd versus FAI General Insurance
Company Limited [(1995) 1
QldR 142], at 146: "It is fallacious to seek to subsume this specific basis of legal liability into some wider or different basis merely because the presence of additional factors makes the other basis of liability also available. Thus, for example, it does not exclude the particular basis of the appellant's liability to the plaintiff in respect of the vehicle if it is also liable to her as an occupier in respect of the dangerous excavation or as an employer in respect of the unsafe place of work.
... One basis of liability is not exclusive of the other...".
Mr Maconachie also sought to support his proposition by reference to the discussion of the phrase 'caused by or arising out of in a number of cases concerned with the third party insurance policy issued under the [Motor
Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act 1942](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/) (as amended) (New South Wales) (the old Act). In that policy the insured was indemnified "... against all liability ... incurred by the owner and/or the driver in respect of the death of or bodily injury to any person caused by or arising out of the use of a motor vehicle in any part of the Commonwealth of Australia".
This policy was significantly different from the policy with which the court is concerned in a number of respects. First, it connected the death of, or bodily injury to, any person to the use of a motor vehicle and, secondly, in so doing it described the connection by the words 'caused by or arising out of'. The policy with which the court is now concerned connects the death of, or injury to, the person to the fault of the owner or driver in the use and operation of the vehicle. In this context it is the fault which is connected to the death or injury and the means of connection is effected by the phrase 'caused by'. Clearly enough in decisions concerning the policy under the old
Act (see, for instance, Govemment
Insurance Office of New South Wales versus R J
Green and Lloyd Pty Ltd <case>; [(1966) 114 CLR 437], at 442- 3 and 447) the courts were concerned to give meaning to both arms of the connecting factor. In so doing the High court made it plain that 'caused by' was narrower in meaning than 'arising out of'. In the present policy the court is concerned, inter alia, to construe the expression 'caused by'.
Under the Act the relevant question is whether the injury (damage) was caused by the fault etc. Prima facie, that propounds an enquiry on causation identical with that undertaken in determining whether the negligence of the person claiming indemnity 'caused' the damage and thus was liable for it. That test has now been firmly based on common sense.
(See March versus E and M H
Stramare Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506], at 7). In Robinson I extracted the following test from March: "Once it is established that the Act or omission of the defendant 'was so connected with the plaintiff's loss or injury that, as a matter of ordinary common sense and experience, it should be regarded as a cause of it' liability will be established." (See also Fitzgerald versus Penn <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 268], at 284-5.)
Where it is found, on the application of that test of causation, that the negligence of the owner or driver of an insured motor vehicle caused the injuries to a claimant, or the death of a person in respect of whose death a claim for damages is made, then the owner or driver will be liable in damages to the victim of the tort.
In considering whether the person found liable in respect of a claimant's injuries is entitled to indemnity under the statutory policy there is no sound reason why the same test of causation should not be applied. It would not be reasonable, in my opinion, to attribute to the legislature an intention that the expression 'caused by' in the statutory policy should enliven a test of causation different from the test by which the party claiming indemnity had been found liable.
To say, as Mr Machonachie said, that the relevant fault must be a direct or proximate cause does not detract from that proposition. These words have been used from time to time in the authorities when discussing the issue of causation as have others, such as 'efficient cause', 'real cause' and 'effective cause'. The purpose underlying their use has been, as Taylor J said in Fitzgerald (p84-5), to place the defendant's ultimate responsibility upon a practical common sense basis. Understood in that way they direct attention to the way the issue of causation is determined according to the common law.
Similarly the negligence issue arising under the statutory policy will be determined by resolving the identical issues as arise in the substantive claim for damages. In practical terms, where an injured person sues a tort feasor and the latter joins its insurer under a third party policy issued under the
Act, a judicial determination that the injured person is entitled to a verdict because his or her injury had been caused by the negligence of the owner or driver of a vehicle would serve the additional function of satisfying the first two limbs of the test which I have postulated.
Accordingly, in the present proceedings I would conclude that the defendant satisfied the first two limbs of the test. The more difficult question is whether it satisfied the third limb of the test which, to reiterate, was whether the causative fault was 'in the use or operation of the vehicle'. The expression 'use or operation' is not to be regarded in a narrow sense. Principles have been laid down in a series of cases in the High Court concerning the construction of the old Act which provide guidance in the approach to be adopted to the problem presently under consideration.
In
Fawcett versus BHP By-Products Pty Ltd <case>; [(1960) 104 CLR 80] Menzies J said, at 87: "The Act is not, I think, concerned with fine distinctions but requires the issue of a policy that covers liability arising out of everything that falls fairly within the conception of the use of a motor vehicle." .
Again in Green versus Lloyd (supra) Barwick CJ, at 444, cited Fawcett with approval and said: " ... in this field one should not be seeking subtleties but rather applying broad and practical conceptions."
More recently in State Government Insurance
Commission versus Stevens Bros Pty
Ltd and Anor <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 552], a majority of the High Court approved these statements.
The words used by their Honours and their application to a variety of
State Acts providing for compulsory third party motor vehicle insurance make it clear that the broad approach of which they speak should be applied to the statutory policy under consideration here. Consistently with this approach there has been a liberal interpretation accorded to the phrase 'the use of a motor vehicle' so that it is, for instance, not limited to the movement of the vehicle or the operation of some part of its mechanism. In Green and Lloyd at 446 Windeyer J said that he could see no sound reason for so restricting the phrase and added that "any use that is not utterly foreign to its character as a motor vehicle is, I consider, covered by the words". His
Honour then referred to what he had said in Fawcett and went on to say: "I consider that the kind of use of a motor vehicle that is covered by the policy is driving it or doing something to it or with it that is incidental to its normal use as a motor vehicle.
... The loading of a vehicle designed to be used, and ordinarily used, for the carriage of goods is a necessary element in its ordinary use. Loading it is incidental to the use of it in the normal way." .
The carriage of goods on the trailer in question in this case was, clearly enough, a use of the vehicle and the loading and unloading of the trailer was incidental to that use.
In the same case Barwick CJ said (at 442): "I do not think that every act in loading a vehicle for the conveyance of what is loaded upon it is necessarily a use or a part of the use of the motor vehicle. But the act of actually placing the load on the part of the vehicle designed to bear it during transport and for the purposes of its transportation must, in my opinion, be a use of the motor vehicle in the sense relevant to the Act and to the terms of the policy. In my opinion the relevant use of the vehicle cannot be confined to the period it is in motion or its parts moving in some operation. It may be in use though stationary."
There is no reason to distinguish 'unloading' from 'loading' and, while every act in the loading or unloading of a vehicle designed to carry goods may not be a 'use of the vehicle' it is clear to me that the act of removing the load from the vehicle itself is, relevantly, a use. It follows that the vehicle was being used at the time the plaintiff received his injuries. More specifically the vehicle was being used by the defendant insofar as the unloading was incidental to the defendant's use of the vehicle to carry the grain elevator.
There remains the final question, whether the plaintiff's injuries were caused by the owner's fault in the use of the vehicle? That is a question of fact which cannot be resolved by the application of a simple test. In some cases it will be relatively clear whether the fault was in the use of the vehicle. For instance, where the fault lies in the driving of a vehicle. Again where an owner's employee negligently secures a load on a truck so that part of it falls off during a journey and injures another person it is clear enough that the owner's fault would be 'in the use or operation of the vehicle'. They are both cases where the negligence occurs in the actual use of the vehicle.
Where, however, the owner is negligent in some aspect of an operation incidental to the actual use, such as the loading, the position is not so clear. It is settled that 'the incidents attending the actual use of the vehicle form part of its use' (Government
Insurance Office of New South Wales v King <case>; [(1960-61) 104 CLR 93] at 96, per Dixon CJ) but it by no means follows that negligence in the unloading of a vehicle is necessarily' in the use of that vehicle.
Thus, for instance, proof that an employer instituted an unsafe system of unloading may or may not constitute negligence in the use or operation of a vehicle. It will depend on the relationship between the negligent act or omission and the vehicle. If the negligence lies in the unsafe placing of the load on the tray of the trailer of an articulated vehicle it will, in general, be correct to describe the fault as in the use or operation of that vehicle.
Where the negligence relates to some part of the unloading procedure distant from the vehicle then, as it seems to me, it would not be accurate to describe the negligence in the same way.
These are again two extreme situations and there will almost certainly be others in which the position will not be so clear. The question is different from the one considered by Barwick CJ in
Green and Lloyd (pp 442-3) but his analysis of the concept of 'arising out of' bears directly, in my opinion, on the issue with which I am dealing.
Borderline cases will require analysis in the light of his Honour's observations in that case and I do not believe it would be profitable for me to explore problems which do not arise in the present case. Here the negligent system involved the actual removal of the grain elevator from the tray of the trailer and should be seen as in the unloading (ie use) of the vehicle.
I have not so far referred to the provisions of the Act itself for I have not seen the need to look to the sections of the Act to throw light on the meaning of the words in the policy.

There is, however, nothing in the Act which would lead me to a different conclusion. The only section which could possibly create a need to pause is s (6) in which it is said that a reference to the use or operation of a motor vehicle includes a reference to the maintenance or parking of the vehicle.
This may suggest that the words 'use or operation', which are not defined in the Act, where they appear in section 9 have a narrow meaning which excludes maintenance or parking. To the extent that the words would otherwise have been understood to include maintenance or parking I think there is force in the submission. However, the authorities to which
I previously referred, and especially King, have drawn a distinction between using a vehicle and putting it in order. In that context 'maintenance' of a vehicle would not, in general, be understood as 'a use of the vehicle'. 'Parking', while in a general sense a use of the vehicle, may occur incidentally to the maintenance of that vehicle and in those circumstances there may have been a perception that unless parking was expressly referred to there may be uncertainty whether it should be understood as a use for the purposes of the policy in all circumstances.
Section 3(6) removes any doubt on that question. It makes it clear that both parking and maintenance constitute a use of the vehicle. I would not, however, understand that sub-section generally to narrow the meaning of the phrase in the statutory policy.
Another section, <case>, enables judgment to be entered against a licensed insurer at the suit of an injured plaintiff who has recovered judgment against an owner or driver for compensation in respect of injuries caused by the fault of the owner or driver in the use or operation of the vehicle and that judgment had not been satisfied in full within 30 days. That section, which uses expressions identical to those used in the policy, seems to me to support the view which I earlier expressed that proof of a causal nexus between the negligence of the owner or driver and the plaintiff's injuries will satisfy the first two limbs of the test.
There is one other matter to which I ought refer and that is the explanatory note (referring to cl 9) attached to the Motor Accidents Bill 1988 which ended with the following sentence: "The terms of the cover do not extend, as at present, to any death or injury caused by or arising out of the use or operation of a motor vehicle (such as an accident involving the loading of a vehicle)."
The sentence is correct to the extent that it points out that the phrase 'arising out of' does not appear in <case> or the new statutory policy. Insofar, however, as it suggests that accidents involving the loading of a vehicle can never fall within the ambit of the cover it is, in my view, misleading.
Explanatory notes may be considered in the construction of unclear or ambiguous statutory provisions. Where, however, the meaning of the policy is clear, nothing which appears in the explanatory note can qualify that clear meaning. I have earlier indicated that indemnity will not necessarily be attracted simply because an accident happened in the loading of a vehicle but equally it is clear from what I have said that in some instances it will be attracted.
The portion of the explanatory note which appears in parenthesis seems to me to reflect a misconception and does not, in my opinion, accurately state the effect of the policy.
For these reasons the insurers appeal against the defendant should be dismissed with costs.
The defendant itself appealed against the judgment in favour of the plaintiff but, in its written submissions, expressly said that the appeal only became relevant in the event that the insurer's appeal was successful. In the circumstances, it is unnecessary to examine it and it should be dismissed.
Its senior counsel, Mr Gee QC, submitted that because the appeal had been made necessary by the insurer's appeal the court should make an order that the costs which the insurer was ordered to pay to it as respondent in the insurers own appeal should include the defendant's costs in its own appeal (including those costs it was ordered to pay to the plaintiff in that appeal). What the employer sought to do in its own appeal was to defeat the plaintiff's claim against it. Quite apart from the fact that the grounds of the appeal seem tenuous in the extreme it was a matter solely for the employer whether, if it was to be found not entitled to indemnity, it wished to accept its liability to the plaintiff or to challenge that liability. If it adopted the latter course and failed no reason appears to me why the insurer should be found liable to pay the costs incurred by the employer in its unsuccessful appeal. I would make the same order in this case as I made in the previous case.
 .
In my opinion both appeals should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I agree with Clarke JA.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/2.html  
