

Wentworth versus Wentworth Matter Nos Ca 40031/97; Ca 40392/97 [1998] NSWSC 328 (5 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
KATHERINE WENTWORTH versus PETER FITZWILLIAM NEVILLE WENTWORTH (EXECUTOR OF THE ESTATE OF THE LATE 
G N WENTWORTH) 
CA 40031/97 
KATHERINE WENTWORTH versus PETER FITZWILLIAM NEVILLE WENTWORTH & ANOR 
CA 40392/97 August 1998 
Handley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Supreme Court - Equity Division (McLelland CJ in Eq, Simos J) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40031/97; CA 40392/97;EQ 3748/89 
DELIVERED: 5 August 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 14 July 1997 
PARTIES: KATHERINE WENTWORTH versus PETER FITZWILLIAM NEVILLE WENTWORTH (EXECUTOR OF THE ESTATE OF THE LATE 
G N WENTWORTH) 
KATHERINE WENTWORTH versus PETER FITZWILLIAM NEVILLE WENTWORTH & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: Handley JA; Stein JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: In person 
Respondent: N/a 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Russo & Partners 
Respondent: Dunhill Madden Butler 
CATCHWORDS: 
COSTS - SET-OFF - INHERENT JURISDICTION 
EXAMINATION ORDER - WHETHER JUDGMENT CREDITOR ENTITLED TO ENFORCE JUDGMENT 
MAREVA INJUNCTION - WHEN AVAILABLE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 18 
KATHERINE WENTWORTH versus PETER FITZWILLIAM NEVILLE WENTWORTH (EXECUTOR OF THE ESTATE OF THE LATE G N WENTWORTH) 
KATHERINE WENTWORTH versus PETER FITZWILLIAM NEVILLE WENTWORTH & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: These summonses for leave to appeal were heard ex parte, after notice to the opponent, on 14 July 1997. The hearing lasted all day. On 1 August 1997 the claimant lodged an affidavit which inter alia annexed additional written submissions (17 pages), and a copy of her written submissions to Simos J of 24 April 1997 (18 pages). Thereafter the pressure of other cases prevented the preparation of these reasons for judgment before Handley JA went on long leave. However an interlocutory Mareva injunction granted by Handley JA at an ex parte hearing, after notice to the opponent on 23 June 1997, has remained in force. 
The claimant's first summons filed on 17 January 1997 (40031/97) sought leave to appeal from orders made by Simos J on 20 December 1996 and by Mc Lelland
CJinEq on 24 December. Simos J set aside an order under SCR Pt 43, r 1 that the defendant be examined as to his assets (an examination order). McLelland
CJinEq dismissed that part of a notice of motion filed by the claimant on 28
November 1996, which sought a Mareva injunction.

By her second summons dated 30 June 1997 (40392/97), the claimant sought leave to appeal from the decision of Hodgson J of 12 June 1997, in which he refused further applications for a Mareva injunction and an examination order. It will be convenient to consider the issues by reference to their subject matter, rather than the summons in which they are raised.

Mareva Injunction etc 
The purpose of so much of the claimant's notice of motion of 28 November 1996 as sought interlocutory relief, other than a Mareva injunction, was said by
McLelland CJinEq to be "to preserve a fund to provide for: 
Satisfaction of the costs orders made in the plaintiff's favour in the proceedings; and 
Any additional provision which the plaintiff may obtain under a fresh application under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/s8.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) ...".

Its foundation was said to be "that the defendant's financial position has deteriorated to the extent that there appears to be a real doubt as to his ability to meet his liabilities". His Honour made findings as to the defendant's assets and liabilities, other than orders for costs in his favour against the claimant, and orders for costs in her favour against him. This indicated that the defendant was insolvent, and, on the basis stated, had at best a modest surplus of assets over liabilities. His Honour rejected the claims for interlocutory relief, other than a Mareva injunction, and his reasons for doing so were clearly correct.

His reasons for dismissing the claim for a Mareva injunction included the following: "It is not a proper use of the remedy to restrain a defendant from applying assets in payment of his or her legitimate debts, even if that may put at risk the prospect of the defendant's being able to satisfy other actual or future debts or claims the subject of the proceedings ... there is no basis in the evidence for concluding that the defendant is in the process of dealing with his assets in any way which might attract Mareva relief, or is likely to do so. That the defendant is now in financial difficulties even if at an earlier stage of the proceedings he was not ... is not to the point".

He gave other reasons for refusing a Mareva injunction, but there is no need to consider them because the reasons quoted are clearly correct. The claimant has not made out a case for the grant of leave to appeal from this decision.

In June 1997 the claimant applied to Hodgson J for a Mareva injunction. The
Judge noted that this involved a renewed claim for the relief refused by
McLelland CJinEq in an interlocutory decision of a substantive nature made after a contested hearing. He continued: "There is a practice in relation to such applications that a subsequent application which is in substance the same, but seeks a different result, must be based on a material change of circumstances, or the discovery of further evidence that could not reasonably have been put before the Court at the previous hearing".

There was no new evidence of the necessary kind, and his Honour held that there had been no relevant change of circumstances. Accordingly he dismissed the application as an abuse of process. However he had heard extensive argument from the claimant that the Chief Judge in Equity had fallen into error and he dealt with some of her arguments. He said that an inference that the defendant had dissipated, or was dissipating, his assets for the purpose of frustrating the processes of the Court should not be drawn and held that without such a finding the Court could not properly grant Mareva relief. In our opinion Hodgson J was correct on all questions, and there is no arguable basis for the grant of leave to appeal from his refusal to grant a Mareva injunction.

Examination order 
On 6 June 1995 the Registrar in Equity, on an ex parte application by the claimant, made an examination order based on a certificate of taxation of
Registrar Irwin of 5 May 1995. On 15 June the defendant applied by notice of motion to have it set aside. He later sought, in the alternative, a stay of that order. On 28 June 1995 Simos J stayed the examination pending the hearing of the notice of motion.

On 13 October 1995 Simos J reserved on these applications, but deferred his decision pending the judgments of this Court in two appeals concerning related issues. These were delivered on 21 February 1996.

Simos J then received further submissions, and on 12 September he allowed the claimant to adduce further evidence relating to the defendant's financial affairs. On 28 November she applied for leave to adduce yet further evidence, but this application was refused. Simos J delivered his reserved judgment on December 1996, set aside the examination order, and made orders for costs.

The Judge held that he was entitled to have regard to later events, including the decisions of this Court of 21 February 1996, in considering whether to discharge the examination order under SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/index.html#p61), r
He said: "What is really in issue between the parties in the present proceedings is not simply whether the examination order was originally issued properly, but whether, at the present time, ... it is valid, and not liable to be stayed or set aside. No purpose would be served by the Court dealing with the issue of the validity of the original issue of the examination order and ignoring the effect of subsequent events relevant to its continued operation".

This is clearly correct. Simos J then considered the five grounds relied upon by the defendant in support of his application to have the order stayed or discharged. These were non-disclosure of material facts on the ex parte application for the examination order, lack of jurisdiction (i.e. power) to make the order, a judgment of Young J of 12 December 1994 dealing with the setting-off of costs orders between the parties (misdescribed as a judgment of March 1995), the summonses pending on 6 June 1995 for leave to appeal from decisions of Master McLaughlin on which the certificate of taxation of 5 May had been based, and a general discretion to stay the order. He gave extensive reasons upholding all grounds, in whole or in part.

It is now necessary to refer to some background facts. On 9 August 1991 Bryson
J made orders in favour of the claimant under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/s7.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) including an order for costs. On 3 March 1992 this Court disposed of an appeal and cross- appeal by the claimant and the defendant and ordered the defendant to pay part of the claimant's costs.

On 16 August 1994, pursuant to the costs order of Bryson J, Deputy Registrar
Howe issued a certificate of taxation in favour of the claimant for $264,236, but ordered her to pay the costs of the taxation, after a set-off, in the sum of $57,251.24 (Ex A in this Court). This left a balance in favour of the claimant of some $206,985.

Both parties challenged the certificate of taxation. After proceedings before
Master McLaughlin and a further taxation, Registrar Irwin on 5 May 1995 issued a revised certificate for $463,038.46, together with the costs of taxation payable by the defendant of $29,290 (Ex B in this Court). Both parties sought leave to appeal from the orders of Master McLaughlin on which this certificate was based. Leave was granted on 25 August and the appeals were heard on 23
November 1995.

On 25 July 1994 the plaintiff obtained a certificate of taxation for $10,480.72 for costs in this Court pursuant to the orders of 3 March 1992. On September she issued writs of execution based on this certificate and on a certificate dated 16 August. It is not clear whether this was the certificate of Deputy Registrar Howe previously referred to or some other certificate of the same date, because the relevant writ only claimed $16,123.43. The defendant had paid $175,194.50 pursuant to interim certificates of Deputy
Registrar Howe, and we have not been able to reconcile the amount of the writ with the balance due on the final certificate of 16 August, but nothing presently turns on this.

The Sheriff levied execution on 22 September 1994 and the following day the defendant moved for a stay. The proceedings were heard by Young J. An interim stay was granted on payment of a further $10,000 which was paid on 4 October.
The Judge gave judgment on 12 December 1994 in favour of the defendant and directed the Sheriff to suspend execution of the writs. He relied on two grounds, one being the Court's inherent jurisdiction. His Honour said that the defendant: "is entitled to an order under the inherent power that, because of the principles of fairness referred to in the authorities, there should be set-off against the various orders for costs one way or the other in these proceedings and there should be no execution until the taxation of all the bills is complete and it can be seen which way the balance lies. If through one person's fault the taxations are needlessly prolonged, then it may be that one or other party can apply to the Court for leave to issue execution. However apart from that matter the stay should be imposed".

His orders were upheld by this Court on 21 February 1996 on this basis, but the other ground based on an agreement was rejected. The claimant submitted that the Court had fallen into error in treating the decision of Bowen CJinEq in Ryan versus South Sydney Junior Rugby League Ltd [(1975) 2 NSWLR 660] as relevant, and that Simos J in particular should have held that it was distinguishable. In her submission Ryan's case depended on the great disparity between the costs payable by Ryan estimated at $28,000 and those payable to him. We cannot accept that this affects either the principle itself, or its application in the circumstances of this case, as upheld by the
Court in its decision of 21 February 1996.

Simos J upheld three grounds of non-disclosure on the ex parte application for an examination order. His decision as to the first, which related to a conversation between Mr Russo, the claimant's solicitor, and Miss Norton, the defendant's solicitor, is beyond challenge. His reasons on the second ground related to the alleged non-disclosure by the claimant of: "... the costs certification dated 16 August 1994 of the sum of $57,251.24 representing the nett costs payable by the plaintiff to the defendant as the costs of the taxation. This had, in orders dated 10 February 1995, been specifically reserved for further consideration by the Master. It was submitted that the disclosure of this material, without also disclosing that it had been specifically reserved for further consideration by the Master, involved material non-disclosure. This was said to be on the basis that it would have been material to the exercise by the Registrar of his discretion whether or not to issue an examination order that there was an additional undisputed amount owing in the said sum of $57,251.24".

With respect to his Honour, these reasons cannot be supported, because that part of the certificate of 16 August 1994 relating to the $57,251.24 was in favour of the defendant, not the claimant. The evidence before Simos J was not before this Court and it is not clear whether the certificate was disclosed, but not the order of the Master, or whether neither were disclosed. The disclosure of the former, without the latter, would have favoured the defendant, and reduced the amount prima facie payable under the certificate relied upon to obtain the examination order. There seems no reason why the claimant should disclose the former without the latter. It is possible therefore that the claimant did not disclose the existence of this certificate at all. This would have been a serious non-disclosure if the certificate was still in force, but it had been set aside and replaced by the certificate of 5
May 1995, which determined that the defendant should pay the costs of the taxation of $29,290.

The claimant therefore had no obligation to disclose either the earlier certificate or the order of the Master.

The third matter of non-disclosure related to a judgment of Young J of 12
December 1994 (misdescribed as a judgment of 6 March 1995. There was a judgment of Young J involving these parties of that date, but it was not relevant to the issues before Simos J). This was the judgment which stayed writs of execution issued by the claimant.

Simos J held that this decision was material to the exercise of the
Registrar's discretion on the ex parte application. His Honour only referred to the second ground for that decision based on an agreement between the parties which was later rejected on appeal. This does not assist the claimant because the decision still stood on 6 June 1995.

His Honour's finding that this decision should have been disclosed was correct. In fact he understated the position because it is inconceivable that the Registrar would have made the order ex parte if he had been informed of the stay of execution. The claimant has therefore displaced one of the findings of non-disclosure upheld by Simos J but not the other two.

The next ground upheld by the Judge was that the Registrar had no jurisdiction (i.e. power) to make an examination order because of the decision of Young J of 12 December 1994 (again misdescribed as 6 March 1995). Simos J held that as a result the claimant was not, on 6 June 1995, "a person entitled to enforce a judgment or order", viz the certificate of 5 May 1995, within the meaning of
SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/index.html#p43) r
The stay ordered by Young J did not apply in terms to this certificate, but his Honour seems to have held that the Court would apply the set-off principle and stay its execution. However one would think that the claimant was entitled to enforce the certificate unless and until a stay was granted.

The rule is open to the construction adopted by Simos J but Brown versus Stafford [[1944] KB 193] establishes that that is not its correct construction. The
Court of Appeal there held that a judgment creditor who was prevented by a stay from proceeding to execution was still entitled to enforce the judgment and able to obtain an examination order. Simos J therefore erred in holding that the Registrar had no power to make the examination order. Moreover the
Court held in Brown versus Stafford at 198 that a judgment creditor is entitled to a examination order "practically as of course" except "in very special circumstances". See also Wentworth versus Wentworth (Hodgson J, 12 June 1997, unrep, p 15).

However the issue before his Honour when he gave judgment on 20 December 1996 was whether the order should then be stayed or discharged and he was bound to have regard to subsequent events. These included the order of this Court of 21
February 1996 setting aside the certificate of taxation of 5 May 1995 on which the examination order was obtained. The claimant still had the certificates of July and 16 August 1994 but execution on these was still stayed pursuant to orders of this Court of 21 February 1996.

The claimant relied on other costs orders in her favour which had not yet been quantified but until taxation or assessment these orders did not bring her within SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/index.html#p43) r because she had nothing she could enforce. See also Wilkie versus Wilkie <case>; [[1905] VLR 80.] Another basis for maintaining the examination order as at 20
December 1996 was the certificate of taxation of Deputy Registrar Howe of 16
August 1994 (if there were two certificates of that date) on which some $20,000 may still have been owing to the claimant. The orders of this Court of February 1996 (in CA 40374/95) left this certificate in force but subject to the pending review.

The third matter relied upon by the Judge was the decision of Young J previously referred to, and the fourth was the summonses for leave to appeal from the orders of Master McLaughlin pending on 6 June 1995, and the decision of this Court of 21 February 1996, which set aside those orders and the certificate of taxation of 5 May 1995.

Simos J then considered whether, in the light of the circumstances as at 20
December 1996, the examination order should be confirmed or discharged. He took into account his conclusion that on 6 June 1995 the claimant had not been entitled to an examination order. In doing so his Honour erred in law and his exercise of discretion therefore miscarried. His Honour also relied on his findings that the claimant had failed to disclose three material matters on her ex parte application. His Honour erred in one of those findings but in our view this error was not significant because a single material non- disclosure justifies setting aside an ex parte order.

This Court must therefore consider the re-exercise of the discretion as at 20
December 1996. On the evidence before Simos J, the only orders which the claimant could then enforce were the certificates of taxation of 25 July and August 1994 on which execution had been stayed.

The evidence and judgments known to the Court reveal a number of changes since the judgment of Young J of 12 December 1994. On 24 August and 4 October 1995 the claimant's appeal from orders made by Santow J under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/s8.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) had been dismissed, and the defendant's cross-appeal allowed and those orders had been set aside. The claimant was ordered to pay the costs of the proceedings before
Santow J and in this Court. The High Court refused special leave. Further costs orders in favour of the defendant had also been made by Bryson J on 12
September 1995, and by this Court on 22 March 1996 (40599/95). The evidence did not reveal that any application had been made to dissolve the stay of execution on the ground that the defendant had unreasonably delayed the taxation of the costs payable under orders in his favour.

In Brown versus Stafford (above) the stay of execution had been ordered under wartime legislation subject to payment of instalments. An examination of the debtor might establish that his capacity to pay off the judgment debt had increased and support an application for the removal or variation of the stay.

In the present case evidence about the defendant's assets obtained on his examination would not support an application for the removal or variation of the stay. The evidence would not help the claimant enforce her certificates of taxation until the stay was removed, by which time it might be out of date and useless. An examination order is a remedy to assist judgment creditors to enforce their judgments. It is not available to assist plaintiffs to obtain evidence in support of an application for a Mareva injunction to protect pending claims.

On a re-exercise of the discretion there would therefore be an overwhelming case for discharging the examination order of 6 June 1995. The Court heard full argument from the claimant at the hearing which was later supplemented by written submissions. She invited the Court to treat the hearing of the summonses as the hearing of the appeals. Since the claimant has been fully heard, and we have reached the firm conclusion that the orders of Simos J should be affirmed on a re-exercise of the discretion, the appropriate course, despite the errors we have found, is to refuse leave to appeal and dismiss the summons. Compare Re the Will of Gilbert <case>; [(1946) 46 SR 318], .

The claimant also challenged the order for costs made by Simos J in respect of her notice of motion to set aside his order of 28 June 1995 staying a writ of execution she issued on 9 June based on the certificate of taxation of 5 May.

An unconditional stay granted by Simos J was still in force and cross- applications to continue it or set it aside were part heard when, on 22 August , the claimant obtained from Powell JA, exercising the original and not the appellate jurisdiction of this Court, an order lifting the unconditional stay and substituting a stay on condition that the defendant provide security in the sum of $100,000.

This order was granted in conjunction with the cross-summonses for leave to appeal from the decisions of Master McLaughlin which had been heard on 14
August. Both parties were granted leave to appeal on 25 August. The stay granted by Powell JA was continued and on 24 November 1995 Priestley JA ordered that it continue conditional on the defendant providing security in the sum of $150,000. This was provided. On 21 February 1996 this Court set aside the orders of Master McLaughlin and the certificate of taxation of 5 May
This terminated the stay and in due course the defendant's security was released.

Simos J relied on the unnecessary duplication of proceedings involved in the application to Powell JA while the application before him was part heard. The costs of the proceedings in this Court relating to the stay of execution appear to have been reserved or made costs in the appeal. In the result the parties bore their own costs of such proceedings because this Court made no order as to the costs of the appeal and cross-appeal.

This Court would rarely grant leave to appeal from a decision of a Divisional
Judge dealing with the costs of interlocutory proceedings. The claimant abandoned her notice of motion before Simos J when she applied to Powell JA so that the costs incurred before Simos J were thrown away, and her notice of motion in the Division was unsuccessful. Although she obtained an order from
Powell JA which required the defendant to give security, it cannot be assumed that Simos J would not have made such an order in due course. The Judge had a discretion in relation to the costs of this motion and we can see no proper basis for this Court to interfere.

On 15 January 1997 the claimant made a fresh application for an examination order. Her notice of motion was heard by Hodgson J in June 1997. His Honour was faced with the decision of Simos J of 20 December 1996 which, as he said, was an interlocutory decision of a substantive nature made after a contested hearing.

The claimant contended that it was not necessary to establish a material change of circumstances since the order of Simos J, but we have already rejected this submission in relation to her claim for a Mareva injunction.
She also contended before Hodgson J that there had been such a change of circumstances for reasons which included a further certificate of taxation in her favour dated 29 November 1996 for $22,707.90 (Ex C in this Court). His
Honour held that the matters relied upon did not establish a material change of circumstances.

He also considered whether a different result would be justified, independently of the principle requiring a material change of circumstances and, even on that basis, held that an examination order should not be made.

He was not satisfied that he had full information from the claimant as to the costs orders between the parties, and had regard to the reasons for judgment of McClelland CJinEq of 24 December 1996. That Judge had found on the evidence before him that there were then approximately forty separate costs orders in favour of one party or the other. There were two subsisting certificates in favour of the claimant, one dated 16 August 1994 which was under challenge by the claimant on which $21,790.85 was owing, and the certificate of 29 November
There were eight certificates of taxation or assessments in favour of the defendant which totalled $25,552.43. There were thus some thirty orders where the costs had not been quantified. There was no admissible evidence before McLelland CJinEq, Hodgson J, or this Court which would enable us to form any opinion as to where the balance lay and for how much. We don't even know how many of those thirty orders were in favour of the claimant, and how many in favour of the defendant.

Hodgson J also noted that the defendant had a restitution claim for some $30,000 arising from payments pursuant to the orders of Santow J which had been set aside by this Court. He held that the combination of these matters, and the set-off principle applied by this Court in its decision of 21 February , comprised special circumstances making an examination order inappropriate in accordance with the principles in Brown versus Stafford [[1944]
KB 193] CA.
The claimant's application for an examination order was therefore refused.

An application for leave to appeal from an interlocutory order in a matter of practice and procedure always faces substantial difficulties. In our opinion the claimant has failed to establish that his Honour's exercise of discretion miscarried on either of the two alternative bases considered by him, and we would refuse leave to appeal from his decision.

The incidental rulings of Hodgson J, also challenged by the claimant, relating to matters of evidence could not possibly attract the grant of leave.

In our opinion therefore the following orders should be made: 
Summons for leave to appeal (40031/97) from the decisions of Simos J of 20
December 1996 and McLelland CJinEq of 24 December 1996 dismissed.

Summons for leave to appeal (40392/97) from the decision of Hodgson J of June 1997 dismissed.

Exhibits may be returned.

Interlocutory orders of 23 June 1997 discharged.

Registrar directed to enter these orders forthwith.
 * * * 
