

Regina versus Combeo Matter No 60062/97 [1997] NSWSC 438 (29 September 1997) 
Regina versus Combeo /97 September 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Sully J, Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Peter COMBEO 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The appellant was charged at the Bega District Court on 3 February 1997 with the common law misdemeanour of escaping from lawful custody. The charge was that he on 2 December 1995 at Tomakin in the State of New South Wales, then being a person in the lawful custody of Bruce Ward, a member of the Police Force, escaped from such lawful custody. 
The appellant pleaded not guilty and was tried before Downs DCJ and a jury. He was legally represented at the trial. He was convicted by the jury. He was not given a custodial sentence. On sentencing, Downs DCJ deferred sentence upon the appellant entering into a recognisance himself in the sum of $2,000 to be of good behaviour for a period of three years. The appellant appeals against his conviction.

The evidence led in support of the Crown case may be summarised as follows.

In the early hours of the morning of Saturday, 2 December, 1995, Senior
Constables Boyd and Ward were patrolling in the Batemans Bay area. They were travelling in a marked highway patrol vehicle. They said they observed a white
Ford Falcon come out of Tomakin Road into George Bass Drive. The vehicle was driving quite slowly and swerving within the traffic lane.

When the vehicle drove past them the police car's siren was activated. The police did a U-turn and commenced to follow the Ford. The two police officers,
Boyd and Ward, both said they noticed there were four passengers in the vehicle.

After the vehicle travelled a short distance it stopped and the police car stopped directly behind it. The two police officers said that they saw certain rather complicated movements taking place within the car. They said the driver appeared to shuffle from the front seat of the vehicle into the rear and that he got out of the vehicle backwards from the driver's side rear passenger door. That person was identified as the appellant.

The evidence was that that person was unsteady on his feet and smelled of intoxicating liquor. Senior Constable Ward then requested the appellant to undergo a breath analysis. The appellant replied in terms that could fairly be described as an emphatic refusal.

Senior Constable Ward then said to the appellant, "You are under arrest for not undergoing a roadside breath test". The appellant was then placed in the rear of the police vehicle. The other members of the car were asked to alight from the vehicle. As they were complying with this request, the appellant was observed winding down the rear window of the police car, reaching through to the outside of the car and opening the rear passenger door. The appellant then ran from the scene to a reserve across the road and into a creek. He was pursued and handcuffed. He was then taken to the police station.

The appellant gave sworn evidence, although it is not entirely easy from his evidence to identify precisely the nature of his defence. The principal point he seemed concerned to make was that he was not in truth the driver of the vehicle. He denied that the police had told him he was under arrest and that was an issue of fact for the jury to determine. A witness was called in the defence case whose evidence was aimed at supporting the evidence of the appellant that he had not been the driver of the vehicle.

The learned trial judge summed-up to the jury in an orthodox fashion and in due course the appellant was convicted. He brings this appeal.

There seem to be two points on which the appellant relies, and they need to be dealt with separately.

Mr Miles, the solicitor for the appellant, has, in my view rightly, observed that there may well be cases in which difficulties can arise concerning the mens rea associated with an offence of escaping from lawful custody. Mr Miles gave as an example the case of a person who believes that those who have taken him, or purported to take him, into custody are ruffians impersonating police officers. I agree that there may be some cases in which difficulties could arise about the mental state of a person charged with such an offence. This, however, is not one of them.

In so far as the appellant protested, and protests, that he was not the driver of the motor vehicle, and was therefore not guilty of any driving offence, or of the offence of refusing to take a breath test, that has nothing to do with any mental state that might be relevant to guilt or innocence of the offence presently in question. It is not a defence to a charge of escaping from lawful custody that the person who is the subject of the charge believes that he is innocent of any offence and that the police were under a misapprehension when they arrested him.

Whether there may be cases in which, for example, an honest and reasonable mistake of fact, or a belief in certain factual circumstances of the kind given in the hypothetical case to which Mr Miles referred in argument, might give rise to a defence, is a matter that it is not necessary to examine for the purpose of the present appeal.

It suffices to dispose of this point in the circumstances of the present case to say that Downs DCJ would have been quite wrong to have directed the jury that it would have been a defence to the charge against the appellant if the appellant had genuinely considered that he was innocent of any offence of the kind that led the police to arrest him. For Downs DCJ to have raised that issue with the jury would have involved a misdirection of law.

In so far as there was an issue in the case as to whether the appellant was or knew or believed he was under arrest, that was an issue of fact. The police evidence, if accepted by the jury, made it plain that the appellant was, and must have known he was, under arrest. The case was left to the jury on the basis that the case against the appellant involved acceptance of the police evidence.

The learned judge directed the jury appropriately on the matters that they were to take into account in deciding whether or not the appellant had been placed in lawful custody and there is no ground of complaint available to be pursued on this appeal in relation to that matter. In my view, the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.
 
SULLY J: I agree.
 
DUNFORD J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the court is that the appeal is dismissed.

REGINA versus Peter COMBEO 
CRIMINAL LAW - ESCAPE FROM LAWFUL CUSTODY - appellant arrested by police for refusing to take a breath test after a vehicle he was allegedly driving was stopped by police - appellant denied he was driver - argued that appellant's belief that police were mistaken about him driving was relevant to lawfulness of arrest and custody - HELD - there was no such issue to be left to the jury. 
O R D E R S 
Appeal dismissed. * * * 
