

State Bank of NSW Ltd versus Industrial Court of NSW and Anor [1996] NSWSC 336 (6 August 1996) 
STATE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES LTD versus INDUSTRIAL COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES &
ANOR /96; CT 1252/93; CT95/1204 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY P, PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA 
CATCHWORDS: Prerogative writs - Excess of jurisdiction - Industrial Court - Proceedings ongoing - Whether appellate court should intervene - Industrial Relations Act 1991, <case> 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
Prerogative relief sought concerning decision of Full Court of Industrial
Court - Ongoing dispute between State Bank and Abalone Divers Co-operative
Society Ltd - Co-operative now in liquidation - Dispute over cheques given by
Co-operative to second opponent (abalone diver) which were not met by Bank -
Whether contract or arrangement under which abalone diver performed within meaning of <case> Industrial 0Relations Act 1991 - Claim by Bank that
Industrial Court exceeded jurisdiction - Whether appellate court should intervene prior to the conclusion of a proceeding in a tribunal or court and before findings have been made which go to jurisdiction: Held, dismissing the appeal, the Court is not satisfied that a case for intervention by way of prerogative relief has been established.

Parisienne Basket Shoes Pty Ltd versus Whyte <case>; [(1938) 59 CLR 369] referred to.

Windsor Refrigerator Co Ltd versus Branch Nominees Ltd [(1961) Ch 375] referred to.

Industrial Relations Act 1991, <case>.

ORDERS 
Application dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: This is an application which comes before the Court seeking declaratory relief and prerogative relief. The declaratory relief depends essentially upon whether in substance prerogative relief will be granted. I shall therefore direct my attention essentially, though of course not completely, to the substantive relief which is in question. That I have described as prerogative relief.

It is necessary to refer but shortly to the facts. Mr Grover, the second opponent in this matter, was an abalone diver. He was a member of a co- operative described as the New South Wales Abalone Divers Co-operative Society
Limited. His practice was to sell to the Co-operative all of the abalone that he gathered. It may have been a requirement of his remaining a member of the
Co-operative that he do so; that was a matter which was referred to in argument and in the very detailed written submissions which Mr Nicholls has submitted on behalf of the Bank.

But however this be, the Abalone Co-operative fell into financial difficulties. It had from time to time been lent money by the State Bank of
New South Wales. At the relevant time in 1991 it was in financial difficulties. The evidence referred to in the judgments of the Industrial
Court indicates that early in September 1991 there was a meeting at which some members of the Co-operative were present and it may well be that the Co- operative was represented. One of the persons present was Mr Grover.

Certain conversations took place between a representative of the State Bank and those present in which (I put the matter in a neutral sense) the representative of the State Bank indicated that in certain circumstances and subject to conditions the State Bank would be prepared to continue financing the Co-operative during the month of September. I have put the matter in such general terms in order not to pre-empt the disputes of fact which no doubt may arise in relation to what was said.

The Co-operative ultimately failed; counsel have informed this Court that it is now in liquidation. The present dispute arises because Mr Grover, following the meeting to which I have referred, harvested abalone by working in the industry in which he had been working and, as it appears, because cheques were given to him by the Co-operative which the Bank did not meet.

The present application was made under <case> of the Industrial Relations Act
The terms of that section have been examined in litigation on many occasions. The section provides: "275(1) The Industrial Court may make an order declaring wholly or partly void, or varying, either from its commencement or from some other time, any contract or arrangement or any related condition or collateral arrangement under which a person performs work in any industry if the Industrial Court finds that the contract or arrangement or any related condition or collateral arrangement: is unfair; or is harsh or unconscionable; or is against the public interest; or provides or has provided a total remuneration less than a person performing the work would have received as an employee performing the work; or was designed to, or does, avoid the provisions of an award or former industrial agreement; or was designed to, or does, avoid the provisions of an agreement registered, or contract determination made, under Chapter 6.

In considering the question of public interest for the purposes of subsection (1)(c) (but without limiting the generality of the expression 'public interest') regard is to be had to the effect that a contract or arrangement, or a series of contracts or arrangements, referred to in subsection (1) has had, or may have, on any system of apprenticeship and other methods of providing a sufficient and trained labour force.

In making an order under this section, the Industrial Court may make such order as to the payment of money in connection with any contract, arrangement, condition or collateral arrangement declared wholly or partly void, or varied, as the Industrial Court considers just in the circumstances of the case." 
The submissions that were made for Mr Grover were, I think, twofold: first, that there was an arrangement between him and the Co-operative within <case> in respect of which he is entitled to appropriate relief; and, second, that there was an arrangement between him and the Bank within <case> in respect of which he should have relief. The form in which the relief would be granted and the working out of it are matters to which I need not direct attention.

On 24 February 1993 Mr Grover commenced proceedings in the Industrial Court of
New South Wales against the Co-operative and the State Bank claiming relief under <case>. The proceedings are no longer pressed against the Co-operative and essentially it is against the Bank that the proceedings in that court were pressed. The State Bank applied on motion to strike out the proceedings. It argued, in effect, that the matter was not within the jurisdiction of the
Industrial Court and that that issue could be determined at that stage. On 29
June 1995, following argument, Marks J, the trial judge, dismissed the application. The State Bank appealed to the Full Court of the Industrial
Commission and on 13 February 1996 by a majority it dismissed the appeal. On March 1996 the State Bank applied to this Court for the relief to which I have referred. The relief sought is now set forth in the amended summons which has been filed in this Court.

The essential problem which faces the State Bank arises in relation to, as Mr
Nicholls has rightly called it, the threshold question. He has in his written submissions confronted the threshold question, namely, whether this Court can and should at this stage intervene to give the kind of relief which he has sought.

The application is, as I have indicated, based essentially upon the allegation that the Industrial Commission in doing what it has done has exceeded its jurisdiction, or alternatively, that it has no jurisdiction to do what it proposes to continue to do. There is, of course, a distinction in law between the jurisdiction of a body to hear an application and the jurisdiction of a body to make orders following the hearing of the application and the making of the necessary findings of fact. The Industrial Court has jurisdiction to consider the present application under <case> in order to determine whether, amongst other things, the material placed before it constitutes (I use the term "arrangement" for brevity) an arrangement within that particular section.
It has power to make the necessary findings of fact in that regard. Its jurisdiction is not a jurisdiction of the kind referred to in the much cited case of Parisienne Basket Shoes Pty Ltd versus Whyte <case>; [(1938) 59 CLR 369], namely, one which depends entirely upon the making of an objectively correct preliminary finding of fact. Its jurisdiction to make orders depends upon what ultimately is the finding of fact which the tribunal makes at the conclusion of the evidence. Prima facie, therefore, the present tribunal, the Industrial Court of New South Wales, had power to proceed with the hearing of the present proceeding and that is what it proposed to do. It was therefore necessary for Mr Nicholls, on behalf of the State Bank of New
South Wales, to establish some ground upon which this Court should intervene at this stage to grant relief of the kind that is sought.

Mr Nicholls has submitted that before Marks J an arrangement was made of the following nature, namely, that the parties would place before the judge all of the evidence which was called which would go to an issue of jurisdiction; and that the court would then, as upon a preliminary application, namely, the application that had been brought here, determine whether, given that evidence, there would be jurisdiction in the court to grant relief to Mr
Grover. It was contended that such an arrangement had been made and that the relevant material was that referred to in Mr Nicholls' written submissions, namely, the rules of the Co-operative, the provisions of the Co-operation
Act 1923, the transcript of the meeting of 4 September 1991 and Mr Grover's affidavit sworn on 14 December 1994. His submission was that that was agreed to be the evidence and the only evidence upon which any finding of jurisdictional facts would be made.

In view of some of the remarks that were made in the judgments of Marks J and of members of the Full Court of the Industrial Commission upon appeal, this
Court raised initially, when the matter came before it, the question whether there had been such an agreement and whether the judges of the court, at trial level and on appeal, had dealt with the matter upon the basis that there was such an arrangement. Mr Galitsky, who appears for the second respondent in the proceedings, Mr Grover, was, if I may say so without any element of criticism of him, somewhat ambiguous as to whether in fact such an agreement had been made. He referred to his desire to cross-examine representatives of the Bank and perhaps to produce other evidence which would go at least to setting the background against which the meaning of what had taken place at the meeting of September 1991 and the understanding of what was referred to in Mr Grover's affidavit should be understood and judged. I am not sure whether in the end he acceded to the proposition that there was a firm agreement of the kind to which Mr Nicholls has referred.

However, without being in any way critical of counsel in relation to this matter, I shall assume that there was some kind of agreement of that nature. I shall assume that Marks J attempted to case manage a proceeding which otherwise might have been overlong with a view to bringing the litigation to an end as soon as was practicable. Two questions then arise: whether that was in fact the basis upon which the matter proceeded; and, if it was, whether the conclusions arrived at by Marks J at trial level and two of the judges,
Maidment and Peterson JJ, on appeal, namely, that the evidence did not demonstrate that there was a lack of jurisdiction, was correct.

It is proper, I think, to refer in this regard to some observations in the judgments of the various members of the court. In my opinion, the members of the court, when they came to decide the application on motion made by the
State Bank, do not appear to have been satisfied that there was a final agreement in relation to jurisdictional factors of the kind to which I have referred. At least, their Honours do not appear to have been satisfied that the evidence and the only evidence which would be relevant upon an issue of jurisdiction would be that referred to in the four categories to which I have referred and to have proceeded on that basis. In the judgments, which I shall not cite at length, the judges refer to the possibility of other evidence being available. In the judgment of Marks J reference was made to this matter.
His Honour (at p 13 of his judgment) said the following: "I must emphasise that the material which I have extracted from the transcript of the meeting is only one small part of the deliberations of the meeting as revealed in the transcript. However, it appears to me that the material which
I have extracted is capable of allowing the applicant, who attended the meeting, to have formed the opinion that the bank would continue to support the co-operative financially throughout the month of September to the extent contemplated in the co-operative's cash flow projections for September. I must emphasise that this opinion is expressed tentatively by reference to such material as is before me. At this stage no opportunity has been taken by either party to test any evidence by way of cross-examination. In coming to this conclusion I have therefore acceded to the specific assertion put by Mr
Nicholls on behalf of the bank that I should accept the evidence at face value as representing the applicant's case put at its highest. On this basis the evidence to which I have referred is capable of reflecting a representation made by the bank to that effect. The applicant deposed that he continued to deliver abalone to the co-operative as a result of what was said by Mr Lucas
Smith at that meeting. I will assume, acceding to the invitation extended by
Mr Nicholls to regard the evidence at its highest, that it is implicit in the applicant's evidence contained in the two affidavits sworn by him that he would not have supplied the abalone to the co-operative after 4 September 1991 if it were not for the statement made by Mr Lucas Smith at that meeting. As I have previously said, whether the evidence is capable ultimately of supporting such an assumption is a matter which is currently not before me." (Emphasis supplied).

Subsequently, Maidment J, in the course of his judgment, appears to have doubts as to whether the matter was to proceed upon the basis to which I have referred. His Honour, in the course of his judgment (on p 7) referred to the fact that, as he put it, Marks J "was careful to point out the totality of the available evidence is not yet at hand". His Honour, in the course of his judgment, appears to have emphasised that the conclusions at which he was arriving in dealing with the motion to strike out the proceeding and the appeal from the order of Marks J refusing that motion were tentative.

Peterson J, in the course of his judgment, also referred to the difficulty that was involved. In the course of his judgment (on p 4) he referred to the difficulty that was involved in deciding the matter as it were on an application for a summary judgment and he said (at the bottom of p 4): "In the instant case there appear to me to be complexities in the question which are not easy of disposition. This is not a case where at a glance one can observe a want of jurisdiction. That being so it seems to me the motion for dismissal must fail." 
His Honour then referred to the possibility that there was a separate, as he described it, collateral arrangement, made on 4 September 1991 and said: "While I prefer the former view it seems to me that it is necessary the matter be heard to finality to permit a final definition of the parties to and the nature of that collateral agreement." 
I do not refer to the judgment of Cahill Dep CJ because his Honour's judgment was a dissenting judgment; I will, I trust, be pardoned for not lengthening a long judgment by detailing what his Honour said in this regard.

I do not doubt that it is appropriate for the Industrial Commission, in the exercise of its own jurisdiction and acting within the law laid down by its rules and otherwise, to case manage proceedings coming before it and, if it be expedient, to adopt what is the equivalent of an application for summary judgment in the Supreme Court of New South Wales. The dangers inherent in summary judgment applications and in dealing with matters upon assumed questions of fact or law have been frequently referred to. Very often such applications cause more trouble than is saved or attempted to be saved. This has been referred to: see, eg, Windsor Refrigerator Co Ltd versus Branch Nominees
Ltd [(1961) Ch 375] at 382, per Lord Evershed MR.

However, that course having been followed, it was for the Industrial Court to determine how the application should be dealt with. Having regard to the way in which Marks, Maidment and Peterson JJ dealt with it and their tentative view of the findings to be made in relation to the facts (if findings they be), I do not think that the matter is in a position to be dealt with by this
Court. If the conclusions as to the jurisdictional facts be those drawn by their Honours, it is not proper to conclude at this stage that what the
Industrial Court has done or is proposing to do is beyond its jurisdiction.

However, putting that matter aside and looking at the substance of the matter,
I do not think that this is a case in which, having regard to the threshold question, it is appropriate that this Court intervene at this stage. Before this Court deals with the matter it must be satisfied that there has been an assumption of jurisdiction by the Industrial Court which is not warranted. I do not think that this Court can be so satisfied. There has been no final determination of the facts by reference to which the existence or absence of jurisdiction is to be judged. If the only evidence to be called in relation to jurisdictional facts be the evidence to which I have referred, then the procedure which Mr Nicholls suggested was agreed to be followed would have involved that there be a final decision as to such facts. If that had been done, it may be that the evidence of jurisdiction could have been decided. But that was not done: the court, no doubt for good reason, saw it as inappropriate to make such findings. The way in which the present matter was dealt with was described in various ways by the different judges who dealt with it. They have suggested (I take but one example) that the matter is to be dealt with by considering what, at the highest, the facts establish in favour of Mr Grover. But the evidence is in a tentative state: it is not finally concluded. The judges made clear that the conclusions they formed in this regard were tentative only. Presumably they considered that, on a final consideration of the facts and the conclusions that were possible, they could take views different from those they presently held. I do not think that this
Court can come to the conclusion that there is or must be an excess of jurisdiction in what the Industrial Court is doing.

It is no doubt open to this Court in an appropriate case (I would regard such cases as being special cases) to intervene prior to the conclusion of a proceeding in a tribunal or court if it is satisfied that the proper conclusion is and must be that that body is acting without jurisdiction. It may be that by the grant of relief in the nature of prohibition or perhaps certiorari, the Court can and will intervene even before final findings of fact have been made and before the proceeding has come to an end. But those cases are, I think, special cases. The Court will not exercise that jurisdiction where it remains in doubt as to whether, on a proper review of the facts, findings can and should be made which will establish the jurisdiction of the court or tribunal in question. Here the findings have not been made.

The Bank's case is, at the highest, that it can be said in its favour that there is no way in which was has taken place can be understood as giving rise to an arrangement of one or other of the kinds claimed by Mr Grover. But in the present case the judges involved have not come to that conclusion. They have all come to the conclusion (Cahill Dep CJ excepted) that, upon the basis of what is before the court, it is possible to make a finding that there was an arrangement such as would found the jurisdiction of the court. In a case such as this, this Court cannot come to the conclusion that they were wrong and that, on no possible findings of the primary facts, would it be possible to conclude that there was, for example, an arrangement of the kind urged for
Mr Grover. In these circumstances I do not think that this Court can or should intervene at this stage.

What will happen when the matter comes to a final hearing and findings of fact are made before the Industrial Commission this Court does not, of course, predict. What this Court now does does not pre-empt the findings which may be made by the Industrial Court in relation to the matter in due course. But I do not think that a case for intervention at the present stage has been established. In my opinion, therefore, the present proceeding should be dismissed with costs.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with what has been said by the President. I would add that the argument for the claimant today appears in short form in the final paragraph of the reasons of Cahill Dep CJ who, in dissent, would have upheld the claimant's appeal. In that final paragraph the passage which was decisive in his formulation of opinion appears towards the end. He mentioned the evidence which had been before Marks J, as already today explained by the President, and said in conclusion: "In the circumstances I am not able to conclude that the evidence before his
Honour established or was capable of establishing the existence of an arrangement within section 275." 
It may be, although I am not indicating any opinion on this matter, that the
Deputy Chief Judge will be proved to be right at the end of the case in the sense that it is possible that the court disposing of this matter may, so far as can now be seen, find, as a matter of fact, that the applicant had not established the necessary arrangement. I repeat, I am not indicating any opinion by saying that, but the matter is open.

Where I think the argument of the claimant today fails (which is where my opinion differs from that of Cahill Dep CJ) is on Cahill Dep CJ's conclusion, relied on by the claimant here, that the evidence before Marks J was not capable of establishing the existence of a relevant arrangement. That argument might possibly have some attraction were it not for the basis upon which Marks J had been asked to consider the evidence. In his reasons he referred to the invitation by counsel for the Bank for the purposes of the application before him to accept the evidence at face value as representing the applicant's case put at its highest. His Honour went on to say that he would assume, acceding to that invitation, that it was implicit in the applicant's evidence that certain things were so, at least at a prima facie level and subject to the ultimate state of the evidence. I refer to that passage of Marks J's reasons to show that his Honour was taking the invitation that had been put to him as meaning that the most benevolent construction from the point of view of the applicant at first instance should be taken by the court in considering the contention that there was no arrangement. The evidence, looked at in the light of that invitation, seems to me reasonably open to be regarded as supporting the existence of the relevant arrangement.
This point has been made in different forms both by the majority in the
Industrial Court and also, amongst other matters, by the learned President in this Court. It alone seems enough to me to necessitate the dismissing of the claimant's application.

I agree with the orders proposed.

MEAGHER JA: I agree with the President and do not wish to add anything.

MAHONEY P: The order of the Court will therefore be the application is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
