

Director of Public Prosecutions versus Tanswell and Anor Matter No Ca 40495/98 [1998] NSWSC 443 (2 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 November 1998 
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS versus TANSWELL & ANOR 
CA 40495/98; CL 11054/98 October 1998 
Sheller JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Common Law Division - Hidden J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40495/98; CL 11054/98 
DELIVERED: 2 October 1998 
HEARING DATE: 21 August 1998 
PARTIES: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS versus TANSWELL & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: SHELLER, BEAZLEY, STEIN JJA 
COUNSEL: 
Claimant: G S Hosking SC/ M C Blackmore 
First Opponent: S R Norrish QC 
Second Opponent: Submitting appearance 
SOLICITORS: 
Claimant: S E O'Connor - Public Prosecutions 
First Opponent: Trevor Nyman & Co 
Second Opponent: Crown Solicitors Office 
CATCHWORDS: STATUTORY INTERPRETATION - s48E [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO OF PAGES: 17 
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS versus TANSWELL & ANOR 
This appeal concerned the interpretation of the of the paper committals provisions in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/index.html#p4),
Division 1, Subdivision 7A of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) (the
Act). In particular, the issue was whether a magistrate had jurisdiction under [s.48E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) to make an order for the attendance of persons who had made written statements for the purposes of Subdivision 7A but whom the informant did not propose to call in the committal proceedings.

The claimant, in committal proceedings, had written to the first opponent outlining the written statements it intended to rely upon. The first opponent sought an order from the Learned Magistrate hearing the proceedings for the attendance of persons who had made written statements but whom the claimant did not propose to call. The Magistrate refused to make such an order and this conclusion was overturned by a single Judge.

It was argued by the claimant that if the requirements for a direction under [s.48E(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) had been satisfied, the Magistrate may only give a direction for the attendance of a person who has made a written statement for the purposes of
Subdivision 7A if the informant proposed to tender that statement in the committal proceedings.

Held:
The paper committal scheme was implemented to reduce delay. There was nothing in the legislation to suggest that the legislature intended to allow the defendant to override the well entrenched discretion of the informant to tender witnesses. The Queen versus Harry; ex parte Eastway [(1985) 39 SASR ]
at 205, The Queen versus Apostilides <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 563] at 571 and R versus Basha (1989) 39 A Crim R 337 at 341 referred to.
The amendment made enabling the Magistrate under 48E(1) to direct persons to appear was designed to further reduce delay by giving the Magistrate the jurisdiction to decide which of the informant's witnesses should attend to give oral evidence. There was no suggestion in the extrinsic material that this amendment was designed to allow the Magistrate to order the attendance of witnesses who had made written statements which were served upon the defendant but which the informant did not propose to tender.
The effect of [s.48E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) is that the Magistrate had jurisdiction to determine whether the maker of a written statement which the informant proposed to tender should be required to give evidence. Therefore, the learned Magistrate correctly refused to directions for the attendance of persons whose written statements the claimant did not propose to tender.

Authorities: 
Public Service Association of South Australia versus Federated Clerk's Union of
Australia <case>; <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 563] 
The Queen versus Harry; ex parte Eastway [(1985) 39 SASR 203] 
ORDERS Leave to appeal granted;
Appeal allowed;
Set aside the direction of Hidden J in so far as it remitted to the second opponent or directed the second opponent to hear and determine the application under [s48E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) otherwise than in accordance with the reasons for judgment of this Court;
The orders for costs made by Hidden J of the proceedings before him are confirmed;
The first opponent is to pay the costs of the claimant of this application for leave to appeal and of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).

DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS versus TANSWELL & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/index.html#p4),
Division 1 of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) (the
Act) governs the procedures to be followed when a person is charged with an indictable offence. In Subdivision 7, which concerns committal proceedings, [s36](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s36.html) provides that the evidence at the hearing shall be taken, after the administration of the usual oath to a witness, by the examination and cross- examination of witnesses by the prosecutor and by the defendant or their respective counsel or attorneys. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s41.html) provides for the procedure on hearing of a charge of an indictable offence.
Subsections (9) and (10) provide as follows: "(9) The Justice or Justices may at any stage during the examination or cross- examination of any witness giving evidence for the prosecution or the defence terminate the examination or cross-examination on any particular matter if satisfied that any further examination or cross-examination on the matter will not assist the Justice or Justices in forming any opinion referred to in subsection (2) or (6).

If a person attends at committal proceedings because the person has been directed under [section
E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) to attend, the Justice or Justices must not allow the person to be cross- examined in respect of matters that were not the basis of the reasons for giving the direction, unless the Justice or Justices are satisfied that there are substantial reasons why, in the interests of justice, the person should be cross-examined in respect of those matters." 
Subsection (9) was added by the Justices (Paper Committals) Amendment Act (the 1987 amendment Act) and subs (10) by the Justices Amendment
Act 1996 (the 1996 amendment Act).

In 1983 the Justices (Procedure) Further Amendment Act amended the Act by inserting a new Subdivision 7A. Significantly, s48A (1) provided that notwithstanding any other provision of the Act, but subject to the
Subdivision, a written statement by a person was, if tendered by the informant, admissible in committal proceedings as evidence to the same extent as if it were oral evidence to the like effect given in those proceedings by that person. A written statement was not admissible as evidence under s48A in any committal proceedings if the informant had not served within a particular period on the defendant a copy of the statement; s48B (1) (a).

The paper committal scheme, as it was called, instituted by Subdivision 7A, was intended to reduce delay while not denying to a defendant the opportunity to cross-examine a witness for the informant if the defendant so wished. This protection was provided by s48E which was headed "Witnesses may be called".
Section 48E provided: "(1) Where in any committal proceedings - the defendant has been served with a copy of a written statement, as referred to in section 48B, and serves on the informant, within such period as the Justice or Justices may direct, a notice to the effect that the defendant desires the attendance at those proceedings of the person who made the statement; or the Justice or Justices, on his, her or their own motion, or on the application of the defendant, gives or give a direction requiring the attendance at those proceedings of the person who made a written statement tendered as evidence under this Subdivision.
 the statement, if not already admitted as evidence in those proceedings, is not admissible as evidence under section 48A in those proceedings if - in a case to which paragraph (a) applies - the defendant, after serving the notice referred to in that paragraph, does not consent to the admission in evidence of the statement; or in the case to which paragraph (b) applies - the Justice or Justices, after giving the direction referred to in that paragraph, does not or do not withdraw the direction.

Where in any committal proceedings the defendant applies to the Justice or
Justices for a direction to be given as referred to in subsection (1) (b), the
Justice or Justices may give the direction, and shall do so if the written statement has not already been admitted as evidence in those proceedings.

A direction given as referred to in subsection (1) (b) on application by the defendant may not be withdrawn except on application by or with the consent of the defendant." 
Thus delay was reduced by allowing written statements tendered by the informant to be admitted, if various conditions were satisfied, but the defendant could require, if the evidence of the person making the statement was to be admitted, that that person attend. Consistent with this scheme was the informant's right to decide which witnesses the informant would rely on at the committal. The Magistrate had no power to direct the informant to call any witness or to submit any statement in lieu of calling such a witness; compare
The Queen versus Harry; ex parte Eastway [(1985) 39 SASR 203] at 205.
However, as King CJ pointed out later in his reasons for judgment in that case at 209 the discretion of the informant to decide which witnesses should be called must be understood in the correct sense. At 210 the Chief Justice said: "I content myself with pointing out that it requires the Crown Prosecutor to call all `witnesses essential to the unfolding of the narratives on which the prosecution is based..... whether in the result the effect of their testimony is for or against the case for the prosecution' (Seneviratne versus The King [[1936] 3 All ER 36] at 49), unless `there is sufficient reason for not calling them, as, for example, where he concludes that the witness is not a credible and truthful witness': The Queen versus Richardson <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 116] at 121. The performance of the duty involves calling of `all the material witnesses before the court, even though they gave inconsistent accounts, in order that the whole of the facts may be before the jury', R v
Harris [[1927] 2 KB 587], per Lord Hewart CJ at 590, although, as the Privy Council pointed out in Adel Muhammed el Dabbah versus Attorney General (Palestine) [[1944] AC 156] at 169, it is the function of the prosecutor to determine who the material witnesses are." 
No one suggested that the duty of the informant on committal proceedings, as so described, was any different as the result of the introduction of
Subdivision 7A. Nor do I think s48E, in its then form, touched upon the informant's discretion to determine what witnesses would be called. Notably the power of the Magistrate on his or her own motion to give a direction requiring the attendance of a person at the committal proceedings was limited to giving a direction in respect of a person who had made "a written statement tendered as evidence under this Subdivision". Even if such a direction were given, its only direct effect was to make the written statement not admissible as evidence under s48A in those proceedings without the defendant's consent.

The first significant amendment to this scheme came with the 1987 amendment
Act which, with the introduction of s48AA, made mandatory, subject to certain exceptions, the use of written statements in committal proceedings. What had been an optional procedure became a mandatory procedure. In addition to the restrictions on cross-examination imposed by the new s41 (9), restrictions were placed on the right of the defence to cross-examine victim witnesses.
Section 48AA (1) provides that evidence for the prosecution in any committal proceedings must (subject to the section) be given by means of written statements which are admissible as evidence under s48A. At the same time s48E was slightly amended by requiring that before giving a direction under subs (b) for the attendance of a witness the Magistrate was to be satisfied that it was in the interests of justice to do so. Section 48E was also made subject to a new s48EA which in subs (1) defined the expression "offence involving violence" and then in subs (2) provided that where in any committal proceedings the Magistrate was satisfied that - the defendant had been charged with an offence involving violence; and the person who made a written statement tendered as evidence under the
Subdivision was an alleged victim of that offence, the Magistrate should not give a direction under s48E requiring the attendance at those proceedings of the alleged victim, or otherwise reject the statement because the defendant had requested the attendance at those proceedings of the alleged victim unless the Magistrate was satisfied that there were special reasons why the alleged victim should, in the interests of justice, attend at those proceedings to give oral evidence. It is to be observed that subs (2) spoke again of "a written statement tendered as evidence".

The amendment which gave rise to the issue on this application by the claimant, Director of Public Prosecutions, for leave to appeal from the decision of Hidden J was made by the 1996 amendment Act. Section 48E was replaced. The new s48E no longer made a written statement not admissible as evidence under s48A because the defendant had given a notice requiring the person who made it to attend. It became a matter for the Magistrate to decide, on the application of the defendant or informant or on his or her own motion, whether a direction should be given requiring the attendance at the proceedings of a person who had made a written statement for the purposes of the Subdivision. If such a direction was given the statement was not admissible as evidence under s48A in the proceedings unless the direction had been withdrawn. Section 48E, so far as material, provides: "(1) For the purposes of committal proceedings, the Justice or Justices may give a direction requiring the attendance at the proceedings of a person who has made a written statement for the purposes of this Subdivision. The direction may be given on the application of the defendant or informant or on the motion of the Justice of Justices.

The Justice or Justices may give the direction only if: in the case of a witness in proceedings that relate to an offence involving violence who is the alleged victim of the offence - the Justice or
Justices are of the opinion that there are special reasons why, in the interests of justice, the witness should attend to give oral evidence, or in any other case - the Justice or Justices are of the opinion that there are substantial reasons why, in the interests of justice, the witness should attend to give oral evidence.

The Justice or Justices must not give the direction if the written statement has already been admitted as evidence.

A defendant may apply for a direction under subsection (1) only if the defendant has served on the informant, within such period as the Justice or
Justices may direct, a notice that the defendant wishes the person who made the statement to attend at the proceedings.

If a direction has been given under subsection (1), the statement is not admissible as evidence under section 48A in the proceedings, unless the direction has been withdrawn." 
Subsection (9) defines "offence involving violence" in the section.

The 1996 amending Act also omitted s48EA which had become superfluous.

APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL 
The claimant seeks leave to appeal from the decision of Hidden J of 16 June in which his Honour made an order on the application of the first opponent, Malcolm Carlisle Tanswell, pursuant to s134 of the Act, that is to say, relief in the nature of mandamus to a Magistrate; see generally Saffron v Director of Public Prosecutions [(1989) 16 NSWLR 397] at 418.
The first opponent is awaiting committal proceedings at the Downing Centre
Local Court on a charge of murder and two charges of conspiring to pervert the course of justice. The claimant has the conduct of those proceedings.

On 26 and 27 March 1998 the second opponent, a magistrate, Vincent Dereck
Kearney, who has filed a submitting appearance, heard an application by the first opponent under s48E of the Act for a direction that certain persons who had made written statements for the purposes of Subdivision 7A but whom the informant did not propose to call in the committal proceedings, be required to attend at the proceedings. The learned Magistrate was of the view that the purpose of Subdivision 7A was the admission into evidence of statements at the election of the informant. He held that he did not have jurisdiction to make an order under s48E (1) (b) in respect of those witnesses whose statements the informant did not seek to tender. The first opponent successfully challenged this conclusion before Hidden J.

ARGUMENT 
Unenlightened by any knowledge of its legislative history, the meaning of s48E would appear fairly plain. On the application of the defendant or informant or on the motion of a Magistrate, if the requirements of subs (2) are met and if the written statement, the subject of the application, has not already been admitted as evidence in the committal, and, due notice has been given by the defendant pursuant to subs (4), the Magistrate may give a direction requiring the attendance at the proceedings of a person who has made the written statement "for the purposes of" Subdivision 7A. This would have included, I would have thought, at least, a written statement served on the defendant as required by s48B (1). The claimant submitted, however, that the Magistrate's jurisdiction, meaning thereby "authority" (see per Deane J in Public Service
Association of South Australia versus Federated Clerks' Union of Australia <case>; [(1991) 173 CLR 132] at 149), to give such directions under s48E (1) extended only to those written statements which the informant proposed to tender in the committal proceedings.

The point of distinction can be illustrated by the evidence in this case.
According to an affidavit by the first opponent's solicitor, in September,
October and November 1997 the first opponent was served with documents described as copies of "Forms 1, lists of witnesses and related correspondence". Part of the correspondence was a letter from the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions to the solicitor dated 1 November 1997 to which was attached a list prepared by the writer of all documents which, according to her records, had been served in the matter. The "Form 1" refers to s48D (1) of the Act and to the charges against the first opponent and attaches a list of statements and evidence. Section 48D provides that a written statement is not admissible as evidence under s48A if the informant has not served within a prescribed period on the defendant a notice in or to the effect of the prescribed form explaining the effect of the Subdivision and the rights of the defendant in relation thereto. At the bottom of the form is a space for the first opponent to require persons whose names appear on the back of the sheet and whose statements were served on him to attend the Court in order to give evidence in the proceedings.

On 12 March 1998 the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions wrote to the first opponent's solicitor stating: "The prosecution presently intends to rely on the following evidence:" 
There followed a list of people's names which presumably was intended to refer to statements by those people. The claimant's point was that the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to direct that any person whose statement was not included in that list attend at the proceedings.

The parties accept, though this must be inferred from the terms of s48E, that if a direction is given and the person attends at the proceedings pursuant to it, not only is that person's statement not admissible as evidence under s48A in the proceedings (subs (5)) but the informant will call that person who will then be available to be cross-examined by the defendant. If the defendant wishes to call evidence from any person it is up to the defendant to produce the witness and lead the witness' evidence. To bring a witness before the court the defendant may rely upon what is apparently an informal practice of the local court issuing "subpoenas" or the more formal practice of a summons; s26 of the Act.

The claimant, in aid of the submission that the Magistrate's discretion under s48E is limited to giving a direction requiring the attendance at the proceedings of persons who have made statements, which the informant proposes to tender, relies upon the established principle that the Magistrate has no power to direct the police prosecutor to call any witness or to submit a statement in lieu of calling such a witness; The Queen versus Harry at 205; The
Queen versus Apostilides <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 563] at 571 and following.

CONCLUSION 
The legislative history supports the claimant's submission. From its inception in 1983 the paper committal scheme was designed to reduce delay by first enabling and then requiring the informant's evidence in the committal proceedings to be by written statement. Originally, the defendant could effectively prevent this by giving notice that witnesses were required to attend at the proceedings. But the failure of the witness to attend meant no more than that the written statement was not admissible in the proceedings.
There was nothing in the legislation to suggest that the legislature intended to allow the defendant to override the informant's discretion by forcing the informant to tender more witnesses than the informant, in the proper exercise of that discretion, decided would be tendered. The right of the informant to decide what witnesses would be tendered in the informant's case was well entrenched. A stay of the proceedings might result if the discretion was not properly exercised and the prosecution's failure to call a witness in the committal proceedings created a prejudice which was not otherwise cured by the
Crown; R versus Basha (1989) 39 A Crim R 337 at 341.

The 1996 amendment was designed further to reduce delay by giving to a
Magistrate the jurisdiction to decide which of the informant's witnesses should attend to give oral evidence. Nowhere in the extrinsic material is there a suggestion that it was also intended to enable the Magistrate to insist upon the attendance to give oral evidence of persons who had made written statements which had been served on the defendant but which the informant did not intend to tender at the committal proceedings.

The words "tendered as evidence" which were included in the previous s48E (1) - wherein the Magistrate's jurisdiction to direct the attendance of persons at the proceedings was found - after the words "who made a written statement" do not appear in the new s48E (1) introduced by the 1996 legislation. But I think the effect of those words is picked up in the new subs (2) and the use of the word "witness" twice in paragraph (a) and once in paragraph (b). In those paragraphs, the question for the Magistrate is whether there are reasons, special or substantial, why in the interests of justice "the witness should attend to give oral evidence" and not merely, as otherwise would be the case, give evidence by written statement alone. In other words the question is not whether the informant should be required to tender the evidence of the maker of a written statement but whether the maker of a written statement, whose statement the informant proposes to tender, should be required to give oral evidence. This interpretation of s48E preserves and is consistent with the informant's right to decide which witnesses the informant will tender in the committal proceedings. The matter for the Magistrate is whether those witnesses should give their evidence by written statement or orally.

For these reasons, in my opinion, the learned Magistrate correctly refused to give directions under s48E in the case of persons whose written statements the informant did not propose to tender and to this extent Hidden J erred in holding otherwise and making any consequential direction under s134.

ORDERS 
The first opponent succeeded before Hidden J on another aspect of his claim to relief under s134. Hidden J remitted the matter to the Magistrate to be dealt with in the light of the principles he had stated and pursuant to s134 directed the Magistrate to hear and determine the application under s48E of the Act for the attendance of witnesses at the committal proceedings according to law. Against this background, I propose the following orders: Leave to appeal granted;
Appeal allowed;
Set aside the direction of Hidden J in so far as it remitted to the second opponent or directed the second opponent to hear and determine the application under s48E otherwise than in accordance with the reasons for judgment of this
Court;
The orders for costs made by Hidden J of the proceedings before him are confirmed;
The first opponent is to pay the costs of the claimant of this application for leave to appeal and of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA. 
STEIN JA: I agree with Sheller JA. Although my mind fluctuated during the course of the hearing, I have concluded that the magistrate was correct in finding that he had no jurisdiction to give a direction under [s 48E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) in the case of persons whose written statements, although served on the opponents, the informant did not propose to tender at the committal hearing. 
Put shortly, my reasons are that it is not suggested that [s
E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48e.html) of the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), or any other provision in the Act, alters or diminishes the prosecutorial discretion as to the calling of witnesses in the informant's case. It is the prosecutor alone who bears the responsibility for deciding whether a person will be called as a witness in the Crown case, The Queen versus Apostilides <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 563] at 575. A magistrate, or a judge for that matter, cannot direct the prosecutor to call a witness, The Queen versus Harry [(1985) 39 SASR ]
at 205 and Apostilides at 575.

Although the prosecutor is obliged to call all witnesses she or he sees as material, whether their evidence strengthens or weakens the prosecution case, there is no obligation to call a witness if the overriding interests of justice require that course to be followed, Apostilides at 576 noting that such occasions are likely to be rare.

It follows, in my view, that unless a prosecutor proposes to tender a person's written statement at the committal proceeding, <case> simply does not arise for consideration. The provision is enlivened when, but only when, the prosecutor tenders the written statement of a witness.
 * * * 
