

Regina versus Kay Matter No Cca 60071/98 [1998] NSWSC 140 (27 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 
REGINA versus ROULA KAY 
CCA 60071/98 April 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Mason P, Smart J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Application for leave to appeal against interlocutory judgment 
FILE NO/S: 60071/98 
DELIVERED: Monday, 27 April 1998 
HEARING DATE: Tuesday, 31 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Roula KAY 
JUDGMENT OF: GLEESON CJ, MASON P, SMART J 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: M Thangaraj * Respondent: J P Kiely & D M Woodburne 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: ----- * Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: STAY OF PROCEEDINGS - LEGAL REPRESENTATION - WHETHER ACCUSED'S CONDUCT UNREASONABLE - CONSERVING FUNDS FOR TRIAL 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Remitted to Flannery DCJ 
NO. OF PAGES: 18 
HEADNOTE 
K applied for a stay of her trial on the ground that she was unable to obtain legal representation. This was refused and she sought leave to appeal.

Held: - The test imposed in Dietrich versus The Queen <case>; [184 CLR 163] is not a rigid but a flexible one. Regard must be had to all the circumstances of the case.
 - The court must examine and assess the acts and omissions of the accused in the circumstances which exist and determine whether they should lead to a refusal of a stay. Generally speaking, this involves the assessment of the reasonableness of the conduct of the accused in all the circumstances.
 - The exercise of the judge's discretion miscarried. It was unreasonable for the accused to be asked to incur further indebtedness when she was markedly insolvent and had no means, even over a period, to discharge her debts. It was unreasonable to request her to execute an unregistered mortgage of the kind envisaged.
 - The judge was hampered by insufficient information and the parties not addressing some important questions. The matter required further consideration.
 - An accused's funds should be conserved for his or her trial and not exhausted on committal proceedings. Solicitors should advise their clients of this and of the risk of a stay being refused.

ORDERS:
Leave to appeal granted. Appeal allowed.
Matter remitted to trial judge to be further dealt with in accordance with the reasons of Smart J.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ and MASON P: We have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Smart J. We agree with the orders proposed by Smart J. 
The central problem in the present appeal is that, at first instance, attention does not appear to have been directed to the significance of what might be described as the personal covenant in the proposed mortgage. In fairness to Flannery DCJ, it should be said that this reflected the way the case was conducted, and the absence of precision in the formulation of the legal aid conditions, which were the principal subject of dispute. It may be that some reconsideration and clarification of those conditions will facilitate a decision on the stay application.

SMART J: Mrs Kay seeks leave to appeal against the decision of Judge
Flannery of February 1998 declining to grant a stay of her trial with four other named persons (including her husband) on a charge of between 1 December 1995 and 24
July 1996 at Sydney conspiring amongst themselves, other nominated persons and other persons (unnamed) to supply not less than the large commercial quantity of a prohibited drug, cocaine. There was a second count in similar terms of conspiracy to supply not less than the commercial quantity of heroin. A stay was sought until she was able to afford and obtain adequate legal representation.

It is alleged that Mrs Kay was actively involved in the management of the day to day operations of the Cosmo Restaurant and that it was used as a shopfront for selling capsules of cocaine and heroin. She was one of the persons to whom others accounted for some of the proceeds of sale.

Before this Court these matters were common ground: 
The offences were serious; 
The trial is likely to last six months and may last as long as nine months. The trial is likely to be complex and difficult with a mass of evidence; 
Mrs Kay needs adequate legal representation for the trial to be a fair one.

Mrs Kay is indigent. The judge had so found and the Crown did not press its submissions to the contrary before this Court.

Matters (a), (b) and (c) were also common ground before the judge although he was sceptical about the trial lasting more than six months. He recognised that it may. There was no estimate of the applicant's costs of a six month trial before the judge and counsel were unable to give this Court any assessment.
This was no doubt due to the differences between full private rates, legal aid rates and negotiated rates. Both parties were agreed that the costs would be substantial.

The Legal Aid Commission ("the Commission") granted Mrs Kay legal aid for her trial but subject to her making a contribution of $20,000 towards the costs of her defence to the Commission. She did not have that sum. Her parents were not prepared to give or lend her that sum. Her husband was on legal aid. In lieu of a cash contribution the Commission was prepared to accept an unregistered mortgage over her one third interest in a modest household property at 30
Burlington Avenue, Earlwood, allied with the lodging of a caveat to protect its equitable interest. That mortgage would require the payment of interest.
The rate was not definitively stated but was said to be about 7 1/2 %. It was not clear whether the rate was fixed or variable but that does not presently matter. The Commission, by a senior officer, stated that it was prepared to agree not to force a sale of the house so long as the circumstances remained substantially unchanged. If Mrs Kay received some money or assets or her other liabilities were much reduced the Commission would require to be paid within a reasonable time. No objection could be taken to a provision to this effect.
However, the mortgage would have to contain a personal covenant by Mrs Kay to implement the Commission's intentions. The Commission was prepared to take a punt on the priority which it would obtain and whether it was ever paid. Mrs
Kay declined to execute a mortgage along the lines of that proposed.

In applying Dietrich v. The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 163] at 183-185, the judge thought that, on the facts which he found, the matter on which he had to focus was the reasonableness of the conduct of the accused in all the circumstances. This led the judge to state the question which had to be decided as "Is her conduct in declining to execute the mortgage required by the Commission unreasonable?" The judge stated that the Commission had been very reasonable about the alternative proposal of a third mortgage (after an existing registered mortgage to Westpac and an unregistered mortgage to secure bail for her husband) but added that whether the Commission had been unreasonable in requiring the contribution he was unable to say. The judge concluded: " ... by not accepting this offer Mrs Kay has not acted reasonably and I take into account the particular position of Mrs Kay." 
Before the judge and before this Court counsel for Mrs Kay stated that her major difficulty was the payment of interest. Counsel provided the judge with some calculation showing that the debt and accrued interest would amount to a substantial sum after a number of years, especially if the interest was compounded.

It is not the role of a trial court or this court to sit, in effect, on appeal from Legal Aid determinations of the Commission.

It is now necessary to review the materials in a little more detail. In about /1992 Mrs Kay was keeping company with her husband. He had been made bankrupt and she bought his one third share in the house for $50,000 as tenant in common. She borrowed that sum from Westpac. Her co-tenants were the parents of her husband whom she married in August 1995. The house was said to be in a poor state. It had no bathroom, no kitchen and no electricity and it was necessary to go elsewhere for a shower. It was not in a fit state to accommodate the young child born in about early 1997.

In about July 1996 Mr Kay was arrested and remained in custody until he was released on bail in about May/June 1997. While he was in custody she lived with her parents at 12 Robert Street, Marrickville. About the time of her husband's arrest or perhaps a little before her arrest in October 1996, orders were allegedly placed for materials for the house such as tiles. Deposits were paid. Over a period her parents paid for items for the Earlwood house or incurred indebtedness for them. The amounts paid or liabilities incurred amounted to about $30,000.

Apparently, most of the renovation and repair work was carried out in about the 3 to 4 months prior to late January 1998 when Mrs Kay moved into the house with her husband and the baby. It was intended that his parents would also live in the house as from the completion of all renovations, they having moved out while the renovations were carried out.

In about August 1997 a valuation was made of the Earlwood property in the sum of $210,000. Apparently that was before the renovations were executed. There is no up to date valuation. While cost does not necessarily equal value, the renovations are alleged to have made the difference between a house which was moderately habitable and one which was in a poor state.

On the present state of the evidence it would not be unreasonable to treat the house as having a value of $240,000. Having regard to the adjustment to be made between co-tenants it would not be unreasonable to proceed upon the basis that Mrs Kay's interest in the house property would be of the order of $100,000 (70,000 being one third of $210,000 and $30,000).

Mrs Kay asserted that she had the following debts: 
Amount due to Westpac under a first registered mortgage $41,000 
Amount due to her parents for renovating and other amounts lent $55,000 to her by them 
Amounts due under joint and several liability for debts incurred $20,000 by her husband 
Amounts due on credit on ANZ Visa Card, Citibank Mastercard, $15,580 
Citibank Visa Card being respectively 6, 269 ,483 ,058 
Outstanding legal fees $13,500 
Loans from named friends $ 5,000 ---------- $162,890 
There was also a contingent liability to the Crown secured by an unregistered mortgage and supported by a caveat for the bail of her husband. Counsel for
Mrs Kay indicated to the Court that the debts were about $150,000.

It is not clear whether any of the Bank Credit Cards conditions create a charge.

Mrs Kay's parents have made the repayments to Westpac and continue to do so.
Of the sum of $55,000 stated to be due to the parents, $13,440 represents payments made by them to Westpac on her account.

Mrs Kay detailed the amounts which she had paid since her husband's arrest.
The total was substantial and included appreciable sums for legal fees for herself and her husband. The committal proceedings took 74 days. The costs of such a hearing would deplete, if not consume, the cash reserves and assets of many people and appeared to do so to Mrs Kay's assets.

The judge treated Mr Kay as still being bankrupt but Mrs Kay's evidence indicates that he was discharged from bankruptcy about one year ago. The position as to her dependence on Social Service payments appears to be that she was dependant upon these until she resumed co-habitation with her husband.
Now she is dependant upon him. He is stated to be earning $350 per week as a car salesmen. She earns about $75 - $80 per week as a telemarketer. She may be entitled to a parenting allowance. Their combined incomes are modest to support two adults and a baby. She also has continuing treatment for her depression from a psychiatrist.

The financial position of Mrs Kay is parlous. She has substantial debts which she cannot service. Her assets are insufficient to satisfy her debts.

Her parents appear to have some assets. They helped her with the legal costs of the committal proceedings but they do not wish to go any further. They are not prepared to make any contributions to her legal costs of the trial. They will be meeting the monthly payments to Westpac. As the debt to Westpac gradually reduces Mrs Kay's debt to her parents will increase and that by significantly more than the Westpac debt with its components of capital and interest will reduce.

During the proceedings before the judge, the Crown was critical of the parents of Mrs Kay being prepared to spend and incur debts of about $30,000 on repairing and renovating the house rather than providing $20,000 to the Legal
Aid Commission.

From counsel's submissions, the applicant appears to be submitting that the judge erred in the following respects: 
He had not applied the correct test. He had to be satisfied before refusing a stay that the accused by her gratuitous and unreasonable conduct had been the author of her own misfortune. He could not be so satisfied.

Either no or insufficient weight had been attached to Mrs Kay not utilising $24,500 which the Commission had set aside to meet the costs of pre- trial applications. She had saved the Commission this sum and this should be taken into account when considering the question of fault. It exceeded the amount of the contribution sought by the Commission.

Having regard to the facts proved it was an unreasonable exercise of the judge's discretion to refuse to grant a stay. Reliance was placed on the extent of the indebtedness of the accused, her assets of much less value, her inability to service her debts with her minimal income, and the requirement that interest be paid on the mortgage principal of $20,000.

There is another point of importance. It is intended that a debt of $20,000 be created. Thus, in respect of a person who is already insolvent and dependent upon the assistance of her parents, it is proposed that she incur further indebtedness when she has no apparent means to repay her debts. She knows that she cannot pay the increased indebtedness out of her own resources. Incurring further indebtedness would affect her unsecured creditors and any secured creditor whose equity is treated as subsequent in priority to that of the
Commission. It is true that her unsecured creditors include her family.

Neither party referred this Court to or relied upon [s (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s268.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/) which provides: "A person who has become a bankrupt and, within 2 years before he became a bankrupt and after the commencement of this Act, has contracted a debt provable in the bankruptcy of any amount of $500 or upwards without having at the time of contracting it any reasonable or probable ground of expectation, after taking into consideration his other liabilities (if any), of being able to pay the debt, is guilty of an offence and is punishable, upon conviction, by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 1 year." 
As it was not argued I do not propose to rely upon that section. It is a reflection of the principle that a person ought not to incur debts which at the time of contracting she had no reasonable or probable grounds of expectation of paying. That probability cannot be measured by the present help that can be obtained from friends or relatives.

In summary, the Crown submitted that: 
The judge's decision was discretionary and interlocutory and that it had not been shown that his decision was not reasonably open; 
The onus is on Mrs Kay to establish that she is unable to obtain or has been denied legal representation. She has failed to do so. The only impediment to her obtaining legal representation is her refusal to pay $20,000 or enter into the unregistered mortgage albeit with a caveat. She is unwilling to incur a liability to pay at some future time the interest which would accrue on any unpaid contribution. She is thus at "fault" and it is her "fault" that she cannot obtain legal representation. She was able to bear some financial responsibility for her legal representation; 
While Mrs Kay might complain that she would in 30 years be liable to pay $200,000 in interest (at a rate of 71/2%) this would be offset by an increase in value in the property; 
The assertion that the applicant had already saved the Commission $24,500 was irrelevant and unsupported by evidence; 
The judge did not apply the wrong test of "fault". Hunt CJ at CL was correct in Kennedy v. The Queen, unreported, CCA , 1 July 1997 when he said: "It was submitted that the test posed by Craig requires the grant of a stay unless there has been `gratuitous and unreasonable conduct such that the accused can fairly be labelled the author of his misfortune'. I do not agree.
That was given as an example of when the accused would not have demonstrated that his inability to obtain legal representation was through no fault of his own. The High Court, by its adoption of what had had been said by Olsson J, was not saying that - the other Dietrich requirements being satisfied - a stay would be granted as long as the accused had not been guilty of such conduct." 
The applicant had acted unreasonably in incurring the debt to her parents for house renovations at a time when she had been charged with two serious criminal offences.

Regard must be had to the interests of the Crown acting on behalf of the community as well as to the interests of the accused.

Although there is no estimate of the applicant's costs of a six month trial before this Court, it can safely be assumed that $20,000 represents a small part of Mrs Kay's costs. If such costs were assessed at $1000 per day for six months (130 days), that would involve $130,000. That may be an unrealistically low figure but it suffices to illustrate the point. A relatively small contribution to a substantial liability is being sought. That is not unreasonable.

The relevant principles are stated in Craig v. South Australia <case>; [184 CLR 163] at -184: "The decision of this Court in Dietrich v. The Queen established that, in a criminal case where an unrepresented accused is facing trial for serious offences, a trial judge has power to make an order staying the proceedings if, in the circumstances of the case, it appears that the accused would otherwise not receive a fair trial. In the course of their joint judgment, Mason CJ and
McHugh J made the following comments as reflecting their approach and that of the other majority Justices: ` ... we identify what the majority considers to be the approach which should be adopted by a trial judge who is faced with an application for an adjournment or a stay by an indigent accused charged with a serious offence who, through no fault on his or her part, is unable to obtain legal representation. In that situation, in the absence of exceptional circumstances, the trial in such a case should be adjourned, postponed or stayed until legal representation is available.' 
The effect of those comments was to indicate circumstances in which a trial judge should grant an adjournment or stay until legal representation was available. The reference in them to an accused's inability to obtain legal representation being `through no fault on his or her part' was not intended to indicate that every instance of misbehaviour, improvidence or other fault on the part of an accused which had contributed to his or her lack of representation must automatically preclude entitlement to a stay. In that regard, we agree with the view expressed by Olsson J in the Full Court that: ` ... what was in contemplation was a test which focused on the reasonableness of the conduct of an accused in all of the circumstances; and excluded situations in which it could fairly be said that the accused, by his gratuitous and unreasonable conduct, had been the author of his own misfortune.' 
A fortiori, it was not intended to suggest that the power to grant a stay on the grounds of inability to obtain legal representation does not exist at all if there has been, as a matter of objective fact, contributing fault on the part of the accused." 
That passage makes plain that the test is not a rigid one. Regard must be had to all the circumstances of the case. These are likely to vary greatly and depend on a multitude of factors. A person may dissipate her assets or handle them improvidently or unreasonably enter into further liabilities. One common problem lies in an accused spending all her assets on committal proceedings (including borrowing from friends or relatives) and having nothing left for the trial. There is the question of how the help of close relatives (usually parents or siblings) should be channelled and how family affairs should be arranged. Questions of looking after or making provision for young children may also intrude. As in the present case, families are often more interested in that than in making contribution to Legal Aid. The variety of the circumstances and the competing claims illustrate what a difficult task the
Commission has in deciding whether Legal Aid should be granted and the conditions to be attached. In formulating the conditions the Commission has to have regard to potential sources of help. Future cases will almost certainly throw up other factors.

The discussion in Craig formulated the test in a flexible way. Reference was made to "no fault on his or her part", "a test which focused on the reasonableness of the conduct of the accused in all of the circumstances" and "gratuitous and unreasonable conduct" leading to the accused "being the author of his own misfortune" In some cases "fault" may not seem an apt description but the accused's conduct may be unreasonable given the interest of the community. An accused may be diffident about asking a wealthy parent for help for reasons of self respect or fear of having his or her inheritance reduced or left to others such as his children. New fact situations can confidently be expected. There is no tension between the various phrases used. Sometimes one may be more appropriate than the other. They all involve an examination and assessment of the acts and omissions of the accused in the circumstances which exist and a determination whether they should lead to a refusal of a stay.
Words such as "fault" and "unreasonable" are a good guide but should not be treated as necessarily extending to all circumstances. Generally speaking, what will be involved is the assessment of the reasonableness of the conduct of the accused in all the circumstances. I would be wary of giving "fault" a meaning which is strained or extended. "Fault" was used in a judgment not a
Statute.

In Karounos v. The Queen <case>; [(1995) 77 A Crim R 479] at King CJ said: "a person cannot be said to be deprived of a fair trial by reason of lack of legal representation if he refuses to take reasonable steps to obtain it. He thereby deprives himself of the opportunity to obtain legal assistance ... An alternative way of looking at the matter, is that he is not really unable to obtain representation because he has unreasonably omitted to use the necessary means to obtain it." 
It was stated that it was necessary for the appellant to prove that he had complied with all the reasonable requirements of the South Australian
Commission, being the instrument through which legal aid was dispensed. At 486
King CJ stated that an accused is required to utilise her own financial resources. The Commission had to ensure that it was not imposed upon and that it had the means to verify and did verify the accused's financial position.

The judge endeavoured to assess the reasonableness of the conduct of the accused in all the circumstances and applied that test to the facts which he found. The accused's non utilisation of the Commission's funds for pre-trial procedures is not of much moment.

The factor which has worried me is that Mrs Kay, although insolvent, is being asked to increase her indebtedness when she has no reasonable expectation of being able to pay her debts including the contribution of $20,000. That factor received no attention in the trial court.

The mortgage required by the Commission arises out of the incurring of the further liability of $20,000. The father of Mrs Kay indicated that $10,000 was given to her for legal expenses before the Local Court as it was believed that if the charges were adequately defended they would be dismissed there. Speedy resolution was important as she was depressed and there were fears about the baby. The money expended by the parents on the house was needed to make it liveable for the baby. Practically, he could require her interest in the house to be transferred to him. However, he was saving it for the baby. Despite Mrs
Kay's requests the father has indicated that there is no more money available from the parents for her defence of the criminal proceedings.

The exercise of the judge's discretion miscarried. It was unreasonable for the accused to be asked to incur further indebtedness when she was markedly insolvent and had no means, even over a period, to discharge her debts. It was unreasonable to request her to execute an unregistered mortgage of the kind envisaged.

The requirement as to the payment of interest is not unreasonable as such. Nor would the requirement of an unregistered mortgage be unreasonable if it did not contain a personal covenant. I would not necessarily regard a suitable provision deferring the payment of the Commission's debt and accelerating its payment if the accused's circumstances changed as unreasonable. Such a clause would need careful drafting. One of the problems in the present case is that the precise terms of the conditions were not stated nor was there any document embodying them.

There is one further matter which should be mentioned in view of the discussion in the trial court. For many years well drawn mortgages have not contained a clause prohibiting conveyances, assignments or mortgages because of the fear that such prohibitions were against public policy as being restraints against alienation. There is a helpful discussion in Hall versus Busst <case>; [(1960) 104 CLR 206] with references to the older cases and articles. Instead, the standard form mortgages used by banks and other institutions usually contain a clause along these lines: "That the Mortgagor will not without the prior written consent of the bank convey assign surrender mortgage charge or otherwise deal with or dispose of the mortgaged premises or any part thereof and any consent by the bank under this clause may be subject to such further terms and conditions as the bank thinks fit." 
A breach of such a clause usually entitles the bank to demand payment of the principal and interest. Much would depend on the bank's attitude. This point may need to be considered when the matter is remitted and further dealt with.

Expensive Committal Proceedings 
This court has noted that defendants are spending substantial sums of money on committal proceedings and have no money left to pay for or contribute to legal representation for their trial. Legal Aid is sought for the trial and the accused wishes to make no contribution or a minimal contribution or is unable to make a useful contribution. This practice cannot be allowed to continue.

Henceforth, solicitors should advise defendants for whom they appear that, if appreciable funds and their borrowing capacities are substantially exhausted on committal proceedings, they may be refused legal aid for their trial and they may not obtain a stay of proceedings. This could result in them being unrepresented at their trial. Defendants should be advised that they should give priority to conserving their funds and being represented at the trial.
The advice should not be perfunctory.

Care should be taken to confine the committal proceedings to the important issues and avoid them becoming protracted. In some cases where the funds available to a defendant are limited it will be reasonable for a defendant to be represented at committal proceedings which are confined. Difficulties can arise in joint committals where one of the defendants has ample funds and wants to explore many avenues. Each case must be assessed on its own merits but there must be reasonable management of a defendant's finances when expenditure on committal and trial proceedings are under consideration and assessment. Some expenditure may seem reasonable at the time it occurred but not in retrospect and as the High Court pointed out in Craig contributing fault on the part of the accused does not necessarily mean that a stay will be refused.

The purpose of these comments is to draw attention to an undesirable practice which has emerged in some cases and to make legal representatives aware of the advice which they should give their clients.

Joint committals and joint trials may impose heavy costs burdens on a defendant. The Crown should be aware of these particularly as they affect the lesser players in a conspiracy. Every effort should be made by the Crown to limit the number of days at committal and trial when an accused should fairly be represented. In some instances if a case against one accused is likely to last 8-10 days and the cases against other accused will take some months it may be better for there to be separate trials. The question of expense needs to be carefully monitored.

Disposal of Application 
I would grant leave to appeal and allow the appeal. Instead of granting a stay
I would remit the matter to the judge to be further dealt with by him in accordance with these reasons. It would be of much assistance to the judge if any proposals were expressed in precise rather than general terms.
 * * * 
