

Young versus Buckley and Boston; Jarvis versus Buckley and Boston; Wood versus Buckley and Boston Matter Nos 30105/97 [1998] NSWSC 1006 (20 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
BRIAN JOHN YOUNG versus STEVE BUCKLEY and KENNETH BOSTON /97 
MAUREEN JARVIS versus STEVE BUCKLEY and KENNETH BOSTON /97 
WALTER HENRY WOOD versus STEVE BUCKLEY and KENNETH BOSTON /97 March 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These three summonses have, by consent, been heard together. Each plaintiff seeks relief in respect of punishment for breach of discipline imposed by the first defendant as a prescribed officer pursuant to <case> of the Teaching Services Act 1980. It is an agreed fact that in all cases the punishment awarded was a caution which is the least available in the scale tabulated in that section. Whilst the particulars of charge differed, the allegation was that the plaintiff was negligent in the discharge of his or her duties which by definition constituted a breach of discipline: see <case>(e). In broad terms, the negligent conduct in each case was omission to respond appropriately to the receipt of information concerning the behaviour of another particular teacher towards pupils at the school where they were on staff. 
The charges followed disclosures emerging in the course of evidence being taken in the extension of inquiry into paedophilia by the Royal Commission into the New South Wales Police Service. Germane to the present summonses is the use of code descriptions to anonymize some witnesses and persons referred to at that Commission. I have been informed by senior counsel for the defendants who is instructed by the Crown Solicitor that any necessary waiver has been obtained and a key to the code was handed up by counsel for the plaintiffs at the commencement of hearing. Any inhibition upon disclosure in these proceedings is taken to have been removed. I am not informed whether any residual embargo exists and if further publication is contemplated, the intending publisher must rely upon his or her own enquiries.

A protocol for the laying of and dealing with charges is set out in clauses 14 and 15 of the Teaching Services (Education Teaching Service) Regulation 1994.
It is mandatory to act in accordance with the precepts of the regulation:
Ward versus Director General of School Education & Anor unreported Supreme
Court, Dunford J 23 February 1998. The evidence shows that the first defendant complied with the regulatory requirements. An argument was presented asserting that the first defendant fell into legal error in not conducting an inquiry as contemplated in parts of clause 15. Clause 15(2) provides the disciplinary authority (in this case the first defendant) may deal with a charge by either directing the member of staff to furnish an explanation in writing within a specified time or by conducting an inquiry. The first defendant elected to take the first course. Clause 15(3) provides that if action is taken in accordance with that option, a finding may be made after considering any relevant reports and replies or explanations from the staff member or, again at that point, an inquiry may be instituted.

Reference was made to the remarks of Aickin J in Heatley versus Tasmanian Racing and Gaming Commission 1977 137 CLR @ 516: "I do not think that fairness requires in this context an oral hearing though in some circumstances the Commission may well find that it cannot resolve inconsistencies between its information and written submissions from the person concerned without such a hearing. It is however for the Commission itself to devise its own procedures in the light of its obligation to act fairly. It should however not act on information the general nature of which is not revealed to the person affected." 
Further reference was made to collected illustrations of occasions when it was said oral hearing should be had: Judicial Review of Administrative Action
Aronson & Dyer LBC Information Services 1996. It was conceded that these were suggestions and not authoritative.

The conclusion sought to be derived was that in these three cases there were circumstances which called for inquiry at the outset. Alternatively it was claimed that when the accumulated material was considered a decision to conduct an inquiry should have been made. Attention was directed to some of the language chosen to express the first defendant's determination, in particular phrases such as, for example in the case of Mr Young: "I accept the Department's advice that the transcript attached at TAB E is from the Wood Royal Commission and that the Department has had access to a
Code List from the Wood Royal Commission enabling the Department's officers to identify their employees as they have submitted.

Desirous of preserving an informal approach to the acceptance of evidence I therefore accept the Department's submission that the transcript they have provided at TAB E is an extract from the Wood Royal Commission and that, as indicated by the Department, Teacher 5 is Mr Doherty and Deputy Principal 2 is
Mr Young." 
This was said to invite inference that there had been some advice or indication adverted to by the decision maker other than what can be found in the disclosed material. For my part, I would not have regarded the expression as representing anything more than not uncommonly encountered bureaucratic language which conveyed no more than that the decision maker was accepting the parenthetical identifications in the departmental report. The report itself stated that evidence was extracted from the Royal Commission and where there was a reference for example, to Deputy Principal 2 the name of Mr Young was inserted in brackets.

However it is not necessary to implement any interpretation that I might consider appropriate. It is clear that the discretion to choose between the alternative procedures contemplated by clause 15(2) and clause 15(3) lay with the first defendant and that discretion cannot be impugned in these proceedings. In Matkevich versus New South Wales Technical and Further Education
Commission (No 3), unreported CA 2 February 1996 Powell JA observed: 
It cannot, in my view, be the law that, where in a case such as this, rules which have legal effect permit disciplinary charges to be dealt with in one or other of two defined ways at the discretion of the relevant officer, the rules of procedural fairness require that the relevant officer exercise this discretion in one rather than the other of those ways." 
And Cole JA observed: "Once it is accepted that a discretion to hold an inquiry exists as a matter of law, and that there was no procedural unfairness in relation to the exercise of that discretion, it cannot be said that the factual circumstances are such as to remove the right to exercise a discretion in the manner which occurred. So to hold would be to rewrite the regulation." 
I am unable to detect any procedural unfairness attaching to the election made by the first defendant.

Before passing to some aspects of the individual cases I should note that some emphasis was placed by counsel upon the appearance of the plural words in clause 15(3)(a). I do not consider that the provision as drafted implies either an obligation on the decision maker to seek multiplicity or to await multiple documents from the member of staff.

BRIAN JOHN YOUNG 
The particulars of charge against the plaintiff Mr Young were as follows: "Whilst employed as an officer of the Education Teaching Service in the
Department of School Education, at the Broadmeadow School, on being told in or about 1994, by Terence Doherty, a teacher at that school, that he was concerned about the improper relationships of a male teacher at that school, namely Peter Boys, with female students of that school, you failed to take any action to cause an investigation to be made in regard to that allegation.: 
By letter dated 1 September 1997 a copy of the departmental report was furnished to the plaintiff through his solicitor and a direction to furnish an explanation within fourteen days pursuant to clause 15(2)(a) was given. The response received, after some exchange of correspondence not presently relevant, was a six page document from the solicitors containing a concluding submission that the charge ought to be found not proven. It is not necessary to recapitulate the whole of the content. A prominent feature of the submission canvassed in these proceedings was a claim that there was no evidence to support the assertions that the transcript exhibited to the report was indeed evidence given to the Royal Commission nor was there evidence of the identity of the persons referred to as "Teacher 5", "Deputy Principal 1" and "Deputy Principal 2".

It is noted that the submission challenges the evidential basis of the assertions of fact but does not challenge the accuracy of those assertions. In this regard I admitted evidence over objection that the identifications drawn from the code were correct. I held that such information was relevant to potential discretionary withholding of relief if grounds relating to these issues were otherwise made out. I would not exercise discretion in favour of the plaintiffs but it is not necessary to reach that point. The first defendant was not bound by the laws of evidence applicable in courts of law.
In his administrative process he was entitled to rely upon the statements in the report. It would have hardly surprising if he did so in the absence of any suggestion from any quarter that the information was or might be wrong.

I would refuse the relief sought in paragraphs 2, 3,4 and 4(a) of the Amended
Summons.

A consideration of the relief sought in paragraphs 1 and 5 of the Amended
Summons involves reference to the evidence given by Mr Doherty. The annexure to the departmental report which was, as I have observed, forwarded to the plaintiff through his solicitors and appears to be the entirety of that witness' testimony. Only some of this related to Mr Young. It should be borne in mind that the Royal Commission was not created to exercise judicial power and evidence could be taken as the Royal Commissioner saw fit. That evidence was in a form which would be inadmissible in a Court of Law is not to the point either then or now.

What Mr Doherty had to say about his contact with the plaintiff emerged in this fashion. He said that he had reported his concerns to superior officers being Deputy Principal 1 (Mr Thomas), Deputy Principal 2 (the plaintiff Mr
Young) and a member of staff whose name he then wrote down (the plaintiff Ms
Jarvis). He went on to testify that he had made some observations himself of overfamiliarity between Mr Boys (Teacher 9) and pupils and that ultimately he had this conversation with Mr Thomas: "Q. Could you use the codename. I'm terribly sorry to interrupt you? 
A. Yes. I said to deputy principal 1, `What are you going to do about the paedophile who is running that particular department?' He said, `You best be careful of that you say. You can be prosecuted for libel. You can't just listen to rumour' - and I said, `I think I have more than rumour'. I said - I remember the expression I used. I said, `If you see smoke on the horizon you can jump to the conclusion that there is a fire, even though you don't see it.' He then said to me, `Do you have any concrete evidence?' I said, `I do not have photographs, I'll admit to that', but I said, `I think this should be investigated', and he said to me, `You can't make allegations like that about someone unless you have proof." 
The evidence he gave of conversation with the plaintiff was in a form incorporating the above: "Q. And could you tell us, please, then, without using any names, once again what was said to deputy principal 2? 
A. It was a conversation very similar to that which I had with deputy principal 1 that what was going to be done about teacher number 9 and his conduct and behaviour, and there was no comment forthcoming.

Q. Well, was deputy principal number 2 silent? 
A. Yes, he made no positive comment at all.

Q. You were in his office obviously wanting to express your concerns? 
A. That's correct.

Q. When you had no response, what did you say, if anything? 
A. I rightly or wrongly came to the conclusion that I was not telling anyone any new news, that his lack of response indicated that you were only stating something that's widely known.

Q. Did he inform you of any action that might or might not be taken? 
A. That was no - I got no response." 
It was submitted that the essentially vague nature of these allegations provoked a need for inquiry as to exactly what had been said and this situation was compounded by the absence of any specific allegation about Mr
Boys and any identified student. The submission overlooks the gravamen of the charge which was the failure to take any action to cause an investigation to be made. In crude terms, the first defendant was called upon to determine whether the plaintiff was negligent in doing nothing about causing an investigation of what had been conveyed to him by Mr Doherty and the detail of what Mr Doherty said to him was only relevant as providing a basis upon which inaction could be adjudicated as negligent. The quality of Mr Doherty's testimony otherwise is not a matter for examination in these proceedings.

Paragraph 1 of the Amended Summons recites the denial of the charge by the plaintiff pursuant to clause 14(5) of the regulations on the basis, I infer, that the submission by the solicitors did not constitute an explanation or reply from the member of staff in response to the notice previously given.
Assuming that a credit issue between the plaintiff and Mr Doherty has thereby been raised, it was for the decision maker to decide in what manner as prescribed by regulation he would proceed and any external view that resolution of a credit issue might preferably be done by inquiry is not of consequence.

I would also refuse the orders sought in paragraphs 1 and 5 of the summons.

MAUREEN JARVIS 
The case argued on behalf of the plaintiff Ms Jarvis was to all intents and purposes identical to that presented on behalf of Mr Young. She was referred to in the evidence of Mr Doherty as a senior member of staff in an executive position and her name was written down and the piece of paper became confidential exhibit 5819 at the Royal Commission. His testimony included: "Q. Could you just remind us, you've told us that you raised it with the person whose name is on the recent exhibit, the last exhibit, exhibit 5819, confidential.

A. Yes.

Q. When was that? 
A. The first week she arrived in the school - 
Q. And - 
A. -- on appointment.

Q. Yes. Was she in a superior position to yourself? 
A. Certainly.

Q. And did you tell her of your concerns? 
A. I did.

Q. And was that in which year? 
A. I think it was three years ago.

Q. And did you in fact ask her to do anything? 
A. Yes.

Q. What did you ask her to do? 
A. It was the first week that she was in the school. I made an appointment to see her, went to her office. I introduced myself as I had never met her formally before, only at a general meeting, and I explained to her my reason for being there was to inform her that I had concerns regarding teacher number
I described him in similar terms as I did to deputy number 1 and I said something should be done about it and I said `I'm informing you because it's information I feel you should have since you are in - you are the direct superior in that faculty area and you will not be told any of these informations by anyone else.' 
Q. I see.

A. I specifically made that appointment to inform her of this information.

Q. When you said, `You will not be told by anyone else', had you seen any conduct by deputy principal 1 or deputy principal 2 that led you to believe that the person on exhibit 5819C wouldn't be told by them of your concerns? 
A. I formed the impression that the best way of handling this from the hierarchy's point of view was non-discussion, because I got a warning from deputy 1, no response from deputy 2; I was aware that other executive staff in the school would have been just as prescient and observant as I and other colleagues were and would have observed the same sorts of things, but it seemed to me there was a - I don't know how to express it - a culture that did not encourage reportage, put it that way.

Q. You reported your suspicions and you felt from what you've told us, is this right, that they were based on reasonable grounds.

A. I do.

Q. When you reported it to the person on 5819C - 
A. Yes.

Q. -- did you, in fact, understand from her whether she was going to do anything at all in respect of your concerns? 
A. It's difficult to comprehend this, but I got no response; even though I made the appointment to tell her that specific thing, she made no response in regard to that at all. Just accepted the information and I left it, but there was no response." 
It was submitted that the evidence was too vague to allow formation of an adequate basis for the first defendant's determination. The particulars of the charge are pertinent: "Whilst employed as an officer of the Education Teaching Service in the
Department of School Education, in the period 1992-May 1997, you, at the
Broadmeadow School, on being told in 1992 by Terence Doherty, a teacher at that school, that he was concerned about the improper relationships of a male teacher, namely Peter Boys, with some female students of the same school, failed to take any action to cause an investigation to be made in regard to that allegation against Peter Boys." 
The gravamen of the charge was inaction after being made aware of the concerns about the improper relationships, not that the inaction followed demonstration by Mr Doherty of the existence of improper relationships. As the transcript shows, Mr Doherty was not claiming to possess evidence but he was drawing concern to the attention of his superior.

I am unpersuaded that the plaintiff has made out a case for the relief sought in the Amended Summons.

MR YOUNG AND MS JARVIS 
On behalf of both Mr Young and Ms Jarvis it was claimed that they had in the circumstances not been heard in argument on the merits of proof of the charges. As already indicated, in response to the direction under clause (2)(a) to furnish an explanation in writing within fourteen days, each of these plaintiffs chose to have their solicitor make submissions as to why the respective charges should have been dismissed. Thus, it was put, the first defendant had rushed to determination without himself responding to the solicitor's submissions. He was not required so to do. The determination was made two weeks after the date on the submissions which themselves were provided at the expiry of the period specified in the direction under clause (2)(a). I find nothing in those circumstances provoking the exercise of jurisdiction by the Court.

WALTER HENRY WOOD 
The charge concerning Mr Wood did not derive from the evidence of Mr Doherty to the Royal Commission. The particulars of the charge against him were: "Whilst employed as an officer of the Education Teaching Service in the
Department of School Education, at the Broadmeadow School, in or about 1986, having been told by, and given a typed statement by Leanne Scott, a teacher at the Broadmeadow School, of concerns that she had about the improper conduct of a male teacher at the school school, namely Peter Boys, with female students at that school, you failed to cause an investigation to be made with respect to that allegation." 
Although, in a vein similar to the charges against Mr Young and Ms Jarvis, the charge alleged failure to cause investigation there were what were described by counsel as three foundations upon which this failure was based.

First, in an interview on 9 December 1996 Ms Leanne Scott had stated that to an interviewer: "I went to Wal Wood with a typed statement of incidents; unprofessional behaviour of PB (Peter Boys); he told me it was slander because much of it was hard to prove; I took it back. I don't have it now." 
Second, Ms Scott gave evidence at the Royal Commission. What appears to be the entirety of her testimony was annexed to the departmental report which was sent to the plaintiff's solicitors on 1 September 1997. Mr Wood does not raise issues about the transcript or the identity code. Teacher 8 is Mr Wood himself and Teacher 9 is Mr Boys. Part of Ms Scott's evidence was: "Q ....Did you at some stage raise some concerns about teacher 9 with the superior officer at school 2? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. Could you look at the list, please, and tell us who that superior officer was using the codename? 
A. Teacher 8, but it was very blandly put. It was a specific complaint.

Q. And was it in some form of writing? 
A. Yes, it was.

Q. Who did the writing? 
A. I did.

Q. And when you say it was `bland', to the best of your recollection, firstly, when did you write it? 
A. I think it was probably '86, but the basis of what I was complaining about were other things and I just put in a little bit at the end in anger.

Q. In anger? 
A. Yes, probably.

Q. And what did that anger relate to? 
A. Well, it was probably - it was definitely based on gossip and I'd had concerns that I'd seen, but I had no definite proof or anything like that.

Q. Did you have suspicions? 
A. Not really, because I'd only been there for a year and I hadn't heard much and I - I guess I didn't really have suspicions because I couldn't have though that it would happen.

Q. Yes. So this document that you have, and you go along to teacher 8, you produce a document with some matters not relating to the type of conduct about which you've heard today; is that correct? 
A. That's right.

Q. But with a little bit at the end, you say; did that relate to the type of conduct of a relationship or sexual matter? 
A. Not sexual. I just said unprofessional and perhaps friendly.

Q. Friendly? 
A. Mmm, overfriendly with - something that I wouldn't do, that I would have thought that most teachers wouldn't do. I just thought it was perhaps a little bit too far.

Q. Right. And when you say `too far', do you mean by `too far' too close or what is it? 
A. Yes, too close.

Q. And was that something that you wrote in the document? 
A. No, I think I just wrote that I thought teacher 9 was being overfamiliar and friendly with students.

Q. Did you observe that? 
A. Yes, I did.

Q. And so what you wrote was something that you had observed? 
A. Yes, I'd observed overfriendliness.

Q. Yes, I see. So that when you said a little earlier that you wrote it in anger, whatever the emotion, was what you wrote true or not? 
A. Well, it was based on gossip, but I had seen that I thought he was overfriendly, but there was gossip of a higher level of overfriendliness which
I sort of dismissed, because I had only seen overfriendliness. I hadn't seen anything else.

Q. Yes. Did that overfriendliness concern you? 
A. It did in a way.

Q. To the point that you put it in a document? 
A. Yes." 
And later: "Q. Thank you. When you went to teacher 8 the following year, with your document, they were concerns that you had and you've told us from your own observations and you categorized one of the areas as overfamiliarity; correct? 
A. Mmm.

Q. Can you tell us, please, what teacher 8 said to you in respect of what you should do or he should do, if anything? 
A. Well, he said that what I had written was libellous and that - did I have proof, and I said, `No, it was just gossip.' There were other concerns which he dealt with, there were concerns about our work space and the environment which we dealt with.

Q. Certainly? 
A. But I took the complaint back and I ripped it up and put it away." 
The third matter is part of a recorded response by the principal (Mr
Cotterill) that "the only thing on file about Peter Boys is the 1993 touch football thing." 
In a response to the direction under clause 15(2)(a) Mr Wood's solicitors sent a typed submission which included the following: "28. Mr Wood instructs that in or about 1986 Ms Scott did speak to him, and showed him (rather than gave him) a written list (though he is unsure whether it was typed) of her concerns about Peter Boys. Mr Wood denies, however, that the concerns conveyed to him by Ms Scott, verbally or in writing, included that Mr Boys was engaging in improper conduct with female students, or that anything she conveyed to him in 1986 was of a nature which would give rise to a duty to cause an investigation to be made.
We are instructed that in fact what Ms Scott `disclosed' to Mr Wood in were her complaints concerning Mr Boys' disregard to her professional position in allowing students to use the staffroom which she and Mr Boys shared and treating her, in the presence of students, as though she were of lesser status than them. We are instructed that specific complaints included that student Carol Watson frequented the staffroom and spread her belongings on Mr Scott's desk, sat in her chair and helped herself to Ms Scott's coffee, and that Mr Boys told students to ignore Ms Scott. We are instructed that Ms
Scott had referred towards the end of her written list of complaints to Mr
Boys being `overfriendly' or `overfamiliar' with students, that Mr Wood questioned her as to what she meant by that and that she responded by referring to her earlier complaints about students using the staffroom etc., and Mr Boys treating students as equals, and added that she had heard `gossip' or `rumours'. Mr Wood believes that he questioned Ms Scott about that, although he cannot recall what he asked or how she replied. However, we are instructed that Ms Scott definitely did not provide any details as to what she had heard. Mr Wood further instructs that he does not recall telling Ms Scott that what she had written was `slander' or `hard to prove' but that he did advise her not to leave the written list of complaints around the staffroom where Mr Boys, or students, might see it, as that was likely to aggravate the conflict between her and Mr Boys. We are instructed that none of the complaints presented by Ms Scott, either verbally or in writing, concerned any allegation that Mr Boys was engaging in any kind of sexual misconduct.
Mr Wood instructs that he did in fact act on the concerns raised to him in 1986 by Ms Scott regarding Mr Boys' conduct toward her. He instructs that he felt sympathetic with Ms Scott and spoke to Mr Boys shortly afterward and also on subsequent occasions when he observed Mr Boys being inconsiderate of
Ms Scott. He also instructs that, some time later, he informed the Principal of the concerns that Ms Scott had raised with him. We would submit that Mr
Wood took appropriate action in respect of the complaints he received from Ms
Scott." 
Paragraph 1 of the Amended Summons relates to a submission that the factual issues could only be resolved by inquiry and that the election not to hold one denied the plaintiff natural justice. I refer again to the citations from the judgments in Matevich and my remark that jurisdiction of this Court is not enlivened by preference and it was the decisionmaker who was entitled to determine within the ambit of the regulation which procedure he adopted. The first defendant did not act or purport to act outside the regulated method.
There was simply no obligation arising from the regulations or from the circumstances to conduct an inquiry (whether pursuant to clause 15(2)(b) or (3)(b)) and the relief sought in paragraphs 1 and 1A of the Summons must be refused.

Paragraph 6 of the Amended Summons raises what purports to be a "no evidence" point. On any view, it must be acknowledged that the material emanating from
Ms Scott was hazy. Attention was drawn to the expressions in the first defendant's determination articulating "Scott's very serious allegations about
Mr Boys' improper conduct with female students" and his finding that even if his concerns were raised by the plaintiff with the principal he had not "adequately or comprehensively conveyed the serious nature of " them.

The submissions fail to distinguish between a situation where there is truly no evidence and a situation where a decision is wrong. I am not vested with appellate jurisdiction entitling intervention where the latter is shown to be the case.

The final matter argued on behalf of Mr Wood related to the relief sought in paragraph 7 of the Amended Summons. The asserted error in law was the failure of the decisionmaker to take into account that all music teachers including Mr
Boys, enjoyed close relationships with the students. It is true that no reference was made to this issue in the written determination. That document was not a judgment and there are restraints upon making analysis in proceedings such as these in order to detect error. In Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs versus Wu Shan Liang 1996 185 CLR @ 272 the following appeared in the joint judgment: "...It was said that a court should not be `concerned with looseness in the language ... nor with unhappy phrasing' of the reasons of an administrative decision-maker Pozzolanic (1993) 43 FCR 280 at 287. The Court continued: `The reasons for the decision under review are not to be construed minutely and finely with an eye keenly attuned to the perception of error.' 
These propositions are well settled. They recognize the reality that the reasons of an administrative decision-maker are meant to inform and not to be scrutinized upon over-zealous judicial review by seeking to discern whether some inadequacy may be gleaned from the way in which the reasons are expressed. McAuliffe versus Secretary, Department of Social Security [(1992) 28
ALD 609](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281992%29%2028%20ALD%20609 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 616. In the present context, any court reviewing a decision upon refugee status must beware of turning a review of the reasons of the decision-maker upon proper principles into a reconsideration of the merits of the decision.
This has been made clear many times in this Court. For example, it was said by
Brennan J in Attorney General versus Quin <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 1] at 35-36: `The duty and jurisdiction of the court to review administrative action do not go beyond the declaration and enforcing of the law which determines the limits and governs the exercise of the repository's power. If, in so doing, the court avoids administrative injustice or error, so be it; but the court has no jurisdiction simply to cure administrative injustice or error. The merits of administrative action, to the extent that they can be distinguished from legality, are for the repository of the relevant power and, subject to political control, for the repository alone'." 
The administrative decisionmaker is not bound to make reference to every matter raised by or on behalf of a respondent. There is authority that even a judicial decision in respect of which considerable strictures apply may not necessarily be impugned because the expressed reasons are not absolutely inclusive of every matter canvassed: Watt versus Thomas 1947 AC @ 492. There is no general obligation to give reasons for administrative decision but those given in these cases adequately fulfilled any special requirement derived from the need to render natural justice: See generally Public Service Board of NSW v Osmond [1985 159 CLR 656.] 
It follows from the foregoing that none of the plaintiffs has established entitlement to any of the relief sought.

Each summons is dismissed. In each case the plaintiff is ordered to pay the defendants' costs. Relative to the costs order it is noted that the defendants availed themselves of the same representation and that the three matters were the subject of a single hearing.
 * * * 
