

Director General Department of Community Services versus Australian
Broadcasting Corporation and Ors [1996] NSWSC 174 (4 June 1996) 
Director General Dept of Community Services versus Australian Broadcasting
Corporation & Ors /96 
Tuesday, 4 June 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings relate to two children, a girl (A) aged 8 and a boy (B) aged 9. Each has been declared by the Children's Court to be a ward under the [Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/) (the Care Act) pursuant to a care application under s.72 of that Act. It follows that the Minister for Community Services is their guardian (Care Act s.90).

The first defendant (the ABC) is a statutory corporation which provides public television services. The second defendant (Mr O'Brien) is a journalist who presents a regular current affairs television program for the ABC called The :30 Report. The third defendant (Ms White) is a television journalist associated with The 7:30 Report.

At some time before 24 May 1996 A and B, who had been residing in accommodation provided for wards in premises under the control of the
Department of Community Services (the premises) left those premises without permission and could not be found. On 24 May 1996 information was received by
Ms White (and through her by Mr O'Brien) from a person who had previously been in contact with Ms White in connection with matters relating to State wards, to the effect that A and B wanted to talk to them about events during their period of residence at the premises. It was apparent that this involved allegations of misconduct towards them by officers of the Department. It is unnecessary for present purposes to detail the course of events over the next two days, which involved further communications with the intermediary and attempts by Mr O'Brien to resolve the legal and ethical problems inherent in the situation. The upshot was that it was arranged through the intermediary, that Mr O'Brien and Ms White would conduct an interview with A and B on the understanding that at the conclusion of the interview the Department would be advised of the location of the children and that they would voluntarily return to the care of the Department.

The interview, which was recorded on video tape, took place on 26 May 1996 at a location to which the intermediary escorted Mr O'Brien, Ms White and their camera crew, but which had not previously been disclosed to them. The participants in the interview were Mr O'Brien, A, B, a former foster mother of
A, and B's mother. During the course of the video-taped interview allegations of serious misconduct by officers of the Department involving sexual abuse of
A and physical abuse of B were made by the respective children.

By the present application the Director General of the Department seeks an interlocutory order restraining the defendants from "publishing, broadcasting, disseminating or copying" video tapes and other records of, and other material obtained at, the interview on 26 May 1996.

There is no challenge to the jurisdiction of the Court to make an order of this kind, but it as well to state the nature of that jurisdiction. It is the inherent jurisdiction of the Court derived historically from the prerogative of the Crown as protector of those unable to protect themselves, of which children who are minors are the most significant class. In the exercise of that jurisdiction the Court has power to make orders for the protection of a child from any interference with his or her welfare, direct or indirect.
Although it was once common to precede such orders by an order formally declaring the child to be a ward of Court (which is a different status to that of a ward under the Care Act), such a declaration is not a precondition of the making of other orders in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction (K v
Minister for Youth & Community Services [1982 1 NSWLR 311).] The powers of the Court extend, for example, to the making of orders designed to protect a child from publicity which is likely to be harmful to his or her welfare (see
In re X [1975 Fam 47]; In re X [1984 1 WLR 1422]; P versus P [1985 2
NSWLR 401).](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1985%202%20NSWLR%20401 "View LawCiteRecord" )

The inherent jurisdiction of the Court is not affected, so far as concerns children who are wards under the Care Act, by the [Family Law Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/) (see [s.60E(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s60e.html) and (5) of that Act and [s.3(2)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fla1975114/s3.html) of the Commonwealth Powers (Family Law - Children) Act 1986), and is not displaced by the Care Act itself in any respect relevant to the present proceedings (see K versus Minister for Youth & Community Services supra).

As I understand the position, no final decision has been made by the defendants to broadcast any part of the interview. It is the intention of the defendants in any event, in any broadcast to conceal the identity of the children and the two adults who also participated in the interview by using a process of `pixellation' to conceal their faces, and if it were determined to be necessary also by providing some distortion to their voices.

In considering the matter generally it is necessary to recognise that there are at least two legitimate and highly significant interests involved. One is the relatively narrow interest involving the welfare of the particular two children. Another is the broader public interest in the administration of the
Department and the conduct of its officers in relation to wards under the guardianship of the Minister. It seems to me that both those interests converge in an important respect namely that both would be best served by a thorough, skilled and objective investigation of the allegations made by the children. Those allegations may be entirely true, they may be exaggerated or distorted, some may be wholly or partly true and others wholly or partly false, or they may be entirely false. It is of great importance that every reasonable step be taken to ascertain the truth and that nothing be done to inhibit that process. The investigation of such allegations is a delicate task which requires high professional skills as well as a high degree of detachment. Because it is so dependent on information and evidence of a sensitive and detailed kind from the complainants, and no doubt from other young children also, and it is so easy for such information and evidence to become contaminated and unreliable, it is essential to avoid, to the greatest extent reasonably possible, every potential contaminating influence.

This application has been heard at very short notice and the evidence is less comprehensive than one would expect on a final hearing. However, on the evidence presently before the Court I have reached the conclusion that the broadcasting of any substantial part of the interview (even with the identities of the participants disguised), at least for the time being, would carry an appreciable risk of significant interference with the proper investigation of the allegations in question and with the conduct of any consequential legal proceedings. The interview, understandably, departed in many respects from what would be required for the purpose of eliciting information from the children for forensic purposes in the course of a proper investigation of the subject matter of the allegations, both in the form and nature of the questions put and in the general environment which included the presence of the two adults as well as both children together. The repetition on television of the contents of the interview would be likely to have a highly detrimental effect on the reliability of any information or evidence later given in the course of any investigation or proceedings. If the allegations or some of them are substantially true, it would be contrary to the interests of the children for the information or evidence subsequently elicited from them (and others who may watch the broadcast) to be rendered less acceptable. If the allegations or some of them are substantially untrue, there is evidence which I accept to the effect that their public ventilation on television may have long term adverse psychological effects on the children themselves.

My ultimate conclusion is that the public broadcasting by the defendants, or indeed by anyone else, of any substantial part of the interview of 26 May 1996 or any material then obtained, would, at least until the relevant allegations have been properly investigated and any forensic consequences completed, pose a real risk of substantial harm to the children, which the Court should act to prevent. The evidence indicates that such an investigation is in process.

I propose to grant an appropriate interlocutory injunction to operate until further order.

I contemplate that the proceedings will be brought back before the Court for a final hearing in several months. I propose giving directions to that end, including a direction that at some time prior to that hearing the plaintiff supply to the Court a written report as to (a) the course of investigation of the allegations of sexual and physical abuse made by A and B respectively, and the result of the investigations.

This application was heard in the absence of the public and on 29 May 1996 an order was made that until further order there be no disclosure without the leave of the Court of evidence adduced in the application or information derived from such evidence. That order remains in force.

On 30 May 1996 a direction was given that there be no restriction on the publication of the fact and terms of any order made in the course of the hearing, provided that the identity of any of the children is not disclosed.
That direction also remains in force.

This judgment is given in open Court and there is no restriction on its publication. I do however make the following further order: I order that there be no publication of any matter likely to lead to the identification of either of the children the subject of these proceedings.
 * * * 
