

Nabatu Pty Ltd versus Crawley t/as Aubrey F Crawley and Co Matter No 13164/97 [1997] NSWSC 617 (5 December 1997) 
Nabatu Pty Limited versus Crawley t/as Aubrey F Crawley & Co /97 December 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Nabatu Pty Limited versus Crawley t/as Aubrey F Crawley & Co 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The defendant is a solicitor. He had acted for the plaintiff prior to the retention of its present solicitors (Ellitt & Law). He claims to have performed legal services for the plaintiff in 1987. In November 1995, the defendant rendered a Bill of Costs in respect of the said legal services. He claims a lien over certain documents. 
The plaintiff contends that any claim for legal costs has been extinguished by reason of the expiration of the relevant limitation period and therefore disputes the claimed lien.

The plaintiff first approached the Legal Service Commission. It sought, inter alia, an exercise of the statutory power requiring that the lien be waived pursuant to [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/s152.html) of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act). It was unsuccessful in that endeavour. It then applied to the Court to have the Bill of Costs referred to a Costs Assessor for an assessment of those costs (proceedings No. 90863/97).

One may question the wisdom of taking the latter course, when the apparent purpose of the exercise was to obtain a determination as to the validity of the lien claimed by the defendant.

In any event, the matter was referred to a Costs Assessor (Mr McNally). The
Costs Assessor then proceeded with the assessment process.

The matter of the expiry of the limitation period was agitated before the
Costs Assessor. The Costs Assessor did not accept the plaintiff's contention concerning the limitation period.

The Costs Assessor issued a Certificate As To Determination Of Costs on 2
October 1997. It assessed the costs in the sum of $1,470.39. It seems that this assessment incorrectly included a sum of $100, being the fee paid for the application. The Costs Assessor purported to apply the slip rule and issued an
Amended Certificate As to Determination Of Costs. It was issued on 10 October in the sum of $1,270.39.

The Court has been informed that the Certificate As To Determination Of Costs issued on 2 October 1997 has been filed in the Local Court. Pursuant to section 208JA, it is to be taken to be a judgment of that Court for the amount of unpaid costs. The Court was further informed that the defendant is in the process of filing the Certificate As To Determination Of Costs issued on 10
October 1997.

The plaintiff is unhappy with the determination. The Act provides two avenues of challenging the decision of a Costs Assessor. These are to be found in sections 208L and 208M.

The plaintiff has sought to exercise the avenue provided by section 208L. It enables the bringing of an appeal "as to a matter of law arising in the proceedings to determine the application" "in accordance with the rules of the
Supreme Court". The relief that may be granted is referred to in (a) and (b) of subsection (2).

On 7 November 1997, the plaintiff purported to bring the appeal by the filing of a Summons. The Summons claimed the following:- "1. A declaration that Costs Assessor Peter J McNally erred at law in his determination made on 10 October 1997 (Costs Assessment File No. C/L90863 of ) for the Plaintiff to pay to the defendant $1,270.39 in respect of the defendant's Memorandum of Costs and Disbursements dated 20 November 1995 for work completed on 24 December 1987.
A Declaration that the Determination should be set aside as the claim for costs and disbursements is statute barred by virtue of Section 14 of the
Statute of [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) as the claim for costs was made more than six years after the work was completed, based on a number of English decisions, including Coburn versus Colledge [(1897) 1
QB 702.]
An Order that pursuant to [Section
N](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208n.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) the
Court suspend the operation of the Determination of the Costs Assessor of 10
October 1997 until this Summons is determined.
An Order for costs of this Summons and the Application for Assessment of the defendant's costs." 
The Court has been informed that the purported appeal seeks to raise one matter only (viz. that there was an error of law in relation to the limitation matter).

On 20 November 1997, the defendant filed a Notice of Motion. The application sought summary disposition of the proceedings (inter alia, pursuant to Part 13 rule 5). The application is supported by an affidavit sworn by Mr Tsathas.

The bringing of this application excited certain correspondence between the parties. The relevant material may be found in Exhibit A. There had been some earlier agitation of the question of whether or not the plaintiff had sought the appropriate relief. Also, the plaintiff had in contemplation the bringing of its own Notice of Motion. Ultimately, it was decided that the bringing of such an application was not necessary.

The defendant's application came on for hearing on 3 December 1997. Although it was given an estimate of about 30 minutes, the actual hearing time consumed about 1 hours.

This is yet another of those many cases in which this Court is asked to deal with an appeal from a Costs Assessor involving a very modest sum. This is one of the smallest that has come before the Court. It is in the order of $1,200.
I have recently had to deal with an appeal involving a similar sum (Bowen & Ors t/as Duffield & Duffield Solicitors versus Campbell & Anor, 2
December 1997). In the judgment delivered in that matter, I made certain observations concerning the matter of this Court being the appropriate forum for the determination of such appeals. This is a further instance demonstrating the need for urgent legislative action.

I should observe that the Court has not yet reached the stage of dealing with the appeal itself. At this time, it is merely considering an interlocutory application in the proceedings. The costs involved in this application have already well outstripped the amount which is the subject of the purported appeal.

As is often the case in disputes of this nature, there is considerable ill will. There is vigorous disputation between legal representatives. The costs generated by the exercise seem to be a matter of irrelevance.

The plaintiff has chosen to resist the application. It has not applied to the
Court for leave to amend the Summons.

The application is founded on a number of grounds. I shall refer to certain matters. It is said that the relief claimed in the Summons is inappropriate and cannot be granted by the Court in this case. It is said that there has been a failure to comply with the relevant rules of the Supreme Court (Part
A rules 4 and 5). Further submissions were advanced which relate to the function which the Costs Assessor is required to perform under the Act (viz.
it was said that, inter alia, he was not empowered to determine legal questions as part of the assessment process). For present purposes, it is unnecessary to proceed to a consideration of those matters and, in any event, they were not fully argued. I should add that, for the purposes of this application, the defendant did not argue the question of the merits of the alleged error of law. Accordingly, that question has not been considered by the Court.

The relief claimed in the Summons is certainly not framed in terms of the institution of an appeal that is brought pursuant to section 208L. There is a lack of technical compliance with the relevant rules.

As matters presently stand, the defendant is entitled to relief. The plaintiff has not sought leave to amend. It falls to be considered whether the plaintiff should be given the opportunity to make an application for leave, if it be advised to do so.

There are a number of relevant considerations. I shall briefly refer to some of them.

There are significant matters, such as the amount involved (which is very modest), the disproportionate quantum of costs that may be generated and the pressure of the business of this Court. This Court is lacking in the resources to indulge the hearing time that this minor dispute (which is minuscule even in the context of the jurisdiction of the Local Court) can be expected to consume if it runs the full gamut. Also, regard is to be had to the technical basis upon which an entitlement to relief has been demonstrated. A dismissal of the Summons will mean that the plaintiff is out of time to institute an appeal.

With the greatest reluctance, after much hesitation, I have reached the view that the plaintiff should be given the opportunity to seek leave to amend. I direct that any application for leave to amend be made by 4pm on Tuesday, 9
December 1997. Any such application can be heard by a registrar and should be made returnable before the Acting Prothonotary.

The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion. In the event that no successful application for leave to amend is made, the Summons is dismissed.

In conclusion, it should not have to be said that this matter cries out for urgent rational and commercial resolution. I exhort the taking of that course before there is a further throwing away of costs that are grossly disproportionate to the matter in issue.
 * * * 
