

Regina versus Gillard Matter No 61005/97 [1997] NSWSC 620 (5 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus ROSLYN GILLARD /97 December 1997 
Michael Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
DETERMINATION OF LIFE SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for the redetermination of a life sentence by Roslyn Gillard. The application is not opposed by the Crown and in my judgment a determinative sentence should be imposed. The applicant received the life sentence on 16 March 1989 for the murder of his wife, Beverly Kay Gillard. 
The circumstances are substantially set out in the statement of facts prepared for the purposes of this application and elaborated somewhat in a record of interview between police and the applicant shortly after the offence. I do not think it is necessary to detail matters which can be read there. It suffices to observe that the applicant clearly had some difficulty in coping with observable changes in his wife's attitude and behaviour and the killing was sourced in that change although not in any relevant sense provoked by it.

At the time the applicant had been somewhat affected by the loss of family members and it is open to inference that he was becoming aware of his inability to cope with the very significant changes that his wife had adopted in relation to lifestyle. I observe that he gave some guns to a friend but retrieved them shortly before the offence. He made arrangements both for his and his own wife's death and he shot her and thereafter turned the weapon on himself and discharged it while it was being held under his chin.

It is not necessary to investigate why that attempt at self destruction was not successful but I am satisfied that it was not a mere gesture but a genuine attempt to do away with himself.

After the trial, in my remarks on sentence, I observed that I rejected a claim by the applicant that he was amnesic about the incident. That conclusion must have arisen from the material emanating at trial. I see no reason to change that conclusion but it does not seem to me that it is a matter which is of weight in dealing with the current application.

The applicant has been in custody since the offence on 14 April 1988. There are some very unusual and favourable aspects to the applicant's circumstances.
He is a mature man and will turn 60 years of age very soon. It is clear in my view that he will never offend again. He had no prior conviction before this incident. Apart from the attempt at self destruction which I will take in these particular circumstances as a genuine indication of remorse, he has made similar expressions on many occasions since. I believe those expressions also are genuine.

More to the present point, and if I may add, almost amazingly the applicant has continued to have the unstinted support of the blood family of his deceased wife. This is not knew. At the time that I passed sentence in 1989 there had been tendered to me affidavits by Arthur Edward Hafey and Elizabeth
Pearl Hafey, the parents of the deceased victim. Those affidavits have been reproduced in copy form and attached to the present statement of facts.

Those affidavits show that the parents of the deceased bore no ill will towards the applicant and imply an understanding of the source which led to the applicant's behaviour which was, as they observed, so out of character for him.

The deceased's parents were quite elderly at that time but Mrs Hafey has written again in September 1997 and, amongst other things in a letter addressed to the Court indicating her knowledge of his application, she has said that she accepts her son-in-law's remorse and that she has forgiven him.
The deceased's brother has written a letter on the same date. It is longer in text but contains the same theme of forgiveness and acceptance and again an inference of understanding of the circumstances which led the applicant to behave as he did.

The applicant's record in prison has been without blemish. Although he has currently achieved restricted C2 classification I note that when he was classified as C1 he was permitted outside of the prison under supervision from time to time where he exercised his building and carpentry skills for the benefit of, amongst other places, the Branxton Infant's School. There is a continuing series of observations during his time in custody of his adoption of a leadership role towards other prisoners and the very marked assistance that he has given to the conduct of the prisons by the contribution of his tradesman's skills. I have not overlooked the circumstance that his own father was a prison officer but, be that as it may, his conduct in prison has been impeccable to the point in my view of being almost exceptional.

It is my current task to substitute an appropriate sentence for the existing life sentence. It is not my task to determine the question of actual release but this is a case in which I feel it appropriate to comment that it is clear that no end will be served by the further lengthy detainment of the applicant.
It does not need words from me to impress upon the applicant the seriousness of the felonious taking of human life. As I remarked in an exchange with Mr
McClintock, who appeared for him, that although I observed the stresses and other matters working upon the applicant at the time of his offence, I agreed with the jury's rejection of his claim of diminished responsibility.
Nevertheless, as I have indicated, I believe that the substantial period of time which he has served to date should, to a large extent, discharge the appropriate punishment for his crime.

I have, as required by the statute, taken into account the subsequent matters together with the previous practice of release on licence and necessarily the age of the applicant both at the time of the offence and at present. I have been assisted by the reference to ranges of redetermined sentences provided to me by Mr Thompson, who appears for the Crown, relating to cases where the killing has occurred within the family or quasi family group.

As the report of the Serious Offenders Review Council indicates, it will be necessary for them to consider an appropriate pattern to enable the reintroduction of the applicant into the community. The orders which I propose to make will give full scope for that to be done although it is obvious that the ability for the applicant to be released to parole will not be in the far distant future.

Roslyn Gillard, for the murder of Beverly Kay Gillard in lieu of the sentence of penal servitude for life which I imposed on you on 16 March 1989 I sentence you to a total term of 14 years penal servitude to consist of a minimum term of ten and a half years to date from 14 April 1988 and to expire on 13 October together with an additional term of three and a half years. You will be eligible for parole from 13 October 1998.
 * * * 
