

Regina versus Baartman (No. 5) Matter No 70368/93 [1998] NSWSC 657 (27 October )

Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
REGINA versus JON LESLIE BAARTMAN (NO. 5) /93 October 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT: (Re application to discharge the jury or alternatively order that the question and answer in re-examination of Sergeant Constable be struck out - see page 252 of the transcript). 
HIS HONOUR: The victim in this case was shot in February 1993. The accused was tried and convicted in October 1994 (the first trial) and sentenced in December 1994. 
Following disclosures in the Royal Commission into the Police Service, an appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal on the ground that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory was successful and the accused was granted a new trial. This occurred in March this year (the second trial) and the jury were unable to agree, hence this is the third trial.

Evidence was given yesterday morning by Constable Berry that the Beretta pistol alleged to be the murder weapon had been destroyed by mistake sometime after it had been subjected to a ballistics examination. Late yesterday, evidence was given by Sergeant Constable of ballistics tests which he had done on the weapon and photos of the weapon were tendered without objection. In cross-examination further evidence of his tests was elicited, including photos of the firing pin markings on the rear of the cartridge case allegedly fired at the shooting, and on the rear of the test cartridge case used for comparison testing, and ultimately it was put that these, or similar tests, could not be duplicated because of the absence of the gun and at page 246
Sergeant Constable was asked: "Q. You would not be able to arrive at an opinion as to whether the test cartridge case and bullet matched the found spent cartridge case and bullet without relying on the first examiner's report, would you".

The answer at page 247 was as follows: "Before the court is the spent cartridge case, fired cartridge case and the spent bullet. I have in my possession the test fired cartridge cases. Another independent examiner, should he wish to check my testing together with the exhibits that are before the court today, he could examine it and come up with his own findings. . . . ." 
The balance of the answer was not responsive to the question.

In re-examination the Crown Prosecutor asked Sergeant Constable: "Q. Has anybody ever sought access to your test material?" 
The question was not objected to and answer was "Never". The jury then left the Court for the day.

Application then was made for the discharge of the jury, or alternatively that the question and answer in re-examination be struck out, on the ground that the question was unfair because it was known to the Crown Prosecutor, who was the same Crown Prosecutor as in the second trial, that the material had previously been sought; and accordingly that the Crown Prosecutor knew the question was misleading.

I was referred to the transcript of the second trial at p 40 where reference was made to the fact that the Crown would not be able to produce the pistol in evidence owing to the fact that it had been destroyed. A submission was made on behalf of counsel then appearing for the accused to exclude any evidence being led as to the finding of the pistol, and the tests subsequently done in relation to it. It was said: "Subsequent to the accused's original trial the accused had made a number of efforts to arrange through the Supreme Court to have that exact item subpoenaed so that a forensic examination could take place if it was needed in relation to the subsequent trial".

Counsel then pointed out that those attempts had been unsuccessful and it was not until early this year that it had been discovered that the firearm had been destroyed.

In my opinion, the question was not misleading at all. Prior to the second trial what had been sought was the pistol itself, not the test material on which Sergeant Constable had been cross-examined, namely, the spent cartridge case, the fired cartridge case and the spent bullet and the test fired cartridge cases and possibly also his photographs which have been tendered and which became exhibit 7.

The question asked in re-examination was directed to those materials and not to the pistol itself. Accordingly, I see no reason to discharge the jury and no reason to strike out the question and the answer in re-examination.
 * * * 
