

Immer (No 155) P/L versus Houghton and Ors [1996] NSWSC 427 (13 September 1996) 
IMMER (NO 155) PTY LTD versus HOUGHTON & ORS /96 
THURSDAY 25 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for interim injunction in rather unusual circumstances. The plaintiff is the unitholder in a strata scheme with respect to a building in Riley Street, East Sydney. The defendants control all units, except unit 1 and the common property. It is said by the plaintiff that resolutions allegedly passed earlier this year were invalid because they were a fraud on the minority, or they were not validly passed under the Strata Titles Act.

The principal defences appear to be that the rules governing duties of majorities do not apply to this sort of corporation and that there was laches because the intention of the defendants was clearly shown in 1993, and to the knowledge of the plaintiff the defendants have been prejudiced by the plaintiff not taking action before.

The suit is in the Expedition List on 2 August 1996. Nothing is going to happen between now and 2 August because the local council will take at least that time to consider whether it should issue the appropriate Local Government consents.

At the moment my view is that there is a sufficiently arguable case and that the balance of convenience favours the grant of an injunction to prevent the consummation of the resolution by lodging plans and dealings with the
Registrar General.

I understand that the plaintiff's equity in unit 1, which is its only substantial asset, is of questionable value, but it seems to me that on the evidence that the court has before it at the moment, it is probably at least $200,000. I agree, however, with Mr Ashhurst, for the defendants, that that evidence is not particularly convincing.

As time goes on, the damages being suffered by the defendants because of the injunction would increase because of holding charges and it may be that even before the end of this year the point will be reached where there is, without a secured undertaking as to damages, a scenario where the balance of convenience would not favour the continuation of the injunction. Indeed, I would think that the court will need better valuation evidence as to the plaintiff's unit than it presently has and in the absence of that evidence the court may very well think that, to use Mr Ashhurst's expression, the value of a million dollars put on it by all the valuations is "pie in the sky".

However, it is clear that for the next few weeks the injunction can be granted with an undertaking as to damages, and probably little damage will be suffered anyhow, and that it is better to do that than to let the plaintiff have the risk that its rights may be able to be undermined by dealings being registered and get the benefit of indefeasibility under the Torrens Register.

Accordingly, I think what I should do is grant an injunction up until the middle of August. This will then enable the Expedition Judge, whose list the matter is in on 2 August 1996, to either fix the matter for hearing or, alternatively, to say that he is not going to fix the matter for hearing, so that either the Expedition Judge or the Duty Judge in August will have a better idea as to how long the period for which an interlocutory injunction will have to be granted, if one is to be granted at all.

Knowing how this sort of case goes, I would think that it is more likely than not that the Expedition Judge might put the matter over for two weeks before he makes a final decision, so that I will make the injunction up to 19 August .

Accordingly, upon the plaintiff by its counsel giving to the court the usual undertaking as to damages I make orders 1 and 2 in the plaintiff's notice of motion filed 5 July 1996 up to and including 19 August 1996.

I decline to make any order on the defendants' notice of motion of the same date at this stage.

The matter is stood over to the Expedition Judge's list on 2 August 1996.
Costs of today are to be costs in the cause.

Immer (No.155) P/L versus Wayne Lawrence Houghton and 2 Others /96 August 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
COWDROY AJ 
JUDGMENT 
By Statement of Claim filed on the 7th June 1996 the plaintiff seeks equitable relief concerning the effect of a certain resolution of the third defendant.
To understand the plaintiff's claim, it is essential to have regard to several resolutions passed by the third defendant between 1992 and 1996.

The History 
In 1974 the plaintiff became the registered proprietor of premises located on the ground floor of a five story commercial building located at 121-125 Riley
Street East Sydney. Such premises are known as lot 1 in Strata Plan 803 ("SP803"), a strata scheme which was registered on the 6th April 1964. Each of the four floors above the plaintiff's premises comprise other lots in the strata plan. Above the highest floor was a flat concrete roof with a low parapet wall surrounding it. This area was designated in the strata plan as common property.

The first defendant is the registered proprietor of lots 2-5, which corresponded to floors number 2-5 in the building. The first defendant and
Graham James Bates ("Dr Bates") purchased such lots in 1992 with a view to developing them into residential lots ("the development"). Dr Bates, as detailed hereunder, sold his interest in 1995 to the second defendant, a company owned by the first defendant and his wife. The third defendant, the body corporate, has submitted to any order the court might make.

The plaintiff conducts a business known as Carroll's Auto Repairs in the ground floor premises of the building. No portion of the building had been used for residential purposes but the structure, which had been erected in about 1920, was suitable for conversion to such use. Subsequent to the purchase of lots 2-5 by the first defendant and Dr Bates, a series of resolutions were proposed by them to the Body Corporate of SP803.
 
Resolutions of 11th August 1992 
By Notice dated 3rd July 1992 the Body Corporate fixed the date for the Annual
General Meeting for the 11th August 1992 and provided notice of certain proposed resolutions. Upon receiving the notice, the plaintiff's solicitors wrote to Gresham Silver, a strata title management firm conducting the administration of SP803, objecting to certain of the proposed motions and pointing out certain deficiencies in the notice of the meeting. In particular, objection was taken by the plaintiff to motions relating to the intended change of use of the building and intended expenditure of substantial sums on the building.

The meeting was held on the 11th August 1992, and the minutes record that the plaintiff, by its director Mr Brendan Bovill was present, as was the first defendant and Dr Bates. The minutes record that Mr K Gresham chaired the meeting.

The meeting resolved to nominate and elect the first defendant, Dr Bates and
Mr Bovill as the council members. The minutes record that various motions were passed, establishing inter alia an administration fund. Two further motions, despite the plaintiff's objections, became resolutions as follows:- "MOTION 8 IT WAS RESOLVED that the Body Corporate instruct legal representatives to put in place empowering By-Laws to make application to council for building application further change of any usage which it deems approved by the council.(sic) 
MOTION 9 IT WAS RESOLVED that the proprietors approve the complete refurbishment of all common areas including lift replacement to a good and serviceable standard of repair on a specification to be decided upon by the incoming council to be established at approximately $800,000.00." 
It should be noted that at this meeting, and at all the subsequent meetings referred to hereunder, the votes of the proprietors of lot 2 to lot 5 hereof (namely the first defendant and Dr Bates, the latter being later replaced by the second defendant), easily exceeded the voting power of the plaintiff.
 
Resolutions of the 13th October 1992 
An extraordinary General Meeting was held on 13th October 1992. The same persons who attended the Annual General Meeting were present. The relevant resolutions passed at the meeting despite the plaintiff's objections were as follows:- "MOTION 3. IT WAS RESOLVED that the proprietors strike a special levy in the sum of $990,200.00 to be as per unit entitlement for the reinstatement of the common property based on the report and schedule from GJ Taylor Pty Ltd architects. The levy is to be called by the Managing Agent who is thus authorised and directed upon receipt of authorised fee claims authorised by the architects.

MOTION 4. IT WAS RESOLVED that the proprietors of lots 2 to 5 be reimbursed for funds paid on behalf of the Body Corporate and that a special levy in the sum of $24,869.00 be struck to the Administration Fund for the purpose of payment of those outstanding accounts." 
On the 19th October 1992 the solicitors for the plaintiff wrote to Gresham
Silver requesting a copy of the minutes of the extraordinary General Meeting and also pointing out that the plaintiff's dissent to the proposals should be recorded. Such letter also pointed out that the plaintiff was not prepared to contribute to any expenses other than those falling within the provision of s (1) of the Strata Titles Act, 1973 ("the Act"). The letter warned the Body
Corporate that no expenditure should be incurred or contracts let until the plaintiff had been supplied with the relevant information concerning the expenses properly falling within <case> of the Act and noted that the plaintiff did not have funds for its proportion of the special levy of $990,200.00.

On the 29th October 1992 the plaintiff's solicitors wrote again to Gresham
Silver, noting that certain building work had commenced on the building. With respect to the minutes of the Annual General Meeting held on the 11th August , the plaintiff's solicitors stated:- "(i) there is no reference to a resolution to approve an application for a
Building Approval to upgrade the property; motion nine of those Minutes approves "the complete refurbishment of all common areas including lift replacement to a good and serviceable standard of repair...."; it is obvious that an application for building Approval had already been lodged prior to the purposed passing of motion 9, in other words the
Proprietors of Units 2-5 had already decided to upgrade the property and had taken steps to do so without obtaining the approval of the Body Corporate and before the meeting of 11 August 1992; even if motion 9 is valid, which we deny, the plans and specifications prepared by GJ Taylor Pty Limited pursuant to the Scope of Works dated 22
September 1992 go far beyond the terms of motion 9, in particular that part of motion 9 which refers to "good and serviceable standard of repair"." 
The letter continued:- "With respect to the Notice of Extraordinary General meeting dated 2 October (we note we have not yet been forwarded the Minutes of that meeting despite our request on behalf of our client, a member of the Body Corporate), are invalid for the reasons stated in our previous faxes and we note that both you and the Architect, GJ Taylor Pty Limited, are on notice of that fact and that any Contracts entered into in reliance on those invalid motions are not binding on the Body Corporate.(sic) 
If any further building work is carried out or any further Contracts are let then same are carried out or entered into at your own risk.

Kindly confirm by return that all building works commenced on the property will cease and that no further Contracts will be entered into until: you and GJ Taylor Pty Limited have supplied the information requested; our client has had an opportunity to obtain comparative quotations for carrying out works within the scope of s. 68(1) of the Strata Titles Act: and a further meeting has been held to consider the information obtained by our client and pass valid resolutions in compliance with s. 68(1).

There is no evidence of the state of repair of the building prior to the proposed complete refurbishment of all common areas, but it appears that the sole purpose of the proposed work was to change the use and to upgrade the building from an old commercial building to a building for residential use.

As a compromise to the dispute, the plaintiff's solicitors by letter dated the nd December 1992 suggested that the owners of lots 2 to 5 agree to a strata sub division of SP803 pursuant to the Strata Titles (Part Strata) Amendment
Act 1992. This would have created a "stratum parcel" as defined in the
Amendment Act for lot 1 and, separately for lots 2 to 5. Such proposal, it was suggested, would have permitted the first defendant to proceed with the refurbishment without the necessity of seeking the consent of the plaintiff, and at its own cost. Such letter continued:- "In summary, we are instructed to point out that our client has no objection to Dr Houghton spending whatever money he considers is required to upgrade
Units 2 to 5, but it does not see any reason why it should contribute to such upgrading (even if it had or could acquire the funds) for no obvious benefit to itself." 
Such proposal was not answered, and the redevelopment of the building began.

On the 4th March 1993 the solicitors for the first defendant wrote to Gresham
Silver forwarding two sketches of a proposal to erect two penthouse units on the fourth floor of the building and on the roof. Such letter stated:- "They proposal (sic) also to subdivide each of the lower floors into four new units and to subdivide the fourth floor and common property upon the roof to create two extra lots.

In anticipation of that new subdivision, we have prepared a consent pursuant to By-law 16 for inclusion in the agenda for the forthcoming meeting, to permit them to undertake the works." 
Resolutions of the 15th March 1993 
On the 15th March 1993 another Extraordinary General Meeting was held. The
Minutes of such meeting note that the proprietor of lot 1 (namely the plaintiff) requested an adjournment of the meeting on the basis that the
Notice of the meeting did not comply with Schedule 2 of the Act. It further noted that the Notice referred to drawings and plans which were not attached to the Notice and which had not been served and that no opportunity had been given to consider the plans and obtain expert opinion in relation to the proposal to construct two penthouses on the common property namely the roof.
The Minutes record the following:- "The chairman ruled that the meeting was valid and would continue further and indicated that the proprietor of lot 1 was unfinancial as he had not paid a levy under a special Sinking Fund struck in October 1992. The proprietor of lot 1 disputed as to whether the levy struck in October 1992 was in fact validly struck and he claims he is in fact financial. The chairman indicated that in his opinion lot 1 was unfinancial and would be unable to vote, however, the chairman indicated that his objections and opposition to the motions would be noted." 
The Minutes record as follows:- "MOTION 1. IT WAS RESOLVED that the minutes of the Extraordinary General
Meeting dated 13th October be confirmed as a true and correct record. The directors of the proprietor of lot 1 noted that they had objected to motions 3 and 4 and that the minutes should be changed to indicate same.

MOTION 2 The Body Corporate resolved pursuant to by- law 16 to permit the proprietors of lot 5, Dr W Houghton and Dr G Bates, to undertake the construction of two penthouse units upon the fourth floor and the roof level in accordance with the drawings which form Exhibit 1 to these minutes of meeting. This consent is subject to the following conditions:- 
Before they commence the building works, the proprietors shall forward to the Body Corporate copies of the following:- 
The approval of the South Sydney City Council to the proposed works; 
Any plans and specifications referred to in the approval: and 
The certificate of a duly qualified engineer that the construction, if undertaken in accordance with specifications approved by the engineer, will not reduce the structural integrity of the building.

The works shall be undertaken by duly licensed tradesman and in a proper and tradesmanlike manner.

The proprietors shall indemnify the Body Corporate against any claims or expense made against or incurred by the Body Corporate and arising out of the building works.

NOTE: Mr Bovill and Mr Burns indicated that if they were permitted to vote they would vote against.

MOTION 3. IT WAS RESOLVED that the Body Corporate specially resolve pursuant to s. 58(2) of the Strata Titles Act 1973 to make an additional by-law in the following terms:- 
SPECIAL BY-LAW 
The Body Corporate shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those conferred or imposed on it by the Strata Titles Act 1973, and the by- laws:- 
The power to undertake building works in accordance with the drawings of
GJ Taylor Pty Limited number 91/180/08 (inclusive), copies of which form exhibit 1 to the minutes of meeting at which this by-law is made, and for this purpose to acquire and to install all necessary building materials and fittings; 
The duty to repair, to maintain and to replace the consequent improvements, as may be necessary from time to time.

Mr Bovill and Mr Burns indicated that if they were permitted to vote they would vote against." 
According to the evidence, the notification of this meeting comprised the first indication to the plaintiff that the proprietor of lots 2 to 5 proposed to use in some way the common property comprising the roof of the building.

Work on the conversion of the building to residential units had been continuing, and carried out in the name of a partnership known as ("Riley
Street Partnership"), the principals of which were the first defendant and Dr
Bates.

By letter dated the 29th March 1993 Messrs Blackshaw Lindsay and Bugden, the solicitors who apparently acted for the first defendant and Dr Bates, rejected the proposal for a compromise made by the plaintiff's solicitor by letter dated the 2nd December 1992. Such letter also took issue with the plaintiff's contentions although it did acknowledge that the installation of a marble floor was a capital improvement which exceeded what was required under s (1)(b) of the Act. However, the letter disputed that it was an improvement beyond their client's power. As regards the plaintiff's threat to commence legal proceedings, the solicitors indicated that the complaint was one within the power of the Strata Titles Commissioner and Board.

In July 1993 the third defendant commenced proceedings against the plaintiff in the District Court of New South Wales for recovery of the special levies and interest which the plaintiff had refused to pay. Such proceedings were defended and have not yet been determined. Meanwhile, correspondence between the plaintiff and the first defendant continued. The plaintiff's position was clearly set out in a letter addressed to the third defendant dated the 29th
September 1993 which stated, inter alia:- "As you are aware, this company objects to the development of the above building which is being pursued by the owners of Lots 2,3,4 and 5 of the
Strata Plan almost exclusively for their own benefit.

While this company has no objection to paying levies to keep the common property in a state of good and serviceable repair and to renew or replace any fixtures or fittings which are properly required to be renewed or replaced, this company does object to the payment of levies which are clearly for other development work.

This company does not object, as such, to the upgrading of the building, provided that the responsibility for payment of the works lies with those owners receiving the benefit of the work. This company is accordingly prepared to discuss the payment of a more equitable contribution by the respective proprietors." 
The managing agents responded to such letter, disputing the allegations save and except for the installation of a marble floor in the building. By letter dated 5th April 1994, the plaintiff again wrote to the managing agents, expressing concern at the absence of documentation relating to the development in the building, noting that there was no contract available for inspection concerning the work and also noting that the levy which the plaintiff had received, requiring it to pay the sum of $370,000.00 was subsequently replaced by another notice claiming approximately $210,000.00 without any proper explanation. The letter sought details concerning the expenditure and details of contracts in respect of work which was being performed on the building. It appears that no such documentation was revealed to the plaintiff.

At this time, proceedings had been instituted between the first defendant and
Dr Bates in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court of New South Wales concerning a dissolution of the Riley Street Partnership. On the 27th February , a receiver was appointed to such partnership in proceedings number 5001 of 1994. Subsequently, on the 15th March 1995 the second defendant acquired the interest of Dr Bates.

Work in connection with the renovation, which had apparently been interrupted, resumed in earnest thereafter.
 
Resolutions of 10th May 1995 
An Extraordinary General Meeting of the Body Corporate was called for the 10th
May 1995. At such meeting, the chairperson ruled that the plaintiff was not financial and could not vote at the meeting.

The following was resolved:- "BY LAW RESOLVED that the Body Corporate specially resolve pursuant to s.
(2) of the 
SECTION 58(2) Strata Titles Act 1973 to make an additional by law in the following terms:- 
The Body Corporate shall have the following powers and duty, in addition to those conferred by the Strata Titles Act 1973 and the by-laws:-
The power to carry out the renovations identified in the plans of Gencur and Associates, copies of which form Exhibit "1" to the minutes of meeting at which this by-law is made and for this purpose the power to install all the necessary building materials, fixtures and fittings ("the improvements").
The power to engage consultants and contractors to carry out the renovations.
The duty to repair, maintain and to replace the improvements as may be necessary from time to time.
The power to reimburse Glencora Pty Limited and Dr Wayne Houghton any monies paid by them in undertaking such renovations or the building works referred to in Special By-Law 1." 
The chairman noted objections made by the plaintiff's solicitor that there were no quantities, specifications or costs tabled or provided for any proprietor to inform himself of the works and its costs. The minutes record the response from the first defendant and Mrs Houghton to the effect that their advice from their consultants was that the construction management option was the most economical one.

The following further resolution was passed:- "RESOLVED that the Body Corporate specially resolve pursuant to s. 58 (7) of the Strata Titles Act 1973 to make an additional by-law in the following terms:- 
On the following conditions, the proprietor for the time being of Lot 5("the
Proprietor") shall have special privileges in respect of the common property to undertake the construction of the apartments identified in the development approvals of South Sydney City Council numbers U92/1129 & U93/938 within the building ("the works"), and to retain the consequent improvements.

Conditions:-
Subject to any amendment of the by-laws from time to time, the Body
Corporate shall continue to be responsible for the proper maintenance and keeping in a state of good and serviceable repair of the common property.

The proprietor shall be responsible to maintain the alterations and additions undertaken pursuant to this by-law in a state of good and serviceable repair, and shall renew or replace them as may be necessary from time to time.
The proprietor shall undertake the works by duly licensed contractors.
The proprietor shall indemnify the Body Corporate against the following:- .1 any liability or expense which would not have been incurred by the Body
Corporate if the works had not been undertaken; .2 any damage to the alterations and additions caused by the Body Corporate undertaking any work referred to in s. 64 of the Strata Titles Act 1973, or in exercising the power of entry conferred by that section; and .3 any increase in insurance premiums or excesses payable by the Body
Corporate and attributable to the works.
The proprietor shall not undertake the works or allow them to be undertaken except between the hours of 7.30am and 5.00pm, Monday to Sunday excluding public holidays.
The proprietor shall pay all costs, including legal costs, incurred by the
Body Corporate in or about the making and registration of this by-law." 
The plaintiff's solicitors also objected to the by-law on the ground that the terms of the motion required a unanimous vote of all proprietors entitled to attend the meeting.

In response the following notation appears in the minutes:- "The chairperson noted the response from Dr and Mrs Houghton that their contention was that the motion did not require a unanimous resolution and that the voting of the proprietors of lots 2 to 5 (inclusive) was, in any case, unanimous." 
It was further resolved as follows:- "RESOLVED that the Body Corporate lodge an application with the Strata Titles
Commissioner for an order to require the proprietor of lot 1 to comply with
Special By-Law 1 and allow access to that lot." 
The Chairperson noted objections to this resolution by the solicitor for the plaintiff.

The Plaintiff's Actions 
According to the evidence of Mr Bovill, the notification of the proposed resolution to construct two penthouse units on the fourth floor and the roof level which he received in May 1995 was the first time that he realised the intent of the first defendant and the second defendant to actually appropriate the common property of the third defendant.

On the 2nd June 1995 the plaintiff lodged an Application for an Order to the
Strata Titles Board pursuant to <case> of the Act. In the Application the plaintiff sought an order that several by-laws be declared invalid and repealed, namely the by-law to undertake building work made on the 15th March , the by-law to carry out renovation work made on the 10th May 1995 and the by-law granting the first defendant and second defendant special privileges in respect of the common property to undertake construction of the apartments and retain the consequent improvements made on the 10th May 1995.

In addition, applications were made under <case>, seeking an order that contribution to levies required of the plaintiff were excessive; for orders under <case> of the Act invalidating the resolutions of the Body Corporate concerning the refurbishment of the building and of striking the levy in the sum of $990,200.00; and under <case>(A1) of the Act for orders appointing a managing agent to perform the duties of the Body Corporate and the Council. No determination was made of these Applications at the time the next
Extraordinary General Meeting was held.

Resolutions of 16th April 1996 
By notification dated the 13th March 1996 the Annual General Meeting was fixed for the 16th April 1996. By letter dated the 11th April 1996, the plaintiff's solicitor provided notification of objection to Motion 7 which was proposed namely:- "7.1 (i) That the Body Corporate SPECIALLY RESOLVE pursuant to s. 37 (4) and s. 11 (b) of the Strata Titles Act, 1973, to approve a subdivision of lots ,3,4,5 and common property in accordance with the strata plan of subdivision prepared by Robert Douglas Dunlop dated 19th February, 1996, and to agree to the unit entitlement of each proposed lot and the proposed aggregate unit entitlement according to the variations to unit entitlements specified on page one of said plan.

That the common seal of the Body Corporate be affixed to the Certificate required pursuant to s. 37(4)(a) of the Act for the purposes of the subdivision 
That subject to the issue by South Sydney Council pursuant to section 37 of the Act of a Certificate of Approval of the subdivision: the common seal of the Body Corporate be affixed to a Certificate pursuant to section 9 (d)(i) of the Act for the purposes of the registration of the plan of subdivision.

That the common seal of the Body Corporate be affixed to a Transfer to WL
Houghton & Glenora (sic) Pty Limited for a consideration of $1.00 of the
Body Corporate's interest in the lots to be created by the subdivision of lot and common property.

That the managing agent be authorised and instructed to affix the seal of the Body Corporate to all documents required on the part of the Body Corporate for the purposes of the Subdivision and Transfer, to produce the Certificate of Title comprising the common property at the Land Titles Office and to do all such other things required on behalf of the Body Corporate for these purposes." 
The plaintiff's solicitor, in his letter stated inter alia:- "My client is concerned that Dr Houghton and Glenora Pty Limited who are the proprietors of four of the existing five lots are proposing a motion that the common property roof of the building be transferred to them for $1.00. My client has not yet obtained a formal valuation of the common property roof area but believes that its current market value may exceed $400,00.00 (sic).
My client objects to the motion proposed that an asset of this value be transferred to Dr Houghton and his company for $1.00." 
At the Annual General Meeting Motion number 7 was passed despite the vote against its adoption by the plaintiff. The Chairman declared the motion passed as an ordinary resolution.

The plaintiff thereupon instituted these proceedings and there has been three important developments since that date, namely:- 
On the 13th September 1996, the Registrar General Of New South Wales acting apparently in consequence of resolutions, issued a strata plan of subdivision registered number 53399 ("SPSD53399") relating to SP803. Such plan creates a subdivision of the first floor, second floor and the third floor which formerly comprised lots 2, 3 and 4 into twelve lots, namely lots 6 to
In addition, the fourth floor, which was previously lot 5 in SP803 was divided into two lots described as part of lot 18 and part of lot 19. The fifth floor, which was previously the roof is now described as part of lot 18 and lot 19. A new level was created described as the roof level, comprising part of lot 18 and part of lot 19.

On the 26th September 1996 the Registrar General of New South Wales issued titles to lots 18 and 19 and described the registered proprietor in respect of each title, which is identified as 18/SP80353399 and 19/SP80353399 as follows:- "The proprietors of Strata Plan 803 of part formerly in CP/SP803 and Glencora
Pty Limited & Wayne Lawrence Houghton as tenants in common in equal shares of part formerly in 5/SP803." 
The plaintiff's applications to the Strata Titles Board were determined on the 23rd July 1996. The Application under <case> of the Act which related to the contributions was dismissed. In relation to the Application under <case>, the Strata Titles Board resolved that the levy of $100,000.00 determined at an
Extraordinary General Meeting held on the 10th August 1993 was invalid, as was a resolution made on the 30th September 1993 for a further levy of $100,000.00. On the 18th September 1996 the plaintiff stated a case to the
Supreme Court in relation to the determinations.

Against the above facts, the plaintiff claims to be entitled to relief in relation to resolution 7 of the 16th April 1996 which, in summary seeks to transfer the common property comprised in the roof to the first defendant and second defendant at a price of $1.00. The plaintiff seeks a declaration that such resolution is invalid; and further, or in the alternative, that such resolution arises out of a fraud on the plaintiff by the first defendant and second defendant, and for consequential relief.
 
Is resolution number 7 made on the 16th April 1996 valid? 
Plaintiff's contentions 
The plaintiff contends that it was not competent for the meeting held on the th April 1996 to resolve to deal with the common property, otherwise than by way of unanimous resolution. The submission is based upon an interpretation of the Act.

S 20 provides as follows:- "The estate or interest of a Body Corporate in common property vested in it or acquired by it shall be held by the Body Corporate as agent: where the same person or persons is or are the proprietor or proprietors of all of the lots the subject of the strata scheme concerned-for that proprietor or those proprietors; or where different persons are proprietors of each of two or more of the lots the subject of the strata scheme concerned-for those proprietors as tenants in common in shares proportional to the unit entitlements of their respective lots." 
S 21 provides:- "Common property shall not be capable of being dealt with except in accordance with the provisions of this Act." 
S 25 (1) provides:- "(1) A body corporate may, pursuant to a unanimous resolution, execute a transfer or lease of common property other than common property the subject of a lease accepted or acquired by the body corporate under s. 19 (2)." 
It is apparent from examination of the other sub paragraphs of <case> that a unanimous resolution is required if the body corporate is dealing with any estate or interest in common property. In respect of the grant by the body corporate of any easement over common property, or other interest, a unanimous resolution is required (see <case>).

The plaintiff contends that the Act is explicit in its requirements concerning any dealings with common property, namely that a unanimous resolution is required. It should be noted that in the scheme of the Act, <case>, 21, 25 and , are contained in a Division of the Act directed exclusively to matters affecting common property, namely Part II, Division 2 -Common Property.

The plaintiff submits that there are no other powers contained in the Act which could enable the disposal of common property. In support of its contention, the plaintiff points to the requirement contained in <case> of the
Act relating to any dealing by a body corporate. S 28(4) requires that a dealing lodged for registration under the [Real Property Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) or [Conveyancing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) for the purposes of the Division shall not be registered under either such Act unless it is accompanied by a certificate, under seal of the body corporate certifying, inter alia, that the resolution authorising the execution of the dealing was unanimous.
 
Defendants' Contentions 
The first and second defendants submit that s21 and 25 of the Act are limited to dealings with "common property". In the events which have happened, a subdivision of the strata plan has occurred as provided by <case> of the Act, as a result of the following:- 
The body corporate pursuant to <case> has submitted to the local council a plan of subdivision, accompanied by a certificate under the seal of the body corporate which certifies that it has, by special resolution consented to the proposed subdivision; that such subdivision was approved by virtue of <case> of the Act. S 9 (1) of the Act provides:- "Lots (other than development lots) or common property, or lots (other than development lots) and common property, may be subdivided, by the registration, as a strata plan of subdivision, of a plan that complies with subsection (3)." 
S 9(3), in summary provides that a plan complies with the subsection if it consists of a floor plan and is accompanied by a certificate given by the local council complying with <case>.

The common seal of the third defendant was affixed to a certificate pursuant to <case>(b)(i) of the Act in consideration of the sum of $1.00 and in consequence of the registration of SPSD53399, a subdivision has been effected.

The registration of the plan of subdivision has not transferred from the third defendant to the first and second defendants the third defendant's interest in the lots created by the registration of SPSD53399. By virtue of the interest of the third defendant in the airspace above the roof, and of the common property which formerly comprised the roof, the third defendant has an interest in the newly created lots 18 and 19 of SPSD53399.

The former roof has been utilised for the purposes of the subdivision in the sense that it is now the floor of the second level of lots 18 and 19, and in the sense that it provides support for the structures which define the upper levels for lots 18 and 19.

What was formerly common property has now been transformed into a lot, or more correctly, part of a lot being part of lot 18 and part of lot 19.

S 65 (1) of the Act provides that a body corporate may by special resolution: "(d) dispose of or otherwise deal with any lot vested in the body corporate as a result of a subdivision effected under <case>." 
By these means, the body corporate has effected a subdivision of common property, or lots and common property in accordance with <case> of the Act and, in combination with <case> (1)(d) of the Act, it is entitled to dispose of the same to the first and second defendants without the necessity of a unanimous resolution.

Essential to the submissions of the first and second defendant is the contention that the concepts of "lot" and "common property", are mutually exclusive. Common property can be subdivided and, by virtue of the registration of a plan of subdivision relating thereto, it becomes a "lot" and thereby ceases to be "common property". The definition of "common property" as contained in <case> of the Act is as follows:- ""Common property" means so much of a parcel as from time to time is not comprised in any lot;" 
The word "lot" also has a specific meaning in the Act. It is defined in the same subsection as one or more cubic spaces forming part of a parcel to which the strata scheme relates as defined by certain boundaries as set out in the definition.

The first and second defendants acknowledge that unanimity would be required for any dealing with common property provided the same were dealt with under s
However, by virtue of <case>, unanimity is not required to effect the plan of subdivision, but rather a special resolution (see <case> and <case> (4)). The argument continues that once a strata plan of subdivision is registered the subdivided common property is thereby transformed into lots. Hence <case> is no longer capable of application since by definition, such lot is no longer "common property" as defined. A transfer by the third defendant of its interest in lots 18 and 19 will not therefore involve the transfer of any of the common property.

In further support of the first and second defendants submissions, it is pointed out that the Conveyancing (Strata Titles) Act 1961 ("the 1961 Act") made no provision whereby proprietors who held the majority interest in unit entitlements could further develop the common property without the consent of all proprietors (s 10 of the 1961 Act). Accordingly it was possible for minority interests to stand in the way of majority interests. Such problems were overcome by inclusion in the Act of <case> and of <case> which permitted local councils to control the various forms of re-subdivision of strata lots and common property. By virtue of <case> of the Act consent of the body corporate to subdivision is merely that of a special resolution, and minority interests can no longer control the property.

Statutory Interpretation 
In the absence of any authority dealing with the issue raised in these proceedings, it is essential to interpret the various sections of the Act to reflect the intention of Parliament. Various tests have been propounded for this purpose and the two most commonly accepted tests have been the literal approach and the purposive approach. It has been said that the fundamental rule of interpretation, to which all others are subordinate, is that a statute is to be expounded according to the intention of the Parliament that made it which intention has to be found by an examination of the language used in the statute as a whole (see Amalgamated Society of Engineers versus Adelaide Steamship
Co. Limited <case>; [(1920) 28 CLR 129] at 161-2 per Higgins J). A caveat, however, was placed upon the use of the literal approach by Lord Wensleydale in Grey versus Pearson <case>; [(1857) 6 HLC 61] at 106; <case>; [10
ER 1216] at 1234 where his Lordship pointed out that the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words are to be adhered to "unless that would lead to some absurdity , or some repugnance or inconsistency with the rest of the instrument, in which case the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words may be modified, so as to avoid that absurdity or inconsistency, but no farther." Such test has been applied in Australia (see for example Australian Boot Trade Employees' Federation v
Whybrow & Co. [(1910) CLR 311] at 342-2; see also Broken Hill South Ltd versus Commissioner of Taxation  <case>; [(1937) 56 CLR 337] at 371.

The alternative approach to the interpretation of any statute is the purposive approach. Such approach has been widely adopted in courts in New South Wales: see for example Kingston versus Keprose Pty Ltd [(1987) 11 NSWLR 404] at 423-4 per McHugh JA; Australian Broadcasting Corporation versus Redmore Pty Ltd [(1987) NSWLR 621] at 625-6 per Kirby P; Brali versus Hyundai Corporation [(1988) NSWLR 734]; Googoorewon Pty Ltd versus Amatek Ltd (1991) 25 NSWLR 330 at per Clarke JA with whom Kirby P agreed). Pursuant to this test, the inquiry is directed to the purpose which the legislation seeks to achieve. The application of this test usually involves the examination of the statute as a whole.

Applying such tests, the literal approach could lead to a result which is absurd. Part II Division 2 - Common Property contains specific provisions directed at dealings with common property. Very specific provisions have been inserted into the Act to prevent a body corporate from dealing with common property otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the Act: see for example <case>, 25, 26. It can be inferred from such provisions that Parliament wished to provide a safeguard to all proprietors of a strata plan directed to the protection of their common property. They create a code relating to dealings with common property as was the express purpose of Parliament.

The first and second defendants claim the requirements of <case> can be overcome by virtue of the device of effecting the subdivision of common property or of lots and common property pursuant to <case> and then by using <case>(b) as a source of power to dispose of the lots. It should be noted, in passing, that the heading of <case> is "Subdivision of lots and common property" and the heading for <case> is "Miscellaneous powers of body corporate".

I find it impossible to accept that Parliament, having made such express provisions requiring a unanimous resolution for any dealing with common property in <case>, and specifically providing that common property shall only be dealt with in accordance with the Act (s 21) could have intended that by virtue of only a special resolution, disposal of such property, albeit with a subdivision intervening, could be effected under <case>.

I do not consider that such was the intention of Parliament; it would subvert the requirements of <case>. Further, when one analyses the nature of the transaction, it would appear that the lot created in consequence of the subdivision, although no longer "common property" remains nevertheless the property of the proprietors of the strata plan. It would be a very strange result if such property, albeit a lot, could be dealt with otherwise than in accordance with the object of <case>, namely that common property even if not "common property" as defined, could be disposed of otherwise than by unanimous resolution. The general miscellaneous powers of the body corporate as contained in <case> do not avoid the requirements of <case>.

I consider that even though registration of SPSD53399 created lots in lieu of "common property" as defined, the consent of all the proprietors of SP803 and of SPSD53399 is required for any transfer of the interest in lots 18 and 19.
Although now comprised in "lots", the true character of the interest of the body corporate in such property is common to the interests of all proprietors.

Further, there is a presumption that Parliament does not intend to remove property rights unless the contrary is clearly intended. In the instance of this Act, Parliament, by virtue of the provisions contained in "Division 2 -
Common Property", has made such provisions as will ensure that rights in common property cannot be dealt with otherwise than by unanimous resolution.

The purpose of the division was to ensure that the very type of conduct as has occurred in this case, could not occur. Lord Scarman said in Secretary of
State for Defence versus Guardian Newspapers Ltd [[1985] AC 339] at 363:- "..there certainly remains a place in the law for the principle of law which the judge applied, namely, that the courts must be slow to impute to
Parliament an intention to override property rights in the absence of plain words to that effect." 
Put another way, legislation must be interpreted in such manner that it does not interfere with property rights: see Wade versus New South Wales Rutile Mining
Company Pty Ltd <case>; [(1970) 121 CLR 177] per Barwick CJ at 181 and Menzies J at 182; Clunies-Ross v
Commonwealth <case>; [(1984) 55 ALR 609] at 611; Springhall versus Kirner <case>; [[1988] VR 159] at 165-6.

It must also be noted that <case> of the Act specifically preserves the rights of proprietors and others having an interest in any strata plan as follows:- "Nothing in this Act derogates from any rights or remedies that a proprietor, mortgagee or chargee of a lot or a body corporate or a covenant chargee may have in relation to any lot or the common property apart from this Act." 
Adopting these principles, I consider that the disposal of any commonly owned property by proprietors in a strata plan, or of any "common property" as defined, requires a unanimous resolution. S 65(1)(d) must be read as being subject to <case>.

Fraud on the Minority 
As an alternative ground, the plaintiff seeks relief on the basis that the first and second named defendants, by their adoption of Resolution 7 pursuant to an ordinary resolution, constitutes a fraud on the minority. In support of its contentions, it relies upon the well known principles relating to such fraud as is commonly found in matters involving corporations law.

Since I have already determined that the requirements of <case> provide that a unanimous vote is required, it is not essential that I deal with this issue.
However, in the event that I should be found to have erred in relation to my conclusion in relation to the first issue, it is appropriate that I deal with the second issue, namely whether or not the doctrine of fraud on the minority has any application in relation to a strata scheme under the Act and if so, whether there has been the commission of such fraud by virtue of the resolution of the body corporate of the 16th April 1996.

The plaintiff contends that the transfer of the property, formerly common property, for the sum of $1.00 to the first and second named defendants deprives the plaintiff of valuable rights and that the overwhelming voting rights of the first and second named defendants has had the effect of denying the plaintiff any interest therein. It is said that the first and second named defendants, in exercising their voting rights in this way, are in breach of a fiduciary duty. Even if the roof area on the building, as it previously existed prior to the registration of SPSD53399 was of no value, the first and second named defendants have the opportunity of exploiting such area for their own profit by outvoting the plaintiff, and by such action a breach of fiduciary duty owed to the other unit holder, will result.

In defence to such submissions, the first and second defendants submit that such doctrine has no application to a strata scheme since the Act provides, in
Part 5 a comprehensive system of review for any matter arising in the administration of a body corporate. It is further contended that the value of the common property must be taken into consideration to test whether the resolution providing for the transfer of the body corporate's interest in lots and 19 for consideration of $1.00 could constitute a fraud.

The concept of fraud on the minority arises out of the doctrine of fraud by the exploitation of a power. In this sense, the doctrine "fraud" means that a party has used a power beyond its scope. It was succinctly defined by Lord
Parker in Vatcher versus Paull [[1915] AC 372] at 378 as follows:- "The term fraud in connection with frauds on a power does not necessarily denote any conduct on the part of the appointor amounting to fraud in the common law meaning of the term or any conduct which could be properly termed dishonest or immoral. It merely means that the power has been exercised for a purpose, or with an intention, beyond the scope of or not justified by the instrument creating the power." 
In its application to corporate law, the doctrine of fraud on a power has been used to invalidate any irregular exercise of that power which is really "a means of securing some personal or particular gain, whether pecuniary or otherwise, which does not fairly arise out of the subjects dealt with by the power and is outside and even inconsistent with the contemplated object of the power" (per Dixon J in Peters' American Delicacy Company Ltd versus Heath <case>; [(1939) 61 CLR 457] at p.511.

Fraud of this kind may arise in many contexts; see for example Crumpton v
Morrine Hall Pty Limited <case>; [(1916-1917) 23 CLR 362] at , the court spoke of the majority of the company having acted "outside the fair scope of the social contract".

The authorities suggest that such doctrine is not predicated upon the existence of a fiduciary relationship (see Peters' American Delicacy Co Ltd v
Heath (supra) at p. 504; rather, it stems from the concept that courts will act to prevent company directors from abusing their powers or otherwise using their powers for improper purposes, such purposes being the planning of an advantage to one group without a similar advantage being afforded to the others.

In principle, there is no reason why such a doctrine should not have application to the proprietors of a body corporate. Although it is provided by s 54(2) of the Act that a body corporate (ie. a body corporate created by s (1) of the Act) is not a corporation within the meaning of the Companies (New South Wales) Code, the Act has nevertheless created an association of persons or corporations in an analogous way to that created by the companies legislation. The proprietors of lots in a strata plan are associated together in consequence of the strata scheme created by the Act. The Act prescribes that the body corporate shall, inter alia, control, manage and administer the common property for the benefit of the proprietors (s 68(1)(a)). Further <case> of the Act provides that the estate or interest of a body corporate in property vested in it or acquired by it shall be held by the body corporate as agent for the proprietor or proprietors (s 20 (a)).

These sections clearly show that Parliament intended that the body corporate must act in the interest of all the proprietors and create a regime amongst proprietors analogous to shareholders. The phrase "the company as a whole" was the subject of judicial definition by Evershed MR in Greenhalgh versus Arderne
Cinemas Ltd and others [[1951] 1 Ch 286] at 291 where he said:- "..the phrase, "the company as a whole", does not (at any rate in such a case as the present) mean the company as a commercial entity, distinct from the corporators: it means the corporators as a general body. That is to say, the case may be taken of an individual hypothetical member and it may be asked whether what is proposed is, in the honest opinion of those who voted in its favour, for that person's benefit." 
I see no reason why the same principle, although read subject to the joint majority judgment of the decision of the High Court of Australia in Gambotto v WCP Ltd <case>; [[1994-1995] 182 CLR 432] should not apply to the proprietors of a body corporate: the interests to be considered are those of the proprietors of lots in the strata plan rather "corporators". The council of the body corporate is in no different position to that of corporate directors, who owe fiduciary duties to their company. The council members of the body corporate are not entitled to make a present to themselves of property of the body corporate, in the same way as directors of a company cannot make a present to themselves of the company's shares: see
Dutton versus Gorton and others (supra) at p. 394; Ngurli Limited & Anor v
McCann & Anor <case>; [[1954] 90 CLR 425]; see also Kak Loui Chan versus Zacharia <case>; [(1983-1984) 154 CLR 178] which deals with the fiduciary duties of a partnership.

In my view, the irresistible inference is that Resolution 7 is only for the benefit of the first and second defendants: it could clearly not be in the interests of the proprietors generally.

It is essential now to have regard to the issue of valuation which is raised by the defendant, it being claimed that the former roof comprising the common property was of no value and therefore its expropriation did not cause loss to the proprietors generally.

The valuation evidence 
Prior to its redevelopment, the roof of the building known as 121-125 Riley
Street East Sydney was available for use by the proprietors. There was a concrete stairway access to the roof from the stairwell landing on level 4.
From 1972 until late 1992, various proprietors, their employees and guests used the roof area for social functions. From the roof area there was a view of the city, the Domain, and Woolloomooloo Bay.

Since the redevelopment, all of the common property has been utilised and now comprises parts of lot 18 and 19 of SPSD53399. There is no common property on the roof of those lots, other than areas of ducting. Certainly, there is no area available for use for any proprietor other than the proprietors of lots and 19.

The plaintiff has obtained the evidence of an expert valuer, namely Mr Edward
Watts, concerning the value of the common roof area of the building as it existed prior to the redevelopment. Mr Watts adopted the direct comparison method of valuation, which in summary, takes account of sales evidence of comparative buildings. By this method, the roof area was considered as equally developable as the other floors. Various buildings of a similar nature were used for such comparisons, being located in Rushcutter's Bay and in
Darlinghurst. Using this method, Mr Watts assessed the value of the roof area in the sum of $447,700.00.

Mr Watts adopted a secondary method of arriving at a value by way of a hypothetical development analysis. Such method estimates the final value of development of the home units after deduction of realisation or selling costs, developers profit and risk allowance, construction costs, finance charges and holding costs to reach a residual value of the undeveloped roof area. By this method, he assessed the value of the roof to be $403,758.00. He concluded that a realistic value of the roof area was the sum of $420,000.00.

Mr Watts' methods of valuation, and the detail included therein was the subject of attack by the defendants, whose expert prepared a valuation on a different basis. The defendants' valuer, namely Mr Phillip Hanbury Edmonds prepared a valuation which concentrated on the hypothetical development basis.
He estimated the net sale price of the development which would represent the highest and best use of the property and deducted therefrom an allowance for profit and risk and of the estimated costs of development to arrive at the figure which he assessed was the value of the property. Using such method, he took into account the heavy expenditure which he believed would be hypothetically incurred in the development and concluded that the roof had no value. In fact his valuation concluded that the roof had a negative value of $49,343.00. In his view, it was not financially feasible to use the common property on the roof. It had no value other than a nominal value of $1.00.

Having heard the lengthy cross examination of each valuer, it is apparent that both methods of valuation are very much dependent upon hypothetical and speculative considerations and allowances. Such allowances and costs could vary enormously thereby providing a very inaccurate assessment of the value of the common property on the roof area. I found that the court was not greatly assisted by either valuation, save and except that it became apparent that the roof area, by virtue of its amenity, obviously had some value for the enjoyment of the proprietors of the strata plan and that its value would depend very much upon the price which any developer would pay for such unique space. At the very least, the proprietors may have had a chance to utilise the space for profit. Even such chance may have had a value: see Sellars v
Adelaide Petroleum NL <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 332.] 
I preferred the approach taken by Mr Watts, since I consider his evidence to be more realistic and not entirely dependent upon hypothetical figures as was the valuation prepared by Mr Edmonds. Obviously, because of its location, the opportunities to develop the roof area were exceptionally limited.
Nevertheless, I believe that such area did retain a value of the type referred to by Mr Watts.

Considered in these terms, the roof area did possess value. Perhaps the best guide of that value is contained in the oral evidence of Mr Watts. He provided evidence that if the two penthouses are sold, the value of the common property of the roof area represented one third of the net sale price. He testified as follows:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. When you said the sale price would reflect one third of the value of this space, are you suggesting that the sale price of unit 18 or 19, whatever that sale price is, one third of it could be attributed to the area or the value of the area of the roof space? 
A. Yes.

Q. So if, for example. the units were sold for $900,000 you would attribute a $300,000 component to the fact that there is a building above the old roof line? 
A. Yes.

Q. In that figure do you take into account the costs of the development that had taken place necessary to produce the $900,000? 
A. Yes" 
This leads to the inevitable conclusion that the first and second defendants were able to exploit the roof area for profit. They foresaw the opportunity do so, but at no stage placed before the proprietors, prior to the development, the proposal so that an informed and fair evaluation could be made. There was a clear conflict of interest: on the one hand, the first and second defendants had, as their objective, the redevelopment of the building for their own profit. On the other hand, there was the duty which the first and second defendants , as members of the body corporate, owed to control, manage and administer the common property for the benefit of all the proprietors, as required by <case> of the Act.

In these circumstances, as members of the body corporate, the first and second defendants were placed in a conflict vis a vis the interest of the proprietors. To such relationship, the principle in Keech versus Sandford(1726)
Sel cas t King 61; <case>; [25
ER 223)] is applicable. The actual value of the property expropriated is of little consequence: the first and second defendants were, by virtue of their position, able to manipulate the meetings of the body corporate to their advantage and, ultimately for their profit, as exemplified by the passing of
Resolution 7 on the 16th April 1996.

I find that the resolution of the 16th April 1996, being Resolution 7 resulted from the oppressive conduct of the first and second defendants towards the plaintiff.
 
The Levies 
The history of the resolutions passed at Extraordinary General Meetings, or at
Annual General Meetings shows that the levies were struck for work which went far beyond the maintenance of the building to a state of good and serviceable repair as envisaged by the provisions of <case> of the Act. In reality, it was the object of the first defendant and Dr Bates and later, of the first defendant and the second defendant to upgrade the building to a standard which was necessary only for its proposed altered use. The body corporate possessed powers to maintain and keep common property in a state of good and serviceable repair, and to remedy defects thereto of the type referred to in <case> of the Act namely the structural defects or defects that may occur in common services: see Proprietors of Strata Plan No. 6522 versus Furney and Anor [(1976) NSWLR 412.] The work in this case greatly exceeded any such repair.

In these circumstances, although I am not called upon to review the validity of the resolutions preceding the 16th April 1996 striking levies for the development, it appears they have been tainted with the same vice as taints
Resolution 7 of that date.
 
Part 5 of the Act 
For the defendants, it is argued that the Act contains a mechanism for the resolution of disputes as set out in Part 5 of the Act and that consistent with the principles in North Wind Pty Ltd versus Proprietors - Strata Plan 3143 [(1981) 2 NSWLR 809], the court in its discretion should not grant relief as sought, but rather leave it to the parties to exhaust those rights.

Part 5 contains a limited mechanism for the settlement of disputes, and the power of the Strata Titles Commissioner ("the Commissioner") to award damages is, by <case> (1A) limited to the sum of $500.00. The Commissioner may, pursuant to <case> (2) refer any application made to him to the Strata Titles
Board ("the Board") in certain limited circumstances. By <case> the Board is to be constituted by a Magistrate.

The Board's power is defined by <case>, and comprises the power of a
Commissioner, together with the powers contained in Part 5 Division 6. One such power, as contained in <case>, is to issue restraining orders. Such orders are limited in their scope and may be issued only "For the purpose of securing compliance with an order under Division 4 or on appeal...". Such power expands the power of the Board to make orders of the kind which the Commissioner might make pursuant to the powers vested in him under <case>.

Nothing in these provisions suggest that either the Commissioner of the Board possesses any power to deal with the circumstances arising in this case, nor to provide the relief which is necessary. In any event, the jurisdiction of the court is not ousted by the existence of the provisions of Part 5: see
MacLeod versus Proprietors of Strata Plan No. 6544 [(1980) 2 NSWLR 691.] For these reasons, I reject the submissions that Part 5 remedies are adequate.

The Relief 
The plaintiff claims a declaration that Resolution 7 contained in the Notice of Annual General Meeting was not properly passed, and is of no force and effect. In the alternative, it seeks a declaration that if Resolution 7 is passed, then the first and second defendants effected a fraud on the plaintiff by procuring the third defendant's agreement to transfer to the first and second defendants the third defendants' interest in the property roof area for nominal consideration, and for subsequent orders.

By way of defence, the first and second defendants maintain that they have at all times complied with the provision of the Act and secondly rely upon the defence of laches and delay.

In reply to the defence of laches, the plaintiff says that it was under the belief, as at March 1993 when it received notification of the proposed construction of the two penthouse units on the roof level, that there was a provision pursuant to which a body corporate could by special resolution pass a by-law granting to proprietors special rights in regard to the use of common property. The plaintiff did not believe in March 1993 that the first defendant or Dr Bates was intending to seek to transfer to themselves the title to the roof area, and believed at that time that they were not entitled to obtain such transfer. The plaintiff was also of the view that if such a transfer was sought, the proprietors of lot 5 would be required to seek the consent to such transfer from the plaintiff as a prerequisite to such transfer. The plaintiff was of that view until the 4th May 1995 when he received notice of the resolutions relating to the utilisation of the roof.

The defendant maintains that Mr Bovill, representing the plaintiff, knew that exclusive use rights were being obtained by the first defendant and Dr Bates of common property as early as 1993, and that such rights would have constituted a fraud in the same way as a transfer of such property.

Mr Bovill was cross examined concerning his understanding of the exclusive use rights which have been, by special resolution, provided to the first defendant and Dr Bates and of the understanding concerning ownership of such rights. In his mind, there was a distinction of the two concepts. It was also put to Mr
Bovill that certain construction work began in 1993 in the building, not only to the common property but also to the redevelopment of lot 5. Such work was well advanced by May 1995. It was also put to him that a further 18 months elapsed after he became aware of the intended transfer before proceedings were instituted, and that at all times he had the advice of a solicitor. The defendants further submitted that the correspondence from the plaintiff's solicitor as early as October 1992 threatened court proceedings, and that accordingly the plaintiff should have taken action earlier.

The defendant points to the fact that extensive work has been effected to the building, such work including the strengthening of the former roof of lot 5 in order to take the additional building comprising the penthouse portion of lot and lot 19. The first and second defendants have borrowed substantial sums to effect the redevelopment. The first defendant has also sworn an affidavit saying, in effect, that had he been advised that the use of the existing roof of the premises would cost him $500,000.00, he would not have proceeded to construct the penthouses, being lots 18 and 19.

The fact is now that a plan of strata subdivision has been registered, new lots have been created, and building work has reached the point of virtual completion involving the common areas of the building. It is now too late, in practical terms, to revert to the position in which the parties were placed prior to the commencement of any development work in late 1992.

The relief sought by the plaintiff, if granted, would leave many questions unresolved and could only be productive of further hardship and possible loss to the parties. Although it is apparent that the plaintiff never acquiesced in the conduct of the first defendant and Dr Bates and later by the first defendant and second defendant, I consider that consistent with the principles discussed by Deane J in Orr versus Ford and Anor <case>; [(1988-1989) 167 CLR 316], the relief sought by way of declarations as sought should not be granted.
However, the plaintiff never gave the first and second defendants any ground to believe that it would surrender its entitlement in the common property.
Accordingly, any delay does not destroy the plaintiff's entitlement to appropriate relief: see Led Builders Pty Ltd versus Masterton Homes Pty Ltd and others <case>; [(1994-1995) 30 IPR 447] at p. 462- 465; and authorities referred to therein. The plaintiff has sustained a detriment in consequence of the conduct of the first and second defendants.
Its interest in the common property which comprised the roof has been utilised wrongfully to the advantage of the first and second defendants. It would be unconscionable for them to have the benefit of such area without being required to compensate the plaintiff for its interest therein.

Lastly, for the defendants, it is argued that the Act contains a mechanism for the resolution of disputes as set out in Part 5 of the Act. Consistent with the principles in North Wind Pty Ltd versus Proprietors - Strata Plan 143 [(1981) NSWLR 809], the court in its discretion should not grant relief as sought, but rather leave it to the parties to exhaust their rights under Part .

I am by no means satisfied that the Strata Titles Commissioner would have the power to necessarily provide the relief which this matter demands. In any event, the jurisdiction of the court is not ousted by the existence of the provisions of Part 5: see MacLeod versus Proprietors of Strata Plan No. 6544 [(1980) 2 NSWLR 691.] 
I consider that the plaintiff, in lieu of the relief claimed, is entitled to equitable compensation in accordance with the principles referred to in
Greater Pacific Investments Pty Ltd (in Liq) versus Australian National Industries
Ltd and Another [(1996) 39 NSWLR 143] at p.
The method by which such damages should be calculated remains to be considered.

In Wrotham Park Estate Co. Ltd versus Parkside Homes and ors [(1974) 1 WLR ], the court was faced with an analogous situation. In those proceedings, the plaintiff sought an injunction to restrain the defendant from building on land in breach of a covenant and for a mandatory injunction for the demolition of any buildings erected in breach thereof. Building work had been undertaken, and deposits taken from impending purchasers of the houses under construction in breach of the covenant.

In refusing the relief as sought but in awarding damages, Brightman J. said (at p. 815G):- "I think that in a case such as the present a landowner faced with a request from the developer, which, it must be assumed, he feels reluctantly obliged to grant, would have first asked the developer what profit he would have expected to make from his operations." 
Brightman J. determined that the landowner would then reasonably have required a certain percentage of the anticipated profit as a price for the relaxation of the covenant. On the facts before him, he said that the court ought to act with great moderation in assessing what would be a fair percentage of that profit to which the plaintiff was entitled in view of the plaintiff's own delay. Such approach has been followed: see Bracewell and Another versus Appleby [(1975) Ch. 408]; Carr- Saunders versus Dick Mc Neil Associates Ltd and ors [(1986) 1 WLR 922.] 
According to the valuation by Mr Edmonds as at the 16th April 1996, he assessed the current market value of the penthouse apartments in the sum of $875,000.00 for lot 18 and $900,000.00 for lot 19. The plaintiff's valuer Mr
Watts, assessed the value of each of such lots at $950,00.00 each.

As discussed previously, Mr Watts considers that approximately one third of the sale price of each such unit is attributable to the use of the common property which existed before registration of SPSD53399.

It is preferable to assess an amount of compensation to which the plaintiff is entitled by way of damages rather than allow the possibility that an order or declaration of the court could be used to obtain an unfair advantage from another party. To arrive at such amount, I take into consideration the evidence concerning the proportion of the price which reflects the value of the former common property. I also take into consideration the evidence concerning the estimated current market values of lots 18 and 19. Allowing for expenses of sale, I am prepared for the purposes of the calculation, to accept that an estimated net $900,000.00 will be achievable in respect of the sale of each of lots 18 and 19. Of this sum, $600,000.00 represents the value of the common property. The plaintiff has a unit entitlement of one fifth in the
Strata Scheme. Accordingly his notional share is the sum of $120,000.

Accordingly, I determine the plaintiff is entitled to receive from the first and second defendants the sum of $120,000.00 by way of damages for the utilisation of the common property .

The orders I make are:-
I DECLARE that the plaintiff, as proprietor of lot 1 in SP803, is entitled to equitable compensation in the sum of $120,000.00 in consequence of the conduct of the first and second defendant in appropriating the common property of the roof area comprised in SP803 for their use.
I ORDER that the plaintiff be entitled to charge the payment of the equitable compensation totalling $120,000.00 against the title to lots 18 and being computer folio references 18/SP53399 and 19/SP53399.
I ORDER the first and second named defendants to pay the costs of the plaintiff.
 * * * 
