

Regina versus David Lloyd Monks [1996] NSWSC 152 (23 May 1996) 
REGINA versus David Lloyd MONKS /94 
Thursday 23 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, HULME J, DOWD J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In August 1994 the appellant was tried before his Honour Judge Davidson QC, sitting without a jury, upon two alternative charges.

The first charge was that on or about 11 February 1991 he dishonestly, with a view for making a gain for himself and Presbent Pty Limited, did destroy by fire a dwelling house and its contents, and a shed and its contents. The second and alternative charge was that on the same day, some person or persons unknown, dishonestly with a view for making a gain for the appellant and
Presbent Pty Limited, destroyed those premises by fire, and that the appellant was an accessory.

Following a lengthy trial his Honour found the appellant guilty of the first charge.

On 7 October 1994 the appellant was sentenced to 18 months' penal servitude to be served by way of periodic detention to commence on 14 October 1994. It appears from the information before us that the appellant did not serve the periodic detention as ordered, and absconded. A bench warrant was issued for his apprehension. That explains the delay in this appeal coming on for hearing. We were told that at some time after 6 December 1995 the appellant was arrested, and he is now serving a period of full time imprisonment pursuant to an order made in September 1995 in the District Court.

The Crown case may be summarised as follows: 
In February 1991 the appellant and his de facto partner, Louise Banks, were the directors and sole shareholders in Presbent Pty Ltd. That company had, in , acquired two properties in the Blayney area. One, named Linfern, was acquired for about $250,000. The other, named Eden View, was acquired for about $750,000. The appellant and Ms Banks lived at Eden View.

Without going into detail, it suffices, for present purposes, to say that the evidence showed that Ms Banks had invested a substantial part of her assets in
Presbent. Those assets, in turn, resulted from a substantial award of damages which she had received following a claim for damages for personal injuries.

At the beginning of 1991 Presbent was in serious financial difficulties. The company owed a large amount of money to the bank and had no realistic prospect of meeting its financial commitments. In late 1990 the appellant had arranged for the insurances over Linfern and Eden View to be substantially increased.

In early February 1991, under considerable pressure from the appellant, Ms
Banks left Eden View to pay a visit to Adelaide. Between 6 and 10 February the appellant and an employee named Reuben Hetherington visited Sydney. A man named Piers was to look after the dogs on the Eden View property during the absence of the appellant.

The appellant's father lived in Sydney. The evidence indicated that the father lived about two and a half to three hours' drive from Eden View.

On 8 February 1991 Mr Piers noticed some unusual features about the property.
He saw that gates were not in the condition in which he had left them. He also found beside a shed a bucket containing a candle, and some Jiffy fire-lighter packaging.

However, he did not at that stage go into the premises, it appears that he could not see inside them either.

On 10 February 1991 the appellant and Mr Hetherington returned to Eden View.
When they entered the farmhouse they found that it appeared to have been set up for a fire. There were trails of computer paper throughout the house, and
Jiffy fire lighters and candles had been located at various positions in the relation to the computer paper. The appellant notified the police, who came to the property, examined it, and requested the appellant to leave it undisturbed so that forensic experts might later examine it.

The appellant was at Eden View on 10 February and 11 February 1991. Early in the morning of 12 February 1991 the buildings at Eden View were destroyed by fire. A witness who arrived at the premises at about 8 am on 12 February 1991 said by that time they had been almost completely destroyed. There was expert evidence to the effect that the fire would have blazed for some hours, although there was uncertainty as to exactly when the fire would have taken hold. However, the learned trial judge found on the basis of certain evidence that the fire would not have taken hold until some time after midnight.

There was a good deal of evidence in the trial as to the possibility that the fire might have started as a result of some electrical fault, but that possibility was ruled out and it is not relevant to anything that has been argued on this appeal. There was also an attempt made on behalf of the defence to implicate a person named Mr Alcock as a suspect, but that got nowhere, and, once again, it is not relevant to anything that has been argued on this appeal.

The precise movements of the appellant on the evening of 11 February 1991 assumed particular importance at the trial. Mr Hetherington, who lived at
Linfern, said that the appellant joined him for a brief evening meal at about .40 pm and left at about 8 pm saying that he was going to Sydney. Some time between 9.30 and 10.30 pm the appellant returned to Linfern and told Mr
Hetherington that he had come back to collect a brief case and some money. The parents of the appellant said that he arrived at Sydney at about 12.30 to 1.00 am on 12 February. I earlier mentioned that it takes about two and a half to three hours to drive to Sydney from Eden View or Linfern.

The learned judge inferred that the appellant had returned to Eden View after leaving Hetherington and before coming back to Linfern. His Honour inferred that the appellant was at Eden View at least until 9.10 pm on 11 February and possibly for half an hour or so after that. None of these conclusions has been the subject of challenge on this appeal.

His Honour's ultimate conclusions were set out in par 31 of his reasons for judgment in the following terms: "On the basis of the whole of the evidence and more particularly the matters canvassed above I find the following to be established beyond reasonable doubt:
As at 11/12 February 1991 the bank was continuing to seek from Presbent reductions in the debt owing to it;
The capacity of Presbent to raise funds for the above purpose was minimal, it having no trading surplus and the assets of Miss Banks having been already consumed for that purpose;
The accused was well aware of the foregoing state of affairs referred to in 1. and 2. and was also aware that if he was to raise funds by selling off parts of the Eden View acreage he would need up to twelve months to do this;
At the instigation of the accused the insurance cover of Eden View, both as to building and contents, was substantially increased and a good deal of domestic and other items were stored in the stables;
As at 11/12 February 1991 the only person who might have lived in Eden
View were the accused, Miss Banks and on occasions Mrs Hunter, her companion.
The accused arranged for Miss Banks to take a trip to Adelaide accompanied by
Miss Hunter and he knew that she was due to return on 12 February 1991;
During the 24 hours between 6.00 pm on Thursday 7 February and 6.00 pm
Friday 8 February persons unknown prepared Eden View house for ignition by a delayed action technique involving candles and fire lighters. It remained in this state until substantial quantities of petrol accelerant were added and deliberately ignited by human act;
The last person who on the evidence was in or at the house at Eden View was the accused. He was there until about 7.30 pm on 11 February and returned shortly after 8.00 pm. I find that he was still there at about 9.00 pm which gave him the opportunity to distribute petrol as a fire accelerant in the house and prepare the stables in a similar way for delayed action ignition;
There is no evidence of any mentally ill person, vagrant or child or drug addict being at or near the premises on the night of 11/12 February 1991. The
Alcock hypothesis can be excluded because of the inherent unlikelihood of Mr
Alcock or someone acting at his instigation preparing the house for ignition on 10 February and not igniting it. The "threat" theory also fails because of the inherent unlikelihood that Mr Alcock or someone acting on his behalf would deliver such a threat to be effective for only some 72 hours or so and then come back and complete the job on the night of 11/12 February 1991;
I find motive, opportunity, and a degree of preparation in arranging the absence Miss Banks established against the accused;
The person who ignited the fires at the house and stables at Eden View was the accused and I make this finding excluding all other hypotheses consistent with his innocence;
It follows as a matter of necessary inference from my conclusion that it was the accused who by his deliberate act ignited the fire at the house and stables, that he did so dishonestly both in the subjective and objective sense and with a view to gain in the form of the insurance company meeting
Presbent's claim under its policy of insurance." 
The challenge to his Honour's reasonings which form the sole basis of this appeal relates particularly to pars 6 and 7 above. Counsel for the appellant, who is to be complimented upon the selectivity with which he prepared his submissions for this appeal, concentrated his attack upon the finding of the trial judge that a delayed action technique involving candles and fire lighters was used in relation to this fire. The point of the challenge is as follows. On the finding made by the trial judge the appellant must have left
Eden View not later than about 9.45 pm on 11 February 1991. Again, on the finding made by the trial judge the fire took hold not earlier than midnight.
Accordingly, it is important for a conclusion that it was the appellant that lit the fire, that there was, to use the trial judge's expression, some kind of "delayed action technique".

Counsel for the appellant observes that although an expert witness, Mr Cafe, was called by the Crown, the thrust of his evidence was to deal with the defence's suggestion that the fire might have resulted from an electrical problem. Nobody asked Mr Cafe to give an opinion about delayed action techniques or to express a view about how the appellant might have contrived to ignite something no later than 9.45 pm which resulted in a blaze that took hold no earlier than midnight.

In par 16 of his detailed reasons for judgment, Davidson DCJ made the following reference to the state of the premises as found on 10 February 1991: "Mr Piers and the accused entered the house. The accused first producing a key to the back door which would not open when Mr Piers tried it. They then went to the front door and gained entry with the key produced by the accused.
Mr Piers in the house saw the continuous trails of computer paper on the floor on each room of the house interspersing with Jiffy fire lighters and candles." 
At that stage there was no sign of accelerant in the premises, but the expert evidence showed - and there is no challenge to this - that a substantial quantity of accelerant must have been distributed through the premises at some stage before the fire actually started. Later tests revealed the presence of residual hydrocarbons consistent with petrol which had been used as an accelerant.

It should also be mentioned that the destruction caused by the fire was so complete that by the time people arrived early on 12 February 1991 there was no remaining indication of exactly how the fire had been lit or where it had started, although the evidence indicated that there might have been a number of different seats of the fires.

Having referred in further detail to the condition of the premises on 10
February 1991 his Honour said at the conclusion of par 19 of his reasons: "The house at Eden View therefore remained primed for a delayed action fire needing only the addition of petrol accelerant." 
His Honour then went on in pars 20 and 21: "20 Mr Hetherington went to Eden View at about 8 am on the morning of 11
February 1991. He saw the accused there and left at about 4 pm arranging that the accused should come to where Hetherington was living as Linfern and dine with him that evening at about 7.30 pm. The accused, he said, arrived at about .40 pm. He did not eat much and left at about 8 pm saying he was going to
Sydney. At about 9.30 to 10 pm that night the accused returned and told Mr
Hetherington that he had done so in order to recover his brief case and money which he had left there. He told Mr Hetherington that he had got as far as Mt
Lambie where he had stopped to get petrol, that it was then he discovered that he had neither brief case nor the money in his possession. He recovered his brief case and left again asking Mr Hetherington to ring his father in Sydney and explain that he would be late arriving there." "21 At about 9.10 pm on 11 February 1991, Mr Oldham who lived on the property adjacent to Eden View saw from outside his own premises an electrical light shining from the stables at Eden View. It was, he said, a light attached to the outside of the building. At about midnight on 11 February 1991 Mr Jason
Hunter rang the Eden View telephone number from Blayney. He said that the phone at the other end kept ringing till the ringing cut out. There is other evidence which I also accept that after the fires took hold at Eden View there was no power into the house nor as I apprehend it into the stable.
 
This evidence therefore tends to place the time at which the fire allegedly spread significantly within the house at some time after midnight. The evidence of the accused supported by that of both his parents is that the accused arrived at his parents' home at some time between 12.30 1.00 am on 12
February 1991. Assuming a three hour driving time or thereabouts he must have left the Linfern/Eden View area by about 9.30pm on 11 February. The accused gave evidence of a driving time of that order and Mr Hetherington said it took two and a half to three hours to drive from Oatley to Eden View on 10 February ." 
Counsel for the appellant referred to the principles stated in the R v
Perry [(1990) 49 ACrimR 243] at 249, and submitted that the present was a case in which the subject matter was such that inexperienced persons were unlikely to be capable of forming a correct judgment upon it without expert assistance.

It was argued that neither Davidson DCJ nor a jury, if there had been one, could properly have formed a view about the potential for delayed action ignition of the kind referred to in the reasoning of the trial judge without the benefit and assistance of expert evidence. Since the expert evidence called in the case was silent upon the subject, then, it was argued, it was not open to the trial judge to reach the conclusions he did concerning the matter of delayed action techniques.

In order to put that submission into perspective, it is necessary to bear in mind that the unchallenged evidence was that whoever had made arrangements exposed at the premises on 10 February 1991 had left a trail of computer paper amongst which there were interspersed candles and Jiffy fire lighters. The clear inference was that at some later time accelerants would be distributed at selected locations around the premises. That, at least, is what actually happened.

The use of candles for the purpose of assisting in creating a fire at such premises can scarcely have been for any purpose other than to achieve some degree of delayed action. The reason why someone might want to delay the action in question, or at least one reason, is perfectly obvious.
Considerations relating to the personal safety of the individual who lit the fire would dictate that there should be at least some time gap between striking the match or matches to light the fire and the conflagration, especially in circumstances where it was contemplated that a substantial quantity of accelerants would be spread around the premises. Furthermore, if the person who lit the fire wanted to have an alibi, or wanted to distance himself or herself from the premises, that would provide an additional reason for delaying the action of igniting the fire.

There was some discussion in the course of argument in this appeal as to the precise method by which candles and Jiffy fire lighters and trails of computer paper might in combination be used to delay the action of igniting a fire. One of the members of the bench personally experienced in these matters observed that standing a candle on its end, with Jiffy fire lighters at the base, and paper in the immediate vicinity, would be a very easy means of ensuring a substantial time gap between the use of some matches and the commencement of a conflagration. Just as the evident purpose of candles is to delay the commencement of a fire, so the evident purpose of Jiffy fire lighters is to promote a fire once the flame has come into contact with the fire lighter.
Candles and fire lighters, it will be remembered, were found at various locations amongst the computer paper.

As has been observed on behalf of the Crown, most Australians have a reasonable familiarity with the action of candles, Jiffy fire lighters, and paper. In my view, this is a subject upon which the trial judge was entitled to rely upon the ordinary experience of human kind. Having regard to the presence in the premises on 10 February 1992 of candles and Jiffy fire lighters and computer paper, he was entitled to infer that some kind of delayed action technique was envisaged by whoever set and whoever ultimately lit the fire.

It was not necessary to his reasoning that he should go on or to form any opinion about the precise methods that might be used in this regard, although, as I mentioned earlier, one fairly obvious method was discussed in argument in this appeal.

The point that the appellant was seeking to make in the appeal was that there was an inconsistency between the finding that the appellant had left Eden View by about 9.30 or 9.45 pm on 11 February, the finding that the appellant arrived at his parents' home in Sydney at about 12.30 or 1.00 pm on 12
February 1991, and the finding that the fire took hold some time after midnight. It was the delayed action technique that was the trial judge's explanation as to why there was no inconsistency between these findings. It was for that reason that the appellant saw it as important to attack the reasoning of the trial judge in relation to the delayed action technique.

Ultimately, I have come to the conclusion, after examination of the evidence and a consideration of the arguments advanced by counsel for the appellant and the Crown, that this challenge to the reasoning of the trial judge has not been made good. I consider that his Honour has not been shown to be in error and in, particular, that he has not been shown to have erred in forming a conclusion on this subject of the kind referred to above in the absence of expert evidence on the point.

For those reasons I consider that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed. There has been no challenge to the sentence.

HULME J: I agree with the reasons enunciated by the Chief Justice and the order proposed.
 
DOWD J: I also agree with the reasons of the Chief Justice and the order proposed.
 
GLEESON CJ: The appeal against conviction is dismissed.
 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - WHETHER EXPERT EVIDENCE NECESSARY 
The appellant, who was tried before a judge sitting alone, was convicted of arson. It was essential to the trial judge's reasoning that the fire in question had been started by a delayed action technique. There was evidence that the fire had been started by the use of candles, Jiffy firelighters, computer paper spread through the premises and accelerant. It was argued that, there being no expert evidence as to how this could have involved a delayed action technique, the judge was not entitled to form his own view on the subject - HELD - The use of candles in starting a fire is itself an indication of a desire for some kind of delayed action, and the judge did not need expert evidence to tell him how the use of candles and Jiffy firelights and a paper trail could involve a delayed action.

O R D E R S 
Appeal against conviction dismissed.
 * * * 
