

Tanna versus Deutsche Bank (Asia) Ag and Ors; Saad and Anor versus Barwick and Ors [1996] NSWSC 408 (5 September 1996) 
TANNA versus DEUTSCHE BANK (ASIA) AG & ORS SAAD & ANOR versus BARWICK &
ORS /87 3105/93 
Thursday 5th September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I am dealing with two proceedings, in which damages are sought against three solicitors, who practised at the time as Barwick & Co. (who I will refer to as "the defendants"), arising out of certain loan and mortgage transactions entered into by the plaintiffs in 1982 and 1983. 
The first proceedings are No.4924 of 1987, brought by James Tanna, and commenced in November 1987 against Deutsche Bank (Asia) AG (previously
European Asian Bank). The defendants were added as defendants to these proceedings pursuant to an order made on 24th March 1988, and they are now the only defendants to the proceedings.

The second proceedings are No.3105 of 1993, brought by Neville Saad and his wife Julie Saad, and originally commenced against the defendants in the Common
Law Division on 28th November 1989.

In both cases, it is alleged that the defendants breached a duty of skill and care owed to the plaintiffs (that is, to James Tanna and to Mr. and Mrs.Saad) as their solicitors. The two proceedings have been heard together, with evidence in one being evidence in the other.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
It is convenient first to outline the facts which are either not substantially in dispute or clearly proved.

James Tanna, who is the brother of Julie Saad, was born in Lebanon in about
It appears that Julie Saad was born in Lebanon about two years earlier, and she married Neville Saad in Lebanon in about 1949. Mr. and Mrs. Saad came to Australia with Kenneth Tanna, the father of Julie Saad and James Tanna, in about 1950 or 1951. James Tanna came to Australia with his mother in about
Vincent Tanna, a brother of James Tanna and Julie Saad, also came to
Australia, perhaps a little earlier than the others.

Between 1955 and 1969 James Tanna worked in various jobs as a process worker and labourer. Between about 1950 and 1976 Julie Saad worked in various jobs as a process worker and in businesses owned by other family members. Neville Saad did not give evidence: there is evidence that he has a substantial hearing difficulty.

By the time of the first transaction the subject of these proceedings, the plaintiffs had acquired a number of properties in the Parramatta area. James
Tanna, together with his father Kenneth and his brother Vincent, owned two lots in Lansdowne Street, Parramatta. One of those lots was, in July 1981, mortgaged to ANZ Banking Group (along with other property) to secure an advance of about $1 million, apparently made for the purpose of developing a property owned by Kenneth and Vincent Tanna in Great Western Highway,
Parramatta. James Tanna also was the sole owner of 75 Prospect Street, Harris
Park, on which he had built an eight-flat residential property. James Tanna lived in one of these flats and rented the rest. That property was mortgaged to secure about $120,000.00 owed to two mortgagees by James Tanna.

Mr. and Mrs. Saad owned a house and shop at 51 Rosehill Street, Parramatta.
They also owned 60-64 Meehan Street, Granville, on which they had erected sixteen home units. They lived in one unit, and rented the rest. This property was subject to a mortgage to Perpetual Trustee Company, securing about $360,000.00.

In late 1981, Vincent Tanna negotiated for a loan in overseas currency at a low interest rate. By a letter dated 18th March 1982, addressed to Vincent
Tanna, Theresa Tanna (Vincent's wife), Kenneth Tanna, James Tanna, Neville
Saad and Julie Saad, the European Asian Bank offered to lend the equivalent of $1.6 million in Swiss francs for a period of five years, for the purpose of completing the construction of a seven storey block containing forty-two units, and to discharge existing mortgages and bank bills. The security for this advance was to be a first mortgage over property in Great Western Highway (owned by Kenneth and Vincent Tanna, and being the site of the construction project), 75 Prospect Street and 60-64 Meehan Street; and there were to be joint and several guarantees given by each of the borrowers.

One copy of this letter of approval in evidence contains signatures of all the offerees, accepting the conditions of the loan, and dated 2nd April 1982.
There is in evidence a further document dated 2nd April 1982, being a request to open an account, also with signatures of all offerees. Both these documents are witnessed by one D. Payne, who is probably an employee of the Bank.
However, I am not able to infer that James Tanna or Mr. and Mrs. Saad actually attended the Bank to sign these documents.

Barwick & Co. acted for the borrowers in relation to finalising this loan.
The responsible partner was the defendant Terry McCabe. He dealt with Vincent
Tanna, and said that he had no significant dealings at all with the plaintiffs. He arranged for an employed solicitor, Avril Hetherington, to carry the matter through.

On 7th May 1982, all borrowers attended the office of Barwick & Co. They signed statutory declarations, witnessed by Mrs. Hetherington, to the effect that there were no unsatisfied judgments against them and no outstanding charges on the properties. They also signed a loan agreement with the European
Asian Bank for $1.6 million, and mortgages to the Bank over their respective properties.

On 26th May 1982, the Bank's solicitors, Holman Webb, wrote to Barwick &
Co. enclosing a replacement page 8 of the loan agreement, incorporating a clause 5.06 previously omitted, and requesting that this replacement page be initialled in the margin adjacent to cl.5.06 by the signatories to the loan agreement. The signatories, including the plaintiffs, did subsequently initial this page, and Mrs. Hetherington's initials also appear there above and below the other initials.

The advance was settled on 28th June 1982, and the agreement and mortgages were dated that day. The settlement sheet shows that about $1.1 million of the advance was used to pay out the ANZ Bank; about $361,000.00 was used to pay out Perpetual Trustee; and about $120,000.00 was used to pay out the mortgagees in respect of James Tanna's property. The rest of the advance went in fees, costs and disbursements.

On the same day, there was settled a mortgage granted by Kenneth, Vincent, and
James Tanna to Roland Gridiger and others over property in Lansdowne Street,
Parramatta, to secure a loan of $400,000.00 for a period of three months. The evidence is not clear as to when this document was signed by the mortgagors, but the signatures were witnessed by Mrs. Hetherington.

Thereafter James Tanna and Mr. and Mrs. Saad paid what they understood to be their share of interest payments to Vincent Tanna. Barwick & Co. wrote to
Mrs. Saad on 24th August 1982, advising her that her share of the mortgage was .5% of the total.

On 11th October 1982, Holman Webb wrote to Barwick & Co. advising that there were caveats on the Great Western Highway property, apparently relating to unpaid land tax; and enclosing statutory declarations to be executed. On th November 1982, Mrs. Hetherington wrote to Vincent Tanna enclosing a copy of this letter, noting that the land tax problem arose because Vincent had to cancel a cheque for land tax, and enclosing the statutory declarations for signature (and stating that Mrs. Hetherington would attend to witnessing them on their return).

The Gridiger mortgage was extended to 25th November 1982, but was still unpaid in July 1983.

On 18th July 1983, by a letter addressed to the existing borrowers, the
European Asian Bank offered to advance the equivalent of a further $600,000.00 in Swiss francs for about four years, on the existing security plus some additional security, for the purpose of re-financing existing borrowings and financing working capital. This offer was apparently discussed by Mr. McCabe with Mr. Gridiger, and a copy was sent to Mr. Gridiger by Barwick & Co.
under cover of a letter dated 26th July 1983.

There is in evidence a file note dated 26th July 1983 in which Mr. McCabe records that no payments had been made under the Gridiger mortgage; that a further advance could not be settled until land tax (which was noted elsewhere to be $30,000.00) had been paid; that there was an interest payment of $55,000.00; that they had been "knocked back on more funds"; and that "we to organise $60,000 loan".

On 31st August 1983, Vincent Tanna saw Mr. McCabe and another partner, Mr.
Gallagher, in conference, and advised that he required $10,000.00 in order to prevent Mr. Gridiger imposing a penalty interest rate of 32%. Barwick &
Co. agreed to lend Vincent Tanna $10,000.00.

On or about 4th November 1983, it appears that the plaintiffs and the other borrowers attended the office of Barwick & Co., and signed a Supplementary
Loan Agreement with European Asian Bank. Their signatures were witnessed by
Lee Downey, a conveyancing clerk employed by Barwick & Co. in place of
Mrs. Hetherington, who had left the firm to have a baby.

A further advance from European Asian Bank was settled on 18th November 1983.
$104,000.00 was deducted from the advance, including about $34,000.00 land tax and about $58,000.00 interest (which I infer was outstanding under the original $1.6 million loan). To discharge the Gridiger mortgage, $475,000.00 was paid as principal (it being not clear to me where the increase from $400,000.00 comes from) and about $66,000.00 was paid as interest. This left a shortfall, and to make this up a further sum of about $45,000.00 was apparently borrowed from the National Australia Bank.

The Great Western Highway project was apparently unsuccessful, and did not produce money sufficient to pay out money borrowed for that purpose. The properties mortgaged to the European Asian Bank by the plaintiffs were sold in order to pay out the amount owing to the Bank.

James Tanna's property, 75 Prospect Street, Harris Park, was sold by contract dated 10th December 1987 for $440,000.00, with all proceeds going to the Bank.

Mr. and Mrs. Saad sold eight of their sixteen units in 1985 and 1986, the net proceeds of about $407,000.00 going to the Bank. The remaining eight units were sold by a contract dated 15th December 1987 for $480,000.00, with all proceeds going to the Bank. Their home at 51 Rosehill Street, Parramatta was subject to a mortgage of about $120,000.00 in 1987. Mr. and Mrs. Saad say that, by reason of the loss of income of their other units, that mortgage has now gone up to $400,000.00.

ISSUES 
James Tanna and Julie Saad say that they cannot read English (indeed, Julie
Saad says she cannot read at all); that they have limited understanding of spoken English; that they believed in May and June of 1982 that they were making themselves and their properties liable only for about $120,000.00 and $360,000.00 respectively, not for the whole advance of $1.6 million; and that they did not know what they were signing for in November 1983. James Tanna also says that he knew nothing about the Gridiger mortgage.

The plaintiff's case is that Barwick & Co. were under a duty to exercise reasonable skill and care, at least to ensure that there was no conflict of interests in the transactions, and to explain adequately to the plaintiffs the legal effect of what they were doing; that Barwick & Co. breached this duty; and that, as a result, the plaintiffs became liable for more than what they believed they were making themselves liable for, and suffered damage.

The defendants accept that the plaintiffs were clients to whom the defendants owed a duty of skill and care. Evidence was led by Mrs. Hetherington and Mr.
Downey concerning explanations given by them to the plaintiffs; and the defendants contend that there was no breach of duty. The defendants also raise a substantial issue on the related questions of causation and calculation of damages: even if the duty was breached, the defendants contend that the plaintiffs have not shown what, if anything, would have been done differently if the duty had not been breached. The defendants also rely on the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/).

At the hearing, the plaintiffs applied for leave to put on a reply, relying on s.55 of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/). Ultimately, this was not pressed, because Mr. Cauchi, Counsel for the plaintiffs, accepted, correctly in my opinion, that the evidence could not justify a finding of fraudulent concealment against the defendants: cf. Hamilton v.
Kaljo [(1989) 17 NSWLR 381.] There were other amendments sought at the hearing, in order to incorporate references to the Gridiger loan in the statement of claim. Although these were opposed, ultimately Mr. Jacobson QC for the defendants did not submit that the defendants were prejudiced; and I do allow these amendments.

The judgment will first outline the submissions made on both sides. I will then look at questions of credit. Next, I will consider the case brought by
James Tanna, in relation to the following matters: breach of duty in relation to the 1982 transaction; causation and damages in relation to the 1982 transaction; breach of duty in relation to the 1983 transactions; and causation and damages in relation to the 1983 transactions. Next, I will consider the case of Mr. and Mrs. Saad, in the same manner. Finally, I will consider the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) question.

SUBMISSIONS 
For Plaintiffs 
First, Mr. Cauchi submitted that the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) had no application. He submitted that the plaintiffs suffered no actual loss when they entered into the various transactions, and that the incurring of a contingency for loss was insufficient to complete their cause of action in tort: see Hawkins v. Clayton (1987) 164 CLR 539; State of Western Australia v. Wardley Australia <case>; [(1991) 30 FCR 245]; Magman Int. v. Westpac <case>; [(1991) 104 ALR 575]; Crisp v. Blake (1992) Aust.Tort Reports, 81-158; Wardley
Australia v. State of Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] and Bryan v. Moloney (1994) 182 CLR 609.

Next, Mr. Cauchi submitted that the defendants owed a duty to all of the clients. As regards the nature and extent of the duty, he referred me to
Hawkins v. Clayton (1987) 164 CLR 539 and Waimond Pty. Ltd. v. Byrne [(1989) 18 NSWLR 642.] 
As regards the first transaction, Barwick & Co. knew that an application was being made for a global sum of $1.6 million, for the whole of which each of the borrowers would be liable, which was to be applied to pay out an existing mortgage to the ANZ Bank (about $1.1 million) plus existing mortgages of the Saads (about $360,000.00) and James Tanna (about $120,000.00). The plaintiffs had been told by Vincent Tanna that all they were doing was replacing their existing mortgages by a mortgage with a lower interest rate: nothing else about the mortgage was explained to them. The defendants had a duty to enquire whether any conflict of interests may arise, and they breached that duty because they made no further enquiry beyond Vincent Tanna. The plaintiffs should expressly have been given the option of having independent advice. Furthermore, the defendants had a duty to inform the clients explicitly of the risks being undertaken and to satisfy themselves that the clients did understand the full effect of the transaction. Accordingly, even if I were to accept Mrs. Hetherington's evidence in full, she did not do enough: the explanation which she gave was not clear enough, and, in circumstances where she should have been aware that there was a language problem, she did nothing to overcome that problem.

In the result, the plaintiffs went ahead with the first transaction without any understanding that they were individually making themselves liable for the whole $1.6 million and that, if Vincent Tanna and Kenneth Tanna failed to repay the amount being applied to their project, the plaintiffs would have to repay that as well as the moneys being borrowed for their purposes.

In the case of James Tanna, his evidence was to the effect that he had no participation in and no understanding of the $1 million advance from the ANZ
Bank and the mortgage given to Mr. Gridiger and others. Had he understood that, by a transaction from which he benefited only to the extent of $120,000.00, he would be liable for $1.6 million to the European Asian Bank, and a further $400,000.00 to Gridiger and others, he would not have entered into this transaction. As regards Mr. and Mrs. Saad, they had never been involved in a common or joint mortgage with Vincent Tanna, particularly any transaction in which they would be liable for Vincent Tanna's debts. If they had understood that this transaction would make them liable for $1.6 million, they would have simply replaced their existing mortgage or else paid it out by selling some of the units.

Turning to the second transaction, Mr. Cauchi submitted that there was a plain conflict of interests between Mr. and Mrs. Saad and the other borrowers, and that a breach of duty arising out of that conflict of interests was substantially admitted by the defendants. Mr. Cauchi submitted that there was a similar conflict of interests as between James Tanna and Vincent Tanna, because James Tanna was completely unaware of the breaches occurring in relation to the Gridiger mortgage and was given no information about that.
Again, there was a breach of duty by Barwick & Co. in failing to inform the clients explicitly of the risks involved in the second transaction, and to satisfy themselves that the clients understood the effect of the transaction.

As regards damages, Mr. Cauchi submitted that they should be calculated in accordance with Exhibit P8: for James Tanna as set out in par.42, and for Mr.
and Mrs. Saad, as set out in par.36 (scenario 2), but replacing $110,000.00, given as the average value of the units, by $115,000.00.

For Defendants 
Mr. Jacobson has provided a written outline of submissions, which I will leave with the papers. 
First, he submitted that the onus was on the plaintiffs to establish that, if the defendants had fulfilled their duty, the plaintiffs would not have entered into the loan agreement and mortgage for $1.6 million: see Ellis v. Wallsend
District Hospital [(1989) 17 NSWLR 553] at 581;
Gates v. City Mutual (1985-6) 160 CLR 1 at 13-14.

As regards James Tanna, he gave no evidence that he would have acted differently if he had known of his liability for the whole $1.6 million. In any event, the Court would infer from the circumstances that he would not have acted differently. Mr. Jacobson particularly relied on the circumstance that
James Tanna was already personally liable on the $1 million loan from the ANZ
Bank which was repaid out of the European Asian Bank loan; and on the evidence of his acting over considerable period of time in accordance with the wishes of Vincent Tanna.

As regards the Saads, Mr. Jacobson submitted that, in the absence of evidence from Mr. Saad, I could not infer what the Saads would have done had any duty not been breached: see Payne v. Parker [(1976) 1 NSWLR 191] at 200-1;
Qantas Airways v. S.S. Pharmaceutical Co., N.S.W. Court of Appeal, 20/7/90.
Even if I were to accept that Mrs. Saad's evidence as to what she would have done represents her present honest belief, that evidence was given with the benefit of hindsight and does not establish what she would have done at the time. It is likely that she would have discussed the matter with her husband, and in the absence of evidence from her husband, it is impossible to infer what the outcome of those discussions would have been.

Turning to the question of duty and breach, Mr. Jacobson submitted that the duty of the solicitor was at most to explain the salient features of the transaction and the joint and several liability: Fox v. Everingham <case>; [(1983) 50 ALR 337] at 341. While the parties to the 1982 agreement received different benefits, there was no conflict of interests and it was not incumbent upon the defendant to inform the parties that they should seek independent advice.

Mrs. Hetherington's evidence of what she said should be accepted. James Tanna and Mrs. Saad had sufficient understanding of English to follow her explanation: Mrs. Hetherington was not cross-examined about her evidence of telephone conversations with James Tanna and Mrs. Saad, nor on her assertion that James Tanna and Mrs. Saad appeared to understand the explanation which she gave at the time. It was not put to Mrs. Hetherington in cross-examination that the explanation which she said she gave was insufficient, or that it should have been put in more explicit terms.

Mr. Jacobson submitted that James Tanna was an unsatisfactory witness, who had no need to give his evidence totally, or almost totally, in Arabic; and who insisted that numerous earlier mortgages were either not signed by him or not explained. Mrs. Saad also, he submitted, was not a reliable witness. She had a good appreciation of money matters. She would not accept that documents were signed by her where she apparently thought it was contrary to her interests in the case. Mr. Jacobson also pointed to inconsistencies in Mrs. Saad's evidence about the execution of supplementary loan agreements.

Mr. Jacobson substantially conceded that there was a breach of duty in relation to the entry by the Saads into the supplementary loan agreement in
November 1983. However, he submitted that no damage was shown flowing from entry into that agreement. The evidence suggested that default would have occurred under the original loan agreement of $1.6 million, and there was no basis on which the Court could infer that property owned by Vincent Tanna and
Kenneth Tanna would then have borne the share of the advance attributable to them, or any greater share than they were ultimately able to pay. There was no evidence as to what other securities were provided by Vincent Tanna and
Kenneth Tanna and what the value of those securities was from time to time.

On the question of damages generally, Mr. Jacobson submitted that a witness called by the defendants on damages, Mr. Jansen, was not cross-examined, and that accordingly at least $180,000.00 should be deducted from the Saads' claim because it would amount to double counting. He submitted also that a further $175,000.00 or thereabouts should be deducted as being the one-half of construction costs attributable to the second lot of eight units which were sold. Finally he submitted that there were expenses which had to come off the lost income claim, in particular strata levies. As regards James Tanna, he submitted that the income claim could not be sustained, because there were no primary records to support it.

On the limitation question, Mr. Jacobson submitted that all the causes of action were complete on the settlement of the respective transactions, because this involved the immediate creation of a charge on property owned by the plaintiffs: see Forster v. Boutred [(1982) 1 WLR 86.] 
CREDIT 
Although this is not strictly a matter of credit, I first consider what, if anything, follows from the failure of Mr. Saad to give evidence. Accepting that he does have a serious hearing impediment, I do not consider this to be an adequate explanation of why he did not give evidence. He could have given evidence (if these things were indeed true) to the effect that he did not hear what was said on the occasions when loan and mortgage documents were signed, that he did not understand that he would be liable for money advanced for the use of Vincent Tanna, and that, if he had known this, he would not have signed the documents. The applicability of Jones v. Dunkel to the failure of Mr. Saad to give evidence was discussed during the hearing and in final submissions, but no application was made for leave to put on a late affidavit from him or to call him to give oral evidence. Accordingly, I do not see any basis for not applying Jones v. Dunkel in relation to the failure of Mr. Saad to give evidence. As will appear, this has some importance in a case where the onus lies squarely on the plaintiffs to prove causation. It is true that, if Mrs. Saad alone had not signed the documents, the transactions would not have gone ahead; but, as submitted by Mr. Jacobson, one would have expected there to be dialogue between Mr. and Mrs. Saad if a question arose about this, with a view to reaching agreement as to what course to take. 
Turning to the evidence of James Tanna and Mrs. Saad, undoubtedly both have suffered great losses through the mortgages given to the European Asian Bank and to Mr Gridiger and his associates, and as a result of Vincent Tanna's dealings with money advanced pursuant to those mortgages. It is fair to say that they believe they are entitled to compensation for these losses from their solicitors. I believe their evidence has been affected by reconstruction of events, which occurred thirteen or fourteen years ago and are imperfectly remembered, in the light of that belief: for example, their evidence to the effect that no explanation was given of the documents they were signing. I find this unlikely, and I accept the evidence of Mrs. Hetherington and Mr.
Downey to the extent that it suggests that at least some explanation was given. I consider that both these plaintiffs were over-reluctant to acknowledge their signatures to documents and to acknowledge awareness of transactions (quite apart from the subject transactions), and I accept Mr.
Jacobson's submission that there were inconsistencies in Mrs. Saad's evidence.

Accordingly, while I do not believe that either James Tanna or Mrs. Saad have set out to give deliberately false evidence, I do not feel able to rely on the details or even the substance of their evidence as to what happened thirteen or fourteen years ago, in the absence of corroboration from other evidence or the general circumstances of the case.

On the important question of what would these plaintiffs have done if they had understood the nature of the documents which they were signing, James Tanna gave no direct evidence; and I will consider the implications of that later.
Mrs. Saad gave evidence to the effect that she would not have signed the documents. I accept that this is what she now believes, but cannot give that evidence very much weight. It is given with the wisdom of hindsight, informed by the large misfortunes which have resulted from the transactions, and this is a matter on which the danger of re-construction is particularly great.

As regards the other main witness for the plaintiffs on the question of liability, Kevin Saad, who is Mr. and Mrs. Saad's son, I believe he gave his evidence honestly and with reasonable recollection. However, his evidence does not assist the plaintiffs very much on the questions of liability and causation of damage.

Turning to the defendants' witnesses, I was concerned by certain evidence given by Mrs. Hetherington about the statutory declarations sent under cover of the letter of 16th November 1982. It is most unsatisfactory that a solicitor should propose that statutory declarations be signed in her absence, and then returned to her to be witnessed. Mrs. Hetherington says that she took that course because she was instructed to. However, the matter was not taken up with Mr. McCabe, who may have given the instruction, and there were no questions asked as to whether the statutory declarations were in fact dishonestly witnessed. However, the circumstance that this should even be proposed reflects badly on the standards of a solicitor.

Notwithstanding that, I think that Mrs. Hetherington gave her evidence honestly and with reasonable recollection. Again, I think there was a certain amount of reconstruction of imperfectly remembered material, affected by a belief that what she would have done at the time must have been correct.
Similar comments apply to the evidence of Mr. McCabe and Mr. Downey.

JAMES TANNA'S CASE 
Duty and Breach in 1982 
I accept that the defendants had a duty to exercise reasonable skill and care in being alert to possible conflicts of interest, and in giving an adequate explanation to the clients of the legal effect of the transactions, in a way appropriate to the circumstances. In the case of the 1982 transaction with
European Asian Bank, all borrowers were members of a family and were getting substantial benefits from the loan, albeit not to the same extent; and I do not think there was such a conflict of interests as to require the defendants to explicitly raise with the plaintiffs the question of whether they should have independent solicitors.

I think that an adequate explanation to the plaintiffs of this transaction would have been directed towards ensuring that they understood at least the following elements. Firstly, the usual effect of a mortgage of property; secondly, that the loan had to be repaid in Swiss francs, so that currency movements could mean that the principal to be repaid could be substantially greater than $1.6 million; and thirdly, that each participant was liable for the whole of the loan so that if, for example, Vincent Tanna did not repay the $1.1 million applied for his purposes and interest on that sum, then the plaintiffs would have to repay those sums as well as the parts of the loan taken for their own purposes.

No specific complaint is made in respect of the first and second of those elements; and although I have some doubt whether the explanations which Mrs.
Hetherington says she gave on the second element were sufficient, I do not believe that was in issue in the case either as pleaded or as conducted. As for the third element, I have some doubt whether the explanations which Mrs.
Hetherington says she gave about this were sufficient, using words such as "you will all have to pay the whole amount", "the bank ... can take all your properties ... and sell them", and "if there isn't enough to pay, then the bank can take you all to Court" and "each one of you will be individually liable"; and whether, particularly in circumstances where she says that
Vincent interrupted her talking in the Lebanese language, she did enough to ensure that each one of the borrowers understood the explanation she was giving in English.

Mr. Jacobson submitted that it was not put to Mrs. Hetherington that she did not give a more pointed explanation, drawing specific attention to the possibility of having to repay money used by Vincent Tanna: if that had been put to her, then she could have had an explanation. Mr. Jacobson also relied on evidence that she asked each of the participants individually "Do you understand", and each one of them indicated he or she did; and that the evidence was not challenged in cross-examination. However, I do think that the issue of whether what Mrs. Hetherington said and did was enough was sufficiently raised at the hearing. As I have already indicated, I do not accept evidence given for the plaintiffs that no explanation was given; but on the other hand, I do not feel confident about Mrs. Hetherington's evidence that she asked each person individually "Do you understand"; and I do believe that the circumstances should have raised the question for Mrs. Hetherington whether the plaintiffs' understanding of English was adequate for them to understand what she was saying.

However, the ultimate onus on this issue is squarely on the plaintiffs. Their evidence does not assist me to determine what was actually said. I believe something to the effect of Mrs. Hetherington's evidence was said by her, although I cannot be confident as to its details. In the circumstances, I do not feel able either to decide precisely what was said, or to decide that, whatever it was, it amounted to a failure to perform the defendants' duty.

I have a similar difficulty in relation to the Gridiger mortgage. This mortgage did not have the unusual features of the European Asian Bank mortgage (foreign currency, and a liability of each for the whole loan, in return for part only of the advance); although the evidence does suggest that the whole advance was probably used for Vincent Tanna's project, and not for the benefit of James Tanna. Furthermore, the interest rate of 32% was extraordinary; but this is not a subject of any specific allegation of breach of duty, and the evidence does not suggest any detriment to James Tanna from this interest rate. I believe that a standard sort of explanation was given of this mortgage, and the question is whether that was enough in the light of James
Tanna's language limitations, and in a case where the mortgage money was apparently used for Vincent Tanna's purposes - although no evidence was led showing the actual application of this mortgage advance.

In circumstances where the onus is squarely on the plaintiffs, I do not feel able to decide precisely what was said to James Tanna in relation to this mortgage, or to decide that, whatever it was, it amounted to a failure to perform the defendants' duty.

Causation and Damages in 1982 
In case I am wrong in my finding that a breach of duty has not been established, I will consider the question of causation and damages, on the assumption that the defendants did breach their duty to James Tanna by not giving a sufficient explanation to him of the legal effect of the European Asian Bank mortgage or the Gridiger mortgage.

On that assumption, I would find that James Tanna did not understand that he and his property would be liable for the whole of the European Asian Bank mortgage and the Gridiger mortgage, if the other borrowers (especially Vincent
Tanna) did not pay the shares of the advance and interest thereon representing the amounts applied to their benefit. However, that does not of itself establish causation of loss flowing from entry into those mortgages. To prove causation, James Tanna must prove, on the balance of probabilities, that he would not have entered into the mortgages if he had understood their effect; and the amount of the damages will reflect the difference between his actual position and what it would have been if the defendants' duty had not been breached.

James Tanna gave no evidence of what he would have done if he had understood the effect of the mortgages. It might be said that such evidence would not have been admissible, because it is purely hypothetical: it is not evidence of something actually observed or of actual beliefs or intentions. It is, of course, clear that, if a person at the time actually considers what he or she would do in a certain eventuality, and that consideration bears on the probabilities of whether or not some relevant steps would have been taken, then evidence can be given of that consideration and of any intentions actually formed. However, in the present case, it seems clear that James Tanna gave no consideration at the time as to what he would do if the mortgages he was about to sign made him liable for more than his $120,000.00. Nevertheless,
I am firmly of the view that evidence of what he would have done if he had understood this, would have been admissible: cf. Ellis v. Wallsend District
Hospital [(1989) 17 NSWLR 553], at 560, -2, 607; Rogers v. Whitaker (1991) 23 NSWLR 619, at 608, 611, 619; <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 479] at 492.

In my opinion, evidence of that kind may often be the most direct and understandable way in which a person can express a relevant actual past state of mind, which in turn bears on the probabilities of what that person would have done. The state of mind in question may not have been active or explicit or even fully conscious, because no actual consideration was given to the particular question at the time; but nevertheless what the person would have done in certain circumstances is plainly related to his or her state of mind at the time, comprising a multitude of beliefs and attitudes. It would be impossible directly to describe this state of mind fully and accurately. Very often the best that can be done is for the person to say what he or she would have done, if the relevant events had occurred: that is, in this case, if the defendants had not breached their duty. Such evidence may be far from conclusive, even from a completely honest witness, because it may be the result of unconscious reconstruction affected by the wisdom of hindsight; but in my opinion, it is clearly admissible.

Where a party fails to ask questions of a witness in chief, the principle of
Jones v. Dunkel may apply: Commercial Union v. Ferrcom Pty. Limited [(1991) 22 NSWLR 389] at 418-9. A fortiori, this would be the case where it is the party himself or herself who fails to give relevant evidence. Quaere whether that principle should be applied in this case: cf. Ellis v. Wallsend District
Hospital (1989) 17 NSWLR at 590. In any event, it is clear that James Tanna's failure to give evidence on this matter means that his case of causation depends entirely on my being able to draw inferences from his other evidence and the circumstances.

I cannot infer, on the balance of probabilities, that James Tanna would not have entered into the European Asian Bank mortgage or the Gridiger mortgage if he had understood their legal effect. He was already personally liable for the $1 million loan from the ANZ Bank, which was paid out with about $1.1 million of the $1.6 million advance from the European Asian Bank. He trusted his brother Vincent, and his asset position at the time suggests that his trust had apparently paid off so far. There is no evidence that in June 1982 there were any signs that Vincent's project for the Great Western Highway property would be unsuccessful.

No case was put on the basis that James Tanna, by reason of the defendants' breach of duty, lost the opportunity to consider his position, this being a commercial opportunity which had some value: cf. Sellars v. Adelaide
Petroleum <case>; [(1992-4) 179 CLR 332] at 335. In any event, I do not think, in the circumstances of this case, that an opportunity for James Tanna to consider his position in the light of a full understanding of the proposed mortgages can be regarded as a valuable commercial opportunity: cf. Wardley Australia
Limited v. Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514], and see also my discussion later in this judgment of the limitation defence.

Accordingly, James Tanna's case based on the 1982 transaction must fail.

Breach of Duty in 1983 
Prior to the 1983 transaction, James Tanna was already liable both under the
European Asian Bank loan and the Gridiger mortgage. The 1983 transaction merely added $600,000.00 to the European Asian Bank loan, which in turn was used to pay out the Gridiger mortgage and interest and land tax due in respect of the original European Asian Bank loan. But I believe that James Tanna should have been advised explicitly of the serious breaches under the European
Asian Bank loan and the Gridiger mortgage, and thereby given an opportunity to consider whether he should support the re-financing of the transaction, or in effect cut his losses then and there; and I find that this was not done.

Causation and Damages in 1983 
However, it is clear that James Tanna has not proved causation of damages from any breach of duty in 1983. He gave no evidence about what he would have done if he had fully understood the situation; and, although the serious breaches under the European Asian Bank mortgage and the Gridiger mortgage may have given James Tanna cause to reconsider his trust of Vincent Tanna, the fact is that for James Tanna the 1983 transaction was merely a re-financing of existing liabilities. Without further evidence, I cannot infer that he would not have entered into this transaction, if he had understood it; or even that, if he had not entered into the transaction, he would have been any better off than he turned out to be. There is just no evidence which enables any conclusion to be drawn as to what would have happened to James Tanna's property and financial position generally, if he had refused to enter into the transaction, thereby presumably triggering some enforcement action under the Gridiger mortgage and subsequently, in all probability, the original
European Asian Bank mortgage as well.

MR. AND MRS. SAAD'S CASE 
Breach of Duty in 1982 
My conclusion here is the same as for James Tanna, for substantially the same reasons. There is the additional element of Mr. Saad's hearing difficulty; but, in the absence of any evidence from Mr. Saad himself, I do not think this takes the matter further.

Causation and Damages in 1982 
In case I am wrong in my finding that a breach of duty has not been established, I will consider the question of causation and damages, on the assumption that the defendants did breach their duty to Mr. and Mrs. Saad by not giving a sufficient explanation to them of the legal effect of the
European Asian Bank mortgage.

On that assumption, I would find that Mrs. Saad did not understand that she and the Meehan Street property would be liable for the whole of the European
Asian Bank mortgage, if the other borrowers did not pay their shares.

Mrs. Saad gave evidence that, if she had understood that the European Asian
Bank mortgage made her liable for the whole $1.6 million, she would not have signed it. Mrs. Saad was cross-examined in respect of this evidence: cf.
Ellis v. Wallsend District Hospital [(1989) 17 NSWLR 553] at 572, -9, 607. She acknowledged that in 1982 the family was fairly close, that she trusted Vincent Tanna, and that she regarded him as a successful businessman. It is clear that she and her husband were receiving $361,000.00 out of the total of $1.6 million. There is no evidence that there was any indication in June 1982 that Vincent Tanna's project for the Great Western
Highway property would be unsuccessful. And, for reasons given earlier, I cannot give very much weight to Mrs. Saad's reconstruction of what she would have done.

Despite these matters, if Mr. Saad had given evidence that he did not understand the 1982 transaction and that, if he understood them, he would not have signed them, I may have felt able to find the issue of causation in favour of the Saads, on the assumption that breach of duty had been proved.
However, Mr. Saad did not give evidence at all; and, as I have said, his hearing problem does not avoid the Jones v. Dunkel principle. I infer that
Mr. Saad's evidence would not have assisted the plaintiffs. In the circumstances of this case, I believe this is fatal to any claim by Mr. and
Mrs. Saad that, if the defendants had not breached their duty, they would not have signed the mortgage. The evidence does not satisfy me that Mr. Saad did not understand the effect of the mortgage; and even if I were satisfied of that much, the evidence does not satisfy me that he would not have signed the mortgage if he had understood its effect. If Mrs. Saad had been disinclined to sign, and Mr. Saad inclined to sign, no doubt the matter would have been discussed; and I am not able to reach any conclusion as to what the outcome of any such discussion would have been.

For all these reasons, I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
Mrs. Saad would not have signed the mortgage, if she had understood its effect.

No case was put on the basis that the Saads lost the opportunity to consider their position; and as with James Tanna, I do not in any event think that this could be regarded as a commercial opportunity of value.

Accordingly, the Saads' case based on the 1982 transaction must fail.

Breach of Duty in 1983 
In my opinion, the defendants clearly breached their duty to the Saads in
There had been serious breaches under the Gridiger mortgage, to the extent that the defendants had even lent Vincent Tanna $10,000.00 to stave off imposition of interest at 32%; land tax of $30,000.00 and interest of $55,000.00 was outstanding under the European Asian Bank mortgage; and the defendants apparently were involved in seeking a further bank loan to make up the difference between the total liabilities to be repaid and the further $600,000.00 to be advanced by the European Asian Bank. Under the 1983 transaction, the Saads were to become liable for this further $600,000.00, which was to be wholly used up towards making good these breaches and repaying the Gridiger mortgage, for which the Saads were not liable. This involved a clear conflict of interests between the Saads and (at least) Vincent Tanna; and the Saads should have been advised to consult other solicitors. At the very least, the above matters should have been very plainly brought to the
Saads' attention; and they were not.

Causation and Damages in 1983 
The failure of Mr. Saad to give evidence makes the question of causation difficult for the Saads in respect of the 1983 transaction, as in respect of the 1982 transaction. I am satisfied that Mrs. Saad did not know of the breaches of the European Asian Bank mortgage and the Gridiger mortgage; or that she was making herself liable for a further $600,000.00 purely to remedy these breaches and the repay a loan for which she was not liable. I am satisfied that, if she had known these things, she would no longer have had the same trust in Vincent Tanna as she had before, and her belief in him as a successful businessman would have been affected. To that extent, as compared with the position in 1982, it is easier to conclude that, whatever her husband's attitude, she would not have signed the supplementary loan agreement.

On the other hand, she and her husband were already committed to the $1.6 million loan, and the evidence does not make it clear what the Saads' financial position would have been if the supplementary loan agreement had not been signed. It appears likely that the Gridiger mortgage would have been called up and enforced; and this would probably have led in turn to enforcement action under the $1.6 million European Asian Bank mortgage.

During the hearing, I suggested to Mr. Cauchi that I would need evidence and submissions as to how the Saads' position would have been different if they had not entered into the 1983 transaction, and this matter was again discussed during final submissions. Ultimately, Mr. Cauchi submitted that I could infer that, if the 1983 transaction had not been entered into, the matter would have come to a head much earlier than it did; and the liabilities would not have blown out to the extent that the shares of those liabilities referable to the parts of the advance used by the respective parties were not covered by the securities granted by those parties. In particular, he submitted, I could infer that in 1983 the share of the total liabilities referable to amounts used for Vincent's purposes would have been covered by the securities granted by Vincent. However, Mr. Cauchi did not refer me to evidence quantifying, at or around the end of 1983, the total amount then owing in respect of the amounts used for Vincent's purposes, or the value of securities then provided by Vincent; and I do not believe there is such evidence before me.

If the evidence did satisfy me that the Saads were, in the result, substantially worse off than if they had not entered into the 1983 transaction, but did not enable me to calculate how much worse off, I would have been prepared to make my best guess, allowing for the circumstance that the necessity to guess arose from lack of evidence from the plaintiff: cf. my decision in Jaffers v. Chief Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences , 22/7/93 at pp.40-42, and cases there cited, in particular Jones v. Schiffman <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 303] at 308; Enzed Holdings Limited v. Wynthea Pty. Limited <case>; [(1984) 57 ALR 167] at 183; and
The Commonwealth v. Amann Aviation Pty. Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64] at 83.

However, without the 1983 transaction, the property mortgaged under the
Gridiger mortgage would presumably not have been available to contribute towards repayment of the $1.6 million European Asian Bank loan, plus interest thereon of about $58,000.00 and land tax of about $34,000.00; and I have no evidence of the value of other securities held by the European Asian Bank apart from those given by James Tanna (later sold for $440,000.00) and the
Saads (later sold for $887,000.00). Accordingly, in order the find that the
Saads are worse off by reason of the 1983 transaction, I would need at least to be satisfied that Vincent and/or Kenneth Tanna or the securities provided by them would then have provided more than about $360,000.00 (that is, about $1.69 million less about $1.33 million). I have not been referred to any evidence which shows this, and I do not believe there is such evidence. In those circumstances, I am not satisfied that the Saads were, in the result, worse off than if they had not entered into the 1983 transaction.

This conclusion also reflects back on their case on causation. If, on the evidence, it does not appear that they were worse off entering into the 1983 transaction, it makes it more difficult to infer that they would not have done so. This, to some extent, counter-balances the considerations more favourable to finding causation, at least concerning Mrs. Saad, in relation to the 1983 transaction.

However that may be, the failure to prove any damages from entry into the 1983 transaction is fatal to the Saads' case on this issue.
 [LIMITATION ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) 
James Tanna's proceedings were commenced in November 1987 against the Deutsche
Bank. By a notice of motion filed 7th March 1988 and addressed to the present defendants, it was sought, inter alia, that these defendants be added as second defendants in the proceedings. The Court file suggests that the present defendants were represented before Master Hogan on 24th March 1988, when
Master Hogan made orders, including an order that the present defendants "be added as second defendants in these proceedings", and that James Tanna have leave to file and serve an amended statement of claim. This amended statement of claim was apparently not filed until 2nd September 1988, and an appearance for the defendants was filed on 30th September 1988. Mr. Jacobson QC submits that Fernance v. Nominal Defendant [(1989) 17 NSWLR 710] means that, in these circumstances, the proceedings were not commenced against the defendants until 2nd September 1988 (cf. Pt.8 r.11(3), and Wenham v. General
Credits, McLelland, J. 16/12/88); so that James Tanna's proceedings are statute-barred except in relation to a cause of action based on the 1983 transaction.

As regards the proceedings brought by the Saads, they were commenced ten days after expiry of six years after completion of the 1983 transaction.

Wardley Australia v. Western Australia <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 514] established that a person granting an indemnity, under which he is obliged to make a payment when the loss of the party to be indemnified is ascertained and quantified, suffers no actual loss until this contingency is fulfilled; so that a cause of action for purely economic loss, dependent on damage being caused by the granting of the indemnity, does not arise until that contingency occurs. However, during discussion of this question at pp.527-533, the majority of the High Court did not disapprove of Forster v.
Outred [(1982) 1 WLR 86], where it was held that a plaintiff suffered actual loss, not merely prospective loss, when, on negligent advice from her solicitors, she executed a mortgage over her property to secure debts of her son. Their
Honours explained this case by reference to the immediate effect of the mortgage on the value of the plaintiff's property, which had previously been free from encumbrances.

In the present case, although the loan agreements signed in 1982 and 1983 by the plaintiffs immediately made them liable for the whole amounts of $1.6 million and $600,000.00 respectively, the arrangement among the borrowers meant that, as between themselves, each borrower was primarily liable for the share of the loan referable to the amount used by that borrower; and the liability of each borrower for the remainder of the loan would involve actual loss only in the event of default by other borrowers in respect of their respective shares. Ascertainment and quantification of any loss to the individual borrowers depended on that contingency. Wardley suggests that there was no complete cause of action in those circumstances until at least some such loss was actually ascertained and quantified.

However, James Tanna gave mortgages over his Prospect Street property and his share of the Lansdowne Street property, and the Saads gave a mortgage over their Meehan Street property. It could be argued that Forster v. Outred means that actual loss arose immediately on completion of these transactions.

In my opinion, Forster v. Outred is distinguishable. Prior to the 1982 transaction, James Tanna already had mortgages over his Prospect Street property, and over his share of the Lansdowne Street property; and the
European Asian Bank mortgage and the Gridiger mortgage replaced these mortgages. Accordingly, as a result of the 1982 transaction, James Tanna's properties were still subject to charges; and the value of the equity of redemption of these properties was dependent upon contingencies, especially the extent to which Vincent Tanna would repay his share. Therefore, in my opinion, in terms of Wardley, there was no actual loss until the occurrence of a contingency, such as James Tanna actually having to pay part of the share of Vincent Tanna. Similar reasoning applies to the Saads in respect of the transaction.

As regards the 1983 transaction, James Tanna's properties remained, after that transaction, subject to the same overall liabilities; and the same argument applies. The Saads' property was made subject to a charge possibly extending to a further $600,000.00 plus interest and expenses, but any actual loss was still dependent upon the contingencies, especially the contingency of Vincent
Tanna not paying his share.

Accordingly, in my opinion, none of the claims are statute-barred.

In some future case, it may be necessary to spell out in greater detail the relationship between the principle in Wardley and that in Sellars v.
Adelaide Petroleum. It would seem that, if one can characterise an economic disadvantage suffered by the plaintiff as involving the loss of a commercial opportunity which has some value, then that will be enough to constitute actual damage and to complete a cause of action (Sellars). However, if the economic disadvantage is no more than a contingency for future loss, then, unless and until the contingency occurs, there is no damage and no cause of action (Wardley). I do not think it would be helpful for me to try to spell out the distinction between these two situations in the abstract.

CONCLUSION 
Although the limitation defence fails in both cases, my decision on other points means that the proceeding brought by James Tanna and the proceedings brought by the Saads both fail; primarily because the evidence does not satisfy me of breach of duty or causation of loss in 1982, or that their position would have been different if the defendants had fulfilled their duty in 1983.

It follows that both proceedings will be dismissed. At present, it seems to me that the ordinary result as to costs should follow.
 * * * 
