

National Australia Bank versus Marjorie Maud Winskill [1996] NSWSC 547 (15
November 1996) 
NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK v. MARJORIE MAUD WINSKILL /93 
FRIDAY 15 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD, J.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff claims possession of the defendant's residence at 1 Parkland Avenue, Punchbowl erected on the whole of the land comprised in Certificate of Title Volume 5280 Folio 29 on account of default by her under a mortgage registered no. W662041 dated 21 October 1986 given to secure her liability to the plaintiff under a guarantee given by her on 22 July 1991 for the debts of George and Penelope Shenouda and George and Margaret Petridis trading as "319 Food & Liquor". Execution of the relevant documents, default under the mortgage and guarantee, and the service of the appropriate notices have all been admitted and the only defences relied on are those matters arising out of the cross-claim which alleges unconscientious conduct on the part of the plaintiff Bank, and that the transactions are unjust within the meaning of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

Facts 
The plaintiff is the widowed mother of Penelope Ann Shenouda, wife of George
Shenouda, who with him became interested in late 1986 in purchasing a food and liquor store at Maroubra in partnership with her husband's uncle and his wife,
George and Margaret Petridis. George Shenouda and George Petridis applied to the Brighton-le-Sands branch of the Bank for a loan of $490,000 and offered as security for such loan a Traders Bill of Sale over the business, a second mortgage over the Shenoudas' home unit at Kogarah, a second mortgage over the
Petridis' home at Connells Point and a first mortgage over the home at Moate
Avenue, Brighton-le-Sands of Abraham and Jenny Shenouda, the parents of George
Shenouda. The proposal was submitted to the Bank's head office and in due course the then branch manager, Mr. Fisher, advised George Shenouda that the security was $80,000 short. George Shenouda and the defendant were not on close terms but Penelope Shenouda approached her mother and said to her words to the following effect:- "George and I are interested in buying a liquor shop business at Maroubra with
George and Margaret Petridis. We are $80,000 short. Will you come in?" 
The defendant replied, "I don't know. I'll have to thing about it". Mrs.
Shenouda said, "We don't want it for long, just a couple of years. We'll be able to pay it back in a couple of years". She said that her mother sounded very hesitant and doubtful, but she rang every day for about a week and took her to see the business, saying things like, "We only want it for a couple of years". After about a week, her mother replied, "Alright, but only if it's for a couple of years. I don't know what's going to happen to me. I might need to sell and go into a retirement home", to which Mrs. Shenouda replied, "Fine, that's not a problem". There is no challenge on behalf of the plaintiff to the evidence of Penelope Shenouda concerning the conversations that she had with her mother (transcript p.4).

The defendant said that she was reluctant to commit her home which was her only asset to a loan but thought that if she refused she would be stopping her daughter's prospects of success. She knew what a mortgage was and thought she was borrowing $80,000 that would go to her daughter and her son-in-law to help in the purchase of the business. At the time she also understood that a guarantee meant that the person giving the guarantee was to be responsible for making sure that the person who was borrowing would repay the loan, but nobody told her she was a guarantor and she believed she was the borrower of a sum of $80,000.

On 8 October 1986, Mr. Fisher the manager of the plaintiff's Brighton-le-Sands branch, wrote to Mr. and Mrs. Shenouda and Mr. and Mrs. Petridis advising that the Bank had approved the facilities therein set out, namely an overdraft with a $30,000 limit and an instalment loan with a limit of $460,000, and listing the various securities which included a guarantee for $490,000 from various people including the defendant and a registered mortgage over the defendant's property at 1 Parkland Avenue, Punchbowl. The addressees were asked to signed the attached copy of the letter where indicated and return it as an indication of their agreement to the terms and conditions set out. A copy of this letter was not sent to the defendant, no doubt in accordance with the Bank's usual practice, so that she did not, either then or at any subsequent time, receive any letter from the Bank setting out the totality of the arrangements for which she was making herself liable. Nor was she directly asked by the Bank whether she was agreeable to such arrangements. Apart from the alleged "explanations" by bank officers when she signed the documents, there was no direct communication between the plaintiff and the defendant at any time until she was served with the notice of demand. If she had been sent a copy of this letter and if she had read it and understood it or shown it to an independent person who could explain it to her, she would have realised that the extent of her liability was not $80,000 but $490,000, and other enclosed documents would have made it clear that interest was also payable at a rate to be determined from time to time by the Bank.

On 21 October 1986, the defendant signed a memorandum of mortgage at the
Bank's Brighton-le-Sands branch. Different versions have been given in evidence of what occurred on that occasion. The defendant, and her daughter who accompanied her, both say that the bank officer simply showed her some papers and told her to "sign here" and did not tell what she was signing or ask her if she knew what she was signing, nor did he give her any opportunity to read or check what she was signing. Mr. Fisher, on the other hand, whose signature appears on the mortgage as witnessing the defendant's signature said that as his signature appears as witness it must have been signed in front of him and at the time it was his practice to say to customers executing mortgages words to the following effect:- "The Bank is taking a mortgage over your house as security until the loan to these persons (George Shenouda, Penelope Shenouda, George Petridis and
Margaret Petridis) is repaid. Should the loan not be repaid, the Bank has the right to sell your home.", and that it was his practice to identify the particular persons who borrowed funds from the Bank, and he has no doubt that he said something like this at the time the defendant executed the mortgage.

I very much doubt that he said anything like that on this occasion. At the time the mortgage was executed the guarantees had not been executed and this was not what is commonly referred to as "a third party mortgage" in that it made no reference to the fact that the mortgage was being given by a guarantor for the debts of another or others, and the names of the Shenoudas or the
Petridis occur nowhere on the face of the mortgage document. The evidence does not disclose why the guarantee was not executed at the same time, but Mr.
Fisher's evidence is that it was not; and so at the time this lady executed a mortgage over her house she had no actual or contingent liability to the Bank.
Quite obviously, this strange state of affairs was not explained to her.
Moreover, no amount is set out on the face of the mortgage as the principal debt, so even if the defendant had read it, which she asserts she did not, her attention would not have been drawn to the fact that it was for a sum other than $80,000 which is the amount she claims she believed that she was borrowing. I am satisfied that at that stage she believed that she was borrowing $80,000 from the Bank on behalf of her daughter for a couple of years and that she was mortgaging her house to secure that debt and that if the $80,000 was not repaid she could lose her house to satisfy that debt.

The bank's claim for default under the mortgage arises under a guarantee given by the defendant dated 22 July 1991 for an amount of $367,000 plus interest etc. (Exhibit J) which the defendant claims should be set aside or at least modified in accordance with the Cross-Claim, but in the meantime there were four previous guarantees executed by her namely on 2 December 1986 in an amount of $490,000 (Exhibit E); on 13 May 1988 in the sum of $542,300 (Exhibit
F); on 31 October 1988 in the sum of $600,000 (Exhibit G); and on 16 November in the sum of $642,000 (Exhibit H); and if the guarantee of 22 July 1991 were set aside she would nevertheless be liable pursuant to one or more of the earlier documents. It is accordingly necessary to consider the circumstances in which each of them were executed. It was agreed between the parties that this could be done and the cross-claim read as claiming relief in respect of each of them, without the necessity for any formal amendment of the pleadings.
The defendant admits signing the last guarantee of 22 July 1991 at the Bank but she (and her daughter also) deny that she signed the intermediate guarantees, although it was ultimately conceded that they are her signatures and there is no claim that the documents are forgeries.

The first guarantee to be considered is that of 2 December 1986 (Exhibit E).
Mr. Fisher says that this was executed at the defendant's home at 1 Parkland
Avenue, Punchbowl, that he went there and she signed it there in his presence.
He says that on that occasion he said to her words to the following effect:- "You realise that you are signing this guarantee for the full amount of the loan to George and Penny for $490,000 as security which is to be supported by your mortgage. If something goes wrong we will first look to the business and the principals and then if there is any shortfall we will look to you. The only limitation on the amount of your liability is for this amount.", (pointing to the $490,000 figure on p.1 of the guarantee), and that she then signed and he witnessed her signature, also initialling the alteration on p.1.
The defendant denies that Mr. Fisher ever came to her house or that she ever executed any documents there, or that she went to the Bank on more than two occasions, namely the day she executed the original mortgage and in July 1991 when she executed the last of the guarantees.

In his oral evidence Mr. Fisher added to his evidence by saying that after the defendant had signed the document she expressed some concern about it and said she was worried about going into such an obligation because of the large amount involved, she asked him what he thought about it and he reiterated that she had signed a joint guarantee which was partially secured by her house and that accordingly each person, both jointly and separately, was liable for the debt.

The guarantee itself shows that Mr. Fisher witnessed the signatures of all the signatories, but there are separate attestation clauses and attesting signatures for the defendant and for Mr. and Mrs. Shenouda Snr., which is some indication that they signed at a different time to the principal debtors. Mrs.
Winskill, Mr. and Mrs. George Shenouda and all the bank officers agree that at no time were documents sent home with Mr. or Mrs. Shenouda for Mrs. Winskill to sign, so all documents were either signed at the Bank or, as Mr. Fisher says, on this occasion at the defendant's home. In spite of Mrs. Winskill's denial, I consider it more probable that Mr. Fisher did obtain the execution of this guarantee at the defendant's house and he may have said something along the lines of that asserted in his affidavit. I do, however, have very grave reservations about the further conversation alleged to have taken place after the document had been signed. Mr. Fisher was not impressive in cross- examination in relation to this further conversation and, although he must have been aware that one of the issues in the case was the defendant's understanding of the transaction, he failed to disclose it to the Bank's solicitor prior to the hearing.

There is no contemporaneous note of it and his recollection of the explanation he gave before execution of the guarantee is not specific, but is based only on his general practice. Such factors lead me to the position where I am not prepared to accept that the further conversation took place. Even on the version he claims he did give her before signing the guarantee, there was no reference to the mortgage or the relationship between the guarantee she was giving and the mortgage she had given some six weeks earlier, and he did not tell her in simple terms that if any part of the debt of $490,000 (plus an amount equivalent to one years' interest) remained unpaid she could lose her house. Although he would not have been aware that she believed her liability was limited to $80,000, nothing he apparently said to her on that occasion would have made it clear that her liability was much greater. Mr. Fisher agreed that he regarded the transaction as a good business deal for the borrowers (the Shenoudas and the Petridis) and for the Bank, but there was no benefit in it for the defendant.

The business did not prosper as expected and in 1986 the loan facilities by the Bank were increased to $542,300. This necessitated, from the Bank's point of view, the execution of a further guarantee by each of the principals and guarantors to reflect the increased limit and the fresh guarantee in that amount is dated 13 May 1988 (Exhibit F), all the signatures on which are witnessed by Mr. Thorning who was then the manager of the Brighton-le-Sands branch of the plaintiff. Mr. Thorning said that at that time when he witnessed the signing of a guarantee by guarantors who had already signed a prior guarantee for a lesser amount it was his usual practice to say words to the effect of:- "This is a renewal of your existing liabilities in the increased amount shown here.", (pointing to the amount detailed on p.1 of the guarantee).

Mr. Thorning conceded that he had no recollection of the defendant attending the Bank and had no way of knowing if a person attending to sign a document (as the defendant apparently did) was who she said she was. He realised that as the mother of one of the principals she was herself getting no benefit, but assumed that her family would keep her informed as to what was going on in the business. The only basis for his belief that she came to the Bank is because he witnessed her signature, but he cannot say whether she came alone or with others. Assuming that Mr. Thorning did say to the defendant the words which he set out in his affidavit as his usual practice, she would have been no better informed than she had previously been. Whether the actual amount was indicated, or whether she realised the significance of the amount, and in particular that this was the extent of her liability, are matters about which
I have the gravest doubt.

The next guarantee was one dated 31 October 1988 (Exhibit G), the signatures to which are witnessed by Mr. Mayhew, the accountant at the Bank. Mr. Mayhew said that the signatories did not all attend the Bank on the same day and a "Customer Interview Record" (Exhibit N) indicates that Mrs. Petridis came in on one occasion, Mrs. Penelope Shenouda and the defendant on another, Mr. and
Mrs. Shenouda, Snr. on a third occasion and George Shenouda and Mr. and Mrs.
Petridis on a fourth occasion. He said in his affidavit that he had a standard procedure at the time which he used when witnessing the signing of a guarantee which included asking the people whether their names and addresses were correct, whether they knew what they were signing and whether they understood what a guarantee was. He said that if they replied, "yes" he would then turn to the final page and indicate to them where they were to sign. If they said, "no" he had a short statement which he would use as a purported explanation of the document. There are certain obvious difficulties about that proposed suggested "explanation". Firstly, if the person said "yes" to the enquiry whether they understood what they were signing and/or "yes" to the enquiry did they know what a guarantee was, no further questions were asked or explanation given; so that if the person erroneously thought that they knew what they were signing and/or what a guarantee was, they would remain under the misapprehension which they already had. Moreover, that version is quite different from the version set out in Exhibit M which Mr. Mayhew certified is the explanation he gave, and I totally reject any suggestion that he gave an explanation along the lines of Exhibit N which he apparently regarded as just another document on which to put a signature. Even on his own version, at no stage did he relate the guarantee that the defendant was signing to the mortgage which she had given some four years earlier, and of which he may not have been aware himself. Accordingly, I do not accept that he gave any meaningful explanation of the document to the defendant.

The business continued to deteriorate and in July 1988, Mr. Wells became the manager of the Bank's Brighton-le-Sands branch. He was not happy with the way the business was managed and was rather pessimistic about its prospects. In
April 1990, George and Penelope Shenouda sold their home unit at Kogarah which was secured by a second mortgage to the Bank and, after discharging the first mortgage, the proceeds were placed in a term deposit in the sum of $100,000.

Meanwhile, a further guarantee was approved and executed in the sum of $642,000 on 16 November 1990 (Exhibit H). All the signatures to this are witnessed by Mr. Wells and it would appear from the form of the document that the defendant was the first to sign.

Then in mid-1991, Mrs. and Mrs. Petridis sold their property at Connells Point which was also part of the security for the partnership debt and $275,270 was received by the Bank in reduction of the debt and about 22 July 1991, the
Shenoudas' term deposit was also transferred in further reduction of the partnership debt. Following such reduction and further negotiations, the Bank, by letter dated 17 July 1991, offered a loan to the partners in the sum of $280,000 to be repayable on 22 July 1993 together with overdraft facilities to be secured by guarantee by all the previous guarantors in the sum of $367,000 supported by registered mortgages over the home properties of the defendant and of Mr. and Mrs. Shenouda Snr. No copy of this letter was sent to the defendant.

The guarantee was subsequently executed on or about 22 July 1991 (Exhibit J) and the signatures of each of the guarantors were witnessed by Mr. Wells who at the same time completed a further Customer Interview Record (Exhibit O) in similar form to the earlier one (Exhibit N). Mr. Wells said that at the time the defendant signed the guarantee it was his usual practice in such cases to say words to the following effect:- "You are signing this guarantee and indemnity, guaranteeing these persons for this amount.", (pointing to the amount in item 4 on p.1 of the guarantee). "If there is some reason why these people cannot pay their debts back to the Bank then you will be liable.", and he believed he said something like this at the time the defendant executed this last guarantee.

Mrs. Winskill admits going to the Bank in 1991 and signing this last guarantee, following her daughter telling her that the Bank wanted her to sign some papers and saying things like, "Mum, you're the only one holding out, all the others have signed". She said she went to the Bank alone and announced herself at the counter, another man took her just behind the counter where there was a paper which she signed where the others had signed and left the
Bank. She said she was never told what she was signing nor the full amount of the loan, and denied that any explanation of the document was given to her or that she saw any page other than the page that she signed. She said she thought she was still lending $80,000 to her daughter and this document was necessary because the loan was being renegotiated following the sale of the
Shenoudas' home unit and the Petridis' house.

I have some doubt as to the extent to which Mr. Wells followed his usual practice concerning explanation of the guarantee. He certainly did not, on his own evidence, give any explanation such as that set out in the Customer
Interview Record which he agreed he regarded simply as another formality necessary to complete the paperwork, and did not tell the defendant she could lose her house if any part of the total debt owing by the guarantors remained unpaid. In particular, the explanation in no way related the guarantee to the mortgage which she had previously signed. Mr. Wells agreed in cross- examination that at the time he did not consider the business was being managed well and he had had heated exchanges with George Shenouda in relation to this. The Bank was regularly bouncing the partnership's cheques and he was "pretty pessimistic" about the business. He assumed that George Shenouda was keeping the defendant informed as to the way the business was going. The defendant said she realised that the debt had been reduced and the loan renegotiated and she thought she should have been entitled to get her title deed back, but she did not ask for it and, being required to sign this further document, she realized she had not been released and that she still had a liability of some kind to the Bank which she thought was up to $80,000 (transcript pp.41, 43, 49).

The defendant's demeanour was impressive and she had good recollection for detail particularly concerning past transactions relating to the purchase of the house and repayment of the initial mortgage thereon, and borrowings from
Westpac for house extensions and the purchase of the truck for her husband's carrying business. The difficulty is her denial of Mr. Fisher coming to her house in December 1986 and her signing the original guarantee there and her denial that she went to the Bank in May and October 1988 and November 1990 to sign further guarantees, which matters are in substance also denied by Mrs.
Shenouda and by George Shenouda. I am satisfied from the form of the documents and the evidence of the bank officers that she did execute the other documents and accordingly when she denies Mr. Fisher coming to her house or her going to the Bank herself on the other occasions, she is either mistaken or deliberately lying. In either case her inaccurate evidence affects her credibility on other issues.

However, notwithstanding these matters, I am satisfied that any explanations given to her by bank officers for the various documents that she signed were perfunctory and virtually meaningless, and although they may have been understood by an accountant or a person experienced in commercial transactions they were not intelligible to the defendant; and even if the various bank officers pointed to the overdraft limit on the first page of each guarantee, it was not brought home to her that her liability was for up to that amount, and that the house was security for the whole amount of her liability. She had been approached because the security was $80,000 short and in those circumstances I accept her evidence that she believed this was the extent of her liability. The bank officers had no reason to believe that she had this belief, and it is therefore not surprising that they did nothing to correct her misunderstanding.

On the other hand, the Bank at no stage communicated directly with the defendant except when its officers witnessed her various signatures. At no stage was she sent the letters that were sent to the principals setting out the details of the loans or the various terms thereof, and at no stage was she asked directly by anyone on behalf of the Bank whether or not she wished to enter into the various transactions; nor was she advised to get independent advice. The Bank presumably had no reason to believe that she and George
Shenouda were not on close terms and that all messages were being relayed third hand through Penelope Shenouda. But on the other hand, the bank's only interest seems to have been not whether she was a willing party, but to get her signature on documents which would give the Bank access to the proceeds of her house if there was a shortfall in repayment of the partnership debts.

The defendant was born in England on 30 December 1916 so is now aged almost
She arrived in Australia in 1925 with her mother and stepfather. Her father worked on the trams and her mother went out washing and ironing to earn extra money. She attended school in Sydney and left at the age of 15 years to help support the household. That was in 1931 and the Depression had begun. Her parents could not afford to support her in a business college so she took work as a machinist at Dunlop where she continued until about a year after her marriage which took place on 23 December 1939. After their wedding, her husband and she lived with her parents for about a year. Her husband started a carrying business and also worked as a drummer in a dance band. About a year after their marriage they bought the home at 1 Parkland Avenue, Punchbowl which was financed by their savings and a loan from the Eastern Suburbs No. 4
Building Society Limited, which loan was fully re-paid in about 1949. Her husband ran the carrying business and she was involved in taking bookings, receipting payments and doing the banking. She also paid the bills for the business and the household. Apart from the home loan they also borrowed money from Westpac for a new truck and later for extensions to the house. They adopted two children of whom Penelope Shenouda is one. The other was electrocuted in September 1969 whilst working as an apprentice electrician and her husband died of a stroke on 28 August 1978. He did not leave any money but their assets including the house had always been in her own name.

Unconscientious conduct 
The type of unconscionable or unconscientious conduct relied on is that referred to by Mason, J., as he then was, in Commercial Bank of Australia
Limited v. Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447] at 461, namely that where one party makes unconscientious use of his or its superior position or bargaining power to the detriment of another party who suffers from some special disability or is placed in some special situation of disadvantage. In the same case Deane, J. at 474 expressed the principle as follows:- "Unconscionable dealing looks to the conduct of the stronger party in attempting to enforce, or retain the benefit of, a dealing with a person under a special disability in circumstances where it is not consistent with equity or good conscience that he should do so. The adverse circumstances which may constitute a special disability for the purposes of the principles relating to relief against unconscionable dealing may take a wide variety of forms and are not susceptible to being comprehensively catalogued." 
As Mason, J. emphasized in Amadio's case at 462, the principle does not apply whenever there is any difference in bargaining power, but the disabling condition must seriously affect the ability of the innocent party to make a judgment as to his or her best interests; see also Carrington Confirmers
Pty. Limited v. Akins (Giles, J., unreported 23 April 1991), and age and a lack of business experience do not necessarily put a person at a special disadvantage in dealing with a Bank on a guarantee: Tarzia v. National
Australia Bank Limited (Federal Court of Australia, unreported 12 October at 16). Here the defendant was a person with what might be called an average secondary education, with no experience in what would today be called the corporate, commercial or financial fields, but she is not unintelligent and had had some limited business experience in that she had helped her husband with the bookkeeping etc. of his carrying business, which I assume was relatively uncomplicated, and she was also familiar with borrowings by way of overdraft and deposit of title deeds.

She was on the other hand labouring under the belief that her liability was only to the extent of $80,000, and she had been reluctant to agree to the transaction from which she could derive no benefit and had only agreed to do so as a result of the repeated requests of her daughter, Mrs. Shenouda.

However, even if those matters constituted sufficient disadvantage on the part of the defendant to satisfy the first element of unconscientious or unconscionable conduct, it would also be necessary to show that such special disability was sufficiently evident to the Bank as to make it prima facie unfair or unconscientious for the Bank to procure her execution of the mortgage and guarantees in question: Amadio's case per Deane, J. at 477; see also per Mason, J. at 466.

It is not necessary that the person who benefits from the transaction has itself created the special disadvantage suffered by the other party but it must know or be in a position where it ought know the other party's handicap in the situation and take unfair advantage of the opportunity so presented:
Burke v. State Bank of New South Wales [(1994) 37 NSWLR 53] at 74; or it must be shown that the special disability was "sufficiently evidenced" to the other party: National Australia Bank Limited v. Garcia (Court of
Appeal, unreported 3 July 1996) per Sheller JA. at 9.

This is not a case where the documents were sent home with the persons who were getting the benefit of the transactions (the Shenoudas or the Petridis), but they were each signed in the presence of a bank officer and (with the exception of the first guarantee) at the Bank. The signings were probably accompanied by some formal peremptory explanations which would not have conveyed much, if anything, to the defendant. But, unsatisfactory though the position may be, the Bank did not have notice, either actual or constructive, of the special disadvantages suffered by the defendant, her misunderstanding of her liability and her belief that it was only to the extent of $80,000 including her reluctance to agree to the transaction, and her limited understanding of the effects of the various documents. The Bank did not know what she had been told by the Shenoudas, or that George Shenouda was not close to his mother-in-law and any information to her was being conveyed third hand.
The disadvantageous position that the defendant found herself in was not caused by or known or ought to have been known to the Bank and accordingly it is not unconscientious or unconscionable for the Bank to seek to rely on the various documents. This part of the Cross-Claim accordingly fails.
 [Contracts Review Act, 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) 
The grounds upon which relief can be given under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (the Act) are however much wider. The Act is directed to contracts not investments:
West v. AGC (Advances) Limited & Ors [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610] at 621, and as the liability of the defendant arises under a combination of interrelated contracts, namely the mortgage and the guarantees, it is proper to look at the arrangement constituted by the combination of those contracts: s.15; see also Toscano & Anor v. Holden Securities Pty. Limited [(1985) 1 NSWLR 145] at 149.

For the reasons previously indicated I am satisfied that at the time the defendant executed the mortgage she believed she was giving a mortgage as security for a loan of $80,000 to or for her daughter for a couple of years to be used for the purchase of a partnership business. She had previously given a mortgage over her property when it was purchased and had subsequently deposited the certificate of title with Westpac as security when her husband obtained an overdraft to purchase a truck for use in his carrying business. I am satisfied that she knew in a vague sort of way that if the "loan" was not repaid she could lose her house, but did not fully appreciate that there was any real risk of that occurring. She was of average education but with only limited business experience and, although taken to see the business which "looked good" (whatever that means), she had not been shown any financial statements (and if she had, they would probably have been meaningless to her).
She had no interest in the business and stood to derive no benefit from the transaction except the emotional satisfaction of feeling that she was helping her only surviving child; and although initially reluctant, she was subjected to importunings from her daughter over about a week or so until she agreed.

The mortgage was itself in an unusual form particularly to a person of limited business experience in that no principal sum was expressed on the face of the document, but it was in the typical "all monies" form commonly (if not invariably) used by banks, and so was different to the usual form of home purchase mortgage which generally specifies a fixed principal sum. Moreover the explanation given by Mr. Fisher as asserted in paragraph 9 of his affidavit makes no reference to any principal sum and no-one at any stage made reference to interest. What made the transaction even stranger was that at the time the defendant executed the mortgage, there were no moneys owing by her to the Bank either actually or contingently, as she had not then executed any guarantee. She was asked for and gave up her certificate of title at about that time and she realised that was in relation to the mortgage. There was no explanation given of the transaction and she had no opportunity to make an informed choice about it.

It is next necessary to consider the mortgage in relation to the first guarantee and the explanation asserted by Mr. Fisher in paragraph 13 of his affidavit. That explanation would hardly remove any misconceptions or misapprehensions about the loan which she previously had. In particular, one wonders what a person of the defendant's background would have understood by the words "which is supported by your mortgage". The passage appears on the face of it to cover all the essential points but such a formal and short recitation would not in my view have meant anything to a person in the defendant's position. In particular although the figure on page one of the guarantee was pointed to, it would not have brought home to her a realisation that her liability was $490,000 plus interest and not the $80,000 which she believed was the case. Actually her liability was not for $490,000 but according to the guarantee was for $490,000 plus a sum equivalent to one year's interest thereon (clause 3(b)) together with Bank and other charges, costs and expenses (clause 3(c)). Mr. Fisher did not on his own admission say if the business goes bad she could lose her house or say to her in clear unequivocal terms words to the effect that "this means that you are personally liable for $490,000 and if any part of that amount is unpaid you can lose your house" nor did he ask her if she understood what he had said. If he had, she may have raised some queries as he claims she did after signing the document, in which case the prudent thing for him to do would have been to suggest that before signing it she got independent advice and discussed it with someone outside the family. The transaction was not the subject of negotiation, it was not adequately explained to her, the documents were quite uncomprehensible to a lay person, and she had no real opportunity to make an informed choice about it.

Similar considerations apply to the subsequent guarantees, with the added consideration that neither Mr. Thorning nor Mr. Wells made any references to the mortgage or losing the home when they purported to give her "explanations" of the documents she was signing. Finally at the time of the last guarantee when she knew part of the monies had been repaid, I am satisfied that she still believed her liability was limited to $80,000 irrespective of what the debt of the others to the Bank might be. At no time did the Bank communicate directly with her except when she attended to sign the documents, in particular, the Bank did not send her copies of the letters of offer as it did to the principal debtors or send her drafts of the various documents so that she could obtain independent advice.

What I said in National Australia Bank Limited v. Hall (1993) ASC #56-234 at 58,414 is equally applicable here, as follows:- "This is a case where the Bank and (the principal debtors each) obtained advantages from (the defendant) executing the documents concerned; but whilst incurring the liability she received no corresponding, or any, benefit in return, and it is yet another case where the creditor has dealt only with the principal and has not communicated directly with the proposed guarantor either by letter or by interviewing her separately from the principal, a situation which facilitates pressure being put on reluctant family members to become guarantors, often in the light of assurances (justified or not) given by a persuasive principal who is also a trusted relative and upon whom the guarantor relies for financial advice to protect her own interests: cf.
Melverton v. Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia & Anor (1989)
NSW Conv. R. #55-484; (1989) ASC #55-291; Beneficial Finance Corporation v.
Comer & Anor (1991) ASC #56-042; MLC Finance Pty. Limited v. Milo & Ors (Dunford, J. unreported 18 June 1993) at 20, 22-23, where I drew a distinction between guarantees given by principals of a private company and those given by relatives with no interest in or control over the company. See also Bosnjak v. Farrow Mortgage Securities (in liq.) (1993) ASC #56-225 per Cripps, JA. at 58,332.

Not only was the effect of the mortgages and the guarantees not explained to the defendant in any meaningful way, if at all, but there was no one to caution her about what she was doing, the Bank and the (principal debtors) all having a common interest, contrary to hers, of getting her signature on these various documents. She had no independent advice and no opportunity of forming any independent judgment in relation to the transactions." 
In Beneficial Finance Limited v. Karavas [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256] the trial judge had found that the mortgagor-guarantors all knew that they were executing mortgages, what a mortgage was, that the mortgages extended to their places of residence, that the purpose of each mortgage was to finance the purchase of the business, that if the business failed the company would become in default of its obligations to the appellant and if this happened the mortgaged properties might be sold and that the loan was in an amount of $540,000. The Court of Appeal held that these matters were not fatal to an application for relief under the Act where they were also unaware of the reality of magnitude of the risks involved and of the likelihood that they would lose their homes; and the order of the trial judge was upheld although there were other factors relevant as well, see especially per Meagher, JA at -279.

Having regard to the considerations to which I have referred and the other matters (so far as relevant) specified in s.9(2) of the Act, I am satisfied that the mortgage and each of the guarantees were "unjust" in the circumstances relating to them at the time they were respectively made.

Having so found, I have to consider what, if any, relief should be granted, such relief being discretionary: s.7; Antonovic v. Volker [(1986) 7 NSWLR ]
at 157, 169; Baltic Shipping Co. v. Dillon, "Mikhail Lermentov" [(1991) 22
NSWLR 1](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2022%20NSWLR%201 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 20; Nguyen v. Taylor [(1992) 27 NSWLR 48] at 55.

Unlike the position in cases of unconscientious or unconscionable conduct such as Amadio's case, there is under the Act jurisdiction to make orders in favour of a party who proves that at the date of the contract he suffered from a relevant disability, even though the other party is unaware of the disability, but generally the courts will be reluctant to grant relief in such circumstances: Beneficial Finance Corporation Limited v. Karavas (supra) at 277; Nguyen v. Taylor (supra) at 71; National Australia Bank v.
Garcia (Court of Appeal, unreported 3 July 1996) per Sheller JA. at 37-38.

In this case the Bank was not aware that Mrs. Shenouda had expressed the request to the defendant in terms which led her to believe that she was only mortgaging her house to secure a loan of $80,000 or of the pressure which had been put on her to agree. However, the failure of the Bank to enquire or deal directly with the defendant is a relevant consideration in that regard:
Younan v. Beneficial Finance (Court of Appeal, unreported 21 November ) at pp.16, 18, particularly in a case such as the present where the Bank knew the guarantor had no interest in the business, was an elderly relative of one of the principals and was not receiving any independent advice: cf.
Melverton v. Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia (1989) NSW Conv.
R. #55-484 at pp.58,515-6; Burke v. State Bank of New South Wales [(1985) NSWLR 53] at 77-78.

In all the circumstances, I consider this an appropriate case to grant relief under the Act, but the circumstances are not the same as in, for example,
National Australia Bank v. Hall (supra) or Melverton v. Commonwealth
Development Bank (supra) and I do not regard this as a case where the Bank's right to enforce the mortgage should simply be postponed until after the defendant's death.

I consider the appropriate relief is to modify the mortgage and the last guarantee so as to limit the defendant's liability to $80,000 without any interest, and the earlier guarantees (which were intended to be replaced by the last one) should be wholly set aside. In this way the defendant will be liable for the debt which she believed was being incurred and for which she believed her house property was being given as security, and the Bank will not be deprived wholly of the benefit of the guarantees and mortgage given by her.
The defendant should pay interest on this amount from the date of this judgment in accordance with s.95, [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and SCR [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p40)
Rule 7. The Bank should have judgment for possession but the issue of the writ of possession should be postponed for three months to enable the defendant, if she can, to sell the house in her own right or possibly refinance the debt. If she does have to sell she will not lose all her assets and will have something left for her future use.

I will stand the matter over so that appropriate short minutes can be brought in to give effect to this judgment and I can resolve any remaining matters of detail. I also reserve the question of costs although I observe that virtually the whole of the hearing time was occupied by consideration of the cross-claim on which the defendant has succeeded.
 * * * 
