

Regina versus Johnson Matter No Cca 60447/97 [1998] NSWSC 741 (29 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus BRETT ANTHONY JOHNSON 
CCA 60447/97 April 1998 
McInerney J, Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY, J: I will ask Greg James, J. to give the first judgment in this matter. 
GREG JAMES, J: Application is made for leave to appeal against sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Job, QC. in the District Court of New South Wales sitting at Newcastle on 29 August 1997. 
Following pleas of guilty to the crimes of break, enter and steal (s.112, [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)) and escape from lawful custody (s.34, Correctional Centres Act 1952) and taking into account two counts of larceny of a motor vehicle on a Form One, his Honour imposed a fixed term sentence on the first matter of 12 months' penal servitude to commence on the date of sentencing and, on the second count, a minimum term of 18 months' penal servitude to commence on 13 May 1998 and an additional term of six months. That latter sentence was, of course, cumulative on the sentence of two years' imprisonment being served at the time of the escape, the currency of which was resumed on the applicant's recapture.

On sentencing, during the oral submissions, little reliable information was provided as to the sentencing of the co-accused. One, his Honour was informed, had been dealt with summarily and received a 12 months' fixed term which, on the face of what his Honour was told, would have been subsumed in the additional term in relation to matters for which the sentence had not expired at the time of his escape. The other had apparently received a sentence of five months for the escape and another six months for allowing himself to be carried in a stolen conveyance, the two sentences being concurrent and dating from 30 July 1996.

His Honour made the following findings as to the facts:- "The prisoner was serving a sentence of 18 months' minimum term when on Sunday March, he climbed onto the roof of the metal shop, and there he removed roofing material and gained access to the shop floor. Once inside, several doors were smashed open, and a number of tools were removed.

In the prisoner's record of interview, the prisoner said that he was with at least one other, when that particular escapade took place. Before me he said that he was alone.

The tools that were taken were then buried and the 12.00 muster was conducted, when all the inmates including the prisoner and the other two men, who later escaped with the prisoner, were accounted for. Shortly after that muster, the prisoner with the other two, retrieved the tools, jumped over an inner five foot high fence, then cut a hole in the middle security fence using tin snips, that allowed access into another area, an outer security fence. Another hole was cut in the outer security fence, and all went through that onto the sports oval. Following that, they went to another fence, with a hole in it, that surrounds the sports oval and all three then escaped.

Shortly after that the prisoner and his companions stole a Commodore sedan, which was parked in the roadway outside a house at Cessnock. It was the prisoner who put a screwdriver, which he had taken from the storeroom, and forced the door. He then sat in the driver's seat and started the vehicle by means of the same screwdriver.

The vehicle was driven off, but was seen by the owner of the vehicle who gave chase. The vehicle broke down, that is the vehicle that the prisoner was in, and all ran away. They then walked to a Cessnock town, where another vehicle was parked. One of the other men gained access to the vehicle by damaging the door lock in the same method as the prisoner had used on the other car, and started it by the same way. The vehicle was then driven to Newcastle and the prisoner was dropped off at the Newcastle area.

The prisoner was arrested on 25 March at the Maitland Shopping Mall. Later, he admitted that he was involved in all the matters. He told the police that he escaped because he was sick of being in prison, and that he stole the vehicles as a means of leaving the Cessnock area." 
The applicant, in evidence before his Honour, said that he was in debt in gaol to the extent of $350 which he owed other inmates for heroin, that he had been threatened with a bashing if he did not repay the money and was given till that weekend to obtain the money. Because of that threat, he said, he decided to escape. His Honour expressed the view that he was giving the accused the benefit of the doubt in respect of that matter because there was no evidence to the contrary.

In his remarks his Honour adverted to the prisoner's familiar history of a deprived upbringing and involvement with drugs together with an attempt or attempts to achieve rehabilitation. His Honour noted that although the prisoner's record was not a good one, given the prisoner's background, it was understandable.

There was further discussion as judgment was being given as to the sentences for the co-accused and his Honour was informed that it may be that the five months' sentence referred to earlier was, in fact, a seven months' sentence.
His Honour was of the view that in any event the sentences of both co-accused were not appropriate but took them into account for the purpose of reducing the sentence which he had otherwise intended to impose on the applicant. It was in the light of that circumstance that his Honour imposed the sentence of months' minimum term for the escape and having regard to the two matters on the Schedule. The 12 months' fixed term in respect of the other matter was effectively concurrent and provision was made for an additional term of six months to expire on 12 November 1999.

In argument his Honour had suggested that prior to hearing of the sentences for the co-accused, he had it in mind to impose a sentence on the escape matter of two years plus an extra eight months in the context of a discussion of an asserted tariff rate of two years for a simple escape.

It is submitted on the applicant's behalf that his Honour fell into error in failing to advert to the principle of totality. True it is that in his brief remarks his Honour did not make explicit reference to the principle. The absence of explicit reference does not mean a lack of advertence.

In my view, no such simple error can be read into his Honour's judgment. He was imposing a cumulative sentence as he is required to do by the Act. He is an experienced judge. It cannot be said that he failed to have regard to the fact that the sentence imposed was being accumulated upon the sentence which was being served at the time of the escape. Indeed, the discussion with counsel during submissions on sentencing shows that his Honour was alive to the effect of accumulation. I do not accept he did not make allowance for totality.

It is further submitted on a parity basis that the combination of the criteria examined by the High Court in The Queen v. Postiglione <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 875], together with the information now provided as to the sentences of the co-accused, would illustrate that the sentence is a severe sentence for a simple escape even when considered in the light of the two matters on the Schedule and the break and enter matter. It is submitted that the sentences imposed upon the co-accused were not "utterly inappropriate" or even if they were, regard should nonetheless be given to them for the purpose of reducing the sentence the trial judge might otherwise have passed.

This is, of course, what the trial judge in fact did. The ultimate sentence imposed by his Honour might still be more severe than those imposed on the co- accused but the applicant asserted a dominant role in the offences. The circumstances were different and it seems to me that there was no error in the judge's approach nor has the criticism of his approach on this ground, considered on its own, been made out.

I do not consider that there should be any interference with the total sentence, particularly having regard to the Crown's submissions as to the objective seriousness of the applicant's crimes.

It does seem to me, however, that when regard is had to the context provided by the application of the totality principle and to the question of parity with sentences imposed upon the co-accused, the third ground advanced by the applicant achieves real significance; that is, that there was evidence before his Honour which would attract a finding of special circumstances and that this matter was not dealt with by his Honour either expressly in his judgment or at all.

Reliance is placed on the following passage from Regina v. Too & Anor (CCA, unreported 16 July 1992) at 3 per Hunt, CJ. at CL. with whom Handley,
JA. and Badgery-Parker, J. agreed:- "The judge expressed no view concerning the existence of special circumstances warranting a departure from the one-third rule enshrined by [s.5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/), despite his acceptance of the evidence that the applicant's life had changed for the better and the obvious consequence of that finding that the applicant had good prospects for rehabilitation: cf Regina v. Moffitt [(1990) 20 NSWLR ]
at 121, 136. Where the evidence discloses the existence of material which (if accepted) could amount to special circumstances within the meaning of [s.5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html), but the sentencing judge does not vary the one-third proportion required by that subsection, he or she would usually be expected to explain why. The absence of such an explanation may lead to the conclusion that no consideration was in fact given to whether that proportion should be varied: cf. Regina v. Gallagher [(1991) 23 NSWLR 220] at 234;
Regina v. Jason Loughnan (CCA, unreported 14 July 1991) at 8-9." 
The mere absence of mention of special circumstances in the judgment would not, of itself, mind me to consider the trial judge had failed to consider that matter. However, in this case when one looks at the structure of the sentences in the light of what has been submitted concerning totality, the sentences of the co-accused and the evidence that was before the trial judge, which his Honour appears to have accepted: of the applicant having been 20 years of age at the time of offence; 21 at the time of sentence; had previously been diagnosed as having a psychological disorder, and having a real desire to attend to his rehabilitation and drug problem, it does appear that the applicant would, in the interests of the community as well as in his own interests, require a longer than usual period of supervision following release from custody. Thus there was strong evidence of special circumstances.
Indeed, it appears that the applicant will have been in custody for a period of some three years where only a six months' period of post-release supervision has been provided by the combination of sentences.

Notwithstanding the Crown submissions, in my view the absence of express mention here does indicate lack of advertence. In my view, his Honour has fallen into error in failing to have regard to the special circumstances and it is open to this court to consider the matter for itself. I consider the matters I have referred to in combination do amount to special circumstances.

On the hearing of the appeal there was tendered in evidence, in the event that re-sentencing should occur, a report dated 28 April 1998 by Ms. Anna
Robilliard of Duffy Barrier Robilliard, Psychologists. That report indicates well in favour of the prospects of the applicant for the future and particularly well in terms of his present insight and willingness to take such steps as he can to avoid those factors which have brought him to the sentences he has been serving.

In my view, the error having been made out and, having regard to the matters in evidence before his Honour and that report, there are special circumstances in this matter such that the application should succeed to the extent of providing for a re-structuring of the sentence to provide for a period of supervision of some 12 months.

It is not necessary in this case to consider whether [s.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s11.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) confers on this court wider powers than does s.6 of the Criminal Appeal Act. Such a view might reconcile the different approaches in Regina v. Astill (No.
) [(1992) 64 A Crim R 289.] 
I would, in the context of this case, propose allowing the appeal and varying, pursuant to [s.11(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s11.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/), the minimum and additional terms presently passed, to provide for a minimum term of 12 months' penal servitude to date from 13 May 1998 and to expire on 12 May together with an additional term of 12 months to date from 13 May 1999 and expiring on 12 May 2000.

As it transpires, the minimum term of such a sentence would accord with those imposed upon at least one of the co-accused and would accord also with the submission put by the Crown as to the appropriate course to be taken were this court to intervene on this ground.

To that extent I would propose that leave to appeal be granted, the appeal be upheld and the applicant's sentence be varied accordingly.

I would propose that in addition, particularly in the light of the material provided in the recent report from Ms. Anna Robilliard, that we recommend that the applicant be, during the period he is in custody, detained in an institution which affords him the facilities for drug and rehabilitation- counselling and that a copy of these remarks on sentence, together with that recommendation, be taken out and placed with the papers.

McINERNEY, J: I agree with the orders proposed by Greg James, J. including, and I endorse, the recommendation. The orders of the court, therefore, will be those proposed by Greg James, J. * * * 
