

Shalhoub Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors versus Donnelly and Anor Matter No 1804/92 [1998] NSWSC 299 (3 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 `SHALHOUB HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ORS versus MAX CHRISTOPHER DONNELLY & ANOR` `1804/92` `3 July 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT. 
HIS HONOUR: On 25 June 1992 I gave reasons for judgment in this matter, which dealt with all the issues other than the three reserved issues that were mentioned on p 2, namely: "Claims relating to loss on a foreign currency transaction, wrongful dismissal and damages for personal injury (which) by consent of the parties ... were postponed to a later day." 
After I gave those reasons, a formal order was taken out on 2 February 1995 recording that, apart from those issues which were postponed, the Amended
Statement of Claim was dismissed with costs. The plaintiffs appealed to the
Court of Appeal. Earlier this year the appeal was, if I could say it in a shorthand way, dismissed for want of prosecution.

The matter came back to this Division and it would appear that on 16 April the
Registrar listed the matter and directed that the plaintiffs file all documents on which they proposed to rely in relation to the balance of the proceedings within a short period of time. That has not in fact happened.

On 23 April 1998 the plaintiffs filed a Further Amended Statement of Claim.
The previous version had been the Amended Statement of Claim filed on 6 May , which was the document before me at the trial. The amended document raises new causes of action, particularly causes of action in tortious negligence.

The basic case that was tried before me in 1992 related to the validity of the appointment of the first defendant as receiver of the plaintiff company and other contractual claims.

The events that are complained of commence in 1985, but come to a peak in
December 1990, when the second defendant appointed the first defendant as receiver. Any damage that was suffered by the plaintiffs must have occurred no later than 10 March 1991, being the time when the receiver went out of possession. That, of course, was about seven years before the Further Amended
Statement of Claim was filed.

Today I am trying a motion to strike out the Further Amended Statement of
Claim. This application is made on two basic grounds: viz (a) that the
Registrar's directions have not been complied with and the remaining claims should be dismissed for non-prosecution; and (b) that the amendments raise cases which call in question the issues that have already been decided, or are barred by the Limitations Act. Additionally, there is an application for security for costs if the primary claim is unsuccessful.

Although there has not been compliance with the Registrar's directions, and although this is a 1992 action, I would be loathe to dismiss it for want of prosecution in view of the history between the time I made my decision and the time the Court of Appeal disposed of the appeal. However, the matter has to be finalised before too long as it is almost the oldest case left for trial in the Division.

I asked Mr Hilbery, who appeared today (but who has not appeared previously) for the plaintiffs, as to how long he wished to have to file evidence. He initially said a month, but when I indicated that as far as I was concerned, so long as it was a reasonable request, he could have as long as he liked, he nominated six weeks.

I am prepared to grant those six weeks and order that all the evidence on which the plaintiffs intend to rely be filed and served no later than 17
August 1998.

However, it must be made clear that as I have desisted from striking out the matter on the basis of non-prosecution at this stage, and granted to the plaintiffs the time they say they need, I will entertain a motion on 3
September 1998 at 9.30 am that the proceedings be dismissed for want of prosecution if that order is not strictly observed.

So far as security for costs is concerned, I will stand the motion over to that date to consider that request further.

Getting back to the question of whether part of the Further Amended Statement of Claim should be struck out, it seems to me that the issues based on tortious negligence cannot now succeed even if they were fully and properly pleaded.

The Limitations Act would be a defence no matter how one regards the matter.
In any event, paragraphs, such as 27A and 27B, the latter pleading that "the
Second Defendant and its predecessor, Trade Credits Ltd, acted negligently", have put any claim in an improper form. Trade Credits Ltd does not appear to be a party, unless one of the defendant corporations has changed its name.
Apart from that, the pleading does not identify who owed the breach of duty and how it was breached.

As I said, three claims were reserved. The wrongful dismissal claim cannot succeed. Paragraph 16 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim pleads that the first defendant procured the first plaintiff to breach its contract of employment by causing it to dismiss the second and third plaintiffs.

Damages is then shown as a consequence of the dismissal, not of the procurement. As the first defendant did not dismiss, he cannot be liable for wrongful dismissal, nor can the bank that put him into the company. The personal injury damages are for anxiety, stress and depression as a result of the matters alleged in pars 5 to 10 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim, on which issues I have already found for the defendants.

This leaves the only issue for trial as being the contractual claim contained between pars 26 and 32 of the latest version of the Statement of Claim, that in breach of the loan agreements referred to in the Further Amended Statement of Claim the second defendant converted Swiss franc loans to Australian dollars on 19 December 1990 instead of 19 December 1991.

That does disclose a cause of action that was a matter which was reserved from the 1992 hearing and the plaintiffs are entitled to have it tried.

Accordingly, the issues that need to be determined at the further trial are the issues arising in pars 1 to 6, 26, 27, 27D, 28, 29, 29A, 30, 31 and 32 of the Further Amended Statement of Claim and I will treat the balance as if it had been struck out.

As the defendants have been basically successful in this motion, the plaintiffs should pay the defendants' costs of the motion. Exhibit DX1002 is to remain with the file, but exhibit DX1001 may be returned.
 * * * 
