

Davridge P/L versus Commonwealth Bank of Australia [1996] NSWSC 173 (4 June )

DAVRIDGE P/L & 3 ORS versus COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA /95 
TUESDAY 4 JUNE 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER JA, HANDLEY JA, COLE JA 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: In this case, Mr McAlary, senior counsel for the appellant, has sought an adjournment. The circumstances are these: that the Commonwealth Bank succeeded in obtaining a judgment from Giles J in the Commercial Division in November 1995 against his client for a sum in excess of $9,000,000, and a Notice of Appeal was put on with somewhat over 80 grounds. The matter was expedited and it was fixed for hearing today.

Reading his Honour's judgment, it would seem that the appellants face a situation where there were enormous numbers of issues of fact, on each of which there was conflicting evidence and on every single issue, on my reading, his Honour found for the bank against the appellants. That puts an almost insuperable obstacle in front of the appellants on the hearing. If the hearing were to proceed, as Mr McAlary frankly stated, the authorities as they stand would necessarily result in the appellants failing on that point.

Mr McAlary has informed us that new proceedings were started on Friday to impeach his Honour's judgment on the grounds of fraud. I shall not mention any of the details of the allegation of fraud because that issue has not yet been adjudicated upon. However, one cannot forebear to mention that if the new fraud proceedings had been commenced in December the parties would not be in the situation in which they now find themselves. I must add my remarks in that regard reflect no discredit whatever of Mr McAlary who has only just received his brief in the case.

In the light of that background we have to consider whether we should accede to Mr McAlary's application for an adjournment. In my view we should not. The matter was specially fixed at the result of the urging of his clients and there is no reason why the matter should not go on today. It will not, it seems to me, afford any real disadvantage on Mr McAlary's clients in that if they proceed with the fraud proceedings and are victorious in those proceedings, all other matters will be disentangled.

In my view the application should be refused. I think it is implicit in what
Mr McAlary has said, and I shall ask him again, on the refusal of the application it must necessarily follow that the appeal is dismissed with costs.

MCALARY: I accept that, your Honour. 
HANDLEY JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.

MEAGHER JA: In those circumstances, unfortunately, the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
