

Regina versus Wayne Leslie Condon No. 60437/94 Criminal Law [1995] NSWSC 119 (31 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
ALLEN(1), NEWMAN(2) AND SIMPSON(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30 June #DATE 9:10:1995 #ADD 31:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:        T J Golding 
Solicitors for the Appellant 
Legal Aid Commission 
Counsel for the Respondent:        P D Rosser QC 
Solicitors for the Respondent: 
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth)
ORDER
Appeal allowed.
JUDGE1
Indictments
ALLEN J The appellant was indicted on five counts of defrauding the
Commonwealth (s 29D of the Crimes Act (Commonwealth) 1914).
The first count charged that between 1 January 1989 and 30 June 1989 he defrauded the Commonwealth "with respect to funding made available by the
Department of Employment, Education and Training, a department of the
Commonwealth, for a certain unemployment training program, namely, the first 'Sydney Living Skills' program conducted by the Lake Macquarie Employment
Training and Development
Centre Incorporated."
The second count was in the same terms save that the period alleged was between about 3 April 1989 and about 1 December 1989 and that the program was described as the "second" program.
The third count also was in the same terms save that the period alleged was between about 8 June 1989 and about 1 December 1989 and that the program was referred to as the "third" program.
Likewise count four was in the same terms save that the period alleged was between about 28 July 1989 and about 1 December 1989 and the program was referred to as the "fourth" program.
Count five charged that between 1 April 1989 and about 1 May 1989 he defrauded the Commonwealth "by evading payments of sales tax in relation to the purchase of one 15 inch dot matrix printer and one AT computer with monitor from Universal Office Machines by causing the production to Universal office Machines of purchase orders falsely certifying that the said equipment was for the use of a Community Youth Support Scheme". 
The Trial
The appellant was tried by Judge Kirkham and a jury. The trial commenced on 27 September 1993 and continued until 4 November when the jury returned verdicts of guilty on all counts. The jury had deliberated for about a day. He appeals against those convictions. 
The Crown Case
The appellant was the manager of the Development Centre referred to in the first four counts of the indictment. It operated under the business name
Charlestown Skillshare. I refer hereafter to the Development Centre as "Skillshare".
In 1989 funds were made available by the Department (which I refer to hereafter by its acronym "DEET") for the conduct of courses known as Jobtrain courses for the unemployed. Each of the four Sydney Living Skills programs were funded as Jobtrain courses. The participants in those courses came from the Lake Macquarie region. It was recognised that prospects of employment in
Sydney were, at that time, better in Sydney than they were in Lake Macquarie.
What was special about the Sydney Living Skills programs were that they went beyond the conventional basic job skills courses. What they did was to provide specific industry-oriented training, for example, for the banking industry, for a group of unemployed young people over a period of some weeks and then taking the group to
Sydney for an extended period of time, getting them used to living in Sydney and introducing them to employers. Work experience and job training exercises were included in the courses. Skillshare paid for every aspect of the courses including accommodation, food, clothing, transport and incidental expenses such as grooming.
These programs achieved significant success. The evidence adduced in the
Crown case was that they were cost-effective. They got results which were not being obtained by more conventional approaches.
The appellant went with the
Sydney groups and there was no issue that he devoted himself with considerable vigour and enthusiasm to assist these young people into the workforce.
The method of financing was that Skillshare would present to the
Department a "budget" which set out estimates of expenditure under a number of appropriate heads which in total comprised the whole program.
DEET then approved the budget and paid to Skillshare a substantial percentage of the anticipated expenditure as budgeting. Upon completion of the program
Skillshare then furnished to the DEET a document called an "acquittal" which showed, under the separate headings used for the budget, what the actual expenditure had been. On receipt of the acquittal the Department then paid to
Skillshare the balance of the amount of the budget as originally presented. In respect of each of the programs there was substantial correspondence between the budget and the acquittal. This did not manifest some remarkable prescience at the time the budget was drawn. The evidence of
DEET officers who were involved indicated that the correspondence between the acquittal and the budget was regarded by them as an administrative convention. Their concern was whether DEET had got value for the money rather than with the details of what the expenditure had been. No vouching was required. The attitude of these officers was communicated to Skillshare.
The main thrust of the
Crown case was that subsequent auditing revealed an audit trail of a substantial percentage of the Commonwealth money paid by
DEET for each of the programs ending up in the pocket of, or being applied for the benefit of, the appellant. There were cash withdrawals he made. There were monies paid into a staff fund from which he took extravagant benefits. There was even a bank cheque drawn on the Commonwealth supplied funds in favour of a company which put in a new kitchen in his home.
I refer hereafter to money withdrawn by the appellant, or applied for his personal benefit from the funds supplied by DEET, as the money "taken" by him - using that term in the extended sense of also keeping the money. I refer to the funds supplied by DEET as the DEET funds.
It was not the Crown case that the appellant had not been entitled to take some of the DEET funds. The Crown conceded that he was entitled to recoup himself for money he spent out of his own pocket in implementation of the program and, as to the first program, to pay himself for working overtime and giving tutorials. The Crown case was that as to each program the amounts which he took bore no reasonable relationship to anything he was entitled to and that examination of what the actual costs involved in the program (including what would have been reasonable payment for the overtime and tutorials) established that they were far below the DEET funds for the programs.
The difference, on the Crown case, was taken by the appellant.
The Crown asserted that DEET was deceived as to the taking by the appellant of the money by the appellant dishonestly:
As to each of the second, third and fourth programs putting in a budget for much more than, as he knew, would be spent on the program;
As to each of the four programs not accounting for the DEET funds in a way which disclosed what he had taken; and
As to each of the four programs furnishing an acquittal for a total amount substantially in excess of what was spent on the program.
The foregoing brief summary suffices for understanding of the matters raised by the appeal. The transcript of the evidence ran into thousands of pages: and there were hundreds of exhibits.
But the detail does not matter for the resolution of the appeal.
In respect of the fifth count, which dealt with the evasion of sales tax, the Crown adduced evidence which, if accepted, established the conduct which amounted to evasion as charged and which would have enabled the jury to infer that the conduct was that of the appellant himself or was procured by him. 
The Defence Case
The appellant did not attempt to justify the breakdown in the acquittals of expenses under the individual headings. He acknowledged that those breakdowns were not even intended to be accurate. They simply were in substantial conformity with the breakdowns in the budget for which they were the acquittal. It was his understanding that this was all that DEET really was concerned about. It was a matter only of administrative convenience. He sought to establish that what had been expended on each of the programs nevertheless was in total at least as much as the total stated in the acquittal. He sought to account for each amount he had taken as being reimbursement to him for what he had spent personally in implementation of a specific aspect of the relevant program or as payments to him to which he was entitled for specific overtime worked or tutorials given in the first program.
He acknowledged that he had been careless in not keeping appropriate records of his expenditure or of his entitlements. He gave priority to getting results.
He was working under great pressures of time over the relevant periods.
Not only did he have this commitment to Skillshare he also worked as a legal clerk and was a university lecturer.
Strong character evidence was called for him. 
The Thrust Of The Defence
The thrust of the defence was clearly opened to the jury by his counsel before the appellant gave evidence. The following extracts from the opening set the scene: "I anticipate that there will be evidence forthcoming .. that to say the least Mr Condon was a little bit cavalier with money. He tended .. to use both his own and official monies as the case required, as was convenient for him, and these monies were often intermingled. But I anticipate also that the evidence will show that this was far from criminal, that in fact it was the product of enthusiasm, the product of the fact that this man had in view an end product which were the successful courses in Sydney the evidence will show that it was largely because of this man's enthusiasm, his untiring efforts, his long hours and his spending of DEET money on these people that made them successful. I anticipate that because of this enthusiastic use of money there were often occasions where he had to recoup money from the course because held spent his own, either by cash, credit card or cheque occasionally .. It could be said that his spending .. was extravagant.
I anticipate there will be evidence that at weekends before the students went down to Sydney they were taken out on barbecues, on car rallies, various other excursions and it may well be that when you assess that evidence at the end of the day you may feel yourselves, well that was a bit overboard, but that's not the question before you .. Bear in mind these courses were designed for unemployed people, long term unemployed people, ..
the aim was to get them employment in banks and in other financial institutions and what was being done .. was restoring their self confidence, giving them some reasonable ambition again .. Mr
Condon catered for his student's personal needs, that money was always available, a new pair of pantyhose, a new pair of socks, aftershave, whatever, that almost all their individual wants and needs, which were reasonable, were provided while these people were in Sydney. .. (as to) the acquittal documents Mr Condon used those documents really as a formality, that he did so acting on the advice of his immediate liaison person with regard to these courses in 1989, a man called Jolly, who was an officer of the
CES at Cardiff. .. it became quite clear to the people actually on the ground running the course,
Mr Condon and his staff, that this compartmentalisation which had occurred in the budget was just an impossibility. ... It couldn't be sustained. .. it was on advice .. that the acquittals took the form that they in fact did. ... However, I anticipate the evidence will also show that, as I've already mentioned, Mr Condon was a little cavalier in his attitude towards receipts.
Once it was known that DEET .. did not require receipts to substantiate expenditure on these courses, there was probably little effort made to keep any detailed record of what happened. ... I anticipate that Mr Condon .. will give evidence of his expenditures in all these courses. I also anticipate that some of those expenditures at this point of time and in retrospect the evidence will be in the form of estimates. ..
put Mr Condon's evidence into context of his having to remember without any real or any detailed record what happened now in , bearing in mind that the evidence suggests that the investigation started in early 1990, which even at that stage gave him a year to span with his memory. ... Now I anticipate that Mr Condon himself will give evidence .. that far from overclaiming monies that were due to him .. he claimed everything in terms of reimbursements which he was entitled to, the courses themselves would in fact have been put in jeopardy through a lack of money. And I anticipate at the end of the day .. that there will be evidence before you to suggest that most, if not all of the Sydney Living Skills courses, actually owed him money at the end of the day. That he spent his own to make sure that he fulfilled his objective, that they were successful and they were completed. ... I anticipate the evidence will clearly show that he was careless with regard to financial matters. I anticipate also ladies and gentlemen that the evidence will show also that he was not dishonest." 
As to the fifth count, the count relating to sales tax evasion, counsel for the appellant opened that he knew nothing about what was done which resulted in the non-payment of the sales tax. It was not done by him or procured by him.
The evidence adduced, or already elicited in the Crown case, accorded with the opening address.
The final address for the appellant also was in accordance with the opening. Counsel stressed that in endeavouring to relate the monies which the appellant personally withdrew or had applied for his own benefit to particular types of expenditure incurred in the fulfilment of the programs the appellant had to try "to reconstruct it and he is quite open about it". The address continued: "He had very few records, even as at the early part of 1990 .. So this man, Mr Condon, and he would accept with his friends, the people who were also involved in the Sydney Living Skills courses in 1989, have made an attempt to reconstruct, as far as possible, where this money went to. And of course the Crown pointed this morning, and
I'll come back to it a little later, to an amount of money which
Mr Condon could not explain, could give you no explanation for. And the Crown points to that piece of money and he says, Well look, there's an example. He has no idea where that money went. My submission to you is .. so easy (would it be) would it not, to invent some reason .. But no, what he says is, 'That beats me, I really - I don't know where that went Is that the answer of a man who is trying to pull the wool over your eyes? Or is it the answer of a man who's made a genuine attempt, an honest man who's made a genuine attempt to reconstruct what happened .. it maybe your view that Mr Condon claimed an excessive amount of overtime, but he didn't do it dishonestly. Did he do it with a deliberate intent to deceive?... He may have been foolish to use staff meeting money in the way he did May even have been lavish .. Was it a deliberate attempt to use money which he knew he was not entitled to for that purpose?... You see the Crown has said to you that the fact that the acquittals themselves were not accurate, in itself that, and no more, amounts to a deception. But in my submission ... it could only amount to a fraud .. if it was done dishonestly to bring about a state of affairs which he realised would or might deceive DEET into acting or failing to act so as to suffer economic loss. DEET were interested in outcomes. They said so through the person of Mr Bagwanna in the witness box. They were only interested in outcomes. These courses, you heard from
Mr Jolly, were extremely effective in a cost sense ..
the Crown has not established that these monies were wrongly used and has to resort to the proposition which I submit you will reject and reject outright, that by submitting the acquittals in the way that they were submitted, that this was a dishonest 'criminal deception. ... He's certainly not a saint and he certainly didn't do everything by the book. He's certainly not perfect. He certainly did some things which could be questioned in retrospect.
But my submission to you he is not a criminal. He wasn't deliberately deceitful. He had an end in view. He tended to scatter things a little bit in order to get there. And because he did that he has had to make an attempt to reconstruct the debris before you in these trials, a most onerous and difficult job." 
The Grounds Of Appeal
The grounds of appeal are:
His Honour was in error in failing to direct the jury when considering whether the appellant had defrauded the Commonwealth that they needed to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant himself must have realised that what he was doing was dishonest and in particular that he did not genuinely believe that he was entitled to the monies he received.
His Honour has failed adequately, or at all, to direct the jury as to the case of the appellant.
His Honour was in error in directing the jury that they were entitled to evaluate a witness by reference to whether that witness had "any special relationship with the accused" and whether there was "any hidden agenda" and whether they had "anyone to protect or had an axe to grind".
 
Third Ground
It is convenient to deal first with ground three. His Honour directed the jury: " ... you might look at each witness and determine whether there is any special relationship between any of the witnesses and the accused. A relationship which may have led them either consciously, or even subconsciously, to colour their evidence.
You will ask yourself was the witness totally impartial and objective. Was there a hidden agenda. Did the witness have someone to protect or an axe to grind as has been said in this case. You should also remember that because people are close friends does not necessarily mean that they would not give truthful evidence.
It just means that you would hear a warning bell to examine carefully that evidence."
No objection was taken to that direction at the trial. Leave pursuant to rule four is necessary for the appellant to rely upon this ground. I would not grant that leave. This ground is not sufficiently arguable - and even it were sustained it is unlikely in the extreme that it affected the verdicts. 
First Ground - as to Counts 1, 2, 3 and 4
His Honour's directions as to the legal elements of the offence of defrauding the Commonwealth were as follows: "I will deal firstly with the broad questions of defraud, defrauding, and questions of dishonesty which arise therefrom. As you will recall that each of the counts on the indictment have, at their heart, this allegation of defrauding by the accused. Defraud, the word defraud, and the action of defrauding involves deceit. To deceive is to induce someone to believe that something is true, which is in fact false, and which the person practising that deceit knows, or believes to be false. To defraud is by deceit or deliberate falsehood to induce someone to act to his or her detriment or to take some course of action which he or she would not have taken but for the deceit or the deliberate falsehood." ... To cheat and defraud is to act with deliberate dishonesty to the prejudice of another person's proprietary right. And another person in this case, of course, can be the Commonwealth in the form of DEET. To amount to a fraud the conduct must be deliberately dishonest.

On the question of dishonesty in deciding whether the accused's conduct was, or was not dishonest, you should view his conduct in the light of the current standards of ordinary people. Now you, members of the jury, as representatives of the community, set that standard.
 - as I have said before the heart of the allegation is the phrase, 'Did defraud the Commonwealth', and I now want to expand somewhat on what the phrase means in the context of this case.

As I have already said to you, to defraud is by deceit or deliberate falsehood to induce someone to act to his or her detriment, or to take some course of action which he would not have taken but for that deceit or deliberate falsehood. Deceit is the act of deceiving, that is inducing someone to believe that something is true which in fact is false, and which the person practising that deceit knows, or believes to be false.

Looking a little bit more closely at that explanation, it is clear that there are two distinct elements which, before you may convict the accused, the Crown must establish to your satisfaction, beyond reasonable doubt. First is that the accused practised the deception, or a deliberate falsehood upon the Commonwealth through the Commonwealth's offices. Second that by practising such a deception or by making such a deliberate falsehood upon those offices he intended to and did in fact induce the
Commonwealth through its offices to act to its detriment. I just want to repeat those for you.

The first is that the accused practised a deception or a deliberate falsehood upon the Commonwealth through its offices, and second, that by practising that deception, or by making such a deliberate falsehood upon those offices, he intended to, and did in fact induce the Commonwealth through its offices to act to its detriment."
His Honour then indicated that he did not propose to review the evidence in respect of the first four counts as an exhibit which set out the audit trail did not appear to be significantly in issue. His Honour referred briefly to the general nature of that exhibit.
He then reminded the jury of the submission by the Crown that the fact that the appellant made no apparent effort to disguise the fact that money used for his personal benefit, such as paying for the kitchen, did indicate not honesty but simply that the appellant took advantage of the belief that no auditing would occur.
He then referred to the Crown submission that the handling by the appellant of the staff fund "is also the subject of allegations of dishonesty and is an ingredient of a number of counts in the indictment." .
His Honour continued: "The Crown submits that the bottom line in this case .. (is) that the acquittal in each case was not accurate. It was not truthful and did not reflect the disposition of the funds by the accused because it would have meant owning up to DEET that a significant amount of each of the grants to run the courses went to the accused personally." (emphasis supplied).
His Honour then referred to what he described as "a vigorous and sustained attack upon the credit of the accused mounted by the Crown". He dealt with the detail of that attack.
He continued: "And you will have observed, members of the jury, that none of the counts specify a particular sum that is said to have been in each case the amount which the Commonwealth is said to have been denied by the alleged fraud of the accused. With the benefit of hindsight one can understand this. As the evidence has clearly been from both the Crown and the accused that these accounts were not subject to audit.

Now
I do not intend to present to you again the arguments that have been submitted to you in the last couple of days by counsel.
Their acceptance, as I said, or their rejection for that matter is entirely a matter for you. At the end of the day members of the jury, in respect of those first four counts you say to yourself, with respect, what evidence do I accept? What evidence do I reject?
So as to answer the question, in each case, those first four counts, what happened to the money from DEET? Now when you decide that factual question, what did happen to the money from DEET, you then ask yourselves this question, what has the Crown established about the conduct of the accused? Then in each case, in respect to each of the counts in the indictment you should ask yourselves the question, are we satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused committed the offences with which he stands charged?" (emphasis supplied).
It is convenient at this point to set out the totality of what his
Honour said as to the case for the appellant. It was: "As I have said to you .. the Crown bears the burden of proof beyond reasonable doubt in respect to each and every one of the charges against the accused. He does not have to prove anything.
But in this case, understandably, the accused has chosen to enter the witness box and give sworn evidence like the other witnesses in explanation of the disposition of the funds shown in the money trails. Now the accused, having raised these matters in his defence of each of the charges he is entitled to be acquitted of each and every charge where you have a reasonable doubt about his guilt based upon his explanation. In other words the Crown must satisfy you, beyond reasonable doubt, that the accused's explanation, although he bears no burden of proof in any respect, should be rejected."
That was all.
 .
His Honour then went on to deal with the fifth count. In respect of that count he dealt in a detailed fashion with the evidence and clearly identified the substantial issue which was whether or not the misrepresentation was made or procured by the appellant.
I consider that in respect of each of counts 1, 2, 3 and 4 the directions were misleading and clearly inadequate to present to the jury the critical question of whether the Crown had established beyond reasonable doubt that in taking the money the accused was aware that the amount taken exceeded what he was legally entitled to from the DEET funds. The directions are likely, indeed, to have left the jury with the impression that it sufficed for them to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused's reconstruction of how he became legally entitled to the monies was wrong - or at least wrong to such an extent as to leave in respect of each of the programs money unaccounted for.
The considerations of law pertinent to the directions which should have been given in the present case were dealt with, in large measure, by the Court of Criminal Appeal of Victoria in Salvo <case>; [(1981) 5 A Crim R 1.] In Salvo the errors made in the summing up led to a new trial being ordered. The summing up in the present case contained errors which included errors of like character to those in Salvo.
In Salvo the appellant had been charged with dishonestly obtaining by deception a car (Crimes Act 1958 (Vic), <case>). The appellant was a used car dealer. A man named Kapaufs had traded in a car in exchange for another vehicle. The car, however, when traded in was subject to a bill of sale to a finance company. The appellant, unaware of the encumbrance, sold the car. The car was then repossessed by the finance company. Resolution of the ensuing dispute between the purchaser and the appellant involved the appellant paying out to the finance company the amount owing. The appellant then sought to recover his loss by getting back from Kapaufs, without payment, the vehicle which he had given in exchange for the car which had been subject to the bill of sale. He achieved this by purporting to buy that vehicle from Kapaufs.
Payment was made by a cheque which was then dishonoured - as the appellant had intended from the outset. The defence of the appellant was that he did not dishonestly obtain the vehicle by deception because it was his belief, at the time, that he had a legal right to possession of the vehicle because it had been given to Kapaufs in exchange for the car for which Kapaufs did not have title.
The charge in Salvo was dishonestly obtaining by deception - not defrauding. But as was pointed out in the Court of Criminal Appeal by Murphy and Fullagar JJ the statutory offence is not committed by deception alone. It must be deception by which the property is obtained "dishonestly". The property may be obtained by possession yet not obtained "dishonestly" within the meaning of that statutory offence.
In that respect the statutory offence accords with the legal concept of defrauding. As Fullagar J expressed it (at , 24): "In my opinion 'dishonestly', in this statute, is used in that sense of 'with disposition to defraud' which means 'with disposition to withhold from a person what is his right' ... the concept involved in 'dishonestly' is very close to the common law requirement of 'intent to defraud', or absence of a claim of right..."
In Salvo the trial judge instructed the jury, so far as relevant, as follows: "In the long run this case boils down to the simple issue, simply stated issue, are you satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did what he did dishonestly?" 
His Honour then dealt with the undisputed fact that the cheque being given with a representation that it would be met - notwithstanding that the applicant's intention was to dishonour it.
He then continued: "But when it comes to the question of dishonestly, where the defence case is concentrated here, dishonesty is a subjective concept. That is, it is what was in the mind of the accused man that you are concerned with 
In respect of that last direction
Murphy J said (at 9): "It was correct to tell the jury that 'dishonesty is a subjective concept' and that it was 'what was in the mind of the accused man that you are concerned with'.

But, in a case such as the present, simply to say, that it is what 'was in the mind of the accused man' that the jury had to consider, is not enough. The judge should tell the Jury what aspect of the accused's state of mind it was to which their attention should be directed.

In this case, the jury should have been told, in my view, that the Crown had to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused himself did not believe that he had in all the circumstances a legal right - (not a moral right) - to deprive Kapaufs of the motor car ...
 
If the jury gained the impression from the judge's charge that in deciding what was in the accused's mind they should simply rely on the fact that he 'did make the false representations that the cheque would be met', then .. they would have been acting under a misapprehension. For the deception was admitted. The accused admitted that he performed it for the purpose of obtaining possession of the car and he succeeded in his purpose.

The question always remained, was the obtaining by deception done dishonestly, and, up to this point in his charge, the learned trial judge had not given the jury any express assistance as to what they should consider in arriving at an answer to that question. Up to this point, the Jury could have been misled inferentially into thinking that they should have regard only to the fact that the accused admitted making the false representation to enable them to decide whether they were satisfied that he acted dishonestly." (emphasis supplied).
Subsequently in his charge the trial judge said: "Now you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that that deception which
Salvo practised was done dishonestly". As to that Murphy J said: "This question focuses the jury's mind on the doing of the act ..
as though the doing of the act itself determined in some way whether or not it was done dishonestly. The jury might easily have thought that they were to ask themselves 'Should the accused, having done that, be consequently regarded as having acted dishonestly?'
Again, in the circumstances of this case, it is my view that such an emphasis was quite misleading" (emphasis supplied).
Murphy J was critical also of the charge in that there were instances where the trial judge stated what the defence said but "did so without directing them as to the law and simply in the form of stating an assertion by the accused" (at 11). It is helpful to refer to one such instance. The trial judge stated: "His case is put, 'Well I genuinely believed that I still owned this
Falcon, in view of all the circumstances. I believed I had a right to get it back. It may have been very naughty of me and very deceptive of me to do what I did, to hand over a cheque which I intended to have stopped, but I believed I had a right to do it, and I was acting in my conscience in what I believed was an honest way.'"
As to that Murphy J said: "Again in stating the defence case, the important distinction is drawn between the obtaining by deception, and the element of doing so 'dishonestly'.
Again, it is only put as the defence case. The learned trial judge then runs the two elements together again when he says, 'but I believed I had a right to do it'.

What the accused was saying, and what was put to us by counsel for the appellant, was that the case for the defence was that the accused genuinely believed that he had a legal right to get the car back, and that the practising of the deception was, in the circumstances, his method of ensuring that he did so." (at 12).
In the present case the charge to the jury, no matter what his Honour may have intended, which is far from clear, was inapt to convey to the jury that the element of dishonesty in each of counts 1, 2, 3 and 4 related only to whether he took the money in the belief, no matter how ill-founded or unreasonable, that he had the legal right to take that much as his own - and that if the Crown failed to establish that the appellant did not have that belief the jury were bound to acquit him even if they considered that the budget and the acquittal or either of them was in any way deceptive.
In respect of each of the Sydney Skillshare counts there were, as the trial was fought, only two substantial issues: did the appellant take more than he was legally entitled to take; and to the extent that he did so did he do so without believing that he had a legal right to take the money.
This second question was not identified by his Honour to the jury. Nor were the jury told that if they answered this second question in the negative they had to acquit the accused.
His Honour's general directions as to dishonesty did not make good that deficiency. He made a reference to "the arguments which have been submitted to you .. by counsel". He did not instruct the jury, however, as to the law relating to the arguments for the appellant. In particular he did not instruct the jury that even if they did not accept the appellant's attempted reconstructions in respect of money taken, and even if they were satisfied he had taken more than he was legally entitled to, there was no dishonesty proven, as a necessary element of each charge, unless it had been proven that he took the money knowing that he did not have the legal right to do so.
As the charge was left the jury well may have been left with the impression that if the appellant was not legally entitled to take the money then, if it was obtained by deception which the appellant would have known was dishonest, the elements of deception and dishonesty were established. Where, however, as in this case, there is an issue as to whether the accused believed at the time he had a legal right to take the property, then the Crown fails to prove that he did not have that belief then the element of dishonesty is not satisfied even if the property was obtained by deception. It is not enough that the accused was well aware that the deception itself was dishonest.
The risk of misunderstanding by the jury is the greater because the Crown specifically maintained that there was "dishonesty" by the appellant in presenting the budgets, in failing to account in a manner which disclosed the money taken, and in furnishing the acquittals. In the absence of clear instruction by his Honour, and that was lacking, the jury well may have thought it was enough, as to the element of dishonesty, that he presented budgets which, he knew, were excessive, or that in the accounting to DEET he did not identify, as he knew, the amount he had taken or that the acquittals did not give, as he knew, accurate breakdown of the expenditure. Indeed they well may have thought it enough that what the appellant did in relation to
DEET funds would be regarded, overall, as dishonest by community standards.
That risk was enhanced by his Honour's statement to the jury that the allegations of dishonesty in respect of the utilisation of staff funds were "an ingredient of a number of counts in the indictment".
As Murphy J said in Salvo: "But, in a case such as the present, simply to say, that it is what 'was in the mind of the accused man' that the jury had to consider, is not enough.
The judge should tell the jury what aspect of the accused's state of mind it was to which their attention should be directed." (at 9).
The trial judge clearly was entitled to refer to allegations of dishonesty which, although not dishonesty constituting that element of the crime of defrauding as charged, did go to the appellant's credit. But he had to instruct them that those allegations, if accepted, did not amount to the dishonesty which had to be established beyond reasonable doubt as an element of the crime.
 .
It has been argued for the Crown that it was sufficient for his Honour not to direct the jury more fully because the relevant matters were fully ventilated in the closing addresses of counsel, both as to the law and as to the facts, and the jury would have been left in no doubt as to what their task was. There are two answers to that submission. The first is that it is the task of the trial judge not merely to give formal directions of law as to the legal elements of the offence charge but to explain to the jury the application of those elements to the respective cases of the Crown and of the accused. In short, it is his duty to give them assistance so that they understand what the critical issues of fact are upon application of the law to the particular case. The trial judge is not relieved from that duty by the arguments of counsel. Indeed, as Murphy J pointed out in Salvo, it would not be enough even for the trial judge accurately to state what the case for the accused is as it has been presented. He must instruct the jury what the law is in respect of that case and do so in terms which throw up, clearly, what the critical issues of fact are which it raises.
I do not overlook that since the observations of this Court in R versus Zorad [(1990) 19 NSWLR 91] as to the duties of the trial judge in summing up <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) was enacted. So far as relevant that section provides: "(1) A Judge of the Supreme Court or District Court need not summarise, at the end of a criminal trial before a jury, the evidence given in the trial if the Judge is of the opinion that, in all the circumstances of the trial, the summary is not necessary.

This section applies despite any rule of law or practice to the contrary.

Nothing in this section affects any aspect of a Judge's summing up function other than the summary of evidence in a trial."
Section 405AA applied to the present trial. But even if it reasonably was open to his Honour to form the opinion that a summary of the evidence was not necessary as to which it is not necessary to express an opinion, <case> does not relieve a trial judge of the duties to which I have referred. The fulfilment of those duties does not require that the evidence be summarised as distinct from the respective cases being stated and the jury instructed as to the application of the law to those cases.
The second answer to the submission for the Crown that the addresses of counsel relieved the judge of his duty in that regard is that having carefully perused the transcript of the final addresses I am satisfied that there is a grave risk that the jury were left with uncertainty as to what the critical issues of fact were. This is not a criticism of either counsel. The addresses were of high quality. But neither counsel was performing the task of summing up to the jury. Each was arguing for his client. I think it fair to say that a close reading of the final address for the Crown does not demonstrate any misstatement of the law. Reading together both the final addresses, however, I am satisfied that it is highly likely that the jury were left unclear as to what were matters of argument, particularly in relation to honesty, and what the law was. They were entitled to look to his Honour for assistance as to how the general principles of law applied to the evidence in the case and the arguments mounted on that evidence. That assistance they did not get.
I am of the opinion that the trial so basically miscarried that it did not constitute a trial according to law. This is not a case for application of the proviso.
Counsel for the appellant did not ask for any re-direction. This was a serious blemish in what otherwise was a skilfully conducted defence. The appellant requires leave under [rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) to rely upon this ground of appeal: but the nature of the error, is such, that in my opinion the leave should be granted. 
Second
Ground (as to Counts 1, 2, 3 and 4)
For the reasons already given the case for the appellant was so inadequately presented, if presented at all, that this ground is made out.
Leave is required under [rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) to rely upon it. That leave should be given. 
Fifth Count
The first and second grounds of appeal are relied upon also in respect of the fifth count. Leave is required under [rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) to rely upon those grounds in respect of that count. His Honour clearly left to the jury, in respect of that count, what the critical issue of fact was - namely, had the Crown proven beyond reasonable doubt that the misrepresentations which procured the sales tax exemption were made or procured by the appellant. There was no miscarriage of justice. Leave should be refused. 
Orders
For the foregoing reasons the convictions in respect of the offences charged in counts 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the indictment must be quashed.
Notwithstanding that the appellant has served the whole of the concurrent sentences imposed in respect of those convictions
I consider that a new trial should be ordered in respect of the offences charged in those counts. In his
Honour's remarks on sentence he made it clear that the sentences imposed took into account that the losses sustained by the Commonwealth would be in part balanced by the imposition of a pecuniary penalty order pursuant to the provisions of the Proceeds of Crimes Act (Commonwealth) 1987. But for that consideration heavier sentences would have been imposed. The pecuniary penalty order which was imposed was substantial.
It was $110,136. The appellant appeals to this Court not only against conviction but also against the making of that order. That order was founded upon the appellant's conviction upon the offences charged in the first four counts of the indictment. It follows that the quashing of those convictions makes it necessary to discharge the pecuniary penalty order.
In the result the following orders should be made:
Extension of time for appeal against conviction granted.
Convictions on the offences charged in each of counts 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively of the indictment quashed.
A new trial ordered in respect of each of the offences charged in counts , 2, 3 and 4 of the indictment.
Pecuniary penalty order against the appellant made on 3 August 1994 discharged.
JUDGE2
NEWMAN J In this matter I have had the advantage of reading in draft the reasons of Allen J. I agree with both the reasons he gives and the orders he proposes.
JUDGE3
SIMPSON J I agree with the orders proposed by Allen J and his reasons therefor.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/119.html  
