

Kezarne Pty Limited versus Pan Asia International Group Pty Limited and Anor
Matter No 55055/97 [1998] NSWSC 184 (13 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
KEZARNE PTY LIMITED versus PAN ASIA INTERNATIONAL GROUP PTY LIMITED & ANOR /97 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division Construction List 
Name of Case: KEZARNE PTY LIMITED versus PAN ASIA INTERNATIONAL GROUP PTY LIMITED & ANOR 
Proceedings: 55055/1997 
Date of Hearing: 8 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 13 May 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr D A Cowdroy QC 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Whitfields 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr G TW Miller QC/Mr G O Blake 
Solicitors for Defendants: Colin Biggers & Paisley 
Report of Referee referred back with further questions pursuant to Part 72 rule 13(c).

Necessity for matters to be submitted to the Referee considered:- 
Super Pty Limited versus SJP Formwork (Aust) Pty Limited [(1992) 29 NSWLR 549] and Nine Network Limited versus Kennedy Miller Television Pty Limited (Court of Appeal - 8 June 1994 - unreported) followed.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Application For The Adoption Of The Report 3 
The Submissions On Behalf Of The Defendants 4 
Conclusions 12 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
On 18 December 1997 Hunter J made an order, pursuant to Part 72 rule 2, referring these proceedings to Mr G.A. Markham, an expert in construction and building matters, for enquiry and report. The dispute between the parties arose out of a lump sum building contract entered into between them on 28
March 1996, whereby the plaintiff agreed to build for the first defendant a sixty-two unit multi-storey apartment building in Darlinghurst. For various reasons it was essential that the dispute be heard and resolved urgently and, after his appointment, the Referee implemented and adopted various procedures to ensure that happened. On 28 April 1998 the Referee furnished his final report to the Court, in which he incorporated certain preliminary reports he had made.

The report, save for the matters to which I have referred, was accepted by the parties as a thoroughly detailed analysis and determination of the issues raised by them. It was accepted that the Referee's findings of fact should, generally speaking, be accepted. From my reading of the report, together with its appendices, and subject only to the matters to which I shall refer, these observations about the quality of the report are completely justified. I would add that the Court is indebted to the Referee for the various innovative steps he took to bring about a resolution of the various problems in so expeditious a way.

The Referee's recommendations were:- "249. In my opinion, for the reasons stated, Kezarne is entitled to a judgment against Pan Asia of the following amounts: 
The Balance of $7.5 Million contract sum (Ex D29) - $ 341,339 
Variations to the Works (Ex PD2) - $ 693,240 
Damages, relating to partial suspension of the Works to 10 October 1997 (Variations 67, 68 and 69) - $ 54,300 
Damages relating to suspension of the 
Works for the period 10 October 1997 to deemed practical completion on  October 1997 (2.857 weeks at $22,000 per week) $ 62,857 
Pan Asia's restitution claim ($ 10,517) 
Total $ 1,141,219 . In my opinion, Kezarne is entitled to interest on debts due to it under the Contract under Clause 10.08 and otherwise pursuant to the Rules.
 . In my opinion, Kezarne is entitled to the release of its Bank Guarantee for the sum of $375,000.
 . In my opinion, costs should follow the award." 
The Application For The Adoption Of The Report 
The plaintiff sought an order that the report be adopted. The first defendant opposed its adoption and, pursuant to Part 72 rule 13(1)(c), sought orders:- "1. That paragraphs 134, 225, 235 to 237 and 248 to 252 of the Report of the Referee, Mr G.A. Markham dated 28 April 1998 be rejected and that there be submitted to the Referee for further consideration and a further report in accordance with this judgment the questions of: the quantum of the damages, if any, which the Plaintiff is entitled to recover against the First Defendant for its unlawful termination of the employment of the Plaintiff under the JCC-D 1994 Building Works Contract dated 28 March 1996 and the appropriate order for costs in relation to the Further Amended Summons; the quantum of the damages, if any, which the First Defendant is entitled to recover against the Plaintiff in respect of the rectification of defective work and the appropriate order for costs in relation to the Second Further Amended Cross Claim." 
The submissions, to some extent, ranged beyond these orders and raised other matters.

The second defendant, Mr Spencer, sought orders that the Further Amended
Summons against him be dismissed with costs.

The Submissions On Behalf Of The Defendants 
The first basic submission of the first defendant was that having found, as he did in paragraph 191 of the report, that the first defendant's termination of the plaintiff's employment was unlawful, the Referee failed to consider the appropriate measure of damages recoverable by the plaintiff. It was submitted that consideration of this issue had to be made, inter alia, in the light of the Referee's findings that the plaintiff had offered "a very keen price" to carry out the work: paragraph 17; and that:- "187. In October 1997, Kezarne was in a difficult financial position, however had all payments been made in accordance with the 29/30 July 1197 Agreement and if it had received just over $500,000 for variations submitted to-date, its position would have been much improved, although it would have still recorded a very significant loss on completing the project. There was no evidence as to Kezarne's real financial position, although it was said to owe in the order of $941,000 to supplier and sub-contractors. I touch on this matter, as Pan Asia did not seek to determine the Builder's employment for insolvency pursuant to Clause 12.01." (My emphasis.) 
It was submitted on behalf of the first defendant that as the Referee found as a fact that even if the payment to which he referred had been made, the plaintiff would still have recorded a very significant loss on completing the project, there was no basis, consistently with the decision of the High Court in The Commonwealth of Australia versus Amann Aviation Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64] for awarding any damages to the plaintiff on the basis of the difference between the contract sum of $7.5m and the amount paid of $7,158,661, (being the aggregate of amounts paid by the first defendant to the plaintiff and of amounts paid by the first defendant on the plaintiff's behalf to sub-contractors), namely $341,339. It was submitted, I think correctly, that that figure represented that difference. That was the submission on behalf of the first defendant and the plaintiff was unable to suggest any other basis for the figure. The conclusion is reinforced by paragraph 248 of the report, which stated:- "In final submissions, there was a difference between Kezarne and Pan Asia on the total amount paid to Kezarne, including the sums under the $1.25 Million Agreement and Pan Asia's direct payments to suppliers and sub-contractors. I was not able to resolve the difference from the evidence and have adopted the figures from the Progress Certificate (Ex D29). Mr Spencer was cross-examined on this document, however he was not challenged on the figures." 
Exhibit D29 before the Referee became Exhibit 1 before me. It showed the value of works completed as $6,412,605 and the value of Variations 1 to 65 as $42,575, and it deducted the amount of $910,643.02 paid to suppliers on behalf of the plaintiff and at its request, leaving a sub-total of $5,544,536.98.
From that was deducted an amount previously paid to the plaintiff of $6,248,018 leaving, according to the certificate, an amount overpaid to the plaintiff of $703,481.02. The certificate noted that provisional liquidated damages were to be advised and no provision had been made for defective work rectification or liquidated damages. Relevantly, for present purposes, the figures in that exhibit provide the only basis for concluding how the figure of $341,339 was reached. It was in the way I have explained.

A submission was made on behalf of the plaintiff that the figure may have been derived from the agreement to pay arising from the July 1997 agreement.
Although there was a similarity in the figures, as figures, there was nothing to indicate a direct relationship between them on the face of the Report.

Whilst submissions were made by the first defendant on the basis of Amann, it was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that Amann did not apply in the circumstances of the present case. I have two difficulties with dealing with these submissions. Firstly, the Referee has not, so far as I can see, disclosed other than in the way to which I have referred his reasoning process for holding that the plaintiff was entitled to recover $341,339. If it was by the calculation to which I have referred then it may be that this was not the correct approach. I put this tentatively because it may have been the correct approach if the Referee was satisfied that that amount had already been earned. However, until such time as the Referee discloses his reasoning for coming to that amount, it will not be possible to say if, and to what extent, if at all, the reasoning in Amann is applicable to the facts of this case.

Secondly, I do not think it appropriate for me to write what would be, in effect, an advisory opinion as to how, in various hypothetical circumstances, the principles in Amann might be applicable. The matter has been committed to the decision of the Referee and, in my opinion, he is entitled to conclude his consideration of it untrammelled by any views I may express as to how he should approach that task. However, and this is critical, he is entitled to and must receive the complete assistance of the legal representatives of the parties in determining this, and any other issues I refer to him. I say that in the light of a specific concession, which was made by Senior Counsel for the first defendant, who did not appear on the hearing before the Referee, that the Referee was never referred to the decision in Amann. This is most regrettable, although the view may have been taken that an award of the type made would not be the result of his considerations. To this extent the first defendant may be said to have treated the hearing before the Referee "as some kind of a warm up for the real contest": Super Pty Limited versus SJP Formwork
Pty Limited [(1992) 29 NSWLR 549] at p.563.

I have given careful consideration to whether I should refer this matter to the Referee in view of the prima facie unsatisfactory way in which it appears that submissions on the issue were made to him. In other words I have given consideration to whether I should not hold the parties to the way in which they apparently saw fit to conduct the reference. However, I have come to the conclusion that as questions of damage were clearly in issue, and as there is no explanation for the Referee's determination of the figure of $341,339, other than that to which I have referred, which, at least prima facie and on one view could be erroneous, the matter should be referred back to him.

This submission, as with the second submission, gained force from not only the finding in paragraph in 187, to which I have referred, but also from the apparent acceptance, in paragraph 248, of the figures in progress certificate
Exhibit D29. The second submission really flowed from that acceptance. It was that even if one accepted the figure of $693,240 as the proper amount for the variations to the works, Exhibit D29 showed an overpayment of $703,481.02 and, if that figure be accepted, as apparently it was, the making of that adjustment only would not be such as to entitle the plaintiff to recover damages, without taking into account the amount of the overpayment. It does not appear that the Referee has considered this from the reasons he gave and, in my opinion, that matter should also be referred back to him.

The third submission on behalf of the first defendant was that the Referee had failed to consider Sections 11 and 12 of the contract, which, it was submitted, set up a regime and order for, and limited the amount to be paid on, termination. It was conceded expressly on behalf of the first defendant that the operation and effect of these sections was not specifically pleaded nor were any submissions put to the Referee in relation to them. Unlike the failure to make all submissions in relation to damages, I consider that if the parties simply failed to raise the point, either at a pleading or argumentative level, it is not now open to them to do so now and, accordingly,
I am not disposed to refer this matter back to the Referee. To do so would be, in effect, to allow the first defendant to bring a new and different case:
Super and Nine Network Pty Limited versus Kennedy Miller Television Pty
Limited (Court of Appeal- 8 June 1994 - unreported).

The fourth complaint raised by the first defendant was that the Referee had found, in relation to defective work and commencing at paragraph 221 of his report, that in his opinion the sub-contractors would have rectified the work for which they were responsible, such that the plaintiff would not have been liable for rectification work to the first defendant. This finding of fact was attacked on the bases that viewing the matter prospectively against the background that the plaintiff was not paying its sub-contractors, it could not be said that the sub-contractors would have fulfilled their obligations; that no evidence was called from the sub-contractors that they would have done so, (although it was conceded that this submission was never made to the Referee); and that the contracts and sub-contracts were happening in a loss situation, so that the clear inference was that the plaintiff was not paying the sub- contractors. This was really another way of putting the first submission.

It was further submitted, incorrectly in my view, that the Referee had failed to take account of the submission that there was no evidence of the sub- contracts. He clearly did have regard to that: paragraph 222. However, I think of more significance was the allegation that the three sub-contracts to which the Referee referred in paragraph 223 were not sub-contracts, which related to the whole, or indeed most, of the rectification work to be carried out.

A further submission was made that the Referee seemed, in paragraph 225, to have taken the view that there was an obligation on the sub-contractors to the first defendant to make good the work, whereas, on a proper view of the contract, the obligation was on the plaintiff to make good the work by ensuring that the sub-contractors performed their obligations to it under their contracts with it. I think, as a matter of fact, it would have been open to the Referee to conclude that they would have done so and that, accordingly, the rectification work would have been carried out. However, the difficulty is, if there be a difficulty, that it was submitted that the relevant sub- contracts were not before the Referee, so that he was not in a position to determine, if that be correct, that there were obligations in those sub- contracts whereby the sub-contractors were obliged to carry out the rectification work.

It would not be necessary for the Referee to have the sub-contracts before him if there was other evidence he accepted, which established that the obligation of the sub-contractors was to carry out the work. It would then be open to him, depending on the view he took of the evidence, to find that there was such an obligation and to conclude that it would have been performed, with the consequences he seems to have assumed in his report.

In my opinion, sufficient doubt has been raised about this finding to justify its being referred back to the Referee. It was not really contested in submissions that the relevant sub-contracts were not before the Referee.
Whether they were or not will be a matter for him to determine.

The final submission on behalf of the first defendant was that in paragraph the Referee failed to construe Special Condition 45 properly. I have no doubt that the Referee understood the reason why he was not reducing the variations by the sum of $21,012 in respect of kitchen cabinets but, if I may say so with respect, the words in paragraph 134 do not explain to me precisely why that was. Accordingly, I propose to refer back to the Referee the question as to why he made the finding in paragraph 134.

On behalf of the second defendant it was submitted that he was entitled, on the findings at paragraphs 203 and 204, to have the proceedings against him dismissed with costs. Prima facie I think this must be correct and no submission was put to the contrary. The real question which arises is the extent to which the plaintiff should pay the second defendant's costs. The
Court would be assisted in coming to this conclusion by the Referee's assessment of the additional time taken at the hearing, if any, by virtue of the joinder of the second defendant. This has to be viewed in the light of the fact that the second defendant was a necessary witness for the first defendant in any event, and that there was a clear overlap between issues concerning the first defendant and issues concerning him. In those circumstances the prima facie position would be that the second defendant would, in all probability, only be entitled to a small proportion of the costs as costs referable to the claim against him. The Referee's full knowledge of what transpired at the hearing will enable him to provide that estimate and I shall be obliged if he will do so in percentage terms. I would imagine, although it is entirely a matter for the Referee, that it would be a relatively small part of the time spent at the hearing.

Conclusions 
The Referee has made himself available to further consider this matter commencing on 26 May 1998. It has been suggested that the further hearing may take up to four days, which I must say seems an excessive time having regard to the issues raised and the Referee's obvious knowledge of the matter. I assume the Referee will hold a preliminary conference prior to that date and give directions for the furnishing of written submissions on the issues, which
I have referred back to him. However if the Referee or the parties require any further assistance from the Court they have liberty to apply at short notice.

I refer back to the Referee for his further consideration and report:- 
The reasons why he awarded the plaintiff damages in the sum of $341,339, the manner in which that amount was calculated, and, whether, after a consideration of the further submissions, he is of the view that that figure, or some other figure, should be awarded to the plaintiff under that heading and his reasons for so concluding.

The reasons why, if the Referee accepted the figures in Exhibit D29, he did not take into account the overpayment to the plaintiff of $703,481.02 in assessing damages payable by the first defendant to the plaintiff. The Referee should also report to the Court as to whether that amount, or some other amount, should be taken into account as the amount overpaid by the first defendant to the plaintiff in calculating any damages payable by the first defendant to the plaintiff.

The reasons why the Referee was of the view that the sub-contractors would carry out the rectification work either having regard to the terms of the relevant sub-contracts or to such other evidence as the Referee accepted and whether, if the Referee is not satisfied that this will occur, the first defendant is entitled to damages for rectification works and the amount of such damages.

The reasons for the Referee's conclusions in paragraph 134 and whether, on hearing such further evidence and submissions as may be presented to the
Referee, he is of the view that there should be any variation to that order.

The way in which, if at all, consistently with any further findings made by the Referee, the damages he found payable by the first defendant to the plaintiff should be adjusted.

The percentage of time the Referee considered was taken up by the separate allegations brought by the plaintiff against the second defendant, which allegations failed, and thus the percentage of costs payable by the plaintiff to the second defendant.

I reserve the question of the costs of the present Motion pending the further report of the Referee.

I fix the time by which the Referee is to report as 30 June 1998 and I stand the proceedings over until 3July 1998.

I grant liberty to the Referee or any party to apply.

I order that the exhibits be returned.
 * * * 
