

Regina versus Morrison Matter No 131/90 [1995] NSWSC 3 (21 June 1995) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus PHILLIP THOMAS MORRISON /90 June 1995 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
DETERMINATION OF LIFE SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: Phillip Thomas Morrison (the applicant) applies for the fixing of minimum and additional terms which will together comprise a term of sentence to replace that of penal servitude for life imposed on 20 July 1981 at Wagga Wagga Supreme Court for the murder of Joseph Levett. 
This determination is governed by the provisions of s.13A of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and there are particular precepts applicable to the matter: "(9) The Supreme Court, in exercising its functions under this section, is to have regard to: the knowledge of the original sentencing court that a person sentenced to imprisonment for life was eligible to be released on licence under section 463 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and of the practice relating to the issue of such licences; and any report on the person made by the Review Council and any other relevant reports prepared after sentence (including, for example, reports on the person's rehabilitation), being in either case reports made available to the
Supreme Court; and any relevant comments made by the original sentencing court when imposing the sentence; and the age of the person (at the time the person committed the offence and also at the time the Supreme Court deals with the application), and may have regard to any other relevant matter. " 
The killing took place on 18 February 1981 near the village of Wombat. The applicant accepts the statement of facts prepared on behalf of the Crown and they can be briefly recapitulated. At about one o'clock in the afternoon near
Young the applicant engaged the victim who was a fifty year old taxi driver to take him to the town of Harden. On the way the applicant produced a knife and remonstrated with the victim for having an affair with his (the applicant's) mother. Her husband, the applicant's father was still living. The detail of this was not explored at trial but it would appear from a police interview that the applicant had resented the adultery of the victim and his mother and had been brooding about it for some years. He later told Police that for this reason he was "all stirred up". He directed the victim to the Wombat hotel to purchase some beer and later to stop along a lonely road.

I conclude that the applicant attacked the victim in a frenzy. Post mortem examination identified 23 stab wounds on the body. The applicant dragged the victim to a fallen tree and then decamped in the taxi. His eventual apprehension was inevitable. He even stopped at a road house where he informed some truck drivers of what he had done but they treated his confession with understandable scepticism.

The only matter raised at trial in defence was an assertion of drunkenness but the jury's verdict showed that they clearly found that notwithstanding an ingestion of liquor the requisite intention on the part of the applicant had been proved.

The mandatory sentence was imposed by the Honourable Mr Justice Nagle without expanded comment. Psychiatric opinion was that the applicant did not suffer from relevant mental illness but this and psychological testing revealed some personality disorder.

The attack was ferocious and vicious and so far as can be ascertained was motivated by the applicant's ruminating for years over what he apparently perceived as an affront by the victim to his mother's morality. In the absence of any other evidence or explanation I treat that motive as operating at the time of killing. It is convenient to mention here that the special gravity with which the law views the offences of those who attack providers of public transport would not pertain to this case. The applicant's motive, although criminally misguided, was obviously personal.

It was virtually common ground between Mr Green QC for the applicant and Mr
Thompson for the Crown that it would be appropriate in a very general sense to scale the objective seriousness of the offence and by so doing conclude that it was not in the very worst category. I agree. I do not overlook the aggravating features of pre-meditation and the arming of the applicant with a knife. I see no reason to regard the ingestion of intoxicating liquor as other than a factor for disinhibition and I would not treat that as mitigating the offence.

The applicant was arrested on 19 February 1981 and has served more than fourteen years and three months of actual custody. Mr Green QC in his usual helpful fashion acknowledged the objective seriousness of the offence and concentrated his submissions upon those subjective factors which he sought to make relevant.

It was acknowledged that the evidence did not demonstrate remorse on the part of the applicant but I agree with the submission that this does not result in addition to sentence, but rather removes one factor by which a sentence which properly reflects the objective matters might otherwise be reduced.

The most difficult problem which I find confronts me can be identified by reference to the requirement that I have regard to the report of the Serious
Offenders Review Board/Council and other post sentence matters. It should be emphasised that my task is essentially that of sentence and it is not for me to determine just when during any additional term the applicant will, if at all, be suitable for release.

The applicant is a "loner". He is said to be one of five children although he has variously told people that he is the eldest or the youngest of the siblings. He has rejected visitors for what, by my calculation, now extends for about seven years. He has been described on occasions as institutionalised. My conclusion is that at least to a small degree he has learned to manipulate the prison system to his advantage. I mean no more than that when he is unhappy with the circumstances of his incarceration - Berrima and John Moroney Centre are two examples described in the papers - he offends against prison discipline and achieves a desired transfer. To his credit and giving some faint hope it can be said that when he is satisfied with his conditions he appears well behaved. I have noted the schedule of his prison offences. In the early years I infer that he was associated with prison brew, apparently both as an imbiber and a manufacturer and in subsequent years he has tested positively for drugs. He was content to move to Goulburn which is his present place of custody and he has no offences on his record since he arrived there in March last year. I note that he is trusted to work outside the walls and there is no suggestion of any difficulty in that regard.

As I have indicated the most troubling aspect of this application relates to the lack of progress towards a rehabilitation on the part of the applicant. In and recently he has been seen by Dr Lucas a psychiatrist. These arrangements were made on his behalf by the Legal Aid Commission. No point will be served by my reciting what can be read in his reports but they contain the only glimmers of hope that I can identify which would point to the possible successful re-integration of the applicant into the community.

The impression I have is that the applicant is given to mood swings although his most frequent presentation is as a surly would-be hermit. I expect that his incarceration has contributed to this. I accept the submission on his behalf that an overall reading of his responses to prison officers and to those who examine him, shows that he manifests non-co-operation by careless and inaccurate history. The most disturbing aspect of the information is that in this month he told a trainee psychologist that "he would not hesitate in doing the same thing again (presumably killing) should he be threatened by somebody or should somebody steal any of his property". It is possible that his expression was intended to shock the young trainee but I expressly reach no conclusion to that effect. It is reported that he has made this comment and he declined the opportunity to give evidence in denial or explanation of it.

Although I am obliged by statute to take into account these post sentence factors in a case where these are unfavourable to the prisoner they have more potential relevance to actual release than the task upon which I am engaged.
My function is essentially one of sentence.

Despite the misgivings which are implicit in the foregoing, I must nevertheless as a matter of objective justice impose a sentence which fits the crime and in that sense is within the pattern of impositions upon others in comparable circumstances.

I have reached the conclusion that there are few factors and then only of little weight to reduce a sentence which must reflect the objective seriousness of this offence. Those subjective factors are the comparatively minor record of the offender, his personality disorder and the misguided motive which I am satisfied probably contributed to provoking the attack. I can identify nothing else, I have already said that in the circumstances I do not regard his disinhibition by the consumption of intoxicating liquor as a mitigating circumstance.

Phillip Thomas Morrison : 
For the murder of Joseph Levett in substitution for the existing term of penal servitude for life, I impose a total term of sentence of years penal servitude to consist of a minimum term of 15 years to commence on 19 February 1981 and to expire on 18 February 1996 together with an additional term of 6 years commencing on February 1996. You will be eligible for parole on 18 February 1996. You should clearly understand that that is a date of eligibility and it will be a matter for the appropriate authority to determine whether you should actually be released.

I do draw to your attention that amongst other provisions the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) provides that you may not be the subject of an order for parole unless it is determined that there is sufficient reason to believe that if released from custody you will be able to adapt to normal lawful community life.
 * * * 
