

Bunyan versus Brien Matter No 2440/97 [1997] NSWSC 505 (24 October 1997) 
Bunyan versus Brien /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /97 ELIZABETH ALICE BUNYAN versus RICHARD CAMPBELL BRIEN AS TRUSTEE OF THE
ESTATE OF BRUCE JAMES BUNYAN & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by the plaintiff for a declaration that property at Epping is held on trust for her.

The registered proprietors of the subject property are Bruce James Bunyan and
Kathleen May Bunyan, who are respectively the son and daughter of the plaintiff. The problem comes about in the present case because Bruce James
Bunyan has become a bankrupt and Mr Richard Campbell Brien, his trustee, claims a one-half interest in the property as property of the bankrupt which can be distributed amongst his creditors.

Between 1967 and 1971 the plaintiff and her late husband purchased properties at North Entrance and Bateau Bay on the Central Coast of New South Wales. When the plaintiff's husband died in 1978, the properties passed to her as the surviving joint tenant. The properties were sold by the plaintiff in 1979 and
In 1980, the plaintiff decided to buy a property at Long Jetty. It is at this point that one needs to look at the facts a little more closely.

The plaintiff says that when she sold the North Entrance property she received about $13,000 and she deposited that money into the Bank of New South Wales, as it then was, and used the funds for a trip to Fiji as well as maintenance and repairs on the Bateau Bay property. In 1979, she collapsed when playing bowls at the Long Jetty RSL Club and she was taken to hospital where she spent a few days. She says that she was concerned, at that stage, about her ability to handle her affairs. She had a conversation with her son and her daughter.
Her son, at that stage, was employed in a law office. He later became a solicitor and she asked him to handle her affairs. The son said that he would handle matters and create a trust. Unfortunately, he never created a trust in the formal sense at all in that there was never any writing by way of a declaration of trust and there was a very informal segregation of the so called trust affairs with Bruce Bunyan's ordinary affairs.

When the Bateau Bay property was sold for about $67,500, the money was paid to
Bruce Bunyan and, according to the plaintiff, and, indeed, according to
Kathleen and Bruce Bunyan as well, there was a conversation that the Long
Jetty villa would be purchased in the son and daughter's name in trust. The son handled all the affairs. The villa was purchased and the title was in the name of Bruce and Kathleen Bunyan.

The plaintiff had some family worries in 1982, when her sister became sick, and the plaintiff moved from the Central Coast to Ruse near Campbelltown.
During that period the son and the daughter arranged for the Long Jetty property to be rented. The plaintiff never saw any of the rents and the documents for that period have vanished. However, the son and daughter's evidence was that the rent from the Long Jetty property was not sufficient for the plaintiff's needs once the Epping property was purchased in October 1983 and that they used the rents from Long Jetty partially to pay for the plaintiff's expenses and, in due course, used the capital to purchase the
Epping property. Indeed, it would seem that at least Bruce Bunyan supplemented what was being received in order to ensure that the mother did not want for comfort.

The Epping property was purchased on 31 October 1983 for $89,000. It was purchased in the name of Bruce and Kathleen Bunyan. As the Long Jetty property was not sold until 16 March 1988, when it was sold for $75,500, it was necessary for finance to be raised.

The evidence is that Bruce Bunyan arranged a bill finance facility through the
Westpac Bank, which involved rolling over bills of exchange for $75,000. The security given to the bank was a mortgage over both the Long Jetty and the
Epping properties. Rents came in from Long Jetty. There were some monies paid by Kathleen to Bruce by way of occupation fee because she was sharing the
Epping property with her mother, and Bruce Bunyan seems to have made up any of the deficiency, personally paying some $19,500 over a period of time. So far as the plaintiff is concerned, she says that she believed that the rents and the sale of Long Jetty paid for Epping and that she was just living in her own property purchased by her own monies.

When Long Jetty was sold, the settlement sheets show that the nett proceeds of some $74,000 were paid to the Westpac Bank and there was no longer any need to roll over the bills of exchange.

When Bruce Bunyan went bankrupt, he was a solicitor and, in addition to the trustee in bankruptcy, the Law Society successfully applied to the court to appoint Miss Jean Sayer as Receiver of Mr Bruce Bunyan's trust account. Miss
Sayer has been made a party to these proceedings but she made it clear, through her solicitor, that she made no claim to the property in question.

The contest then was between the plaintiff and the trustee in bankruptcy. Mr
Justin Gleeson appeared for the plaintiff and Mr G Colman appeared for the trustee. Mr Colman made it clear over and over again that his client was in a position of distinct disadvantage in that he was endeavouring to protect the creditors generally. He had no direct knowledge of what had occurred. His client very much suspected that the Bunyans had put their heads together after the event and had reconstructed what had happened so as to show there was a trust. He put to various witnesses different scenarios as to what might have happened. He put to the plaintiff that there had been an arrangement with her children whereby the property would belong to the children, subject to a right of occupancy during the plaintiff's life. The plaintiff disagreed with that.
It was not put to the son or the daughter. It was also put that the property was put in the name of the son and daughter as a gift. That was put to both the mother and the son. Both denied it.

A third scenario that was put to the mother was that she had given the money from the sale of Bateau Bay to her children and that thereafter the children owned the property and they were just, out of filial affection, looking after her. The mother denied that.

There were then questions put to the plaintiff about "rent" that she had paid for Epping. She had told the Department of Social Security (DSS), it would seem, that she was paying rent to her son and daughter for Epping and she was given a rent subsidy. Significantly, the question that was put by counsel for the trustee to the plaintiff was: "You weren't paying rent, were you?" This seemed to be a suggestion that she had misled the DSS rather than what one would have expected, an allegation that she really was just a tenant in property which was owned by her son and daughter. I thought it was significant the way that question was put but a series of questions was put in this area of the case, presumably on instructions, which seemed to negate any suggestion that the plaintiff was in the property as a tenant . Though, of course, it did not exclude the possibility that she was there under some sort of equitable life estate. I should add that the plaintiff explains that she thought paying a contribution towards rates, et cetera, was the same thing as rent so that she could make her statement to the DSS without any hint of deception.

One starts from the fact that when Bateau Bay was sold in 1980, the plaintiff had about $67,500. That fact is incontrovertible. One has then got to trace what happened to that $67,500.

Mr Colman says that there are no credible records dealing with what happened.
Indeed, there are no records which would assist the court in coming to the conclusion that the plaintiff's story was correct. He makes the further suggestion that the records once existed and they are not here now and no-one has explained why they are not here now. Therefore, something notorious must have happened. I do not consider that the evidence is sufficient for me to find that that was so.

Mr Colman then repeats that his client is to a degree floundering in the dark and that that is a matter which is relevant when determining the question of fact in this case.

I dealt with this problem in Ramirez versus Sandor's Trustee 23 April 1997, and
I will not repeat all that I said there. I there mentioned that under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. There is a well established principle, which is dealt with in Michael versus Thompson <case>; [(1894) 20 VLR 548], 552 and Official Trustee versus Marchiori [(1983) 69 FLR ], , that where all the facts concerning a transaction which the trustee in bankruptcy wishes to set aside are not within the knowledge of the trustee or the creditors seeking to impugn the transaction, a very slight degree of proof should be sufficient to shift the burden which lies on the trustee to upset the transaction.

Of course, in the instant case the trustee is not moving to set aside the transaction. Rather the plaintiff is moving for a declaration of trust so that the onus is on her. Notwithstanding this, the matter there referred to affects the way the court deals with the present problem. The onus of proof is not shifted, but the court, when considering whether it is satisfied on the balance of probabilities, takes account of the fact that all the knowledge is in the one camp. I have taken that problem into account when deciding this case.

There is the undoubted fact that the plaintiff had $67,500 in 1980. There are various possibilities: that she retained the $67,500; and that she gave it away.

Mr Bruce Bunyan's evidence, which Mr Colman reminded me was not supported by way of documentation, was that the monies went into a bank account in his name, called a number 2 account, with the Commercial Bank of Australia, which was later absorbed into the Westpac Bank. From time to time monies were withdrawn from that account and were paid into the trust account of GJ Gibbs & Associates, where Mr Bunyan was working, and were recorded in Mr Gibbs' trust ledger, some pages of which are in evidence, under the broad heading "Bunyan Investments". Some monies were then transferred from the trust account into interest bearing deposits, the receipts for two of these are in evidence one which merely records that the money is held for "G J George & Assoc
T/T B Buny" and the other "G J Gibb T/F E A Bunyan".

The documentary material is equivocal.

So far as the oral evidence is concerned, it all goes the one way. The plaintiff, her son and her daughter all say that what happened was that the mother was sick; she was worried that she could not handle her own affairs.
The son was working in a solicitor's office and later became a solicitor, he was able to handle things. The son and the daughter contributed to the mother's upkeep without her really knowing and all parties intended at all stages that the property in the bank account and later property at Epping would be the property of the plaintiff.

In such a situation it is very difficult for the trustee to succeed unless he can show that the witnesses are witnesses of no credit. Mr Colman tried his best but was hampered by the fact that he had "no dirt on the plaintiff".
Despite his best endeavours, the plaintiff gave evidence which was completely credible. She gave it, to my mind, in a straightforward fashion and I cannot see any reason why she should not be accepted. Indeed, the various alternative allegations that were put to her again seemed to throw up the fact that the trustee really did not have any one competing scenario of which he had any satisfactory material which he could put in place of the scenario that the property belonged to the plaintiff.

Mr Colman stressed, in his submissions, that the son and the daughter both had a lot to gain by now backing up the plaintiff's story and, indeed, there must have been family conversations from which they could have implanted in the mother's mind what must have happened. I do not consider, with respect, that that is true of Kathleen. At the moment, Kathleen has a one-half legal interest in the property. If the plaintiff's case is correct, she will have no interest in the property except that under the will of the plaintiff, as it is at the moment, she will be left the house. Circumstances can change and wills can change and I am not at all sure that Kathleen would be better off if the plaintiff's case were right, than if she had insisted that the property was half hers. I took her evidence to be closer to an admission against interest than the evidence of a person who stood to gain by the plaintiff's success. In any event, I found her evidence quite credible and not shaken by cross- examination.

Mr Colman's comment can more fairly be made about Bruce Bunyan but, again, I heard him give evidence in the witness box, I heard him cross-examined and nothing was thrown up which, to my mind, affected his credibility. I consider that I should accept the evidence on behalf of the plaintiff.

Indeed, there was very little in evidence from which one could infer a scenario other than that which the plaintiff put forward. There was, of course, some material suggesting that the number 2 account was in Bruce
Bunyan's name. There was no disclosure to the Westpac Bank that the property at Long Jetty or the property at Epping was other than held beneficially. But, in what appears a close and affectionate family, these matters are not sufficient to put great suspicion on the sworn evidence of the parties.

Mr Gleeson gave me well-reasoned submissions as to both fact and law. I am probably not doing justice to those submissions by dealing with the matter purely as a question of fact, but it seems to me that as neither [s
C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s23c.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) or [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) was pleaded, as I think was quite a proper position for the trustee to take up, I can conveniently deal with this case merely as one of fact.

Accordingly, I make orders 1 and 2 in the statement of claim. I make order 6 in the statement of claim. Liberty to the plaintiff to apply for a vesting order or such other order as she may be advised. Order that the first defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the suit to date. Further consideration reserved.
 * * * 
