

Leda Marine Pty Limited versus Propeller Reconditioners Pty Limited Matter No /96 [1997] NSWSC 469 (10 October 1997) 
Leda Marine Pty Limited versus Propeller Reconditioners Pty Limited /96 October 1997 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: LEDA MARINE PTY LIMITED versus PROPELLER RECONDITIONERS PTY LIMITED 
Proceedings: 50200/1996 
Dates of Hearing: 1, 2 October 1997 
Date of Judgment: 10 October 1997 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr J O Anderson 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Tesoriero Kwan 
Counsel for Defendant: Mr G E Underwood 
Solicitor for Defendant: Gordon A Salier 
Essentially a question of fact.

Held that there was no misleading or deceptive conduct or conduct likely to mislead or deceive.

Terms of contract negated alleged representation:- 
Accounting System 2000 (Developments) Pty Limited versus CCH Australia Limited & Anor [(1993) 114 ALR 355] noted.

Position where contract entered into by parties apparently able to look after their own interests:- 
Austotel Pty Limited & Anor versus Franklin's Selfserve Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 582], and Bank of America & Anor versus Bank of New York & Anor (1995) 17 ATPR 41-390 referred to.

Effect of the absence of evidence from the party who actually entered into the contract, but did not negotiate it and was not shown to be aware of the alleged representation considered.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Contract 5 
The Terms Of The Contract 8 
The Alleged Representation 13 
The Failure To Call Mr Ell 39 
Answers To Questions 42 /1996 - LEDA MARINE PTY LIMITED versus PROPELLER RECONDITIONERS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
These proceedings arise out of a written agreement dated 15 August 1994, which was entered into by the plaintiff, which was then known as Austcorp 302 Pty
Limited and subsequently changed its name to Leda Marine Pty Limited and for which Mr J.O. Anderson of Counsel appeared, and the defendant, for which Mr
G.E. Underwood of Counsel appeared. It defined the plaintiff as "the Owner", and the defendant as "the Builder", and the recital provided:- "WHEREAS the Owner has engaged the Builder to complete the building of a 26.2 metre motor yacht hereinafter described for the consideration hereinafter appearing AND the Builder has agreed to build such yacht (hereinafter called the vessel) and to carry out any further work on the vessel as may be to be supplied by the Owner to the Builder hereto on the basic terms set out herein." 
Various disputes have arisen between the parties and the proceedings, which were commenced in the Equity Division, were transferred to this Division. On 6
December 1996 Giles CJCommD ordered that certain issues be determined separately from and prior to the remaining issues, which, it is agreed, should be referred out pursuant to Part 72 of the Supreme Court Rules. After quite a delay the parties agreed that the Court should determine four matters. Before the hearing the third and fourth issues were resolved and the two, which ultimately fell for determination, were:- "1. Whether upon the true construction of the contract the defendant was entitled to payment from the plaintiff for labour:- in the amount equivalent to that actually paid by the defendant for labour or, alternatively, at the rate of $18.50 per hour.
 . Alternatively whether the plaintiff is entitled to an order pursuant to s.87 of the Trade Practices Act or alternatively s.72 of the Fair Trading Act varying the terms of the contract to provide that the defendant is and was entitled to payment by the plaintiff for labour in the amount equivalent to that actually paid by the defendant for labour." 
At the commencement of final submissions Mr Anderson stated that he did not seek a favourable answer to the first issue, it being accepted by him that on a true construction of the contract a component in any payment was $18.50 per hour per man per thirty eight hour week for labour, subject to any adjustments permitted by the contract, and particularly by paragraphs 2 and 4 of Schedule
Paragraph 2 makes provision for the payment of labour in advance and paragraph 4 provides for the giving of credit if that amount was not expended prior to the next progress payment: Tp.92. At Tp.90 I had suggested that the issue between the parties was that the plaintiff asserted that it was only liable to pay the actual cost of labour, which the defendant had to pay and whether it be more or less than $18.00 per hour; whereas the defendant contended that irrespective of the amount it paid for labour, subject only to a specific rise and fall provision in the contract, it was entitled to be paid $18.50 per hour per man per thirty eight hour week. It was conceded by Mr
Underwood that if overtime was worked the defendant was liable to pay for that and was not entitled to recover any overtime payments from the plaintiff.

Mr Anderson's concession that the plaintiff could not obtain the result for which it contended on a proper construction of the agreement meant the plaintiff accepted that on its true construction it was liable to pay $18.50 per man per hour per thirty eight hour week without adjustment save to the limited extent to which I have referred. It also meant that the plaintiff accepted, on a proper construction of the contract, that it was not able to discharge its obligation to pay for labour by paying an amount equivalent to that actually paid by the defendant for labour. This left the issue, which was raised by the second question, whether the defendant, through its principal director, Mr Colin William Cuneo, had made a representation to the plaintiff's representatives, namely to its solicitor Mr John Richard Tesoriero and to its
Marine Marketing Manager, Mr Ian McKeaghue Green, that the sum of $18.50 was the actual labour cost per hour, which would be paid by the defendant over the length of the contract, which was envisaged to be completed in ten months. The only proviso to this, on the plaintiff's case, was the rise and fall clause dependent upon rise or fall in State and Federal Awards.

The representation does not appear with absolute clarity from the question asked, although it was pleaded from the time the plaintiff filed its Points of
Claim on 24 October 1996 and in the Amended Points of Claim filed on 10 July in the following terms:- "Alternatively, before the parties entered into the contract the defendant represented to the plaintiff that the costs of labour to the defendant would be $18.50 per hour." 
It was alleged that such a representation was made, although it is necessary to read it, and the case was fought on this basis, as a representation that the actual cost of labour to the defendant would be $18.50 per hour per man per thirty eight hour week. It was alleged that it was misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive in that the plaintiff understood that to be the actual wage cost, and that in consequence of and in reliance on the representation the plaintiff entered into the contract and pursuant to its terms paid the defendant some hundreds of thousands of dollars more than it would have if it had appreciated this was not the actual wage cost.

As it was not in issue that the contract provided for payment of labour at the rate of $18.50 per hour per man per thirty eight hour week, which payment was made, the issue is whether the plaintiff was misled or deceived and entered into the contract in those terms in reliance on that representation and because it was led to believe, contrary to the fact, that this was the actual wage component. The plaintiff's case, essentially, was that the labour charge was represented as the actual cost to the defendant; that the defendant was not to make a profit from that charge; and that the defendant represented that it would not be doing so. The defendant's contentions were that it had sought payment at the rate to which I have referred and that it took the risk, subject only to adjustments based on State and Federal Awards, that it would be able to employ direct and sub-contract labour at a lesser rate and hence make an element of profit from the labour component. It relied on the terms of the contract and upon statements made by Mr Cuneo, which, it submitted, were consistent with and expressly disclosed the basis on which it would be paid for labour.

The Contract 
The contract was negotiated over a period between Mr Green and Mr Tesoriero, on behalf of the plaintiff, and Mr Cuneo, on behalf of the defendant. Mr Cuneo provided several drafts, which he prepared, and, on 3 August 1994, after a conference between the three on 2 August 1994, Mr Tesoriero sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Cuneo suggesting various amendments. Generally speaking these were incorporated into the contract entered into on 15 August 1994, and whilst provision was made for adjustments to amounts paid and to be paid, there was no clause which made such a provision in respect of the actual amount paid for labour, save for award variations, which would accord with either the agreement or the representation for which the plaintiff contended.
It is, in my opinion, necessary to look at the contract the parties signed to appreciate the care with which matters of payment were addressed. In doing so
I understand that conduct proscribed by s.52 of the Trade Practices Act may still infect an agreement entered into in consequence of and in reliance on it, notwithstanding that the terms of the contract tend to negative, or do negative, the existence of the conduct of which complaint is made. Indeed, the offending conduct may be a statement embodied as a provision of the contract:
Accounting System 2000 (Developments) Pty Limited & Anor versus CCH Australia
Limited & Anor [(1993) 114 ALR 355.] None-the- less where a contract has been worked out through various drafts by experienced businessmen, and the plaintiff has had the advantage of legal advice in drafting and settling its final terms, there is, in my opinion, the need to show a clear case that a party entered into it because it was relevantly misled or deceived. Austotel Pty Limited & Anor versus Franklins
Selfserve Pty Limited [(1989) 16 NSWLR 582] and
Bank of America & Anor versus Bank of New York & Anor (1995) 17 ATPR -390 per Meagher JA at p.40341 are examples of this proposition. Put another way it is necessary, in my opinion, in such circumstances for the party complaining to explain why the contract did not accommodate the representation.

I should add that in this instance the agreement was not executed by those who negotiated it, but by the Chairman of the Leda Group of Companies, Mr Robert
Ell and his secretary. There was no evidence that what had transpired in the negotiations was communicated to Mr Ell, nor that he, in reliance on the negotiations carried out by Mr Green and Mr Tesoriero, signed the contract. Mr
Ell was available to give evidence, but he was not called. There is no evidence as to what he relied on, either in executing the agreement or in authorising, as he did, the first thirty nine payments to the defendant under it, which payments were made conformably with the contract.

Whilst the plaintiff and the defendant executed the contract, they did not execute the same document. Each signed a counterpart and there was missing from that executed by the plaintiff page 14A, which comprised a calculation sheet showing how the figure of $18.50 was calculated. Mr Anderson relied heavily on this calculation sheet as constituting a representation by the defendant. It was not annexed to the contract Mr Ell signed, (Exhibit 3), although it was not in issue that it was part of it and that it was annexed to that executed by the defendant, (Exhibit A). There was no evidence that the calculation sheet was ever drawn to Mr Ell's attention.

The Terms Of The Contract 
Clause 4 of the contract provided:- "The price to be paid by the Owner to the Builder for the building of the vessel shall be calculated in accordance with Schedule 1 hereto. Notwithstanding that the amounts quoted in Schedule 1 may be estimates the Owner will fact pay to the builder:- 
The purchase price of the vessel as noted in Schedules 1 and 2.

The cost of all materials and consumables attributed to the building of the vessel.

Charges for administration and administration costs as per items "B" and "C" of Schedule 1.

All labour at the rate set out in item "D" of Schedule 1 which charges for labour shall be subject to any rise/fall in State and Federal Awards/All payments for labour shall be made in accordance with Clause 13 of this Agreement.

All costs incurred by the Builder associated with the purchase and delivery of the vessel.

All costs incurred in connection with the transit of the vessel by either sea or road as per Clause 13 of this Agreement.

All or any design fees which notwithstanding anything hereinbefore stated will be paid by the Owner direct to the designers.

The Builder's administration costs to deliver the vessel to the premises 114 Enterprise Drive, Tomago in accordance with the formula in Clause 10 of this Agreement. The Builder's labour shall be paid in accordance with Schedule 1 "D". The Builder and sub-contractors' payments to be paid in accordance with Clause 13 of this Agreement.

The Owner shall make the initial payment and progress payments thereafter to the Builder in accordance with Schedule 2 hereto. The Builder shall be entitled to progress payments upon request but not more frequently than every fourteen (14) days." 
The parties agreed that in the second line of the clause the word "in" has been omitted in error before the word "fact".

It is to be noted that clause 4 makes no provision for profit and that, in relation to materials and consumables, it provides expressly that the amount payable shall be "the cost" of them. Sub-clauses (d) and (h) provide expressly the rate at which labour is to be charged by reference to item "D" in Schedule .

Clause 5, relevantly, provided:- "The Builder shall keep correct and full entries and accounts of all hours expended on the project and shall at all times permit the Owner to inspect and examine all such entries and accounts and the Builder shall produce all vouchers and other documents necessary for showing the amount of materials and things and for vouching the same and shall give all such information, facilities and assistance as may be reasonably required by the Owner or its appointee to enable it fully to understand such accounts and entries and other particulars." 
What is missing from this clause, relevantly for the case propounded by the plaintiff, is a requirement that the defendant should keep entries of amounts actually expended on labour and furnish that to the plaintiff as part of its contractual obligations.

Clause 10 dealt with alterations and additions and concluded:- "In so far as the modification or variation involves an extension of the delivery date then the Builder shall be paid an administration charge on a daily basis according to the following formula: X No of days extension to delivery time." 
Clause 13 provided:- "Upon completion of each stage of construction, the Builder shall forward an invoice for the labour and materials concerned in that stage to the Owner, and the Owner shall pay such invoice within (14) days of date of issue of such invoice. Should such payment not be made within such (14) days, then interest shall accrue ..." 
Schedule 1 provided:- " SCHEDULE 1 
The contract price to be paid by the Owner to the Builder pursuant to this Agreement shall be the sum of the following amounts.

A PURCHASE OF THE VESSEL 
Purchase of the vessel as per attached inventory $ 500,000 
B ADMINISTRATION 
Administration Salaries 
Profit and Directors Fees 
Administration Superannuation & Payroll 
Tax $ 275,000 
C ADMINISTRATION COSTS 
Telephone/Electricity 
Public Liability Insurance 
Accounting/Legal Fees 
Hire of Our Plant and Equipment 
Computer/Stationery 
Motor Vehicle Expenses $ 70,000 
D LABOUR 
Labour at the rate of $18.50 per hour per man per 38 hour week.

Calculation sheet attached." (My emphasis.) 
The only reference to "profit" is under the heading "Administration". The amount payable was the total of the four sums.

Page 14A was in the following form:- 
Schedule 2 provided:- " SCHEDULE 2 
INITIAL PAYMENT - TO BE MADE ON THE SIGNING AND EXCHANGE OF AGREEMENTS.

A Purchase of vessel as per Schedule 1(a) $ 500,000 
B 10% of administration and administration costs $ 34,500 
C Wages, Materials and Consumables $ 110,000 
TOTAL INITIAL PAYMENT $ 644,500 
PROGRESS PAYMENTS THEREAFTER . Nine (9) monthly payments @ $34,500.
 . Wages fourteen (14) days in advance based on hours worked.
 . Materials and equipment within fourteen (14) days of invoice.
 . There shall be an adjustment at each request for progress payment and a credit given in favour of the Owner for amounts paid by the Owner previously which have not been expended by the Builder." 
Notwithstanding clause 13, wages were to be paid fourteen days in advance with the right to adjust the amount paid for moneys not expended.

In the light of the various provisions to which I have referred Mr Anderson made the concession that on a proper construction of the contract he could not assert that the payment for labour was to be in an amount equivalent to that actually paid by the defendant for it, but rather that the payment was to be at the rate of $18.50 per hour. Accordingly, the adjustment provided for by clause 4 of the Second Schedule was the crediting of $18.50 per hour for each hour estimated but not worked in each period. This was the way in which the plaintiff adjusted the accounts submitted to it.

Although, as I have noted, the contract provided that the work would be completed in ten months, the vessel was not launched until March 1996 by which time the plaintiff had paid the defendant approximately $3.454m.

The Alleged Representation 
Mr Green, whose witness statement was made on 31 January 1997 and is Exhibit
C, said that in about April 1994 he discussed the carrying out of the work with Mr Cuneo and asked for a budget for completing the vessel to a comparable standard to one named "Export I". He said, in paragraph 4, that he told Mr
Cuneo the plaintiff would pay a fee for administration and profit and for materials and labour at cost. On 10 June 1994 Mr Cuneo sent Mr Green a costing for a twenty six metre motor yacht, which showed, inter alia, six per cent administration charges, ten per cent profit and a labour rate of $16.282 per hour. Mr Green's statement did not refer to any other conversation with Mr
Cuneo until 15 August 1994 when he said he met with Mr Tesoriero and Mr Cuneo at the former's office and Mr Cuneo said:- "I have had to rework my budget. I have set out my actual labour charges in the schedule which is annexed to the contract. It comes out to about $18.50 per hour." 
Mr Anderson said he relied on this conversation, in conjunction with the wages calculation furnished by Mr Cuneo and annexed to the contract at page 14A, as constituting, in part, the representation. For reasons I shall give I do not accept that Mr Cuneo made this statement at the meeting on 15 August 1994.

Mr Green said nothing further relevant to the alleged representation or the circumstances in which the plaintiff executed its part of the contract. He contented himself by saying that he "subsequently arranged for a copy of the contract to be executed and forwarded to Mr Cuneo". However, it is necessary to note that on 11 July 1994 Mr Cuneo wrote to Mr Ell and Mr Green setting out a costing, which letter stated that the defendant's costs and charges were to be "fixed throughout construction" and, in relation to wages:- "Wages to be paid two weeks in advance based on hours worked at the rate as shown on the wages calculation sheet. A full breakup of hours per section supplied during construction." 
There was annexed to the letter a schedule showing the same type of figures as appeared on the schedule annexed to the contract, which produced a figure of approximately $18.34 per hour. Mr Green advised Mr Cuneo that he was unable to read it, because of some problem with the facsimile transmission machine, and
Mr Cuneo sent a handwritten document containing the same information.
Relevant, for present purposes, was the statement in the letter that wages were to be paid in advance and that a full break-up of hours would be supplied during construction. There was no suggestion that any further particulars of wages actually paid would be provided.

I shall return to consider what, in my view, was a very important conversation between Mr Green and Mr Cuneo on or about 11 July 1994, to which Mr Green made no reference in his witness statement but which he conceded took place essentially in the terms asserted by Mr Cuneo.

Mr Tesoriero's witness statement, which was made on 15 May 1997 and became
Exhibit D, stated that he acted as solicitor for the plaintiff in relation to the preparation of the contract and that he had several meetings and telephone conversations with Mr Cuneo. He referred to a meeting on 2 August 1994 with Mr
Cuneo and Mr Green in which he alleged the following conversation occurred:- "I said to Mr Cuneo: `The boat is to be built on a completely cost plus basis. What I mean by this is that my client will be paying for all materials, including the purchase of the hull, and will pay for all labour. My client will also be taking the lease of the Tomago premises. Your profit is to be derived solely from the administration fees. When you prepare the contract, it is to be prepared on that basis.' 
Cuneo replied: `That is the way I understand it also'." 
Mr Cuneo's witness statement was made on 2 April 1997 prior to receipt of Mr
Tesoriero's witness statement. Mr Cuneo denied, in oral evidence, this conversation took place and it was not corroborated by Mr Green, who made no mention of the meeting in his witness statement. In cross-examination he agreed he was present at the meeting.

On 3 August 1994 Mr Tesoriero sent Mr Cuneo a number of pages of amendments.
None referred to the terms of this conversation or made provision for an adjustment to the labour price conformably with the matters allegedly discussed. The labour price was shown in the draft at $18.50 per hour per man per thirty eight hour week. Mr Tesoriero's suggested amendment to clause 9 provided, inter alia:- "The Builder shall be paid for materials and equipment and for labour in accordance with sub-paragraph (D) of Schedule 1. In so far as the modification or variation involves an extension of the delivery date then the Builder shall be paid an administration charge on a daily basis according to the following formula: X No of days extension to delivery time." 
The amendment provided for payments in accordance with Schedule 1, and required Items C and D of Schedule 2 to be re-worked, and paragraph 4 to provide:- "4. There shall be an adjustment at each request for progress payment and a credit given in favour of the Owner for amounts paid by the Owner previously which have not been expended by the Builder." 
There was no suggestion in the submissions that, as a matter of construction, this allowed a refund of amounts in excess of the agreed hourly rate. Rather, it was accepted that this clause operated to bring about a credit of $18.50 per hour paid in advance, in so far as any of the hours for which the advance payment had been made were not worked. A number of credits were claimed by the plaintiff in those circumstances and payment was made by the plaintiff on the basis of an entitlement to those credits. There was no suggestion in the invoices, which were worked through by the Accountancy Department of the plaintiff, and the first thirty nine payments of which were approved by Mr
Ell, that there should be any other reduction in respect of labour charges. I appreciate that the plaintiff asserted an entitlement to information about actual labour costs, which Mr Cuneo repulsed on the ground that the contract did not give the plaintiff the right to such information and provided for a fixed hourly rate.

Mr Tesoriero made mention of the execution of the contract on 15 August 1994, and referred to some conversation about other possible future contracts. But he did not refer to the conversation about which Mr Green gave evidence as having taken place on that day to the effect that Mr Cuneo had said that he had to re-work his budget and had set out his "actual labour charges" in the schedule annexed to the contract. Thus, neither Mr Tesoriero nor Mr Green corroborated the other on conversations, which Mr Anderson submitted formed, together with the wages calculations, the basis of the representations.

Mr Cuneo made a very detailed statement on 2 April 1997 of which paragraphs 1 and 2 and 19 to 27 inclusive were read and became Exhibit 1. On 11 July 1994 he furnished costings to Mr Green, which he said were necessary to make the venture "a proposition for" him. Mr Green asked for another copy, which showed in detail labour costs of approximately $18.34 per hour. This document was in the same format as that annexed to the contract executed by the defendant. Mr
Cuneo said he had the following conversation with Mr Green "at about that time". It is, in my view, a critical conversation to which, as I have said, Mr
Green did not refer in his statement, but which, in cross-examination, he essentially conceded. Mr Cuneo asserted that Mr Green said:- "We will pay the labour at cost per individual employee." 
In this sentence Mr Green was putting the proposition for which the plaintiff now contends, to which Mr Cuneo said he replied:- "If it is my employees and my company that is to be involved then we will only work on the basis that there be a fixed rate for labour to be paid by Leda. It will be up to me to employ who I want and to treat them either as a sub-contractor or as an employee, at the rate agreed upon with them. The rate that I have allowed will be offset by the amount that is paid. It will be up to myself to make it work with no further costs to you." 
Mr Cuneo said Mr Green replied "OK". I shall refer to Mr Green's acceptance of this conversation in cross-examination. I am completely satisfied it took place in the terms stated by Mr Cuneo. No other conclusion is available on the evidence. In it Mr Cuneo was making clear that the defendant would charge a fixed labour rate; it would employ who it chose and at a rate agreed between it and the workers; the amount in the contract would be offset against what was paid by the plaintiff; and the defendant had "to make it work". There could be no clearer statement that Mr Cuneo rejected the "actual cost of labour" proposition put forward by Mr Green and suggested the alternative, which, provided all went well for the defendant, would leave a profit component for it. Equally there is no doubt that Mr Green agreed to that. The figures showing the cost of labour were the justification for the amount in the contract. They did not, and could not, represent actual labour costs because a number of trades on vastly different wage rates were to be engaged in the work. I am satisfied the figures in the schedule were intended and accepted as an average estimate, not as the amount which would in fact be paid, and that in so far as there was any difference that would be either for the benefit or to the detriment of the defendant.

Mr Cuneo said he had another conversation with Mr Green in July 1994 and, on 2
August 1994, with Mr Green and Mr Tesoriero when the latter raised the question as to how modifications and variations would be paid. Mr Cuneo said he "guessed" on an hourly basis, and that Mr Green said:- "You are being paid $18.50 for your labour, your administration charges are $342,000 for ten months, which is three hundred days. Divide $342,000 by 300 then multiply by the number of days extension to delivery date." 
Mr Cuneo agreed and asked for changes to be sent to him by facsimile transmission. On 3 August 1994 Mr Tesoriero sent suggested amendments, including this one, which makes it wholly probable that there was a conversation on 2 August 1994 in those terms. In his statement Mr Cuneo denied both the second sentence in paragraph 4 and paragraph 8 of Mr Green's statement. As I have said, he did not have Mr Tesoriero's statement when he prepared Exhibit 1.

In cross-examination in relation to paragraph 4 of his statement, Mr Tesoriero agreed that "obviously" more was said and he adhered to what he said in it and advanced a reason for saying it. He could not recall whether $18.50 was mentioned, and he said it may have come up at another meeting or during a telephone conversation "later": Tp.5. He was vague about what was said, although he remembered discussion about modifications and variations and the formula. He agreed there was no reference to this in his statement and he denied that Mr Green said:- "You are being paid $18.50 for your labour, and your administration charges of $342,000 for ten months, which is three hundred days." 
However, he said the figure of $18.50 was mentioned and was "put forward as a figure that that's what labour would cost". Notwithstanding his denial of the statement I have just quoted, which he repeated, Tp.8, he then said he could not recall it. When pressed about a reference to $18.50 he said he did not admit it and could not recall it, but it was consistent with the figures:
Tp.11. Mr Tesoriero adhered to the statement in paragraph 4 of his witness statement and said it was most important, because he had explicit instructions that the contract was to be structured in that way. He said he ensured, to the best of his ability, that the final contract was drafted in accordance with those instructions: Tp.11. The plaintiff no longer contends for the view that it achieved that result.

None-the-less Mr Tesoriero's assertion that he thought the contract was drafted in accordance with those instructions and to accommodate that position is of significance, in my opinion, because it shows that there was reliance on the terms of the contract as achieving the commercial result, which the plaintiff apparently desired, rather than upon any alleged representation. It is very difficult, in my view, to assert that one was induced to enter into a contract by virtue of a representation, when the negotiating parties are of the view that the subject matter of the representation has been dealt with specifically in the contract in terms which negative that representation or, perhaps to put it more accurately in present circumstances, bring about the precise result for which the plaintiff contends.

Mr Tesoriero repeated, Tp.16, that he thought the plaintiff would be paying for labour "exactly what he paid out and his profit was to come from the administration". He said that at the meeting on 15 August 1994 the only discussion about rates was one he had with Mr Green, and he did not recall any such discussion between Mr Green and Mr Cuneo. It then emerged that Mr
Tesoriero had received the contract from Mr Cuneo on about 9 August 1994, which did not include page 14A.

I have noted already that Mr Tesoriero was not corroborated by Mr Green in relation to the essential conversation he said he had with Mr Cuneo on 2
August 1994, and he did not corroborate Mr Green on an arguably essential conversation on 15 August 1994. Mr Anderson relied on each of these conversations as constituting the representation. Mr Cuneo denied the conversations Mr Tesoriero said were held. Mr Tesoriero believed that the contract accommodated the situation the plaintiff wanted but, as a matter of construction, it did not. I have come to the conclusion that Mr Cuneo's recollection of conversations is to be preferred to Mr Tesoriero's. Mr Cuneo was definite in the evidence he gave and he remembered matters, such as the discussion about modifications and variations, which were utterly consistent with the probabilities. In the end it was conceded that such matters were discussed. Whilst I do not consider that Mr Tesoriero was being untruthful, I find his recollection was faulty. He conceded he could not remember many things and, in so far as his evidence was at variance with that of Mr Cuneo's,
I prefer the latter's evidence as being more inherently reliable and in accordance with the probabilities. I have also referred to the lack of internal corroboration as between Mr Green and Mr Tesoriero. Finally, I consider that Mr Tesoriero took the view that the contract covered the position in accordance with his instructions and, accordingly, in so far as Mr
Cuneo was alleged to have made any representations, that these were not reflected in the contract. I accept Mr Cuneo's evidence that he did not have the conversation with Mr Tesoriero on 2 August 1994, which Mr Tesoriero alleged took place in his witness statement.

In cross-examination Mr Green said that it was his understanding that the defendant was to pay for labour charges, which were to be "fixed" throughout the construction period in the sense that they would not vary. This understanding is inherently inconsistent with the conversation for which Mr
Cuneo contended took place in July 1994 and with the plaintiff's contention that it would pay the actual cost of labour. It is consistent with the position taken by the defendant. Mr Underwood cross-examined Mr Green about the July 1994 conversation commencing at Tp.24. The conversation was put to him. Portions, he said, may well have been said or could have been said. He agreed there was a discussion about wages and how they were to be paid and that Mr Cuneo could have said that it would up to him to employ employees or sub-contractors he wanted, and:- "Q. And he said that it was up to him to agree on the rate with his sub-contractors and employees? 
A. Correct.

Q. `The rate that I have allowed will be offset by the amount that is paid', did he say those words to you? 
A. Yes.

Q. `It will be up to yourself to make it work' - sorry, `It will be up to myself to make it work with no further costs to you'; did he say those words to you? 
A. That could be true, yes.

Q. Then you said `Okay', or words to that effect? 
A. Yes." 
Although it was submitted that Mr Green did not embrace "enthusiastically" the version of the conversation put forward by Mr Cuneo, there can be no doubt he agreed substantially with it. He did not deny any part of it, nor suggest any further conversation at that time, which would throw a different light on what was said. Once that situation was reached it became equally clear that Mr
Cuneo was not saying to Mr Green that he would be charging actual labour costs, but a figure which he would offset against the labour costs the defendant incurred. Mr Green further agreed that he told Mr Cuneo that this was "Okay".

At Tp.26 Mr Green said he did not agree that it was in the contemplation of the parties that the plaintiff would pay the actual labour costs. However, he agreed the payment was at a fixed rate, which would cover sub-contractors and employees, and:- "Q. And you also knew that there was to be a fixed rate for labour to be paid by Leda, that was to allow for any offset of the actual amounts to be paid by Mr Cuneo's company to employees and sub-contractors? 
A. Yes": Tp.27. 
This understanding was quite inconsistent with the case the plaintiff was seeking to make, although it was consistent with Mr Green's other evidence in cross-examination. Mr Green said, however, that he thought there would only be a payment of actual labour costs arising from other conversations, which he said he had with Mr Cuneo and which were not recorded in his statement. He said he tried to keep his statement "simple", and then he said he did not know that the labour costs would be fixed nor that the defendant would take the risk: Tp.28. This evidence was inconsistent with his earlier evidence. He agreed there was no correspondence to support his view, nor to dispute a fixed rate of $18.50 per hour per man for a thirty eight hour week, and that there was nothing in his statement about conversations for an amount over $18.50 or about reimbursement if the labour cost was below that: Tp.28. He continued:- "Q. And it is the fact, is it not, Mr Green, that when Mr Cuneo had that conversation with you about Leda paying a fixed rate for labour throughout the duration of the contract, you knew exactly that that meant that there would be a rate of 18.50, subject to any variations which were covered by the contract for the construction of the vessel? 
A. No, that was not my understanding at the time.

Q. And yet you cannot point me to one piece of evidence in this case which supports the contrary? 
A. I understood in the contract that it dealt with that, but whether that was right or wrong, that might be my error, but that's what I thought." 
Once again the situation was reached in which Mr Green stated that he was relying on the terms of the contract as setting forth the position the plaintiff wished to achieve. In these circumstances it becomes very difficult, leaving aside for the moment the other difficulties confronting Mr Green as to what was actually said, for it to be asserted that he was induced to negotiate the contract on the basis that $18.50 was the actual wage cost.

Mr Green's recollection did not extend to enabling him to say, at least initially, that two copies of the agreement were executed.

At Tp.32 Mr Green stated that Mr Ell and his secretary executed the contract for the plaintiff and that Mr Ell was available to give evidence. He denied that the contract was prepared on a "do and charge" basis. He considered it "was an open book type" by which he meant that there was no agreed final total price: Tp.34. He denied that the defendant would be entitled to labour at $18.50 per hour, which he said was "an estimate" "the same as when he gave us the 35-36,000 hours".

Mr Green said that he thought the hourly rate was stated as an estimate in the contract, although he may have misunderstood it. The difficulty with referring to the hourly rate as "an estimate" was that it was at variance with the plaintiff's case that it represented the actual amount to be paid for labour.
Mr Anderson asserted that the plaintiff relied on the calculation sheet as a representation of the actual wage cost. Mr Green did not support this view. He thought it was an estimate, no doubt because wages were paid to different trades at different rates. But once it was conceded that the wages' calculation was an estimate the plaintiff faced the substantial obstacle that the contract it negotiated did not provide for adjustments to accommodate the actual costs. It also faced the substantial difficulty that the representation alleged was that $18.50 was the actual cost and not an estimate.

At Tp.36 Mr Green agreed that he did not refer to the conversation of 2 August in his statement as he did not regard it as relevant, although he recalled a discussion about variations and modifications. Mr Green was asked about his contribution to the conversation, and he said he did not recall setting forth the formula or saying words to the effect that the defendant was being paid $18.50 for labour. His evidence continued:- "Q. Do you deny that you said to Mr Cuneo that you were being paid $18.50 for your labour? 
A. As an estimate.

Q. No, no, just the words? 
A. No.

Q. And then Mr Cuneo said: `Okay', and then he said, `fax all the changes to myself I will add them tonight'. Do you recall that? 
A. I'm sorry, say again? 
Q. Mr Cuneo then said, `Okay. Fax all the changes to myself. I will add them tonight'? 
A. No.

Q. Do you recall that being said? 
A. No, I do not." 
Thus Mr Green did not deny that he said to Mr Cuneo that "you", the defendant, are being paid $18.50 for labour, which was totally consistent with the version of the July conversation, which I accept took place.

At Tp.38 Mr Green was referred to Item D in Schedule 1 and it was put to him that that was consistent with what he had said to Mr Cuneo prior to 5 August
He replied:- "A. Yes, that rate, once again, was put in as an estimate backed up by a break down of what he gave us on request." 
Once again this evidence made it clear that the figure was not put forward as an actual cost, but as an estimate supported in the way to which Mr Green referred.

At Tp.39 Mr Green was cross-examined about the conversation he attributed to
Mr Cuneo on 15 August 1994 and he gave the following evidence:- "Q. At that meeting Mr Cuneo, I put it to you, that the words in paragraph 9 attributed to Mr Cuneo were not said by him to you? 
A. As I recall, at the time he came with a reworked sheet of paper. I think it was a box with various break downs, and that was the first time when we signed or when he signed the agreement that we had a different box than what we had originally. Now, that's break downs of what the labour rates were going to be, and referring to superannuation and holiday pay and all the rest of it, insurances.

Q. You are saying that he told you that the 18.492171 was the actual labour charges which he was going to pay? 
A. It was, I understood, as close as he could come to an estimate of what it would be, so that we could do a budget and we would know, you know, what it was going to cost us to finish the vessel. We multiplied that out by 35-36,000 hours plus whatever else it was going to cost, and that is how we were to arrive at what we thought would finish up the costing." 
This evidence, once again, made it clear that Mr Green understood the figure to be an estimate.

At Tp.40 Mr Green made what, in my view, was another very important concession. In paragraph 9 of his witness statement he asserted that Mr Cuneo said he had set out his "actual labour charges in the schedule". Mr Underwood cross-examined Mr Green thus:- "Q. On your version of the conversation, that was the first time you knew it was an actual labour charge rather than an estimate? 
A. No. We still understood it to be an estimate.

Q. Well, Mr Green, if you understood for several months that there was an estimate in relation to labour, how did you respond to Mr Cuneo when he sent this estimate to you? What did you say in response to that statement? 
A. We accepted it as being an estimate at that time, because he had said -- 
Q. What did you say to Mr Cuneo when he said that to you? What were the words that you used? 
A. Well, we accepted it as an estimate. I accepted it as an estimate." 
The cross-examination continued, Tp.40:- "Q. When he said, `It comes out to about $18.50 per hour', how did you reconcile the fact that in the second sentence he was telling you the actual labour charge and in the next sentence he was telling you it was about $18.50 an hour? 
A. Very easy, because he told us at the time that he would be paying some people a lot less and some people a lot more than the $18.50 per hour. So we had an estimate or an average that we had come to, to do our budgets of that amount. That's how he arrived at that amount." 
In my opinion the concept of an "estimate" does not fit at all with the assertion of the plaintiff that Mr Cuneo represented to it that the actual labour cost was $18.50 per hour; nor does the concept that the figure was an average figure, giving an estimate, based on some trades being paid more and some being paid less. As I have said that is not the representation for which the plaintiff contended, nor, in my view, could it have asserted that it was induced to enter into the contract on the basis that it received no more than an estimate. Further, as I have said, the evidence of Mr Green and Mr
Tesoriero that they thought the contract provided for any necessary adjustment to the estimate, so as to show the actual wages, is inconsistent with the representation alleged.

Mr Green was referred to some subsequent correspondence in which he asserted that the rate of $18.50 per hour was an "indicative" amount only and that the plaintiff felt there should be adjustments:- ".. up or down at the end of every month to compensate for overs and unders in the amount of money paid on an hourly rate to the various staff members": Tp.43. 
Mr Green said he believed there was a clause in the agreement to that effect and:- "Q. But there was in fact no clause in the agreement to that effect in relation to adjustments at the end of every month for overs and unders? 
A. I took it as being the estimate and the fact of what the spirit of the agreement meant, as far as building it, open book; that that's what it meant.

Q. There was no clause in the agreement to the effect that there would be an adjustment at the end of each month.

A. Possibly, no. Exactly, correct.

Q. I gather in your writing this letter you expected there to be an adjustment at the end of each month in accordance with what you had written to Mr Cuneo? 
A. Correct": Tp.44. 
This evidence highlighted the problems the plaintiff's case confronted and to which I have referred.

In the meantime Mr Cuneo was putting forward his view that the $18.50 was to be paid irrespective of the amount the defendant actually paid and, subsequently, invoices were paid on the basis of an adjustment to the number of hours worked, but not to the hourly rate paid by the defendant. Later there was an increase from $18.50 to $18.68 per hour, which Mr Cuneo claimed on behalf of the plaintiff:- "As per the Government regulations 30 June, 1995, Workers Compensation and Superannuation has risen. This is covered in our agreement dated 15 August 1994." 
Mr Anderson, in submissions, relied greatly upon this as showing that the actual amount paid was being claimed by Mr Cuneo. Mr Cuneo asserted, when cross-examined about the matter, that the defendant was entitled to this amount pursuant to alterations in awards. If Mr Cuneo was wrong in asserting that it was covered by the agreement the plaintiff could have told him so. In any event this submission did not fit easily with the concessions by Mr Green that $18.50 was an estimate. This characterisation of the amount is also consistent with Mr Green's statement that $18.50 was an indicative amount.

In his letter of 19 December 1994 Mr Green referred to a discussion with Mr
Cuneo on 15 December 1994 and said that $18.50 per hour "was an indicative amount only". The letter then continued to suggest that there should be an adjustment. In response to this Mr Cuneo, on 20 December 1994, wrote:- "We have discussed this matter on a number of occasions since we entered into the agreement dated 15 August 1994 and we have advised you that our hourly rate and cost of employee's vary quite substantially between employee's and that the hourly rate is fixed at the rate set down in item "d" of schedule 1 of the agreement, the rate which is to be paid by the owner to the builder in schedule 1 has been calculated by ourselves to cover all those variations on our employee's wages and costs throughout the duration of the contract." 
Mr Cuneo agreed that the defendant kept accounts of all hours expended and that the plaintiff was entitled to inspect them. At the time that the plaintiff was seeking to assert a different construction of the contract and the defendant was resisting it, the contract was not far advanced and Exhibit
B shows that after December 1994 a large amount of money was paid on the basis for which Mr Cuneo contended. This, in my opinion, is totally consistent with an acceptance by the plaintiff of the position put by him. Mr Anderson submitted that if there had been a dispute at that stage it would have jeopardised the progress of the work because Mr Cuneo was threatening to stop work if the amounts he demanded were not paid. The defendant had a contractual right to do that if there was a breach of the agreement. It seems very strange to me that if there was any real assertion being made that either pursuant to the terms of the contract or in consequence of some ex contractual representation the plaintiff was not obliged to pay the defendant the amounts it was claiming without recourse to its wage records, that matter was not dealt with at the time. The amounts were substantial. I cannot overlook that the first thirty nine payments were authorised by Mr Ell.

At Tp.48, after being cross-examined about the credits being made on an hourly basis for work not carried out but paid for in advance, Mr Green agreed that the various trades would have been employed on different rates and that all the credits were predicated on $18.50 per hour, rather than on the actual amounts which would have been paid to the trades.

Mr Green's evidence did not, in my view, support the case the plaintiff was seeking to bring. I accept Mr Cuneo's evidence that he had a conversation with
Mr Green in about July 1994 in which he told Mr Green the way in which the charges would be made. This evidence is diametrically opposed to a representation of the type for which the plaintiff contended. Further, Mr
Green understood that the calculation sheet was only intended as "an estimate" and that the $18.50 had the same character and did not represent the actual wages being paid by the defendant. I appreciate, of course, that as there were a number of trades being paid at different rates the plaintiff had to concede that the figure was an estimate or, perhaps, an average. But, none-the-less, that was quite different from a representation that the amount was the actual amount to be paid. Further, the agreement made no provision for a check on the amount actually being paid or for an adjustment on that basis.

Mr Anderson made a submission about the refusal by the defendant to produce the wage records until after the proceedings were commenced. Mr Cuneo's position on this was that the plaintiff was entitled to the records of hours worked, but not to the wage records showing the amounts paid. However, after the proceedings were commenced, the defendant agreed to an order that it supply the wage records. I do not see anything significant in this. The litigation raised an issue as to whether the correct amount by way of wages had been paid. Once the plaintiff propounded that issue there could have been no argument that the wage records were not relevant, such that there could be opposition to their being produced. However, before that issue was put forward there was no basis on which the defendant was obliged to make those records available to the plaintiff.

In my view the recollection of Mr Green, in so far as it is supportive of the defendant's case, is substantially destructive of the plaintiff's case. As I have said I regard the conversation of July 1994 as at odds with the plaintiff's case, and Mr Green's recollection that the figure of $18.50 was put forward as an estimate on the basis of which budgeting could be carried out as inconsistent with the contention that the actual labour charges were $18.50 per hour per man. Further, as I have said, Mr Green thought that the position for which the plaintiff now argues was covered in the agreement.
Clearly it was not.

I think that Mr Green was correct in saying that he considered that the figure of $18.50 per hour was an estimate in the sense in which he was using the word, namely the estimate of wages which would be paid to a number of trades on different wage rates, some exceeding that amount per hour and some being less than it. Once that position was reached the suggestion that the calculation sheet amounted to a representation of the "actual" wages to be paid disappears, in my view. Indeed the various conversations upon which Mr
Green relied did not assert that the amount provided in the contract was other than an estimate and it was Mr Green's belief, which I have suggested is inconsistent with the representation for which he contended, that provision for adjustment was made in the agreement. It was not, but, on his evidence, there had to be such a provision. There is no doubt that the parties turned their attention to an adjustment based on hours not worked and for which $18.50 per hour had been paid. The failure to provide or require a clause in the agreement allowing for an adjustment between the $18.50 per hour and the actual wages paid indicates to me, as clearly as can be, that there never was any such representation made. There was an attempt subsequently to revert to this position, but it was rejected by Mr Cuneo on the basis that there was never any such agreement, a position which was, thereafter, accepted by the plaintiff at least until the contract was concluded.

Although I do not consider that Mr Green was being deliberately untruthful, and whilst I accept much of his evidence which is strongly corroborative of the defendant's case that there was no representation of the type for which the plaintiff contends, in so far as there is a conflict between his evidence and that of Mr Cuneo I prefer the latter's.

Mr Anderson conceded that Mr Green's evidence was both internally inconsistent and was not really consistent with the representation for which the plaintiff was contending. In my opinion these concessions were properly made. The evidence did not support the representation for which the plaintiff contended.
There is one other matter to which I should refer in relation to the evidence of Mr Green. Just before the luncheon adjournment on the first day I asked Mr
Green if he had difficulty in hearing. I did so because he gave me the impression in the witness box that he was having difficulty, and I thought that may have been due to counsel not speaking up sufficiently. Mr Green said he was a little hard of hearing and had been for some years. I refer to this matter because in submissions Mr Anderson stated that I had asked the question for a reason which he did not understand. The reason I thought it may be relevant was because in so far as there was a conflict as to oral conversations it may have given rise to some cross-examination and a submission that as Mr Green was hard of hearing he may have missed certain matters. In the end neither of these matters arose and, in the circumstances, it is unnecessary for me to say anything further about this point.

Mr Cuneo was cross-examined at length by Mr Anderson to seek to establish that he had put forward the figures knowing that the plaintiff would rely upon them as showing the actual labour charge and with the intention that the figures should constitute a representation to the plaintiff as to the actual labour charge. He denied there was any intention that the figures should relate to the actual labour charge. He maintained that the figures were put forward to justify the charge, which he asserted was not to be examined further, of $18.50 per hour. He denied the conversations attributed to him by Mr
Tesoriero, which denials I accept, and, in so far as he and Mr Green were at odds as to conversations I accept his evidence in preference to Mr Green's. I do not think it necessary to go through Mr Cuneo's evidence at any length. I have referred to various differences between him, on the one hand, and Mr
Green and Mr Tesoriero, on the other. I have given my reasons for accepting his evidence in preference to the evidence they gave. Mr Anderson made the point that Mr Cuneo was seeking to obtain as much profit for the defendant as he could and was putting forward figures in the calculation sheet, some of which he did not pay. In this regard he submitted that Mr Green had told Mr
Cuneo that an earlier profit figure was so high that the plaintiff would not accept it. From this he submitted that Mr Cuneo had reduced the stated profit, but "padded" the figure by misrepresenting the wages. I do not accept this. Mr
Cuneo made it clear in the July conversation what he was doing and Mr Green accepted it and the wage calculations he put forward as an estimate. In my opinion Mr Cuneo should be accepted in stating that he was constructing a price, which would make it worthwhile for the defendant to undertake the work, and I have little doubt that he drove as good a bargain as he could. I see nothing wrong with that provided that in doing so he did not make any representation to the plaintiff which was misleading or deceptive. In my view not only did he not make any such representation, but he expressly told Mr
Green of the basis upon which he was proceeding. Mr Green understood this, and both Mr Green and Mr Tesoriero appreciated that the $18.50 per hour was an estimate. They may have thought that there was provision for adjustment in the contract, but this was not a thought stimulated by anything they allege Mr
Cuneo said to them and is not the representation upon which the plaintiff relied. In so far as they did think that, it is at variance with reliance on what Mr Cuneo allegedly represented.

In all these circumstances the plaintiff has not established that the defendant made any representation or engaged in any conduct which was misleading or deceptive.

The Failure To Call Mr Ell 
The evidence made it clear that the contract was negotiated by Mr Green and that, conformably with his instructions, Mr Tesoriero considered the document on behalf of the plaintiff. In some way, which the evidence does not disclose, the contract went to Mr Ell and he executed it on behalf of the plaintiff.
There is no evidence of any discussion he had with Mr Green or of any instructions he furnished to Mr Green. There is evidence that Mr Tesoriero had instructions to ensure that no profit was made on labour. However, there is no evidence of any communication by Mr Tesoriero to Mr Ell as to the effect of the agreement. The evidence is silent as to the consideration Mr Ell gave to the agreement or as to any conclusion he formed as to its meaning.

In many cases it may be that a contract is negotiated by officers of a company and then executed by the Board or by other officers authorised to affix the seal to it. However, it seems strange to me that if the entry into the contract is said to have been infected by misleading or deceptive conduct, that no evidence is called from the party who actually enters into the contract, to say what knowledge, if any, that person had of the terms of the contract, and the basis on which they were negotiated. In some cases the inference may be drawn that the party who actually executes the contract on behalf of a company does so in circumstances where the party is aware that the party negotiating the contract has done so on the basis of certain representations. However, the present case does not seem to me to fall within that category. As I have said there is simply an absence of any evidence of the part played by Mr Ell, the consideration he gave to the contract and of the view he formed as to its meaning. There is no evidence that he was misled or deceived or was aware of any conduct of the defendant, which could lead to that result. There is an inference available that he was satisfied that the only adjustment to wages was to be made on the basis of the failure to work a certain number of hours for which pre-payment had been made and, from this and his failure to give evidence, the inference is available that he could have said nothing to assist the plaintiff's case in relation to the terms on which the contract was entered into.

My present view is that in a case where the party negotiating the contract on the part of a company does not enter into the contract on its behalf, but another person, who has had no proved connection with the negotiations, does, there should be some evidence whereby the alleged misleading or deceptive conduct is brought home to the party entering into the contract to establish reliance on that conduct. Alternatively, it seems to me that there should be evidence that the party entering into the contract was content, for whatever reason, to simply leave the negotiation of it to another party, and that the person actually signing the contract did nothing more than give the ultimate corporate approval to the agreement without directing his or her attention to what caused it to be entered into. I am not to be taken as saying, for the moment anyway, that this latter situation would be sufficient to enable the consequences of any misleading or deceptive conduct to be relied on.

Mr Underwood submitted that I should infer from the failure to call Mr Ell, in circumstances where he was available to be called, that he could say nothing to assist the plaintiff's case: Jones versus Dunkel (1959-60) 101 CLR 297.
There is obvious force in this submission and Mr Anderson really made no submission to the contrary. In the present case the evidence before me leaves me in absolutely no doubt that there was no representation of the type for which the plaintiff contends and, in so far as it may be necessary to go beyond that, there was no inducement or reliance. Usually it is more satisfying to determine the case on the basis of the evidence presented, rather than by recourse to the Jones versus Dunkel principle, although I appreciate that in some cases it may be significant. The Jones versus Dunkel inference would provide another reason for my reaching the conclusions to which I have come. In view of the conclusion to which I have come it is unnecessary to consider Mr Underwood's further submission that the plaintiff is estopped by its conduct from denying the entitlement of the defendant to be paid at the rate of $18.50 per hour.

Answers To Questions 
I answer the two questions posed for my consideration as follows:- (a) It was conceded the answer to this question should be "No".
 (b) It was conceded the answer to this question should be "Yes".
No.

In these circumstances I would propose, although I will hear submissions on this, that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings to date and, in due course, I will give directions for the further conduct of the balance of the proceedings.
 * * * 
