

Roads and Traffic Authority versus P Malcolm [1996] NSWSC 256 (4 July 1996) 
ROADS AND TRAFFIC AUTHORITY versus PETER MALCOLM /95; CC 14379/93 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Handley JA, Powell JA 
CATCHWORDS: WORKERS' COMPENSATION - ASSESSMENT OF INJURY - EFFICIENT USE OF A LIMB - IMPAIRMENT DIRECTLY CAUSED BY INJURY TO ANOTHER PART OF BODY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
The respondent worker received compensation under [ss 66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67 of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) for injuries received to his back, right leg and right arm. The trial judge also found that the respondent had suffered an 80% loss of the efficient use of his penis as a sexual organ and awarded compensation on that basis. The worker's penis is physically and physiologically normal but back pain during and after intercourse had dissuaded him from attempting intercourse and the pain had caused loss of erection. The appellant contested this award questioning the findings of fact and also arguing that there was no loss of the efficient use of the respondent's sexual organs and that the problem was due to his back pain for which he had been separately compensated.

HELD: dismissing the appeal: (1) There was ample medical evidence supporting the assessment and the mere existence of contrary evidence did not establish error; (2) Where the pain in another part of the body directly causes the reduced use of a limb it can be correctly characterised as a "loss of the efficient use of (that) limb": Department of Public Works versus Morrow [(1986) 5 NSWLR 166] at 168-9 per McHugh JA applied; (3) The respondent's injury was not a mere consequence of his back disability but was for practical purposes a loss of the efficient use of the sexual organ.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: I agree with the judgment of Handley JA.

The construction of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) poses a number of problems. Where a claim under the section is based upon a claim that there has been "a loss of the efficient use of" the thing in question, it is necessary for the Court to determine what in principle constitutes a "loss".
In a case such as this, the question is whether [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) applies only where the thing cannot be efficiently used because of an injury to or defect in the thing itself or whether the section applies where the reason why the thing can no longer be efficiently used is outside the thing itself. The present case is an illustration of the second of these: the loss and the efficient use of the thing derives not from any injury to or deficiency in the thing itself but from the pain which is produced in the back when the thing is used or following its use.

I see no reason in the terms of the legislation or the mischief at which it was directed so to limit [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) as to exclude a case of the second kind. That aspect of the matter should, I think, be settled in accordance with the view expressed by McHugh JA in
Department of Public Works versus Morrow [(1986) 5 NSWLR 166] at 168-9, to which Handley JA has referred.

Mr Hoeben SC made an additional submission, relating to the quantum of the loss assessed by the judge. In one form, the submission was that the penis is a multi- functional thing, having functions in sexual intercourse but also in other things such as urination. His submission was to the effect, I think, that the assessment of the loss as 80 per cent of the worst case (as the matter is conventionally described) fails to take proper account of the fact that, in relation to functions other than those of sexual intercourse, the thing may be efficiently used to an undiminished extent. There is force in this submission. The assessment of the degree of loss of efficient use involves, amongst other things, assumptions or conclusions as to the importance for this purpose of one function of the thing as against another.
(The term "importance" is used in the absence of another which more effectively describes the nature of the issue which is posed). However, having regard to the terms generally of this provision and the emphasis which appears from them, I do not think that the Court can or should conclude that the judge erred in the assessment that he made. Notwithstanding the force of Mr Hoeben's submissions, I do not think that this Court should intervene.

I agree with the orders proposed by Handley JA.
 
HANDLEY JA: This appeal from the judgment of Neilson CCJ challenged the award based on his Honour's findings that the worker had suffered an 80% loss of the efficient use of his penis as a sexual organ. The relevant statutory provisions in the 1987 Act comprise <case> (1) (definition of loss which includes loss of efficient use), <case> (1), <case> (1), and the Compensation Table appended to <case>. The Table provides that the percentage of the maximum payable for loss of sexual organs is 47% and note (f) provides that, subject to the maximum percentage of 47%, the percentage payable for loss of the penis is 47%. Note (a) provides that: "Where a range of percentages is provided by the Table the maximum percentage is payable only in a most extreme case and the percentage payable in any other case shall be reasonably proportionate to that maximum percentage having regard to the severity of the matter".

Section 68 (1) further provides that if a loss suffered by a worker consists of the loss of a proportion, but not all, of a thing mentioned in the Table, a percentage of the compensation payable for the total loss of the thing equal to the percentage lost by the worker is payable under <case>.

The worker suffered a lumbo-sacral disc lesion and proceeded to laminectomy and posterior fusion. Aracnoiditis subsequently set in. The Judge assessed the worker as having suffered a 33 1/3 percentage impairment of his back. He also assessed him as having percentage losses of the efficient use of his right leg at or above the knee and the right arm at or above the elbow. There was also an award under <case> based on these injuries which represented 60% of a most extreme case.

The worker's sexual organs are physically and physiologically normal. However he experiences back pain during and after intercourse. This has interfered with his sexual capacity in two ways. His Honour found that the severe pain experienced during and after intercourse, including pain experienced the following day, had dissuaded the worker from attempting intercourse, and that the pain had caused loss of erection. Attempts at intercourse in other positions had not been successful.

Although Hoeben SC for the appellant challenged some of these findings of fact, they were supported by ample evidence, and cannot be disturbed.

Mr Hoeben's principal submission was that the worker had in truth suffered no loss of the efficient use of his sexual organs. His problem was due to his back pain for which he had been separately compensated. This type of problem is not a new one, although this is the first time it appears to have arisen in the present context. In Department of Public Works versus Morrow [(1986) 5 NSWLR ]
this Court upheld awards under <case> of the former Act for the loss of efficient use of the worker's arms and legs consequential on an injury to his neck and back. Under the former Act back injuries as such did not attract any right to lump sum compensation.

The employer's submission in that case had been that limitations in the use of sound limbs to avoid back pain did not attract any right to compensation for the loss of the efficient use of those limbs, but it conceded that limitations in use due to pain in a limb itself would do so. McHugh JA said at 168-9: " ... the difficulties ... in a case such as the present are to be met by insisting on a precise characterisation of the `loss' in question. Is the reduced use properly characterised as the `loss of the efficient use of ' a limb? Or is the reduced use merely the consequence of another disability? A person who no longer runs as fast or lifts as much as he did because of fear of a heart attack would not ordinarily be regarded as having lost the efficient use of his arms or legs. On the other hand where the reduced use of a limb is directly caused by pain in another part of the body, it is natural enough to consider the reduced use as constituting a `loss of the efficient use of ' the limb. From the point of view of the worker, for practical purposes, he has lost the use of the limb. It can hardly matter that the pain which prevents the use of the limb is located in the back instead of the limb.
Section 16 (5) is concerned with the efficient use and not with the physiological impairment of the limb".

This decision was applied by this Court in Owsten Nominees (No 2) Pty Ltd v
Gardner (4 September 1995, unreported), another case under <case>, where awards for loss of efficient use of limbs caused solely by brain damage were upheld.

In my judgment the present case is covered by these decisions and Neilson CCJ was correct. The worker had suffered a compensible loss of the efficient use of his sexual organs as a result of his back pain, although the organs themselves were undamaged.

The permanence of this loss was not in issue at the trial. The Judge in making his award based on an 80% loss accepted the opinion in report form of Dr
Striker, a highly qualified specialist from the clinic at St Vincent's
Hospital. Mr Hoeben criticised the figure of 80% as not "reasonably proportionate" to the loss as required by the terms of Note (a) to the Table, and <case> (1). However the worker and his wife gave oral evidence and were cross-examined and the Judge accepted their evidence. The finding of an 80% permanent loss was therefore amply supported by evidence and cannot be disturbed merely because of contrary evidence in report form from other doctors.

The permanence of the loss was not an issue at the trial in this case. In other cases it may be possible to avoid or mitigate a loss of efficient use of sex organs due to back pain by adopting other positions, and difficult questions of fact as to the permanence of any such avoidable loss may arise.

In this case the worker received lump sum compensation under <case> for permanent impairment of his back, and for loss of the efficient use of his sexual organs due to his back pain. He also received a further lump sum under s 67 for pain and suffering resulting from those losses. The Compensation
Court will need to be careful in cases such as this to avoid compensating workers more than once for what in truth is the same loss.

In my opinion this appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
POWELL JA: I agree with Handley JA.
 * * * 
