

Regina versus Carl Karam No. 60285 of 1995 Criminal Law and Procedure [1995]
NSWSC 172 (18 December 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(1), SMART(2) AND SIMPSON(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, November 1995 #DATE 21:11:1995 #ADD 18:12:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant    G D Woods QC 
Solicitor for the Appellant
Yvonne Swift 
Counsel for the Respondent    W G Roser 
Solicitor for the Respondent   S E O'Connor, Solicitor for
Public Prosecutions
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL The appellant (Carl Karam) was found guilty by a District Court jury on charges of supplying heroin on one occasion and of knowingly taking part in the supply of heroin on the second occasion. Judge Saunders QC imposed a fixed term of imprisonment for three years on the first charge and a total sentence of imprisonment for eight years on the second charge, consisting of a minimum term of five years and an additional term of three years, both sentences to be served concurrently.
The appellant had originally been charged with one Zeki Yenice, who subsequently pleaded guilty to the charge of supply and asked that there be taken into account another offence of supply (which was the subject of the incident forming the basis of the second charge against the appellant). He also pleaded guilty to an escape from lawful custody. He received a total sentence of imprisonment for six years on the supply charge (consisting of a minimum term of three and a half years and an additional term of two and a half years), and a fixed term of imprisonment for six months on the escape charge, to be served concurrently. This Court refused an application by Yenice for leave to appeal against that sentence.
((1) Regina versus Zeki Yenice (9 March , unreported.))
The Crown case against the appellant relied principally upon the evidence of an undercover police officer, a detective sergeant with the Drug
Enforcement Agency, who gave evidence under the pseudonym of "Jimmy". Jimmy entered into an arrangement with Yenice to purchase 28.2 grams of heroin for $9,500. The next day, Yenice introduced
Jimmy to the appellant at premises where the appellant conducted a garment business, and the appellant showed him a cigarette packet containing what was subsequently found to be heroin wrapped in silver foil which was in turn wrapped with black electrical tape.
Jimmy gave the agreed purchase price in cash to the appellant who counted the money.
The conversation was recorded by a listening device. The conversation between
Jimmy and Yenice and another man called Eddie in a car on the way to meet the appellant was clearly in relation to the arranged purchase of heroin and the possibility of future purchases of heroin. There was a delay whilst they waited for the arrival of the appellant. When he arrived, Jimmy declined to enter the building with him, an attitude which the appellant described as ridiculous. He said that he had to "count this", and Jimmy agreed that he had to "check the merchandise out". This accords with Jimmy's evidence that the transaction with the appellant took place in a delivery/service area located just off the street and that the appellant counted the money given to him.
Sometime later, Jimmy entered into a further arrangement with Yenice to purchase half a pound of heroin from the appellant for $65,000. A few days later, Jimmy met with the appellant and Yenice on a railway platform at
Central Railway Station, a meeting which was recorded on both video and audiotape. The appellant complained about the delay and the fact that he was carrying $65,000 in cash around in his car, and he was reassured by the appellant that there was nothing which he could do about it, as "the blokes" will not be ready until about 8.00 pm that night, and that they were "jumping" on him just as Jimmy was "jumping" on him. Jimmy said to the appellant that, if he could not do something, he would not be coming back.
Yenice and the appellant attempted to persuade Jimmy to return at 8.00 pm, but Jimmy said that they were to telephone him first.
Yenice telephoned Jimmy later, and this conversation was also recorded. At one stage, the appellant spoke to Jimmy and told him that "it's here" but will take only a minute. Jimmy replied that he was not coming. The appellant said "I'll bring it to wherever you want". Jimmy declined, saying that his people had told him to leave it.
A few days later, Jimmy informed Yenice that he was prepared to close the deal. Yenice handed over 211 grains of heroin in exchange for the $65,000 near to a multi-storey carpark.
He had earlier been observed there in the company of the appellant. Yenice was seen to enter a car in which the appellant had been observed sitting during the course of this transaction, and before returning to hand the drugs over to Jimmy. Yenice and the appellant were arrested there shortly after the drugs had been handed over.
The appellant made an unsworn statement. He denied any meeting with Jimmy in relation to the supply on the first occasion. He explained his subsequent presence at Central Station in this way: "Yenice asked me if I would go with him and back him up with a story he wanted to tell Jimmy. I went with him and I backed him up, and that was the video .... And that's all it was - I just backed up a mate." 
He explained his telephone conversation with Jimmy that night in this way: "Zekkie ... said something on the phone, he said 'I'll put my mate on who you were talking to earlier' and he pointed the phone at me. I don't know why, I just grabbed it and I spoke - I said something on the phone, but I was just backing up my mates."
He told the jury that he had not been present when Yenice had been speaking to Jimmy on the telephone, and that he did not know what Yenice had been involved in. He said that he had become angry and had told the others that he did not want to become involved in whatever they were doing. He explained his presence at the place where the second supply took place upon the basis that he had thought that he was to meet his auntie with some letters from his grandfather concerning his sick grandmother, about whom he was worried that she was going to die. He had been surprised to see Yenice there, and Yenice had told him that he should not have been there. Shortly afterwards, he was arrested.
The appellant's first ground of appeal is that the judge erred in refusing to exercise his discretion to reject the evidence of Jimmy upon the basis that the police operation against Yenice and himself involved criminal conduct by way of soliciting the sale of prohibited drugs and that Jimmy was himself, as a police officer, involved in various criminal conspiracies for the supply of such drugs.
Evidence was given by Jimmy during a voir dire examination that, in the course of his undercover operation, he had been anxious to see how much heroin
Yenice and his associates were prepared to supply him, how high they could go.
He had been supplied by police officers with the listening devices and the money to use in purchasing the drugs. There were a number of superior officers involved in the operation, in that they liaised with a nominated case officer as to his progress.
The trial took place a few weeks after the High Court had given its decision in Ridgeway versus The Queen. ((2) (1995)129 ALR 41). In that case, the
High Court was concerned with a police operation which involved the purchase of heroin overseas on behalf of the police who arranged for its clearance through Customs, after which a controlled delivery was made to the appellant.
The High Court held ((3) (at 54-55)) that there were two distinct, but possibly overlapping, categories of case in which an offence has been procured by illegal conduct on the part of law enforcement officers. The first is where the accused person has been induced to commit the offence with which he has been charged by the illegal conduct of the police.
The second is where the illegal conduct of the police has itself constituted either the principal offence to which the offence charged is ancillary or an essential ingredient of the charged offence.
In the first category, the High Court said (applying Bunning v Cross ((4) <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54))], the public interest in the conviction and punishment of those guilty of crime is likely to prevail over other considerations except in the hopefully rare and exceptional case where the illegality or impropriety of the police conduct was grave and either so calculated or so entrenched that considerations of public policy relating to the administration of criminal justice requires the exclusion of the evidence against the accused. In the second category, it is unlikely that considerations of public policy would require the exclusion of the evidence against the accused where the illegal police conduct had been disowned by those in higher authority. Where that conduct appears to have been condoned by those in higher authority and where it does not appear that criminal proceedings have been brought against the police concerned, the considerations of public policy will be so strong that an extremely formidable case for exclusion will be raised.
It was submitted to this Court that the true effect of the decision of the High Court in Ridgeway versus The Queen is that, wherever the offence charged is a serious one and the illegality of the police officers forms any significant ingredient of that offence, the discretion must necessarily be exercised to reject the evidence. I do not agree. If that were what was intended by the High Court, I would have expected the Court to have said that the balancing process outlined in cases such as Bunning versus Cross did not apply.
Yet that balancing process was that very approach which was taken by the High
Court, based expressly upon the principles stated in that longstanding case.
The correct approach, in my view, is that which I have already outlined, involving a determination of the particular category into which the facts of the case fall. Some examination of the comparative seriousness of the offence and the illegal conduct of the law enforcement authority is required. ((5)
Bunning versus Cross (at 80)). The more serious the crime committed, the greater is the public interest in securing a conviction, and the more likely that a court's discretion will be exercised against excluding the evidence where the police have acted illegally. The more significant that illegality by the police, the greater is the public interest in protecting citizens against such conduct by the police, and the more likely that a court's discretion will be exercised in favour of excluding the evidence. ((6) Regina versus Edelsten [(1990) NSWLR 542] at 187;
Ridgeway versus The Queen (at 53-54)).
In the present case, the illegal conduct of Jimmy in purchasing the heroin appears clearly to have been condoned by higher authority, and the issue which the judge had to determine was therefore whether the case fell within the first or the second category. The submission by the appellant to this Court is succinct. It is said that the simple proposition is that this case came within the prohibition spelt out by the High Court in Ridgeway versus The
Queen. The answer to that proposition is equally succinct. This case could not be further from falling within the second category. There is not the slightest suggestion that the conduct of the appellant in selling the drugs would not have taken place but for the undercover police officer's request to purchase them. His request did no more than provide the opportunity for the offence to be committed which would have been committed in any event, in that the drugs would have been sold by him to someone else if it had not been to the undercover police officer.
The judge correctly recognized the issue which he had to determine. His decision as into which category the case fell was a factual one, and it was open to him to conclude as he did that it fell into the first category. No error has been shown in relation to the decision which he reached, and this
Court does not rehear such factual issues unless such error has been shown.
((7) AG versus Sillem <case>; [(1864) 10 HLC 704] at ; Regina versus S (1953) 53 SR 460 at 478; Griffiths versus The Queen (1977) 137 CLR at 308; Regina versus O'Donoghue [(1988) 34 A Crim R 397] at 65). I would in any event have come to the same decision. The judge also correctly recognized that, even in relation to the first category, he had a discretion to exclude the evidence in accordance with Bunning versus Cross. I see no error in the exercise of that discretion. Although the illegality of the undercover police officer was deliberate, there could be no suggestion that such illegality affected the reliability of the evidence. The evidence certainly could not have been obtained - easily or otherwise - without resort to the illegality in question. The offences charged, however, were serious ones, and the public interest in securing a conviction was accordingly great.
In weighing up the considerations of such public interest on the one hand and the public interest in protecting citizens against unlawful conduct by the police on the other hand, it seems to me that the decision by the judge not to exercise his discretion to exclude the evidence in question was the only proper one in the circumstances. ((8) The Queen versus Ireland <case>; [(1970) 126 CLR 321] at 335; Bunning versus Cross (at 78-80)). Again, I would in any event have exercised my discretion in the same way.
I would reject this ground of appeal.
The second ground of appeal complains of the judge's rejection of evidence of two police officers which, it is said, challenged the evidence of two other police officers that the appellant had made an oral admission to them that he was linked with the first supply charge.
Detective Sen Const Gray gave evidence that, following the appellant's arrest, he and
Det Sen Const Jones interviewed him in a police station at "about 3.20 pm". He said that the appellant told him that he had counted money for "Tom" (which is the name he used for Yenice) because Tom had been scared and needed a hand', but that he was not sure what it was that was going on.
The appellant had denied knowing that heroin was going to be supplied.
Constable Gray said that he had recorded 3.20 pm as the commencement of this interview in his notebook, and that he expected that time to be accurate unless he had made an error because his watch was wrong. He said that he had no reason to doubt that the time which he had recorded was correct. Again according to the time recorded in his notebook, he said that he would have been engaged solely in the interview with the appellant from 3.20 until 4.45 pm. He had not used the video recording facilities because Yenice was being held in the video room where he was to be interviewed by two other police officers, Det Sen Const Tedder and Det Sen Const Hayes. He agreed that, according to the times recorded in his notebook, he could not have been in the video room with Yenice at 3.40 pm. He had spoken to one of those two officers during the afternoon but, for the same reason, he agreed that it could not have been in the video room at 3.40 pm.
The evidence given by Const Jones was to the same effect as that given by
Const Gray. He said that he had relied upon Const
Gray's notes for the time when the interview took place with the appellant. He said that he had been in the video room together with
Const Gray and Yenice earlier that afternoon, but had left that room with Const Gray just before the interview with the appellant commenced, and at the time when Const Tedder and Const Hayes entered in order to interview Yenice.
Although the questioning of Const Gray was perhaps less precise about this particular episode, his evidence as to being briefly in the video room with Const
Jones and Yenice is consistent with that of Const Jones.
The evidence which the judge rejected is recorded only in the signed statement of Const Tedder, in which he says that at "about 3.40 pm" he and
Const Hayes attended the video room where Const Gray and
Const Jones were seated around a desk in that room with Yenice. He had had a brief conversation with Const Gray, who had said to
Yenice that he would be interviewed by the two officers who had entered the room and Const Gray and Const Jones had then left the room. The only conflict of any substance at all provided by this evidence is that this brief meeting is said by Const Tedder (and presumably also by Const Hayes) to have taken place at 3.40 pm, whereas Const Gray and
Const Jones say that it took place just before .20 pm.
When counsel then appearing for the appellant raised the admissibility of the evidence of Const Tedder, the judge ruled that he would reject it as going only to the collateral issue of the credit of Const Gray and Const Jones, and not to any issue in the case. In my view, that ruling was wrong. Assuming that the jury accepted the evidence of Const Tedder (and presumably also that of
Const Hayes) that Const Gray and Const Jones were in the video room at 3.40 pm, there was at least some evidence (albeit somewhat peripheral) that it would have been impossible for those officers to have been interviewing the appellant from 3.20 to 4.45 pm in a different room, as they said that they were. That forms part of the circumstances that surround the making of an alleged confession which should always be put before the jury to enable them to judge the safety with which they could rely upon the Crown's evidence. ((9)
Jackson versus The Queen <case>; [(1962) 108 CLR 591] at 538-539).
Contrary to the Crown's arguments, the statement by the appellant that he had been counting money for Yenice at the time of the first supply was of at least some significance in the Crown case, in that it placed him at the place where Jimmy said that the offence had been committed and as taking part in that transaction. This is in the context that there was a dispute as to whether it was the appellant's voice on the tape of this episode. It was, however, conceded by counsel then appearing for the appellant that the evidence of Const Gray disputed by him was a very minute part of the case. The weight of the evidence to be given by Const Tedder would, moreover, have been infinitesimal. The appellant did not dispute that he had been interviewed that afternoon by Const Gray and Const Jones. In his unsworn statement, he said that, in relation to the day of the first supply (it was only twelve days before the interview) he had been asked what he was doing on that day and that he had replied that he did not know what he had been doing. He did not dispute anything else which was alleged to have been said by him during that interview. He said that he had answered all the questions asked of him to the best of his ability. We have not been told, for example, when the video recorded interview with Yenice commenced, or whether Const Tedder would say that the time which he recorded - "about 3.40 pm" - was necessarily accurate.
The dispute as to the time at which the interview took place did not by itself have any particular significance in relation to what was alleged to have been said in the course of that interview. Insofar as it may, by a fortuitous sidewind, have had some effect upon the credit of Const Gray and
Const Jones, that effect too would have been infinitesimal, so minor was the discrepancy and (so far as we know) so great is the possibility of error by
Const Tedder as to the time recorded in his statement. The issue between the evidence of the police officers and the unsworn statement of the appellant concerning this admission was adequately put to the jury.
In the light of all the evidence against the appellant, I am satisfied that the jury would still have found him guilty of the first charge even if this slight issue as to the precise time of the interview had been raised in the evidence before them. In those circumstances, I would apply the proviso to reject this ground of appeal.
The third ground of appeal is that the judge failed adequately to direct the jury as to the element of knowledge in the second charge, of knowingly taking part in the supply of heroin.
In the course of his summing up, the judge directed the jury on a number of occasions that the Crown had to establish not only that the appellant had taken part in the supply of heroin - by taking or participating in any step or causing any step to be taken in the process of the supply of the drug (which he defined as selling or agreeing to sell or keeping in possession for supply) - but also that the appellant did so knowingly. The judge described the Crown case as being that the appellant intended to supply the heroin and that he was knowingly taking part in the supply of the heroin by Yenice to Jimmy. He described in detail the evidence upon which the Crown relied.
At the conclusion of the summing up, counsel then appearing for the appellant said that he had no matters of law to raise. The next morning, however, he said this: "Your Honour did not specifically say that taking part without knowledge is not enough, in other words your Honour didn't refer specifically to the element of knowingly,
I would submit that your Honour should do so." 
That was, with respect, inaccurate. Not only had the judge referred to the element of knowingly taking part on a number of occasions, he had also directed the jury that a mere interest in a venture, for whatever reason, would not constitute knowingly taking part in the supply.
The complaint made by counsel is entirely consistent with him just not having recalled the directions which had been given the day before. He had earlier said that his notes were inadequate, and subsequently he said that he did not think that the judge had dealt with "knowingly" separately as an element. The appellant's argument here, however, is that the request to the judge that he should refer specifically to the element of "knowingly" in order to repair his omission to do so previously should have prompted the judge to "expand" upon what he had in fact said by spelling out the three matters to which reference was made by the High Court in Pereira versus DPP ((10) <case>; [(1988) 82
ALR 217] at 219-220) - that knowledge must be shown to be actual knowledge, that it must be the actual knowledge of the accused and not merely of some hypothetical person in the position of the accused, and that, where knowledge is to be proved by inference, such an inference must be the only rational inference available. There are, it seems to me, at least two answers to that submission.
The first is that I do not interpret the request made as being one for such a direction. Leave to rely upon the absence of such a direction must therefore be obtained. ((11) Criminal Appeal Rules, 1952, r4). Leave will be granted where the absence of the direction has caused a miscarriage of justice. ((12) Regina versus Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] at 536). That leads to the second answer to the appellant's submission.
Pereira's Case involved a charge of being knowingly concerned in the importation of prohibited drugs, a charge of somewhat wider range than knowingly taking part in a drug dealing.
((13) cf Regina versus Tannous [(1987) 10
NSWLR 303] at 307-309). The need to elaborate upon what is meant by "knowingly" in that context will often be greater than it will in a case such as the present. To establish that an accused knowingly took part in the supply of a prohibited drug, ((14) The charge was laid under [s 25(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/). "Taking part" is defined in [s6.)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s6.html) the Crown would usually establish that he knew or was aware that the commodity which was being supplied was a prohibited drug. An alternative way of dealing with the element of "knowingly" would be to require the Crown to establish an intention on the part of the accused to supply heroin, a requirement which would be satisfied by proof of either actual knowledge or a belief (falling short of actual knowledge) or an awareness of the likelihood, in the sense of a significant or real chance, that he was dealing with a prohibited drug. ((15) Kural versus The
Queen <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 502] at 504-505. That case, too, involved the importation of prohibited imports. It was applied by this Court to the offence of knowingly taking part in the cultivation of not less than the commercial quantity of plants, as provided by [s 23(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s23.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/): Regina versus CWW [(1993) 32 NSWLR 348] at 355). It is in the result unnecessary for us in this case to determine whether such an approach is always necessary in relation to the element of "knowingly" where it has already been made clear to the jury that the Crown is required to prove that the accused knew that the commodity being supplied was a prohibited drug.
In the present case, the jury was directed that the Crown had to establish that the appellant knowingly took a step in the buying or selling of the heroin, or knowingly participated in any such step or knowingly caused any such step to be taken, and that the appellant intended to supply heroin. The only message which could have been conveyed by those directions is that the
Crown had to establish that he knew that Jimmy, with the assistance of Yenice, was seeking to purchase heroin from him. Although that was not conceded by counsel now appearing for the appellant, no submission was made to the contrary.
Even if I were wrong in that view, the evidence from the tapes demonstrated beyond any reasonable doubt that the appellant did know the nature of the deal in which he was directly taking part. His explanations for his presence at the railway station (that he was backing up a mate), for what he said on the telephone to Jimmy that evening (again, that he was backing up his mates), and for his presence at the carpark (that he was to meet his auntie) were so unbelievable as to give significant support to the Crown case.
I am not satisfied that the absence of the directions now sought led to a miscarriage of justice, in that even if they had been given the jury would still inevitably have found the appellant guilty. ((16) Regina versus Zorad(1990)19
NSWLR 91 at 108).
I would refuse leave to rely upon this ground and reject it.
The last of the appellant's grounds of appeal against conviction is that the verdicts are unsafe and unsatisfactory. The ultimate question which must be answered by this Court in relation to such a ground is whether - notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain those verdicts - this
Court thinks that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. ((17) M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at 492-495; Regina versus McKnoulty A Crim R 333 at 338-339).
The theory put forward at the trial, and repeated in this
Court, is that the appellant was merely caught at the wrong places at the wrong times, and that the real offender with Yenice was his cousin Sam, who is referred to from time to time in the evidence as a rather shadowy character in the background.
The appellant's theory was that Sam may have been an informer and that all of the police evidence was altered or fabricated in order to protect Sam from prosecution. There was no direct evidence of Sam's involvement, and needless to say the appellant did not call his cousin in order to give evidence that it was indeed he who supplied the heroin.
Some circumstantial detail is nevertheless put forward as supporting this theory. The tape recording of the first supply is identified by statements as to the times when it was started and finished which cover a period of ninety minutes, but the tape itself runs only for fortysix minutes. There was no evidence of surveillance mounted of this first episode as there was for all the other episodes. It was suggested that there must have been surveillance but that evidence of it was not led because it would have shown that the appellant was not there. The man called Eddie who was present in the vehicle when Jimmy was being driven to the appellant's clothing factory for the first supply is also suggested to be an informer, and he was both under the influence of drugs and carrying what may have been an illegal but broken weapon at the time. When the heroin supplied on the first occasion was recorded in the police exhibit book, it was by reference only to Yenice and not to the appellant.
All of this is said to render the police evidence so suspicious that it ought not to have been accepted as the full truth.
 .
There were other matters put forward. Some of Jimmy's running sheets did not appear to be contemporaneous records. The allegation that the appellant had said that he counted the money for Yenice was false. There is said to be a conflict in the surveillance evidence of the episode at Central Railway which supports the theory that it was not the appellant but another person who was talking to Yenice.
One of the police officers who gave evidence of having seen the appellant with Yenice in the carpark when the second supply took place changed his description of the third person with them between his evidence at the committal and his evidence at the trial.
Sam was arrested but not charged.
This is said to have supported the theory that Sam was "written out" of the police version in order to protect him as an informer.
That this gossamer thin theory erected on behalf of the appellant was rejected by the jury as a reasonable possibility is hardly surprising, if only because of the utterly unbelievable explanations put forward by the appellant for his presence at the railway station, for what he said on the telephone to
Jimmy that evening and for his presence at the carpark.
The jury were entitled to take into account the absence of any sworn evidence contradicting the evidence given by the Crown's witnesses, not in order to draw any inference against the appellant for not having given such evidence but in order to evaluate the strength of the Crown's evidence. ((18) Regina versus Sidney Warren
Blade (CCA, 1 May 1991, unreported) at 3; Regina versus Gordon [(1991) 57 A Crim R ] at -147). There was nothing at all in the evidence to support the theory that either Sam or Eddie was an informer. No reason was put forward for wanting to substitute the appellant for Sam as the offender on the evidence. Although there was no onus upon the appellant to provide such a reason, the absence of any cogent reason is a matter to take into account in determining what weight ought to have been given to the theory proffered to explain away the unchallengeable and otherwise inexplicable presence and participation by the appellant in the three areas to which I have referred. In the circumstances of this case, once he is shown to be guilty of the second offence, the issues raised as to his guilt of the first offence are of considerably less weight than they otherwise may have been.
I am not persuaded that it was not open to the jury (in the relevant sense of that term) to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. Having made my own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of all of the evidence, I experience for myself no reasonable doubt based upon the quality of the evidence as to the safety of the verdicts of guilty which the jury gave; nor do I see any basis upon which the jury ought to have experienced such a doubt for themselves.
The Crown case against the appellant was a strong one. The matters to which attention has been drawn do not lead me to the conclusion that there is any significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted. ((19) I have here adopted the various phrases used in M versus The Queen (at 494)).
I would reject this last ground of appeal. I propose that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.
No written submissions were filed in support of the application for leave to appeal against sentence. Nothing of substance was put orally. Against a prescribed maximum sentence of imprisonment for fifteen years in relation to each of the two offences, the total sentence of eight years - which encompasses the totality of the appellant's criminality - does not on its face appear to be outside the range available. The transactions were quite significant ones, involving large amounts and the wholesale supply of drugs.
The case is a serious one. There are, of course, subjective circumstances to be considered. The appellant was twentythree years of age at the time of the offences, although not without a criminal record involving offences of dishonesty and violence (albeit some time ago). He had assisted his widowed mother to set up a business when he was very young, and he had then set up his own business in which he had been very successful and from which he contributed to the family expenses. But these subjective circumstances do not permit the serious objective circumstances of these offences to be overlooked or outweighed.
The judge found, as he was entitled to on the evidence, that Yenice was merely the salesman and that the appellant was the immediate source of the supply. He applied the principle of totality. The total sentence which he imposed was very little more than that imposed upon Yenice, who had pleaded guilty at the earliest opportunity, once allowance is made in favour of Yenice for the assistance which he gave to the authorities in relation to another matter (and notwithstanding that Yenice was also being sentenced for an escape from lawful custody). The judge gave careful consideration to that sentence (which this Court treated as one of seven years on an undiscounted basis). He accepted the existence of special circumstances within the meaning of [s 5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/), and he varied the relationship between the minimum and additional terms accordingly.
I see no basis at all upon which the sentence could be challenged. I propose that leave to appeal against sentence be refused, but that an order be made that time is to count.
The orders of the Court are as I have proposed.
JUDGE2
SMART J I agree.
JUDGE3
SIMPSON J I also agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/172.html  
