

Regina versus Dwayne Phillip Weekes [1997] NSWSC 60 (28 February 1997) 
REGINA versus Dwayne Phillip WEEKES /96 
Friday 28 February 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, HUNT CJ at CL, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: In February 1996 the applicant was tried before Robison DCJ and a jury on two counts of sexual intercourse without consent, an offence under <case>(I) of the Crimes Act carrying a maximum sentence of 14 years penal servitude.

On 29 February he was found guilty of one count but not guilty of the other, and was remanded in custody for sentence.

On 31 May 1996 he was sentenced to four years penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of two years and six months to date from 29 February 1996, and an additional term of 18 months. Offences of possessing and using heroin were taken into account on a Form 2. The applicant seeks leave to appeal against that sentence.

At the relevant time, the applicant and the victim had been living together in a de facto relationship for about three years. For a time prior to the offence, the applicant had told the victim that he wished to have anal sex with her but she had declined. On the evening in question he told her that he was going to have anal sex with her, and she again refused. Nevertheless he did so, despite her physical resistance and her visible distress. He then had vaginal intercourse with her.

At the trial, the applicant denied that anal intercourse had taken place and maintained that the vaginal intercourse was consensual. The count on which he was acquitted was that relating to the vaginal intercourse.

Medical examination of the complainant revealed swelling and tears in and around the anal area. From her evidence, and from a psychiatric report in respect of her which was tendered in the sentencing proceedings, his Honour concluded that the offence had had a considerable emotional impact upon her.

The applicant is now 27 years old. He has a criminal record of no great significance, apart from a conviction in 1974 for assault upon his de facto wife for which he was imprisoned for six months. Notwithstanding a relatively stable upbringing in the Lithgow area, he developed a number of personal problems from his mid teens. He left school without completing the School
Certificate. His employment history is somewhat patchy, although he enjoyed seasonal work as a deckhand on prawn trawlers in North Queensland.

He abused alcohol as a teenager, but has since brought his drinking under control. However, for many years he has used marijuana and in more recent years, heroin and amphetamines. He and the complainant had two children and he has another child the product of an earlier relationship with another woman.
His relationship with the complainant was turbulent and there were periods of separation. According to her, he was violent and mistrustful, frequently accusing her of infidelity.

An explanation for the unsatisfactory features of his background may lie in his mental illness. On two occasions in 1995 he was admitted to Bloomfield
Hospital at Orange, the diagnosis being a previously untreated schizophrenic illness. Before his Honour were reports of two forensic psychiatrists, Dr
Bruce Westmore and Dr Robert Lewin, both of whom concluded that he suffered from schizophrenia. When Dr Westmore first saw him in March 1996, he was severely mentally ill and, because of his aggressive behaviour, he was detained in what the doctor described as a cage at the Long Bay Prison
Hospital. However, when the doctor saw him again in May, he had responded to medication and was in partial remission. Doctor Lewin, who had had contact with the applicant during an earlier period in prison, also saw him in May and was of the same view.

Dr Westmore noted the applicant's limited education and observed him to be of dull intelligence. Dr Lewin referred to his significant history of drug abuse, which he believed to have had a considerable impact upon his psychotic illness.

To both psychiatrists the applicant expressed bitterness towards the complainant, arising apparently from the allegations which led to his trial and their relationship as a whole. He told Dr Lewin that he believed that she had been having sexual intercourse with his friends. Nevertheless, albeit somewhat begrudgingly, he did acknowledge his guilt of the offence to Dr Lewin and also to Mr Bill Kearney, a probation officer who produced a pre-sentence report.

The applicant gave evidence in the sentencing proceedings. He said that the prescribed medication made him feel better and that he appreciated that he would have to maintain it. He vowed to abstain from the use of illicit drugs because, as he put it, "it scatters my head". He said that, upon his release, he would like to return to employment on the prawn trawlers in Queensland where he considered he would stay out of trouble. Asked how he felt about the complainant, he answered, "I've got two beautiful kids to her so she's still there". He said that he loved the children and, in respect of the complainant, added, "I still love her too, but it's too late now".

The sentence is challenged on two bases: firstly, that his Honour failed to apply the principles relating to the sentencing of persons suffering from a mental illness and, secondly, that his Honour failed to reduce the sentence in the light of what was asserted to be the applicant's "demonstrably more severe experience of imprisonment".

As to the first matter, there is a well established line of authority relating to the sentencing of offenders suffering mental illness. The topic was revisited by this Court in R versus Engert [(1995) 84 ACR 67], where the relevant principles were restated by Gleeson CJ at pp 70-71. It does not appear that the offence was committed by the applicant during a psychotic episode, although Dr Lewin thought it possible that his aggression might have been brought about by a delusional belief that the complainant had had sexual relations with his friends. The doctor added, however, that he had "little factual information to call upon in support of this line of argument". Today, before us, counsel for the applicant acknowledged that there was insufficient material to form a causal link between the mental illness and the effects.

That, of course, is not an end to the matter. As Gleeson CJ observed in
Engert (at p 71), an offender's mental illness may not explain the crime but "may be very important to considerations of rehabilitation, or the need for treatment outside the prison system".

In the course of his remarks on sentence, his Honour referred to the evidence before him concerning the applicant's schizophrenic illness. Nevertheless, he had regard to the need for public deterrence, characterised the offence as a serious one and concluded that a custodial sentence was inevitable. He added: "In saying that, I have also taken into account his medical condition and, clearly, he has a medical condition which warrants appropriate treatment".

I take that to be a matter to which his Honour had regard in determining the overall sentence, not just the minimum term. His Honour then went on to find special circumstances warranting a departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms, saying: "...I consider that the prisoner would benefit from lengthy counselling and rehabilitation from the Probational Service as well as appropriate treatment for his current medical condition..." 
The applicant committed the offence with knowledge of the nature and gravity of his actions and the case was not one calling for a significant moderation of the consideration of general deterrence in the light of his mental illness: see R versus Bus & Anor (CCA unreported, 3 November 1995) at p 7. The
Chief Judge had occasion to enunciate those principles again only this morning in the matter of R versus Wright, which we heard today.

On the other hand, the applicant's condition did warrant an extended additional term so as to foster his rehabilitation. Accordingly, it appears to me that, in the course of the sentencing exercise, his Honour did have regard to the applicant's mental illness in accordance with the applicable principles.

As to the second matter of complaint, relating to the applicant's experience of imprisonment, there was simply no evidence to warrant the conclusion that imprisonment would bear more harshly upon the applicant than the average prisoner. As earlier observed, when Dr Westmore first saw the applicant, he was in a state of unusual confinement because of his aggressive nature at that time. No-one would make light of the nature of that confinement, but there is nothing to suggest that this was other than a temporary measure because of his condition, which was subsequently brought under control by medication. The pre-sentence report observes, without elaboration, that the applicant "has experienced psychological difficulties whilst incarcerated". I take this to mean no more than that, since being in custody, he has required treatment for his psychiatric condition. The fact that that treatment required his admission to the prison hospital is not to the point. No doubt many prisoners require admission to the hospital from time to time for a wide variety of reasons.

The situation here is a far cry from cases such as Bailey [(1988) 38 A
Crim R 458] and McDonald [(1988) 38 A Crim R 470], where the prisoners' HIV positive status required their confinement in a separate unit within the prison and limited their progression through the classification system. I can see no basis on which this applicant might have claimed leniency because of his custodial conditions.

Accordingly, I would propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

HUNT CJ AT CL: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be that leave to appeal is granted but that the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
