

Application of To Ngoc Nguyen Matter No 009/96 [1998] NSWSC 290 (13 August )

Last Updated: 28 August 1998 
APPLICATION OF TO NGOC NGUYEN /96 August 1998 
Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under <case> of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/), 1989. 
On 15 December 1989 the applicant To Ngoc Nguyen (and I shall refer to him as "To") was sentenced to penal servitude for life for the murder of Dinh Tranh
Ngo (to whom I shall refer as "Tranh"). To makes application for the determination of a minimum term and an additional term concerning that sentence.

No oral evidence was given on the present application. Mr Thompson for the
Crown tendered the requisite Statement of Facts annexing transcript of evidence taken on 4 December 1989 and the exhibits tendered on that date. Mr
Thompson also tendered two reports from the Serious Offenders Review Council.
I was also taken to my remarks when sentencing To's brother Ngoc Quang Nguyen ("Loi") and to the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal when Loi's appeal against sentence was dismissed.

Mr Buddin of Senior Counsel, on the applicant's behalf, tendered a Notice of
Reply to the Statement of Facts, a letter from the Department of Corrective
Services dated 7 April 1997, to which I shall later refer, and three references. I have considered all the material tendered together with submissions placed before the Court concerning the present application.

The relevant facts concerning this crime of murder are as follows: 
On 8 December 1987 To was one of a group of ten people at the Bar Luck restaurant in John Street, Cabramatta. With him were his brother Loi and another brother Bao Ngoc Nguyen ("Bao"). At another table in the restaurant was a second group celebrating a reunion and Thanh was the host at that second table.

Somewhere between 6.30 pm and 7.30 pm To and Loi walked across to Thanh's table and To stood behind Thanh whilst his brother Loi stood near another male named Tam. Whilst Thanh remained seated To struck him on the head with a pistol. The pistol discharged and Loi was shot as a result. However, then To shot Thanh through the head killing him and Loi then used his gun to shoot
Tam, who, like Thanh, was seated at the table at the time.

I observe that apart from the two groups to whom I have referred, there were other occupants of the restaurant at the time, being patrons and people employed there.

At his trial To made an unsworn statement denying any involvement in the shooting. No explanation was advanced for this murder, which I described in my remarks on sentence as "a cold blooded and ruthless act". No further evidence has emerged on the hearing of this application such as would cause me to alter that description. On this application To gave no evidence and has not attempted to introduce any evidence such as might advance an explanation for what he did. One of the documents contained in the later of the reports of the
Serious Offenders Review Council suggests that To may have given an explanation when seen in prison on 6 March 1997 to the effect that Thanh and
Tam were shot because they had shot To's brother and were going to kill his family. Hence he shot Thanh first. However, absent any sworn evidence to this effect, I am unable to attach any credence to that note in the report Exhibit
D. Nor does Mr Buddin suggest that I should. In the result, no explanation is available to account for the commission of this grave crime.

It is appropriate now to consider the shooting of Tam with whose attempted murder both To and Loi were charged and convicted. It was no part of the prosecution case that To shot Tam. The evidence was that Loi did that but against To it was contended that his shooting was carried out pursuant to a common purpose. The jury obviously accepted that contention because To was duly convicted.

Curiously, as I remarked previously, the jury apparently was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that To shot Thanh pursuant to a common purpose between To and Loi, since Loi was acquitted of his murder.

For his crime Loi was sentenced to seventeen years penal servitude with a non parole period of thirteen years. Loi was sentenced on Friday, 22 September and the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) of 1989 came into effect on the following Monday, 25 September 1989. Loi therefore enjoyed the benefit of remissions and, indeed, was released upon parole on 18 March
For that same crime To was sentenced to a fixed term of thirteen years (the same as Loi's non parole period), but because he was sentenced later than
Loi he did not enjoy the benefit of remissions and his fixed term on the attempted murder will not expire until 2 June 2001. If To had been sentenced only for the attempted murder, it would not have been appropriate for him to have received a longer sentence than Loi for that crime and I note that Loi's sentence was redetermined under the transitional provisions of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) and this resulted in a minimum term of eight years three months ten days and an additional term of two years five months nineteen days. I am of course mindful of the effect of that redetermination in addressing my present task on this application. However, on the view I take of the gravity of this crime of murder, I consider it would be altogether inappropriate to fix a minimum term in respect of it such as would expire as early as 2 June 2001.

To is now thirty-seven years of age, having been born on 10 August 1960. He spent his early years in Vietnam and the report of Dr Clark, which was before me in 1989, gives a picture of the unfortunate background in To's childhood years. He had limited schooling because of the war in his homeland and he left
Vietnam at the age of seventeen to go to Thailand where he was in a refugee camp for several months before being allowed to come to Australia. He arrived in this country unskilled and poorly educated.

The applicant has a number of convictions in this country apart from those arising out the shooting offences. In 1979 he was convicted of an assault in the Court of Petty Sessions at Liverpool and placed on a recognizance for three years. He was at the same time convicted of carrying a cutting weapon.
Two months later he was convicted in the District Court of malicious wounding and sentenced to twelve months hard labour to be served by way of periodic detention. There followed convictions for assault and carrying a firearm whilst under the influence of alcohol in 1981. Thereafter, apart from driving offences, To committed no further offences before he went to the Bar Luck on December 1989.

To has, at the present time, the support of his sister, one of the referees identified in Exhibit 2, and apparently he has the support of other members of his family as well.

Whilst in prison To has apparently been well behaved. He has availed himself of the opportunity to do courses on the English language and Mr Buddin pointed out also that he underwent a course described as covering, inter alia, "rational alternatives to anger". He has progressed in the prison system to a "B" classification and in time spent in the prison at Junee he developed skill as a fork lift driver and in the institution there he was employed by
International Cable Manufacturers. The explanation was given that the prison at Junee is conducted by private enterprise and International Cable
Manufacturers apparently employed prisoners to work within the prison itself.
This is apparently how To happened to have worked with ICM. There is in evidence a laudatory reference from ICM in relation to the work that To did for that company.

In short, having reviewed the reports from the Serious Offenders Review
Council, it seems that To's conduct has been satisfactory since he was first imprisoned. That is a matter to be taken into account in considering the prospects of rehabilitation in this case.

A matter of hardship for To is that in recent years it has been drawn to his notice that there is the risk of deportation once he is released from prison.
The records indicate that To was extremely distressed when he learned of this and the uncertainty that still persists is a matter, no doubt, which makes prison more onerous for him.

Mr Buddin drew attention to the curious circumstance to which I have earlier referred that whilst To was convicted of both crimes charged, his brother Loi was not. He submitted that it would not be appropriate to find that what occurred at the scene of the crime had been planned in advance. He submitted it was not to be inferred that To formed the intent to kill Thanh any earlier than the time when he fired the fatal shot.

I accept that the evidence does not warrant a finding that this crime was premeditated but nevertheless it can only be categorised as an extremely grave crime. No contrition has been expressed and, indeed, Mr Buddin has not been able to point to any acknowledgment by To that he was responsible for the shooting before this was expressed in paragraph 1 of the Notice of Reply to the Statement of Facts signed by his solicitor: "1. The applicant accepts that he shot and killed the victim." 
I have decided that it is appropriate to now fix a minimum term and an additional term for the crime of murder. In doing so I heed the effective sentence that Loi served for the crime of attempted murder earlier referred to. The sentence I now set for To on the murder charge will be served concurrently with his sentence for the attempted murder and in my present task
I must have regard to the principle of totality. I must determine what is just and appropriate having regard to the totality of the prisoner's criminal behaviour.

To has been in custody since the date of his arrest on 3 June 1988, and the sentence will be backdated accordingly.

I bear in mind all the provisions of <case> of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). Mr Buddin made a submission that there were special circumstances in this case because To will need a long period of supervision after a long term of imprisonment. By reason of <case>, [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) does not apply, but I consider the structure of the sentence I about to set affords an adequate period of supervision once To is released on parole, whilst at the same time setting a minimum term which I regard as appropriate having regard to the gravity of To's criminal behaviour.

I now impose a total sentence of twenty one years penal servitude with a minimum term of sixteen years commencing on 3 June 1988 and expiring on 2 June and an additional term of five years commencing on 3 June 2004 and expiring on 2 June 2009.

I specify as the first date upon which To is to be eligible for release on parole as 3 June 2004.
 ----------- * * * 
