

Gio General Limited versus Residential Tenancies Tribunal and Ors Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 734 (8 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
GIO GENERAL LIMITED versus RESIDENTIAL TENANCIES TRIBUNAL & ORS /97 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
The proceedings 
By the second amended summons, the plaintiff appeals to this court from the whole of the decision of the Residential Tenancies Tribunal in proceedings numbered 97/23674, 97/23676, 97/23678, 97/23681, 97/23684, 97/23691, 97/23694, /23696, 97/23698, 97/23700, 97/23704 and 97/23719 seeking orders that the appeal be allowed, that the decision of the Tribunal in those proceedings be set aside and an order that in lieu of the orders made by the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal on 13 October 1997 in those proceedings, the said applications be dismissed. To this summons the Tribunal filed a submitting appearance, the second to 13th defendants, the successful applicants below (the defendants) appearing to contest the proceedings.

The appeal is brought pursuant to s.107 of the [Residential Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/) (the
Act). By s.107(2) an entitlement to appeal on a question with respect to a matter of law to the Supreme Court is given to a party to proceedings before the Residential Tenancies Tribunal who is dissatisfied with the decision of that Tribunal. By s.107(3), the Supreme Court, after deciding the question the subject of the appeal, has conferred upon it, unless it affirms the decision, power to make such order in relation to the proceedings in which the question arose as, in its opinion, should have been made by the Tribunal or to remit and order a re-hearing.

As to the conduct of the appeal, s.107(1) of the Act provides:- "An appeal under this section shall be made in accordance with rules of the
Supreme Court." [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/index.html#p51a) [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s4.html) provides for the institution of the appeal to this court by summons claiming the relevant order the appellant seeks in lieu of the decision of the Tribunal below. [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s5.html) requires a brief but specific statement of the grounds relied upon in support of the appeal.

The grounds of appeal 
There has been filed, in accordance with the Rules, with the second amended summons a [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/index.html#p51a) [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s5.html) statement (as amended during the hearing by consent) setting out the grounds of appeal as follows:- "It is the contention of GIO that the upkeep of the road on Crown Land was not a 'service or facility provided with the premises' and as such the failure of
GIO to continue to effect repairs to the road on Crown land cannot constitute the 'reduction or withdrawal by the landlord of services provided with the premises' so as to found the making of an order by the Tribunal pursuant to [ss.47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s47.html) and [49](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/s49.html).

It is contended that the carrying out of repairs to the road was not done pursuant to any 'arrangement' with the residents as found by the Tribunal.

Further, in relation to the third defendant, the cessation of the doing of repairs to the road occupied prior to the commencement of the tenancy." 
During the argument I was informed that it was no longer sought to proceed with the matter raised in the last paragraph of the grounds and that it was common ground that the third defendant should not be treated specially or by way of any special circumstance in the appeal.

The Act 
Section 47 provides:- "(1) A tenant under a residential tenancy agreement may, at any time, apply to the Tribunal for an order declaring that the rent payable under a residential agreement or a proposed residential tenancy agreement for residential premises already occupied by the tenant is excessive, having regard to the reduction or withdrawal by the landlord of any goods, services or facilities provided with the premises.

This section applies whether or not the goods, services or facilities are provided under the agreement or a separate contract, agreement or arrangement or were provided under a previous contract, agreement or arrangement." 
Section 49 gives power to the Tribunal to reduce the rent.

The issues 
The drafting of these questions as raising clear questions of law is at least infelicitous. Indeed, it is submitted by the defendants that as originally expressed and even as re-formulated no questions of law are raised.

During argument, the issues were resolved somewhat into two questions which overlapped to a degree. Particularly it was contended:- that the upkeep of the road was not capable in law, of being a "service or facility provided with the premises" because, so it was contended, it was not "provided under the agreement or a separate contract, agreement or arrangement or ... provided under a previous contract, agreement or arrangement"; and that the Tribunal had erred in law in holding that the repairs to the road were "provided under ... (an) arrangement" in circumstances where the Tribunal had held:- "I take this section to refer to 'goods', services or facilities' provided in an agreement or arrangement, not only as part of the premises, but these goods, services and facilities in association with the premises for the benefit of the tenant.
 "I agree with the submission made by Mr. Scicluna that it was not part of the residential site agreement of each applicant that the Park Owner would be responsible for maintenance of the access road to the Island Caravan Park. Nor was there any evidence to suggest that there was a separate agreement between the parties that such work would be undertaken by the Park Owner." 
Reasons of the Tribunal 
It is not contended by the plaintiff that the Tribunal in any way fell into error in the views expressed in the latter of these two paragraphs. Rather, it is contended that given these findings and, so it is argued, the lack of necessary and appropriate further findings, the factual findings made by the
Tribunal did not allow it ultimately to come to the conclusion that it did, viz:- "In my view there was an 'arrangement' within the meaning of that expression in s.47 of the Act that the Park Owner would be responsible during the term of each tenancy to maintain Fenninghams Road in a reasonable condition having regard to it being an unsealed gravel roadway.

I am satisfied that the Park Owner has withdrawn the service previously provided under this arrangement ..." 
To put the matter in context, I note that this portion of the reasons on which so much depends for the plaintiff's argument appears in a passage which continues:- "The question then arises as to whether there was any 'arrangement' that the park owner would provide the service of maintaining Fenningham's Road in a reasonable state of repair. I take 'arrangement' to include a plan or understanding which may be informal and unable to be legally enforced - see
Top Performance Motors Pty. Limited v. Ira Berk (Qld) Pty. Limited [(1975) 5 ALR 465."] 
Relevantly, the reasons continue:- "... it is appropriate to examine what the parties have done, prior to, and since entering into the agreement in determining what, if any, arrangement the parties understood to have been made between them. The conduct of the parties must demonstrate, on objective grounds, that the parties are acting in accordance with the obligations they accepted at the time of entering the residential site agreement.

In these proceedings there is no dispute that the past and present Park Owners have maintained the gravel access road to the Island Caravan Park from about to early 1997. At the time each of the applicants entered into occupation of sites at the Island Caravan Park this was a responsibility accepted by the
Park Owner. At various times a tractor and grader blade was part of the equipment kept at the Park for maintaining the road. At one stage in order to improve road access to the Park, the Park Owner raised funds by way of a special levy of $30 per quarter on tourist sites to bitumen seal a short section of the roadway." 
Thereafter, the Tribunal held that there was no evidence that there had been express discussions of the access road and continued:- "However in the circumstances of these applications I do not think that the failure to expressly address the question of maintenance of the access road precludes an arrangement from existing in circumstances where the conduct of the Park Owner over the eight years that it has owned the park provides clear evidence of an understanding that it would be responsible for this task during the tenancy." 
Then, the Tribunal examined various matters that might have gone to some form of express repudiation of what might otherwise be taken to be a patent acceptance of that responsibility by the lessor and concluded that there were no such factors. The Tribunal then reached the conclusion I have referred to above.

The issued condensed 
I was assured in argument that the real issue was whether or not each of the two matters I have referred to was capable in law of being found by the
Tribunal, given its factual findings, and that no argument was being based simply on a mere absence of reasons (see Public Service Board (New South
Wales) v. Osmond [(1986) 159 CLR 656)] or a failure to refer expressly to the making of a finding which was necessarily implicit in a more general finding expressly made. Thus the submission was akin to a "no evidence" one and the order sought involved a reversal of that made below rather than a remitter.

Questions of law 
Even as so expressed it is not entirely clear to me that those questions are questions of law.

The defendants contend that neither question in any formulation raises any question of law on the basis that the language of the section is ordinary speech and that in those circumstances whether or not the facts as found fall within the section raises only a question of fact. My attention was drawn to
Azzopardi v. Tasman UEG Industries Limited <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 1] at 7-8. In addition, I drew the parties' attention to the recent decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in Regina v. McEwen &
Ors (unreported 12 March 1998) where Justice Smart, with whom Mr. Justice
Hunt, CJ. at CL. and Justice Simpson agreed, observed:- "In Collector of Customs v. Agfa-Gevaert Limited <case>; [(1997) 71 ALJR 123] at 126, the High Court, whilst acknowledging that general expositions of the law were helpful when considering what were questions of law and fact and when evidence was admissible in dealing with the construction or meaning of a particular statutory or regulatory provision, warned against rigidity of approach and trying to lay down propositions of universal application. It was pointed out that such propositions lost much of their utility when the term or phrase is complex. That remark has particular force in the present case.

Nevertheless, there are some principles which are worth noting. In The
Australian Gas Light Co. v. The Valuer General (1940) 40 SR 126 at 137,
Jordan, CJ. said:- '(1) The question what is the meaning of an ordinary English word or phrase as used in the Statute is one of fact not law. ... This question is to be resolved by the relevant Tribunal itself, by considering the word in its context with the assistance of dictionaries and other books, and not by expert evidence ... although evidence is receivable as to the meaning of technical terms ... and the meaning of a technical legal term is a question of law.

The question whether a particular set of facts comes within the description of such a word or phrase is one of fact.'" 
See also V. & I. Londish v. Knox Grammar School & Ors (Court of
Appeal, unreported 22 December 1997) per Stein, JA., at p.9, with whom Mason,
P. and Meagher, JA. agreed:- "It is a question of law whether the primary facts can necessarily fit the statutory description: Azzopardi v. Tasman UEB Industries Limited [(1985) NSWLR 139] at 156. However, whether facts fall within the meaning of an ordinary expression, such as 'educational establishment' as a matter of common understanding, is a question of fact. Although more than one conclusion might reasonably have been reached by a decision-maker, an incorrect finding will not involve an error of law (see Hope v. Bathurst City Council <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 1).] In such cases, it is not for the court to substitute its own opinion for that of the primary decision-maker: Minister for Aboriginal
Affairs v. Peko Wallsend <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 24."] 
The plaintiff's arguments 
However, the plaintiff submitted that the facts as found were not capable of constituting a sufficient basis to reach the conclusion expressed unless there had been an error of law in the construction of the section in that not enough was found to permit an essential finding of an arrangement. This raises a different question.

It may be, and I incline to that view, that s.47(2) does not impose a limitation such as that for which the plaintiff contended, ie. that the provision of the goods and services must be under some agreement or arrangement. The purpose of the subsection may only have been to exclude the circumstances referred to in s.47(2) from operating so as to take a matter outside s.47(1), but in the circumstances I am content to deal with the plaintiff's argument that an arrangement or, as expressed in the reasons, "a plan or understanding" would be legally necessary, since having regard to the conclusion to which I have come, it is not necessary for me in this case to go further as I am of the view there was an appropriate finding of an arrangement and that it was sufficiently express.

It was contended that there was no such finding and that in the absence of the express statement of it, a finding that the GIO had intended the tenants to accept that it was responsible for the upkeep of the roadway or at least a finding that the tenants depended on the GIO to keep up the roadway and that there was some sort of communication or mutuality about the matter was not made, so there could not be found such a legal arrangement as, it is contended, the section requires. My attention was drawn to various cases, including Top Performance Motors Pty. Limited v. Ira Berk (Qld) Pty.
Limited [(1975) 24 FLR 286]; Trade Practices Commission v. Email Limited <case>; [(1980) 43 FLR 383] at 385; Trade Practices Commission v. David Jones
Pty. Limited [(1986) 13 FCR 446] at 463-464;
News Limited v. Australian Rugby Football League Limited [(1995) 58 FCR ]
at 528-529; News Limited v. Australian Rugby Football League Limited <case>; [(1996) 64 FCR 410] at 571-573 in which the requirements for a meeting of minds or communication were examined.

It was submitted that there was no meeting of minds or consensus between the parties to the effect that the plaintiff was and would remain obliged to carry out maintenance work upon the access road; that there may well have been a hope on the part of each tenant that the plaintiff would continue to carry out such work but the notion of an ongoing obligation or responsibility to do such work was absent from the dealings between the parties. It was further submitted that an understanding required a mutual comprehension of each others meaning or thoughts and that even if the tenants believed that the plaintiff was under some obligation, there was no express finding the plaintiff ever held such a belief. It was emphasised that the arrangement had to be consensual and that there be some adoption of it by the parties. I was referred to what was said by Justices Gibbs and Mason in Federal
Commissioner of Taxation v. Lutovi Investments Pty. Limited <case>; [(1978) 140 CLR 434] at 444; and Newton v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1958) 98 CLR 1] at 7.

Content of reasons 
It is trite that the Tribunal is required to give its reasons and that those reasons should desirably express and precisely, all findings of matters of fact necessary for the Tribunal to reach its conclusion. It is a different thing to contend that the absence of an express statement means the absence of a finding. Findings may be expressed either in detail or by compendious findings. If no complex reasoning process is necessary and the reasons adequately express the basis of the decision, or the way in which the relevant conclusion is derived from the accepted evidence is plain, then it may well be that the duty has been complied with sufficiently to avoid error of law.

There is no doubt that here more may have been said. More might always be said. In any judgment there will be matters assumed, implicit or left unstated. The absence of any further specific statement may be due to an assumption that it was unnecessary to express it or that it went without saying since it must have been clear from the whole of the reasons that the relevant finding was made and embraced in a more general decision or lastly because that finding, even if essential, was not made. Where there is a challenge of the sort here mounted, and the last of these propositions is contended for, there would need to be particular scrutiny of the judgment in order to determine whether it is affected by some such error of reasoning that there is either a failure to make findings of matters sufficient to support the conclusion or a concealed misinterpretation of the law: see for example,
Repatriation Commission v. O'Brien <case>; [(1985) 155 CLR 422] at 445-446, per Brennan, J. In that regard it is necessary to examine the findings as a whole and in their context in the judgment to ascertain whether there is sufficient found expressly or implicitly. After such an examination, I do not conclude there is such an absence of finding or reasons as amount to an error of law for the reasons I now give.

Findings of fact 
I turn to the factual findings as expressed in the reasons.

In addition to the matters found and expressed in the extracts from the reasons set out above, it was found that the defendants were residents of a caravan park owned by the plaintiff; that they occupied various sites within the park for which they paid rent and that there were express residential site agreements. The caravan park "The Island Caravan Park" is located on the waterway at Port Stephens at Anna Bay and is surrounded by bushland. It comprises an area of freehold land surrounded by Crown land and waterway. The only vehicular access to the caravan park is from Nelsons Bay Road via a two and a half kilometre largely unsealed road. That road, in part at least, runs across low lying swampy ground and then climbs through sand hills. Part of the
Crown land through which it runs is reserved for aquaculture. The latter portion of the road called Fenninghams Road, has no purpose other than to provide access to the caravan park and an adjoining piece of land leased by the plaintiff to oyster farmers. The access way had apparently been carved out of the bush by oyster farmers and much of the road base was oyster shells.
Part of the road had been sealed in the past after an impost on holiday makers using the park. The present condition of the road is dreadful. It is pot- holed; one section has sunk to the level of the surrounding level of the tidal mangrove marshland; the last dirt section is rutted and depressed; the earthen road surface at the commencement of Fenningham Road could only be traversed at a speed of some five to 10 kilometres an hour.

There was evidence which the Tribunal accepted from the residents that the caravan park is an isolated area without public transport and that there was no choice but for the residents to use their own vehicles to obtain access by the road to the premises. Further that the deteriorating condition of the road had done damage to their vehicles and that their activities, including social activities and access to medical attention were severely curtailed.

It was common ground that the plaintiff had continued to maintain the road from the time of its acquisition by grading and other road work until March continuing the previous practice of earlier owners. The road is a public road but is not owned by the plaintiff and no other public authority amongst those whose role in relation to the road was canvassed by the Tribunal appears to be liable in law to maintain the road. Each of the authorities examined have made it perfectly clear that they do not intend to maintain the road. The evidence of the defendants of the paucity of access and the deleterious effect on the value of and their use and enjoyment of the residential premises was not challenged.

Contended omissions 
At no point in its findings, so it is urged upon me by counsel for the plaintiff, does the Tribunal expressly assert that the sole means of access to the premises was a "service or facility provided with the premises". Nor, it is contended, are there expressly articulated the steps whereby it might be concluded from the matters expressly stated that the provision of reasonable access was "under an arrangement". It is said that unless the matters asserted to be necessary were expressly stated, it would be reading into the reasons findings which were not made and which were essential, that is, that the maintenance of the access road was provided with the premises and was done under an arrangement or agreement or the subject of an express discussion collateral to the written agreements or implied by law into the agreements. It is submitted that if such service or facility merely accompanied or existed in association with the provision of the premises, such a finding would be insufficient in law to satisfy the requirement of s.47(1), and it is said that s.47(2) requires that the goods, services or facilities be provided under some form of agreement or arrangement. In effect, in this aspect the argument is that s.47(2) provides exhaustively the sources from which goods, services or facilities must proceed if they are to be relevantly the goods, services or facilities of which s.47(1) speaks. Much was made of an assertion that the
Tribunal expressly rejected a finding of the inclusion of any such obligation in any agreement.

The effect of the stated findings 
The first question 
In my view, adapting the language used by Mr. Justice Jacobs in Dowse v.
Wynyard Holdings [(1962) 79 WN 122] at 129, I consider that it was reasonably open from its stated findings to the Tribunal to hold that the road, in reasonably suitable condition to be used as residential access was an "apparent accommodation" to be used by the lessees so long as the lease continued. And that the lessees were intended to continue to enjoy the use of their sole reasonable access to the premises and reasonably depended upon the provision of it to them as long as their tenancy continued. It does not seem to me that it be necessary that there be an express statement by the parties to that effect. As was pointed out in the joint judgment of the High Court in Hawkins v. The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 440] at 447:- "A representation may be made by acts and conduct as well as words or by a combination of words, acts and conduct. As Lord Campbell, LC. Observed in
Walters v. Morgan <case>; [(1861) 3 De G.F. & J. 718](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281861%29%203%20De%20GF%20%26%20J%20718 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 724, 'a nod or a wink, or a shake of the head, or a smile' may constitute a representation. Likewise, the content of a representation (which is ordinarily a question of fact) is to be ascertained, where appropriate, by reference to the circumstances in which it was made and the matters to which it related. So, in the present case, the content of the words spoken depended upon their context." 
And at p.448:- "No doubt a distinction should be drawn between the intention of the representor and the context in which the representation, whatever it may be, is made. But, in determining what representation was made, it may be relevant to ascertain what the representor intended to convey by the words chosen. If the representor intended to convey what the representee understood them to mean, the representor's intention may provide support for the view that, in the context in which they were used, the words should be understood in that sense and amounted to a representation to that effect. So, if the representor used words which he or she intended should be understood in a particular extraordinary sense and believed that the representee would so understand them, that would be a material consideration in determining what the representation was." 
In this case, the findings of fact amount to findings that the conduct of the owner in maintaining the only reasonable means of access and for this purpose keeping at the park such obvious equipment as a tractor and grader blade and raising monies from persons staying at the park in order to fill a portion of the road, (which must have been obvious to those using the road) was sufficient from which it would be open to conclude by the Tribunal (and also the residents) that the lessor had accepted the obligation of providing access to the demised premises which would otherwise be cut off from civilisation generally. No express statement between the parties was necessary for a mutual understanding. Why else would the lessor be doing the work? No-one else would do it and in obedience to the precept of the Little Red Hen the lessor did it itself to provide access for its lessees. No other hypothesis was particularised in argument and even if it had been, it was open to the
Tribunal to find as it did.

It is not necessary to examine whether or not this was a requirement of the lease, ie., falling within the covenant for quiet enjoyment or whether it was implied into the lease by a covenant not to derogate from the grant or for some other reason. The issue at this point is whether it was provided "with" the premises. In this regard, the Tribunal held:- "I take this section to refer to 'goods, services or facilities' provided in an agreement or arrangement not only as part of the premises, but these goods, services and facilities in association with the premises for the benefit of the tenant." 
Putting aside for one moment the question of whether these were provided in an agreement or arrangement, I can see no error into which the Tribunal has fallen in concluding that the provision of access to the premises falls within s.47(1). I see no want of a relevant finding.

The second question 
As to the second question, it seems to me that the plaintiff's argument misses the point of what the reasons were attempting to convey. Communication need not be in express words. It may be by a "wink or nod". It may be tacit. An arrangement or understanding just as much as a representation may be implicit as well as express. The plaintiff had for eight years, as had its predecessors before it, graded the road to provide access to those from whom it was accepting rent in exchange for providing premises. The whole nature of the agreement was, on the one side, to make available the premises, and on the other, to pay rent in exchange for the ability to use the premises. It must have been patent to all that the provision of adequate access was essential to the entire relationship. The examination of the lack of express reference in the agreement and the lack of express discussion between the parties by the
Tribunal occurred lest the obvious effect of the conduct might have by some express statement been cut down. Thus the reference to the conduct of the parties in context makes the matter clear. The relevant intention as far as the lessor is concerned is to be garnered as the Tribunal apparently did from the lessor's role in the relationship and its conduct and the dependence of the applicants on the performance of that role from the absence of any other reasonable route of access.

The Tribunal referred to those matters to conclude that there was an arrangement under which the provision of reasonable access fell. In my view it so concluded properly and sufficiently said so.

It was open in law on the findings of the Tribunal, for it to conclude that the maintenance of adequate access to the premises was within the understanding of the parties to be provided by the lessor, that is it was within an arrangement in that it was mutually understood as part of the "deal" between the parties. The passage on which the plaintiff relies to negate this is merely to the effect that the understanding was not expressly stated in the residential site agreement or other separate agreement. There was, in my view, a sufficiency of findings of which it was necessary for the Tribunal to be satisfied to reach its conclusion in law.

Conclusion 
In these circumstances, I am of the view that the grounds of appeal have not been made out; the Tribunal has not fallen into any relevant error of law. I therefore dismiss the summons. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the second to 13th defendants.

I thank both counsel for their helpful written submissions and succinct argument.
 * * * 
