

Griffiths and Beerens P/L versus Nus International P/L [1996] NSWSC 545 (15
November 1996) 
GRIFFITHS & BEERENS P/L v. NUS INTERNATIONAL P/L /96 
FRIDAY 15 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD, J 
JUDGMENT 
DUNFORD, J: This is an appeal by way of case stated by Griffiths & Beerens Pty. Limited (the appellant) against a judgment of the Local Court at the Downing Centre, Sydney (Coram: M. Morahan, LCM) in favour of NUS International Pty. Limited (the respondent) for $40,000 plus interest for moneys allegedly due to the respondent pursuant to an agreement between the parties dated 9 October 1984.

On 3 October 1984, the appellant by its purchasing officer (Mr. Loschiavo) executed a document addressed to (and prepared by) the respondent containing inter alia, the following terms:- "1. We hereby authorise you to submit recommendations for all possible savings and refunds on our energy costs including electricity, gas, water, effluent disposal, oil, petroleum products, industrial gases and coal. You will make a detailed analysis of all factors in our costs and advise where refunds and reductions can be obtained.
 ...
Any recommendation you make is subject to our approval. Any recommendation acted upon by us shall be deemed accepted and if implemented, we will pay you as outlined below after such savings and refunds are achieved. We will promptly forward to you all information pertaining to your recommendations for your evaluation and further advice.
All negotiations with suppliers are to be conducted through us unless it is mutually agreed otherwise.
We agree to pay you as follows:- a service fee calculated at four percent of our past 12 months' total energy expenditures (minimum service fee $1,000 - maximum $6,000) ...; we will pay you fifty percent (50%) of each refund secured. We shall also pay you fifty percent (50%) of each savings secured for a period of sixty (60) months after which the entire savings will be ours.
 ...
The term of this agreement shall be five (5) years from the date of acceptance and shall continue thereafter, at no additional service fee, for consecutive five (5) year periods unless cancelled by written notice at least thirty (3) days prior to the beginning of any renewal period." 
The acceptance of this offer was signed by Mr. Realf on behalf of the respondent on 9 October 1994.

In earlier negotiations between the parties, the respondent had written a letter to the appellant dated 21 August 1984 explaining the claimed virtues of the respondent's services, pointing out, inter alia, that energy suppliers operate a number of different tariffs, variants and rebate systems some of which are unpublished, that the suppliers are not obliged to offer consumers their best terms and that by a detailed examination of the appellant's invoices, circumstances and supply agreements, the respondent might be able to recommend means of saving costs on such items. The letter went on (in para.
):- "We do not share economics effected by your own staff, nor from alternative tariff arrangements volunteered by the suppliers." 
Further facts found by the learned magistrate (Stated Case para. 2) were as follows:- "(iii) On 14 March 1991, the respondent/plaintiff sent a letter to the appellant/defendant recommending that the SECV (State Electricity Commission of Victoria) be requested to install test metering to establishing the amount of electricity consumed during the Tariff L off-periods and the contract demand which would apply under Tariff L, and that should the results be favourable, a transfer to Tariff L take place. A copy of this letter appears at pages 51-52 of Exhibit 1.

On 5 July and 6 September 1991, the respondent/plaintiff sent further letters to the appellant/defendant. Copies of these letters appear at pages 55 and 58 of Exhibit 1.

On 15 November 1991, a letter to the SECV requesting the installation of test metering equipment was typed onto the appellant/defendant's letterhead and may have been sent to the SECV. A copy of this letter appears at page 60 of Exhibit 1.

Evidence was given by an officer of the SECV, Mr. Neville Green, that had the letter referred to in paragraph (v) above been received by the SECV in or around November 1991, it would have been passed on to him for action, and that no such letter had been passed on to him. There was no evidence that the letter had ever been received by the SECV. No test metering equipment was ever installed, and no test metering was ever conducted by the SECV at the appellant/defendant's premises at any relevant time.

In August 1992, an officer of the SECV, Mr. Neville Green, attended at the premises of the appellant/defendant as a consequence of difficulties experienced at those premises with fuses burning out. Mr. Green recommended at that time an upgrading of the substation on site and, without being aware of the contractual arrangement between the parties or the recommendation made by the respondent/ plaintiff to the appellant/defendant, recommended that the appellant/defendant transfer from general Purpose Tariff E Option 2 to Tariff
L.

In October/November 1992, a transfer from General Purpose Tariff E Option to Tariff L was effected by SECV with respect to the appellant/defendant's premises." 
During the hearing it was agreed that, insofar as it was necessary, the Stated
Case should be deemed to be amended to include a copy of the transcript of evidence in the Local Court.

The learned magistrate found (Stated Case para. 3):- that the respondent/plaintiff had recommended to the appellant/defendant that it transfer from the General Purpose Tariff E Option 2 to the Contract
Demand Time-of-Use Tariff L, and that that recommendation was implemented in
October/November 1992.
 that the transfer in electricity supply between the General Purpose
Tariff E Option 2 to Contract Demand Time-of-Use Tariff L to the appellant's premises which was effected in October/November 1992 was not an `alternative tariff [arrangement] volunteered by' the State Electricity Commission of
Victoria within the meaning of the final sentence in paragraph 6 of the letter from the respondent to the appellant dated 21 August 1984 (page 2 of Exhibit ). I, therefore, did not find it necessary to determine whether paragraph 6 of that letter was a term of the agreement between the parties." 
On behalf of the appellant it has been submitted that the learned magistrate erred in law in that:-
He failed to give effect to paragraph 6 of the letter of 21 August 1984 which either constituted part of the contract between the parties or was a collateral warranty.
There was no evidence that the respondent had at any material time recommended to the appellant that it transfer its electricity supply from
General Purpose Tariff E Option 2 (Tariff E) to Contract Demand Time-of-Use
Tariff L (Tariff L) in that the only recommendation made by the respondent was that test meters be installed and this recommendation had not been implemented.
There was no evidence to support the finding that the recommendation made by the respondent to the appellant had been implemented.
The change by the appellant from Tariff E to Tariff L was not the result of a recommendation of the respondent but was "an alternative tariff volunteered by" the State Electricity Commission of Victoria within the meaning of the final sentence in paragraph 6 of the letter dated 21
August 1984.

Although it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the letter of 6
August 1984 was either part of the contract or a collateral warranty, it quite clearly could not be part of the contract which the parties have seen fit to embody in the terms of a single document, namely that signed on behalf of the parties on 3 and 9 October 1984 respectively. That document sets out the terms of the agreement and, in accordance with general principles, extrinsic evidence is not admissible to add to, vary or contradict the terms of such document whether such extrinsic evidence is of pre-contractual oral or written representations or negotiations: Codelfa Construction Pty. Limited v. State
Rail Authority of New South Wales <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 353.

Alternatively it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the last sentence of the letter of 21 August 1984 constituted a collateral warranty, the consideration for which was the entering into of the agreement of October of that year; and in this regard I was referred to the dictum of Gibbs CJ in
Hospital Products Limited v. United States Surgical Corporation <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 41] at 61-62 and to Ellul & Ellul v. Oakes [(1972) 3 SASR ]
at 381 and 387. In those cases the representations alleged to constitute the collateral warranties were representations as to existing facts (eg. that the house was connected to the sewer), whereas here the alleged representation was as to how a yet unformulated written contract was to be construed. But in any event, it is not sufficient merely for the representation to be made before the entry into the main contract, it must be shown that it was promissory and not merely representational, that is that the party claiming the benefit of the collateral warranty obtained a promise from the other party to that effect as a condition of his entering into the main contract: J.J. Savage &
Sons Pty. Limited v. Blakney <case>; [(1970) 119 CLR 435] at 442, although this can on occasions be inferred from the objective intentions of the parties: Ellul & Ellul v. Oakes (supra at ). In this case there is no evidence or basis for inferring that the appellant's offer of 3 October 1984 was conditional on the accuracy of the last sentence of paragraph 6 of the letter of 21 August 1984.

Furthermore, I consider that the passage referred to in the letter of August adds nothing to the effect of clause 3 of the main contract. If the only cause of savings is a change of rates or tariff scale offered by the supplier, the savings are not secured (in whole or in part) by the implementation of a recommendation of the respondent and therefore are not within the terms of clause 3 of the contract; and so the respondent would not be entitled to any payment.

In NUS International Pty. Limited v. Swan Portland Cement (Yeldham, J., unreported 28 November 1979) the contract was in similar, though not identical, terms to the present, and one clause was similar to the alleged collateral warranty in the present case, as follows:- "You will not share in reductions or savings effected solely by the lowering of rate schedules of any public utilities corporation and which they voluntarily apply to our bills.", and in relation to that clause, his Honour said at p.32:- "The contract did not and does not envisage in any way that the plaintiff would be entitled to remuneration unless its advice and recommendations had secured the relevant savings and refunds. Plainly if the rates were voluntarily lowered by the relevant power authorities this would not be in any way related to advice and recommendations which the plaintiff would have made and hence the clause would appear to be superfluous." 
In my view similar considerations apply here and savings due solely to economies effected by the appellant's staff or solely as a result of new tariffs voluntarily recommended by the supplier either to all its consumers of a particular class or even to a particular consumer (without any input from the respondent, as the appellant contends was the case here) would not be within the terms of the contract, and accordingly the last sentence of paragraph 6 of the letter is superfluous. In other words, it should be construed as referring to savings effected solely by the appellant's staff, or solely from alternative tariff arrangements volunteered by the supplier. On the other, if the word "solely" is not inferred and the passage would have the effect of depriving the respondent of remuneration in circumstances where under the terms of the main contract it would be entitled to it, there would be an inconsistency between the alleged collateral warranty and the main contract, which is not permissible: Hoyt's Pty. Limited v.
Spencer <case>; [(1919) 27 CLR 133] at 147.

The appellant's second main submission was that there was no evidence that the respondent had at any material time recommended to the appellant that it transfer from Tariff E to Tariff L, in that its only recommendation was that test meters be installed, and this recommendation (to have test meters installed) had not been implemented.

It is necessary, in my view, to look at what happened on a broad and practical, rather than a pedantic, basis. In its letter of 14 March 1991, the respondent indicated "there may be an opportunity to reduce ... costs ... by transferring to an alternative tariff", and enclosed a set of calculations indicating that "an annual savings of $8,628 could be possible by adopting
Tariff L'. However, to double check the calculations, the respondent recommended the test meters be installed and if the results were favourable the transfer be made to Tariff L. The recommendation was not merely to install test meters in isolation, but with a view to transferring to Tariff L. Indeed the transfer to Tariff L was the main and substantial recommendation, the recommendation about installation of test meters being merely preliminary and precautionary. I am satisfied there was evidence on which it was open to the magistrate to find that a recommendation was made (within the terms of the agreement) by the respondent that the appellant transfer to Tariff L; and indeed that any other finding would have been unreasonable.

The third and fourth submissions namely:- "3. There was no evidence to support the finding that the recommendation made by the respondent to the appellant had been implemented.
The change by the appellant from Tariff E to Tariff L was not the result of a recommendation of the respondent but was "an alternative tariff volunteered by" the State Electricity Commission of Victoria within the meaning of the final sentence in paragraph 6 of the letter dated 21
August 1984." may conveniently be considered together and involve the proper construction of the contract, particularly in relation to the circumstances in which the respondent was entitled to its remuneration.

Apart from the decision of Yeldham, J. in NUS International Pty. Limited v.
Swan Portland Cement Limited referred to above, my attention was also directed to two American decisions involving an associated company of the respondent, namely National Utility Service Inc. v. Blue Circle Inc. [793
F Supp. 52 (N.D.N.Y.] 1992) and National Utility Service Inc. v. Callahan Mining
Corporation [799 F Supp. 1004 (N.D.] Cal. 1990), both decisions of United States District Courts.

The former (Blue Circle) case involved breaches by the consumer of implied covenants of good faith and fair dealing, and I do not find it relevant to the resolution of the present issues.

The Callahan Mining case on the other hand, was a case where the contract contained terms similar to those in the present contract and in particular, clause 3 in each contract was in identical terms. The plaintiff recommended, amongst other things, that the defendant ask its electricity supply company to switch it from one rate to another, without being aware that the defendant had already asked the electricity company for the lower rate and the latter had promised to monitor the defendant's electricity usage to determine whether it qualified, but had not yet granted the defendant's request. The defendant sent the supply company a letter written by the plaintiff requesting the lower rate, and about three months after receiving such letter the supply company switched the defendant to the lower rate generating substantial savings, and the plaintiff claimed its fee of 50% of the resultant savings.

The court held the contract did not require proof of a causal relationship between the plaintiff's advice and the savings achieved, but that provided the defendant received the advice it bargained for and implemented such suggestions, the plaintiff had performed its part of the bargain. The contract provided that any recommendation acted upon by the defendant should be deemed accepted, and if implemented the plaintiff became entitled to the savings payment. It was held that the use by the defendant of the plaintiff's letter constituted approval or acceptance of the plaintiff's recommendation, that the defendant had bargained not for savings (which the plaintiff could not give) but for recommendations (which it had received and accepted), and the plaintiff was accordingly entitled to recover.

As I have already observed the terms of the contract in NUS International
Pty. Limited v. Swan Portland Cement Limited (supra) were not identical to those in the present contract, and it contained a clause similar to but not identical with paragraph 6 of the letter of 21 August 1984.

The facts relating to dealings between the parties and leading to the change of tariff were detailed and complicated, being set out over 25 pages (3-27) of the judgment and it is not necessary to detail them here, but in relation to the terms of the contract, Yeldham, J., after referring to the appropriate principles of construction set out in Australian Broadcasting Commission v.
Australasian Performing Right Association Limited <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 99] at 109 and other cases said (at p.32 et seq):- "The first paragraph permits (and perhaps, in view of the initial service fee payable, requires) the plaintiff to analyse (inter alia) electricity rates incurred by the defendant, initially for the prior 12 months, and to advise or recommend where reductions can be obtained for the purpose of securing all possible savings and refunds. ... The contract did not and does not envisage in any way that the plaintiff would be entitled to remuneration unless its advice and recommendations had `secured' the relevant savings and refunds. ...

That it is savings and refunds `secured' by the advice and recommendations of the plaintiff which entitles the latter to remuneration appears to be clear from paragraph 2 of the provisions concerning payment:- `Thereafter we will pay you fifty (50) percent of each saving you secure for us ... and fifty (50) percent of any refunds you secure.' 
Mr. Gormly's argument that a temporal but not a causal relationship alone is required ... is principally based upon the clause providing that any recommendation made shall be deemed accepted by the defendant unless rejected by it in writing, and the provisions that `we will pay you only the savings which actually become effective on our bills after your recommendation is put into effect'. But these very words, so it seems to me, envisage that it must be a recommendation which the plaintiff actually makes to the defendant, which the latter accepts and puts into effect, and which secures relevant savings on refunds, that entitles the plaintiff to its remuneration. ...

I do not construe the contract as entitling the plaintiff to remuneration if it recommends to the defendant that it act in a way in which the latter had already determined to act, whether that determination was a result of its own independent consideration or whether it resulted from advice received from elsewhere. I consider the meaning of the contract is that the plaintiff's advice or recommendation must be what is put into effect and it must `secure' for the defendant the relevant savings or refunds.

Insofar as the words of any of the clauses contain an ambiguity - and I think that some of them do - that ambiguity must be resolved against the plaintiff, whose document it is. In my opinion the construction which I have given to the contract avoids unreasonable consequences and arrives at a meaning which reasonable businessmen would have intended.

The critical question therefore arises whether, in the events which occurred, the plaintiff's recommendation that the defendant transfer to the new type of tariff was a factor which led the defendant to do so, with consequent saving in costs. That such a causal connection is required is contemplated by paragraph 6 of the statement of claim, the terms of which have been set out.
But perhaps a more accurate way of putting the matter is to ask whether the plaintiff's recommendation was an efficient (sic: effective) cause of the defendant transferring to the new tariff. That it need not be the sole cause is plain. In this regard I think that cases dealing with the entitlement of agents to commission are of assistance - see Burchell v. Gowrie and
Blockhouse Collieries Limited [[1910] AC 614] at 624; Luxor
Limited & Ors v. Cooper [[1941] AC 108] at 124; and
L.J. Hooker Limited v. Dominion Factors Pty. Limited [90 WN 126] at 129. See also Regina v. Industrial Injuries Commissioner; Ex parte Cable [[1968] 1 QB 729] where Lord
Denning MR, at p.739, observed that when two causes co-operate to produce a disability `it is a result of each and both of those causes'. Hence I think the question which must be answered is whether, without the recommendation of the plaintiff, the defendant would have transferred to the new tariff, for whatever reason, (in which event the plaintiff will fail) or whether it would not have done so." 
Because of the differences between the two contracts, it may be arguable that the judgment of Yeldham, J. in the Swan Portland Cement case does not govern the construction of the contract here under consideration; but no such point was taken by Mr. Gray on behalf of the respondent who conceded both in the Local Court and on appeal that the judgment of Yeldham, J. should be followed, and that it was necessary to show that the recommendation of the respondent had been implemented and had been an effective cause of the savings achieved.

It was therefore necessary for the respondent to show that the recommendation of the respondent contained in its letter of 14 March 1991, which I have already held was effectively a recommendation to transfer from Tariff E to
Tariff L (although qualified by a cautionary suggestion to first have test meters installed), was one of the effective causes of the appellant's switch from Tariff E to Tariff L, which switch brought about the relevant savings.
The learned magistrate found these matters in the respondent's favour and the question of law on this aspect of the case is whether there was evidence on which he could so find.

That the appellant's recommendation was accepted was proved by the typing upon the appellant's letterhead of the letter drafted by the respondent and the sending of a copy thereof to the respondent - see Exhibit 1 on the appeal.
Although the receipt of the original by the State Electricity Commission was not established, Mr. Loschiavo (the relevant purchasing officer of the appellant) conceded in evidence (transcript p.45) that it was probably sent.

The respondent's recommendation had been made by its letter of 14 March 1991, but there had been reminders of it in the further letters of 5 July and 6
September 1991 and the letter to the State Electricity Commission had been typed up and apparently signed by Mr. Loschiavo on about 15 November 1991. Mr.
Green from the SEC who also recommended a change to Tariff L first came to the appellant's premises in August 1992 and the change was effected in October or
November 1992, the decision to change being made by the appellant in September
Mr. Loschiavo in his evidence said (transcript pp.47-48):- "Q. So that by September 1992 you knew that NUS thought that a change to
Tariff L was likely to be advantageous didn't you? A. Tariff L, yes.

Q. And you'd been told by Mr. Green that a change to Tariff L would be advantageous? A. He told me, yes.

Q. So you had two people with some expertise in this field both telling you the same thing? A. Well one telling me one - asking for a particular process to be done before we can confirm.
 ...

Q. All right, put the meters on and just make sure? A. Yes.

Q. Mr. Green was prepared to make his suggestion without even doing that? A.
That's right.

Q. So that in that sense if you like NUS was being more cautious than Mr.
Green was? A. Yes.

Q. But both of them, NUS and Mr. Green were both giving you the same advice about which tariff was or was likely to be most advantageous? A. Well Mr.
Green was more definite about the proposal and the recommendation he prepared on the day, he visited my plant. And I discussed that matter with a few people and we proceeded with that change, some two or three months later.

Q. And at the time you proceeded with it you knew that you then had two experts if you like or two people with knowledge in this field, NUS and Mr.
Green, both talking about Tariff L? A. Well I knew we were with the SEC I didn't know about NUS talking about Tariff L after that situation.

Q. No, NUS had talked about it months before hadn't they? A. Yes.

Q. So what I suggest to you is that by September 1992 you got conditional advice from NUS, have a test and if it shows X change. And unconditional advice from Mr. Green to make the change both in the same direction? A. Yes.

Q. And I suggest to you that those were the facts that you had in your mind when you were deciding to implement this change to the substation? A. The only facts I had in my mind was that Neville Green was firm and decisive about his proposal and recommendation and we proceeded with that. We accepted his costs and presented on that basis." 
Although these answers tend to suggest that it was the advice of Mr. Green which triggered the change of tariff, it is impossible to disregard what had gone before. It is inconceivable that the recommendation previously received from the respondent did not play a part in the thinking of the appellant's officers when the decision to switch was made, even if only to support or confirm the advice they were receiving from Mr. Green. I am therefore satisfied that there was evidence on which it was open to the magistrate to find or from which he could infer that the recommendation of the respondent was one of the effective causes of the switch to Tariff L; and accordingly that the respondent's recommendation was implemented within the terms of the contract and the respondent is entitled to the remuneration claimed. It also follows that the switch to Tariff L was not solely an "alternative tariff volunteered by" the supplier.

To put it another way, at the time the appellant made the decision to change to Tariff L, its officers had received both recommendations (the respondent's first in time) and the probable influence of that recommendation in confirming
Mr. Green's advice cannot be ignored. Here was Mr. Green recommending a change of tariff which had already been recommended by the respondent and it would be unrealistic to assert that the earlier advice by the respondent (which had not been rejected, but which had been accepted by the preparation and probable sending of the letter of 15 November 1991) did not render the appellant more amendable to accepting Mr. Green's advice.

For these reasons the appeal is dismissed and the question raised by the
Stated Case answered "no". I order the appellant to pay the respondent's costs of the appeal.
 * * * 
