

P R Horrobin and Anor versus Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd; E A
Horrobin versus Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd [1996] NSWSC 431 (16
September 1996) 
PETER ROBERT HORROBIN & ANOR versus AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND BANKING GROUP
LTD ELIZABETH ALISON HORROBIN versus AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND BANKING GROUP
LTD /96 40221/96 CL 11145/94 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MAHONEY ACJ, CLARKE JA, SHELLER JA 
CATCHWORDS: Summary judgment for possession and amounts due under mortgages and guarantees - whether defences based on fraud and unconscionability are arguable defences - <case> [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) - [Pt 13](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p13) r 1 Supreme Court Rules 
Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Limited (NMRB) Act 1991 - Act does not quarantine the bank against the effect of frauds which otherwise might have been enforced 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
In 1994 the respondent, Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Limited , commenced proceedings against the appellants, Mr and Mrs Horrobin and
Mr Sands, to recover possession of property mortgaged by a mortgage vested in it and for an amount claimed to be due to it upon guarantees. The moneys had originally been provided by National Mutual Royal Bank Limited (NMRB), now a wholly owned subsidiary of ANZ. In December 1994, ANZ moved for summary judgment for possession and for the amount claimed. On 29 March 1996, Grove J gave summary judgment against the appellants.

The appellants contend that summary judgment should not have been given because, by reason of <case> of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), the summary judgment procedure is not available in this case; and because (if it is available) there is a sufficiently arguable defence such that summary judgment should not have been given. The arguable defence relied on was that fraudulent conduct alleged to have been engaged in by ANZ against the appellants was of such a nature that ANZ should not be allowed to enforce the mortgages or guarantees. ANZ contended that the effect of the Australia &
New Zealand Banking Group Limited (NMRB) Act 1991, by which Act the banking business of NMRB was transferred to ANZ, is such that even if ANZ was guilty of the fraud, that fraud does not prevent ANZ enforcing the guarantees or the mortgages.

Held: 
If, by operation of the general law, eg. on assignment by way of gift or for consideration, the rights and obligations of the guarantees and the mortgages came to be vested in ANZ, the appellants could rely on the fraud of
ANZ and claim relief against the enforcement of those obligations. There would, under the general law, be a sufficiently arguable defence on this basis alone to prevent the grant of summary judgment.

The legislature did not intend, by enacting the Act, to quarantine ANZ against the effect of obligations into which otherwise it had entered affecting the relevant assets or against the effect of frauds which otherwise might have been enforced against it. The Act does not have effect to release
ANZ from the fraud alleged or to prevent the reliance by the appellants upon the pleading of it.

Having regard to the form of the defence and of the relief which is or may be claimed by the appellants/defendants, it may be arguable that the proceedings, the defence, is not one "within the application of <case>" within
Pt 13 r 1 Supreme Court Rules. However, the relevant defence is not "so clearly untenable that it cannot possibly stand". The defence is appropriately arguable and summary judgment should not have been given: General Steel
Industries Inc versus Cmmr for Railways  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125]; Pannizutti versus Trask [(1987) 10 NSWLR 531];
Spellson versus George [(1992) 26 NSWLR 666.] per Clarke JA: It is at least arguable that ANZ's conduct in seeking to enforce the security documents is unconscionable with the consequence that the court will decline to permit ANZ to enforce its legal rights: The
Commonwealth versus Verwayen (1990) 165 CLR 394; Akins versus National Australia Bank [(1994) 34 NSWLR 155.] per Sheller JA: The summary judgment went further than an order for possession and the appellant's defence, based on unconscionability, went to the right of ANZ to enforce any right under the mortgages or guarantees given by the appellants. In this sense the defence was truly one of equitable set off since it impeached or went to the root of ANZ's title to recover. That being so there was a triable issue on the defence raised and summary judgment should not have been given: Lord versus Direct Acceptance Corporation Limited (Receiver and Manager Appointed) (In Liq) [(1993) 32 NSWLR 362]; MEK
Nominees Pty Limited versus Billboard Entertainments Pty Limited [(1993) V ConvR -468.] 
Orders 
In each matter the orders should be: 
Appeal allowed.

Motion for summary judgment should be dismissed.

The respondent to pay appellant's costs at first instance and on appeal.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY ACJ: On 12 May 1994, Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Limited ("ANZ") commenced proceedings against the defendants, Mr & Mrs Horrobin and Mr Sands, to recover possession of property mortgaged by a mortgage vested in it and for the amount claimed to be due to it upon guarantees given by them. The defendants filed defences to the bank's claim. On 1 December 1994, ANZ moved for summary judgment for possession and for the amount it claimed. On 29 March 1996, Grove J gave summary judgment against the defendants for possession and for the sum of six million seven forty six thousand and ninety four dollars and fifty one cents. The defendants have appealed to this Court against his Honour's orders. They contend that the summary judgment should not have been entered and that the proceedings should go to trial.

The matter has been argued, here and below, as a matter of principle. Mr
Jackson QC for ANZ and Mr Whittle for the defendants have not abandoned the details of the case but they have argued this appeal by reference to (as it may be described) the structure of the cases advanced by the parties. I shall deal with the matter on the same basis.

It is proper to record that an allegation of fraud has been made by the defendants against ANZ. The argument upon this appeal has proceeded upon the basis that the allegation of fraud is capable of being established, in the sense that there is a sufficiently arguable case that the fraud was committed.
ANZ has accepted that this is so for the purpose only of this appeal: It does not, of course, accept that it was guilty of the fraud alleged by the defendants. However, subject to what I shall say, it is proper, on an appeal against an order for summary judgment, and having regard to the way in which the proceeding has been conducted, to accept as proved or sufficiently arguable the allegations made by the defendants in the relevant portions of their defence. I shall therefore assume the facts relied on by the defendants to establish their case to be as they have been contended by the defendants to be.
 . The factual background 
The transactions in question arose in relation to Trawl Industries of
Australia Pty Ltd ("Trawl"). Before and at the relevant times, it was heavily in debt to ANZ; its business was in difficulty; and it needed further capital.
ANZ was desirous that it survive. By fraudulent representations and warranties, ANZ induced the defendants to provide further capital for Trawl.

The capital was provided with the assistance of National Mutual Royal Bank
Limited ("NMRB"). In or about March 1987, Lake Cumbeline Pty Limited, a company controlled by the defendants, agreed to subscribe one million seven hundred and thirty four thousand dollars as share capital in Trawl and to lend
Trawl two hundred and sixty six thousand dollars. These monies were supplied to the Lake Cumbeline company by Idobook Pty Limited, a company associated with the defendant, Mr Sands.

In order that the monies be provided by NMRB, the defendants were required to give guarantees and mortgages. In October 1987 and in July 1988, guarantees were given by various of the defendants and mortgages were given to secure those guarantees. It is these guarantees and mortgages, given to NMRB, which are now in question.

It has not been suggested, for purposes of this application, that NMRB was guilty of fraud or in any way involved in the fraud of ANZ in relation to the guarantees or the mortgages.

In November 1991, by operation of Act No. 35 of 1991, [Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Limited (NMRB) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aanzbgla1991456/), the guarantees and the mortgages became: "binding and of full force and effect in every respect in favour of, or against ANZ, as fully and effectually as if, instead of NMRB, ANZ had been a party thereto or bound thereby or entitled to the whole or any portion of the benefit thereof": [s6(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aanzbgla1991456/s6.html) 
The defendants contend that Trawl was not what ANZ had represented or warranted it to be. Consequently, the companies could not meet their obligations and the defendants were called on to meet them pursuant to their guarantees. The defendants did not do so. Accordingly, ANZ brought the present proceeding against them to secure possession of the mortgaged properties and to obtain judgment for the amount for which, as it contended, they were liable under the guarantees. The defendants pleaded the fraud of ANZ both as a defence and as a ground of their counter-claim against ANZ. They do not claim that the guarantees or the mortgages are void or avoided; the judge noted this and the contrary has not been suggested. The defendants' case is that the fraud was such of the kind that because of it ANZ should not be allowed, inter alia, to enforce the guarantees or the mortgages.
 . The cases of the parties 
The case in chief of ANZ is simple. The guarantees and the mortgage are, by the Act vested in it: that is not contested. The obligations guaranteed have not been met and therefore prima facie the defendants are in default on the guarantees and under the mortgages. Accordingly, ANZ should have the judgment and the orders for possession it seeks. There being no contest on these matters it should have them by way of summary judgment.

The defences filed by the defendants included a defence which alleged: that the defendants were induced to enter into the guarantees of the mortgages by the fraudulent representations and warranties of ANZ; that had the representations and warranties been true and fulfilled, the principal debtors would have been able to meet their obligations and therefore they would not have been called upon on the guarantees and the mortgages; that the effect of the fraud has been that the principal debtors have not been able to meet the obligations guaranteed by the defendants; that the defendants did not seek to have the guarantees or the mortgages set aside as void or avoided; but that they claim equitable relief such as will prevent ANZ calling on the guarantees or the mortgages as they have done in this proceeding.

As I have said, the defendants claim that there is sufficient evidence to support this defence as sufficiently arguable. For the purposes of this application that is not in contest.

Accordingly, the defendants contend that summary judgment should not be given for two reasons: because, by reason of s88 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), the summary judgment procedure is not available in this case; and because (if it is available) there is a sufficiently arguable defence such that summary judgment should not be given.

It is the reply of ANZ which is the main issue in this appeal. ANZ relies on
Act No. 35 of 1991, [Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Limited (NMRB)
Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aanzbgla1991456/). It contends that the effect of this Act, and in particular of s6-8 of it, is that (if ANZ was guilty of the fraud alleged) that fraud does not prevent ANZ enforcing the guarantees or the mortgages.
 . Conclusions 
My conclusions are: 
Prima facie the defendants may under the general law rely upon the fraud of ANZ even though the original guarantees and mortgages were entered into with NMRB and not with ANZ.

The Act does not operate to prevent the defendants relying on that fraud in this proceeding; and 
That being so, summary judgment should not be granted.
 
The position under the general law: 
The original guarantees and mortgages were given to NMRB. For the purpose of the present application NMRB is accepted to be innocent of the fraud.
Accordingly, the fact that ANZ fraudulently induced the transaction would not prevent NMRB, enforcing the guarantees and the mortgages, were it still the party having the benefit of the obligations and the mortgages.

If, by operation of the general law, eg, on assignment by way of gift or for consideration, the rights and obligations of the guarantees and the mortgages came to be vested in ANZ, the defendants could in my opinion rely on the fraud of ANZ and claim relief against the enforcement by ANZ of those obligations.
In the argument on this appeal no reference has been made to authority on this question. However, I see no reason in principle why the law should not be as I have stated it. I am satisfied that it is. This is not a case in which what is in question is the effect of mere notice of an equity; it is not a case in which a person who has not had notice of a prior or better equity has transferred an equitable interest to a person who has had notice of that equity. In this case, what is relied on by the defendants is the fraud of ANZ which is directly related to the giving of the guarantees and the mortgages and which operated to induce the giving of them. I do not think, that, by whatever manipulation of concepts, the law would allow the fraudster whose fraud procured the guarantees and the mortgages to have the effective benefit of its fraud.

As I have said, no reference was made in argument to such authorities as may deal with this question. This no doubt is because at the least the question is essentially arguable, and it is not proper to grant summary judgment where, under the general law, the contention that the fraud of ANZ would entitle the defendants to relief against the enforcement of the guarantees and the mortgages is arguable. There is in my opinion nothing in what was said in
General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] to warrant a different conclusion. Accordingly there would, under the general law, be a sufficiently arguable defence on this basis alone to prevent the grant of summary judgment.
 
The effect of the Act: 
The purpose of the Act was, according to its short title, is to provide in
New South Wales for the transfer to ANZ of the undertaking of National Mutual
Royal Bank Limited and the other purposes there stated. The preamble to the
Act states inter alia that ANZ and (as it is there described) NMRB "each carries on the business of banking in New South Wales and elsewhere in
Australia ......; that on 2 April 1990, ANZ acquired the whole of the issued share capital of NMRB and since that date NMRB has been a wholly owned subsidiary of ANZ." "It is expedient in the interests of efficiency and banking that the banking business conducted by NMRB should be transferred to
ANZ ......;" and that "to vest the undertaking of NMRB carried on in New South
Wales in ANZ ..... it is expedient to enact the provisions" of the Act.

By s5 it was provided that on the appointed day "the undertaking of NMRB is by virtue of this Act divested from NMRB and vested in ANZ". The "undertaking of
NMRB" is defined by s3(1) to mean "the business and all of the property of
NMRB (excluding any excluded asset and any right or power of NMRB related to an excluded asset) vested in or belonging to or held by that bank immediately before the appointed day and all of the liabilities to which that bank is subject immediately before that day".

In the schedule of assets and liabilities contained in schedule 1 of the
Act, reference is made to, inter alia, "securities given to secure mortgaged loans". It was, I think, intended by the Act to deal with the guarantees and mortgages herein question.
 s6 relevantly provides: "6(1) All contracts, agreements, conveyances, deeds, leases, licences and other instruments or undertakings entered into by or made with, or addressed to, NMRB (whether alone or with any other person) in force immediately before the appointed day are on and after that day to the extent that they were immediately before that day binding upon and enforceable by, or against, NMRB, binding and of full force and effect in every respect in favour of, or against, ANZ, as fully and effectually as if, instead of NMRB, ANZ had been a party thereto or bound thereby or entitled to the whole or any portion of the benefit thereof." s7 relevantly provides: "7 Without limiting ss5 and 6, the following provisions have effect in relation to the banking business of NMRB: ......
 ......
 
ANZ is, in relation to any security transferred or deemed to have been transferred to it in accordance with, or by virtue of, this Act and the money thereby secured, entitled to the same rights and priorities and subject to the same obligations and incidents as NMRB would have been entitled and subject to, if the same had continued to be held by NMRB.
 ......
 ......" s8 relevantly provides: "8(1) This section applies to: any action, arbitration or proceeding or cause of action, arbitration or proceeding which is on the appointed day pending or existing by, against, or in favour of, NMRB; and any cause of action, arbitration or proceeding by, against, or in favour of, NMRB, which arises after the appointed day in respect of a contract made by NMRB before the appointed day or which arises in respect of anything done or omitted to be done by NMRB before the appointed day, but does not apply to any action, arbitration or proceeding or to any cause of action, arbitration or proceeding relating to an excluded asset." "(2) Any action, arbitration or proceeding and any cause of action, arbitration or proceeding to which this section applies, is not abated or discontinued or in any way prejudicially affected by reason of this Act, but the same may, without any further act, deed or instrument other than any appropriate amendment of the records of the relevant court or tribunal, be prosecuted and continued and enforced by, against, or in favour of, ANZ, in its own name as and when it might have been prosecuted, continued and enforced by, against, or in favour of, NMRB if this Act had not been enacted." "(3) Despite subsection (2), the court, tribunal or other person making or entering any judgment, order or award for the payment of any sum of money, whether ascertained or to be ascertained, against ANZ in any action, arbitration or proceeding to which this section applies must, at the request of any party in whose favour the judgment, order or award is being made or entered, make or enter the judgment, order or award against both NMRB and ANZ, and the judgment, order or award may, when so made or entered, be enforced against both NMRB and ANZ." s21 provides: "21 Nothing effected by this Act ...... releases any surety or other obligee wholly or in part from any liability." 
Accordingly, it may be accepted for the present purposes that the guarantees and mortgages here in question were subject to the operation of the
Act and that by virtue of the Act ANZ became entitled to the rights and subject to the obligations of them. The question to be determined is whether it goes further and nullifies the effect of such other rights and obligations as the defendants and ANZ had between them by reason of the fraud of the ANZ.

Mr Jackson QC, for ANZ, has pointed to the fact, as it is accepted for the present purposes to be, that had the Act not been enacted, NMRB could have enforced the guarantees and the mortgages against the defendants notwithstanding the fraud of ANZ. His submission has been that the Act is intended to have the effect that the guarantees and the mortgages will be without qualification: "binding and of full force and effect in every respect in favour of or, against, ANZ, as fully and effectually as if, instead of NMRB, ANZ had been a party thereto or bound thereby or entitled to the whole or any portion of the benefit thereof." s6(1) 
He submits that, according to the literal terms of s7(c), the effect is that
ANZ is "entitled to the same rights and priorities and subject to the same obligations and incidents as NMRB would have been entitled to and subject to, if the same had continued to be held by NMRB." 
The submissions suggest that effect is to be given to the plain words of the enactment and that accordingly, at least for the purpose of enforcing the guarantees and the mortgages, any other rights which may have existed against
ANZ or by virtue of its actions are, as far as they relate to assets and liabilities taken from NMRB by virtue of the Act, to be put aside. I do not purport, in stating the matter in this way, to deal with the various variations of the arguments submitted for ANZ but this, I think, is the essential effect of them.

I do not think that the legislature intended, by enacting the Act, to quarantine ANZ against the effect of, inter alia, obligations into which otherwise it had entered affecting the relevant assets or against the effect of frauds which otherwise might have been enforced against it. If, for example, ANZ had entered into a contractual arrangement with the defendants, prior to the Act, under which the parties had agreed that, if ever ANZ became entitled to any guarantees and the mortgages then held by NMRB, it would reduce the rate of interest to be met, that agreement would in my opinion have effect notwithstanding the Act. I do not see it as the intention of the legislature that a contract of that kind should not have its full force and effect.

Similarly, I do not see the legislative intention to have been to release ANZ from the effect of frauds committed by it. It would, I think, be extraordinary if the legislature had so intended. No reason has been advanced why it should so intend or so enact. Where, in particular, the fraud was a fraud which induced the very guarantees and mortgages to be passed from NMRB to ANZ, there seems no reason why ANZ should not bear the consequences of its fraud.

Mr Jackson QC has properly pointed to the generality of the terms of the Act and has submitted, in effect, that the Act should be given effect according to its terms. But the generality of the Act is in my opinion, to be given effect for the purpose for which the Act was enacted. The title to the Act and the preamble indicate that the Act was intended to be, in a sense, a conveyancing statute; it was enacted because it was: "expedient in the interests of efficiency in banking" that the relevant banking business be transferred from NMRB to ANZ and the undertaking transferred accordingly. It was in my opinion not intended to deal with particular obligations which might exist between ANZ and the parties to the relevant assets apart from the legislation.

It is, I think, not necessary to pursue the effect which under the law and in particular in equity is given to fraud. It has been said in general terms that "fraud unravels all". It "vitiates everything, even judgments and orders of the court": Kerr on The Law of Fraud and Mistake (7th ed) 1952 pg 3. It has been said: ibid at 8; that: "If a transaction has been originally founded on fraud, the original vice will continue to taint it, however long the negotiations may continue or into whatever ramifications it may extend: Reynell versus Sprye 1852 1 DM and G 660 at ; Smith versus Kay <case>; [1859 7
HLC 750] at
Not only is the person who has committed the fraud precluded from deriving any benefit under it, but an innocent person is so likewise, unless there has been some consideration moving from himself: Scholefield versus Templer Johns 155; 4 D and J 429; Tophamp Duke of Portland 1863 1 DJ and S 517 at per Turner LJ; Morely versus Lougham 1893 1 736 at 757." 
If it were intended to release ANZ from the effects of its fraud, it would have been expected that the legislation would have provided so, more precisely on its terms.

In my opinion therefore the Act does not have effect to release ANZ from the fraud alleged or to prevent the reliance by the defendants upon the pleading of it.

Upon this basis, summary judgment is, in my opinion, not available. If the position be as I have indicated, then, it has been submitted, there are two reasons why summary judgment should not have been given: s88 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/); and the fact that the defence of fraud set up by the defendants is appropriately arguable.

The provisions in respect of summary judgment are, as far as is relevant, contained in Pt13 of the Supreme Court Rules. Pt13 r1 provides that that
Division "applies to all proceedings except proceedings within the application of s88 of the Act (which relates to cases of fraud and other matters)." s88 provides: "88 Proceedings on a common law claim in which there are issues of fact: 
On a charge of fraud against a party; or on a claim in respect of defamation, malicious prosecution, false imprisonment, seduction or breach of promise of marriage, shall be tried with a jury." 
The defendants' primary contention has been that the bank's claim is a proceeding "on a common law claim", that there are issues of fact "on a charge of fraud" against ANZ and that accordingly the summary judgment procedure does not apply.

The proceedings by ANZ for money judgment are proceedings "on a common law claim", whatever be the nature of the bank's claim for possession. Issues of fact arise on the defence by reason of "a charge of fraud against a party", namely, ANZ. The fact that the issues of fact in question arise in relation to a defence rather than in respect of the plaintiff's claim does not, as such, exclude the operation of s88. This matter was discussed before the learned trial judge. Mr Jackson QC for ANZ has, in my opinion correctly, declined to argue that the fact that the issues of fact on the charge of fraud arise from the defence rather than the plaintiff's claim excludes the operation of s88.

But it is at least arguable that, for other reasons, s88 does not apply. The fraud relied on is not mere equitable fraud. It is, on one view of the defence, fraud arising from a direct and deliberate misrepresentation or warranty: see generally Newton Chemicals Limited versus Arsenis [(1989) 1 WLR .]
However, the relief to be given to the defendants if they succeed in establishing their claim of fraud against ANZ will or may be equitable relief rather than common law relief.

It is not clear how far s88 is intended to apply if, that this ground be common law deceit or fraud, the relief sought is relief which, in its concurrent jurisdiction, would be given by a court of equity.

This is a matter which, in a suitable case, will require consideration. In such circumstances, operation of s88 has not been determined in this State. It is in my opinion not necessary to pursue further the construction of s88 because of the matters to which I shall refer.
 s88 is framed in mandatory terms: "shall" is used. But its operation may, I think, be qualified by the circumstances. Thus, I do not doubt that the parties may, by agreement, dispense with a jury trial even in a case fairly within the section. There are no doubt cases in which the relief sought against the fraudster is such that it is not possible or appropriate to have what is to be done to be decided by a jury's verdict.

Having regard to the form of the defence and of the relief which is or may be claimed by the defendants, it may be arguable that the proceeding, the defence, is not one "within the application of s88 ...." within P13 r1. I therefore do not decide the appeal upon that basis.

I prefer to reach my decision upon the fact that the relevant defence is not "so clearly untenable that it cannot possibly stand": General Steel
Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 130.

ANZ has, for the purpose of its summary judgment application, accepted that on a trial of the facts, the defence might be established. Its case is, in this regard, that if the defence was established, it would not defeat the bank's claim. That case was put in two ways: the Act prevented effect being given to the fraud; and, under the general law, the fraud could not be enforced against ANZ.

The first I have held to fail. That is not a basis for summary judgment.

The second involves two things: a formulation, after findings of fact, of what the fraud precisely was; and the determination of whether the fraud, originally ineffective to prevent enforcement of the guarantees and mortgages in the hands of NMRB, may be relied on when the rights have passed to ANZ.

ANZ has, in effect, accepted the fraud at its highest against it, within the terms of the defendants' pleading. In that sense, no issues of fact are relevant to its case.

It seeks to claim, I think, that though the remaining issue of law is or may be difficult, it should be determined here, so that its application for summary judgment can be finalised. I do not think that is the effect of the
General Steel case and the cases which have considered this issue: see, eg.
Pannizutti versus Trask [(1987) 10 NSWLR 531];
Spellson versus George [(1992) 26 NSWLR 666.] Whatever view be taken of this matter, it is one on which, at highest in favour of ANZ, minds may differ. It is one which should be decided in the light of the precise findings of fact and after due argument and consideration.

It is proper to record that, essentially, the attack upon the defence has been that based upon the Act: and the contention has been that the effect of the
Act is such that the defence would be - and should be treated as being - struck out. If, for the reasons to which I have referred, that be not so, then the defence is in my opinion appropriately arguable and summary judgment should not be given.

For these reasons I am of the opinion the appeal should be upheld. The motion for summary judgment should be dismissed with costs here and below.
 
CLARKE JA: The facts appear in the judgment of Mahoney ACJ with whose orders I agree. I also agree generally with the reasons which led his Honour to propose those orders. I do wish, however, to state shortly my own reasons for agreeing with those orders, albeit that my reasons may be, or may be seen to be, substantially similar to those of Mahoney ACJ. 
There is no doubt that NMRB could, but for the merger, have enforced its legal rights against the appellants. It has not been charged with fraud or with any conduct which would disentitle it from exercising those rights. Equally it is clear that since the merger, and Act No 35 of 1991, ANZ enjoys, broadly speaking, the same relevant legal rights as NMRB would have enjoyed if the merger had not occurred.

Nonetheless, ANZ is charged with having made fraudulent representations designed to induce, and which in fact induced, the appellants to enter into the transactions with NMRB and to give the guarantees and mortgages to secure the loan which that bank made. In short it is charged with having fraudulently induced the appellants to enter the transactions which, as a consequence of the merger and Act No 35 of 1991, it now seeks to enforce.

Its stance is that whatever rights flow to the appellants from the fraud, which for present purposes it is obliged to accept, they do not include a right to impeach the mortgage or guarantees nor do they afford the appellants a defence to its claims based on those documents.

I am unable to accept that the law is as impotent as the submission suggests.
In my opinion it is at least arguable that ANZ's conduct in seeking to enforce the security documents is unconscionable with the consequence that the court will decline to permit ANZ to enforce its legal rights. In The Commonwealth v
Verwayen (1990) 165 CLR 394 Deane J said (at 441): "The most that can be said is that `unconscionable' should be understood in the sense of referring to what one party `ought not, in conscience, as between [the parties], to be allowed' to do (see Story, Commentaries on Equity
Jurisprudence, 2nd Eng. ed. (1892), par 1219; Thompson versus Palmer ((1933) <case>; [49 CLR 507](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=49%20CLR%20507 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 537). In this as in other areas of equity-related doctrine, conduct which is `unconscionable' will commonly involve the use of or insistence upon legal entitlement to take advantage of another's special vulnerability or misadventure (cf Stern versus McArthur at 526-527) in a way that is unreasonable and oppressive to an extent that affronts ordinary minimum standards of fair dealing. That being so, the question whether conduct is or is not unconscionable in the circumstances of a particular case involves a `real process of consideration and judgment' (cf Harry versus Kreutziger [(1978) 95 CLR ], at 240) in which the ordinary processes of legal reasoning by induction and deduction from settled rules and decided cases are applicable but are likely to be inadequate to exclude an element of value judgment in a borderline case such as the present." (See also Stern versus McArthur <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 489] at 526-7.) 
It may be argued that the doctrine of unconscionability will be applied only in those specific areas of the law which have been defined by case law extending over centuries and that the present circumstances fall outside the range of cases in which a party will be able successfully to resist a claim because of unconscionable conduct. I tend to the view that such an argument involves too narrow an approach to the means available to a court to prevent a party who is unconscionably seeking to take advantage of a situation brought about, in part at least, by its own fraudulent or immoral conduct from reaping the fruits of that conduct. Whether that view is correct or not does not matter in the context of the present appeal. What does matter is that it is at least arguable that ANZ will, on the assumptions upon which the appeal has been argued, be held to have acted unconscionably and not to be entitled to insist on its legal rights. In this context I should indicate that the broad principle favoured by Powell JA, as explained in Akins versus National Australia
Bank [(1994) 34 NSWLR 155], at 175, has much in its favour.

It is for these reasons, as well as those given by Mahoney ACJ, that I believe the appeal should be allowed.
 
SHELLER JA: I have had the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by Mahoney ACJ and Clarke JA. 
The respondent sought to maintain the summary judgment in its favour given by
Grove J on 29 March 1996 by relying upon the principle recently expounded in the decisions of the English Court of Appeal in National Westminster Bank PLC v Skelton [[1993] 1 WLR 72] (a decision given in 1989) and Ashley Guarantee PLC v
Zacaria [[1993] 1 WLR 62] (a decision given in 1991). A legal mortgagee's right to possession is a common law right which is an incident of its estate in the land. In the absence of a term of the mortgage the right to possession has nothing to do with default on the part of the mortgagor. If there is a provision that, so long as certain payments are made, the mortgagee will not go into possession, then the mortgagee has to that extent contracted itself out of its rights. For the position under the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) see [ss57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) and [60](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s60.html) and Ex parte Jackson re Australasian Catholic Assurance Co Limited <case>; [(1941) 41 SR 285] at 289 and United Starr-Bowkett Co-Operative Building Society (No 11) v
Clyne [(1967) 68 SR 331] at 347. The existence of a cross claim, even if it exceeds the amount of a mortgaged debt, will not by itself defeat a right to possession enjoyed by a legal chargee. In Skelton at 78 the principle was said to extend to the case where the mortgagor had a claim to unliquidated damages by way of equitable set off. These general principles underlie the decision of the High Court in
Inglis versus Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia (1972) 126 CLR 161 at 165-7 and 169.

In the present case the summary judgment went further than an order for possession and the appellants' defence, based on unconscionability, went to the right of the bank to enforce any right under the mortgages or guarantees given by the appellants. In this sense the defence was truly one of equitable set off since it impeached or went to the root of the respondent's title to recover; see Lord versus Direct Acceptance Corporation Limited (Receiver and
Manager Appointed) (In Liquidation) [(1993) 32 NSWLR 362] at 367;
MEK Nominees Pty Limited versus Billboard Entertainments Pty Limited [(1993) V
ConvR 54-468] at 65,466. That being so there was a triable issue on the defence raised and summary judgment should not have been given.

The respondent also relied upon the provisions of the Australia & New
Zealand Banking Group Limited (NMRB) Act 1991 which on 16 November 1991 divested National Mutual Royal Bank Limited (NMRB) (the original mortgagee to which the appellants gave their guarantees) of its undertaking and vested it the respondent. Pursuant to that Act the proceedings are to be prosecuted by
ANZ in its own name as if they were being prosecuted in the name of NMRB and the Act had not been enacted; see s8 (2). However, as presently advised, I am not persuaded that these provisions were intended to prevent the appellants raising an equitable defence which went to the root of the claim brought by
ANZ even though such a defence would not have been available against the same claim by NMRB.

I agree that the appeal should be allowed and the motion for summary judgment dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
