

St George Commercial Credit Corporation Limited versus Collins Wallis
Properties Pty Limited and Ors Matter No 50571/92 [1998] NSWSC 649 (21 August )

Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
ST GEORGE COMMERCIAL CREDIT CORPORATION LIMITED versus COLLINS WALLIS PROPERTIES PTY LIMITED & 7 ORS /92 August 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
Name of Case: ST GEORGE COMMERCIAL CREDIT CORPORATION LIMITED versus COLLINS WALLIS PROPERTIES PTY LIMITED & 7 ORS 
Proceedings: 50571/1992 
Dates of Hearing: 17, 18 August 1998 
Date of Judgment: 21 August 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr M Cashion SC/Mr M Richmond 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Kemp Strang 
Counsel for Eighth Defendant: Mr M A Pembroke SC/Mr M J Lawler 
Solicitors for Eighth Defendant: Ebsworth & Ebsworth . A solicitor was admittedly in breach of his retainer and negligent in failing to advise his lender client that several out of a number of guarantees taken by the client were unenforceable.
 . In consequence of their unenforceability all guarantees were held to be unenforceable on appeal.
 . On appeal it was held that the amount of damages, which at trial had been held to be nominal only, should be reconsidered.
 . On the further hearing it was established that that which rendered the several guarantees unenforceable could and would have been rectified if the solicitor had drawn the matter to the attention of the lender, and the lender then would have had enforceable guarantees.
 . It was further established that to the knowledge of the lenders the guarantees, if enforceable, would have been financially worthless so that even if the solicitor had not breached his retainer or been negligent and the lender had obtained enforceable guarantees, the lender would have recovered nothing under them.
 . Issue as to the cause of any loss: March versus E & M H Stramare Pty Limited <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506] followed.
 . Held the solicitor's defaults were not causative of any loss.
 . If contrary to this conclusion consideration of 
Mitigation of damages.

Need to prove damages with as much precision as is reasonable in the circumstances: JLW versus Tsiloglou [1994) 1 VR 237; Enzed Holdings Pty Limited versus Wynthea Pty Limited <case>; [(1984) 57 ALR 167] and Underwriters at Lloyds & Ors versus Ellis & Ors (Court of Appeal - 25 February 1998 - unreported) noted.

I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Claim Against Mr Alidenes 6 
The Reasoning Of The Court Of Appeal 
In Relation To Damages 9 
The Issues Raised In The Present Proceedings 12 
Would The Plaintiff Have Entered Into The Transaction 
If It Had Been Aware The Guarantees Were Not Enforceable? 16 
The Evidence Of Mr Lawless 17 
The Evidence Of Mr McBride 30 
The Evidence Of Mr Buchan-Ford 33 
The Submissions On Behalf Of The Plaintiff 37 
A Consideration Of The Legal Principles 40 
Damages 
The Plaintiff's Loss 66 
The Failure To Enforce The Mortgage Over 
Mrs Collins' Property 66 
Interest 77 
Discount on Damages 77 
Costs By Way Of Damages 77 
Contributory Negligence 82 
Fair Trading Act 84 
Orders 84 
ST GEORGE COMMERCIAL CREDIT CORPORATION LIMITED versus ALIDENES 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Summons issued on 31 December 1992 the plaintiff, St George Commercial
Credit Corporation Limited, for which Mr M. Cashion of Senior Counsel and Mr
M. Richmond of Counsel appeared, brought proceedings against Collins Wallis
Properties Pty Limited, which was the first defendant and to which the plaintiff had lent $1,185,000 in March 1989. The loan was for a term of five years during which interest only was payable, the principal being repayable at the end of the term, unless there was prior default. The loan was to enable it to purchase factory premises at 32 Watson Street, Padstow in which Collins
Wallis Pty Limited, which carried on a carpentry and joinery business and of which Mr Barry Donald Wallis and Mr Harold Glenn Collins, the fourth and sixth defendants respectively, were the directors and shareholders, would conduct that business. Collins Wallis Pty Limited was the trustee of the Collins
Wallis Unit Trust, and the income generating entity in what was described as the Collins Wallis Group. The purchase price was $920,000. The balance of the loan was to enable a bill facility with Westpac Banking Corporation in the sum of $185,000 to be discharged, and acquisition costs to be paid.

Mr Collins and his wife, Mrs Colleen Leslie Collins, who was the seventh defendant, each held one share in and were directors of Run-O-Waters Pastoral
Co Pty Limited, which was the second defendant and the trustee of the Harold
Glenn Collins Family Trust. Mr Wallis and his wife, Mrs Anne Wallis, who was the fifth defendant, each held one share in and were directors of A & B
Wallis Pty Limited, which was third defendant and the trustee of the Barry
Donald Wallis Family Trust. Apart from the settlement sums of $20, the only assets of the trusts were units in the Collins Wallis Unit Trust. The shareholders in the first defendant were Run-O-Waters Pastoral Co Pty Limited and A & B Wallis Pty Limited, each of which held one issued share. Mr
Collins and Mr Wallis were its directors, and Mr Wallis was its secretary.

Mr and Mrs Collins and Mr and Mrs Wallis instructed Mr B.D. Willis, a solicitor and partner in the firm of Messrs Macedone Christie Willis Solari and Partners, to advise in relation to the purchase of the factory premises and the loan from the plaintiff to the first defendant.

On 7 April 1993, pursuant to leave granted by the Court, the Summons was amended to add as the eighth defendant a solicitor, Mr Lambros Peter Alidenes, for whom Mr M.A. Pembroke of Senior Counsel and Mr M.J. Lawler of Counsel appeared. Mr Alidenes had been retained by the plaintiff to act on its behalf in relation to certain legal aspects of the transaction.

As security for the repayment of the moneys lent to the first defendant the plaintiff took mortgages over the factory premises, the premises at 9 Androsen
Road, Engadine in which Mrs Collins lived, and the premises at 241 East
Kurrajong Road, Kurrajong in which Mr Collins lived. It also took a mortgage over the residence of Mr and Mrs Wallis at 14 Raleigh Street, Blakehurst, and it was given joint and several guarantees by Run-O-Waters Pastoral Co Pty
Limited and A & B Wallis Pty Limited in their own right and as trustees for the family trusts, by Collins Wallis Pty Limited in its own right and as trustee for the Collins Wallis Unit Trust, and by Mr and Mrs Collins and Mr and Mrs Wallis.

In addition to the Commercial Division proceedings the plaintiff had taken proceedings in the Common Law Division for orders for possession of the various properties over which it held mortgages, including that in which Mrs
Collins lived. They were transferred into the Commercial Division but, to avoid confusion, I shall refer to them as the Common Law proceedings. I made orders for possession, which were not contested, in each of the Common Law proceedings.

I heard the Commercial Division proceedings from 22 to 25 November 1993 and, on 11 February 1994, I published my reasons for judgment in which I concluded, inter alia, that each of the guarantees and mortgages given by Mr and Mrs
Wallis and Mr and Mrs Collins were enforceable in accordance with their terms, and that the guarantees given by the second and third defendants were enforceable other than as against the trust assets. I found that Mrs Collins was entitled to succeed on her cross-claim against Mr Willis and his partners, (the partners' liability arising from that relationship with Mr Willis), her entitlement being to a complete indemnity for the amount she was liable to pay the plaintiff. As between the plaintiff and Mr Alidenes, I found that Mr
Alidenes was in breach of his retainer, but that as this had not caused any demonstrated loss the plaintiff was only entitled to an award of nominal damages. I was of the opinion that as there was no damage proved it was not established that Mr Alidenes was liable in negligence. It will be necessary to return to my reasons in more detail. The Commercial Division proceedings were confined to recovering the amount outstanding and, as against the parties to which and whom the loan had not been made, depended on their liability under the guarantees.

An appeal was heard by the Court of Appeal on 19 November 1996. Not only was there an appeal in the Commercial Division proceedings, but also in certain of the Common Law proceedings, including, relevantly for present purposes, the proceedings against Mrs Collins. In the appeal in relation to the Commercial
Division proceedings it was held that Mrs Collins was not entitled to succeed against Mr Willis and his partners. It was also held that the plaintiff was not entitled to enforce the guarantees against the second to seventh defendants, because it was a condition precedent to the giving of each guarantee that all other guarantors would give valid and enforceable guarantees. The submission in the Court of Appeal was that not only were the guarantees unenforceable, but so also were the mortgages. Their Honours held that the second and third defendants had not given valid and enforceable guarantees because the trust deeds limited the power to give guarantees for the indebtedness of beneficiaries, which the first defendant was not.
Accordingly, those guarantees were not valid and enforceable and, therefore, the other guarantees were not enforceable. The majority, Cole JA with whom
Abadee AJA agreed, held that the position in relation to the mortgages was "different" and that each of the parties was released from the guarantee, but not from the mortgage. Beazley JA considered that each was also entitled to be released from the mortgage and held, therefore, that Mrs Collins was not liable under her mortgage. That, however, was not the decision of the Court as it appeared in the published reasons.

The Court of Appeal was of the opinion that, in these circumstances, it was necessary to reconsider the amount of damages payable by Mr Alidenes to the plaintiff. It is this aspect of the matter which is now before me. The Court of Apeal also made an order, which appears to have been by consent, because it is, prima facie, inconsistent with the view of the majority, that the orders made in the Common Law proceedings against Mrs Collins be set aside, and the proceedings be dismissed. This becomes a matter of significance in considering certain of the submissions.

The Claim Against Mr Alidenes 
By its Amended Summons the plaintiff alleged, and so much was not in issue, that at all material times Mr Alidenes was a solicitor, who was retained to act for and advise it in relation to certain aspects of the security documentation, including the guarantees.

It was asserted by the plaintiff that the first, third, fourth, fifth and seventh defendants had alleged that the guarantee, which was executed by the second defendant on its own behalf and in its capacity as trustee was void and unenforceable as having been given in excess of power; and that the seventh defendant had alleged that the guarantee which was executed by A & B
Wallis Pty Limited on its own behalf and in its capacity as trustee was similarly void and unenforceable and, further, was void and unenforceable in that its execution was not authorised by the Board of Directors of the second defendant and the company seal was not regularly affixed.

In paragraph 26(c) it was pleaded:- "The first, third, fourth, fifth and seventh defendants have alleged (which the plaintiff denies) that they are not liable to the plaintiff pursuant to the Agreement and the Agreements of Guarantee and Indemnity executed by them, inter alia, upon the basis that it was a condition precedent to any obligation on their part that all securities taken by the plaintiff would be effective and enforceable." 
The plaintiff pleaded that it was a term and condition of Mr Alidenes' retainer that he would exercise all due skill, care, competence and diligence and that in breach of that obligation he failed to make any, or any adequate, inquiry, investigation or search to ascertain whether the second and/or the third defendants had power to grant the guarantees so that they were valid and enforceable against them; that he failed to make any or any adequate inquiry, investigation or search as to whether those defendants had validly exercised any such power; that he failed to make any or any adequate inquiry, investigation or search to ascertain whether the common seal of the second defendant was validly affixed and the guarantee was otherwise validly executed; that he failed to advise the plaintiff, adequately or at all, that the guarantees were or might be invalid and unenforceable against the second and/or third defendants; and that he failed to advise the plaintiff adequately or at all that the second and/or third defendants did or might not have the power to grant valid and enforceable guarantees against them.

In paragraphs 30 to 35 it pleaded:- "30. Further , in the alternative, in or about 1989 the eighth Defendant advised and represented to the Plaintiff that the Guarantee was valid and enforceable against the second Defendant.
 . At the time of giving the advice and making the representation the eighth Defendant intended and knew well or ought to have known that the Plaintiff would rely thereon and be induced thereby in relation to its decision to enter into the Agreement with the First Defendant.
 . In the premises, the eighth Defendant was under a duty to take care in and about the giving of the advice and the making of the representation.
 . Acting on the faith of the advice and the representation and induced thereby, the Plaintiff entered into the Agreement with the First Defendant, advanced monies to the First Defendant and refrained from taking any other or additional steps to ensure the validity and enforceability of the Guarantee or to agree to make other arrangements satisfactory to the parties concerning security for the advance.
 . In breach of the said duty, the eighth Defendant was negligent in or about the making of or the giving of the advice and the making of the representation.
 ...
 . In truth and in fact the advice and the representation was false and untrue and inaccurate and misleading.

PARTICULARS 
The second and/or third Defendants did not have the power to grant the Guarantee and the Guarantee is not valid and enforceable against them." 
I have set out this pleading at length because Mr Cashion's primary submission was based on the giving of the advice and the making of the representations contained in the letter and its enclosures from Mr Alidenes to the plaintiff dated 28 February 1989.

The same matters were pleaded in various other ways, including a claim under [s.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

Mr Alidenes conceded, at the original hearing, that the second and third defendants lacked power to give their guarantees because they were only entitled to guarantee the indebtedness of beneficiaries under the trusts, which the first defendant was not. He further conceded that had he checked the trust deeds he would have appreciated this and advised the plaintiff. The
Court of Appeal held that all the guarantors gave their guarantees on the basis of a condition precedent that all other guarantors would give valid and enforceable guarantees, and that as those given by the second and third defendants were not valid and enforceable the guarantees given by the other guarantors were, accordingly, not enforceable. I have referred to the difference of opinion in relation to the effectiveness of the mortgages.

The Reasoning Of The Court Of Appeal In Relation To Damages 
The Court of Appeal accepted that Mr Alidenes had breached his retainer in that there was undisputed evidence that he should, as solicitor for the plaintiff, have ensured that the second and third defendants had power to give their guarantees. Their Honours noted that the plaintiff had submitted that the correct approach to damages was to put it in the position in which it would have been had the breach not occurred, and contended that, on the evidence, it was probable that the plaintiff would not have advanced any moneys to the first defendant had it been aware that the guarantees were not enforceable.

Their Honours observed that there was no evidence which showed the amount advanced by the plaintiff less any recoveries and, at pp.29-30, Cole JA, with whom Beazley JA agreed on this point, said:- "Thus, as I would understand it, the amount of the judgment of $719,071.57 which St George has against the defendants under the orders of Rolfe J does not reflect the value of the Engadine property or the Kurrajong property. The sum which the Bank would be entitled to recover against Mr Alidenes could not exceed the amount advanced less the value of monies repaid and assets realised or otherwise valued for damages calculation purposes with interest adjustments.

Mr Alidenes contended that the Bank bore the onus of proving its loss in its claim against him and has not done so. Further, it had not called any evidence regarding the course it would have adopted had it known the trusts were not entitled to provide guarantees and thus it could not be assumed that the Bank would not have proceeded with the transaction. Further the Bank had not called evidence to establish the consequence of Mr Alidenes' negligence, namely, the assets within the trusts to which recourse may have been had and, presumably, the assets Mr and Mrs Collins and Mr and Mrs Wallis other than the realty mortgaged may have had available under the guarantees." (My emphasis.) 
One may be forgiven for thinking that all these circumstances justified the making of the order I had proposed. However, Cole JA continued:- "With some hesitation and reluctance I have come to the view that the orders of Rolfe J in relation to the damages payable by Mr Alidenes to the Bank should be set aside and the matter remitted to the Commercial Division for further determination. The claim originally litigated was that both the guarantees and mortgages given by Mr and Mrs Wallis and Mr and Mrs Collins, as well as the two trust companies, were unenforceable due to Mr Alidenes' negligence. Rolfe J thought they were enforceable except as to the trust assets. I am of the view that the mortgages are enforceable but the guarantees are not. It is apparent that there are a great number of permutations of possible quantum of damages which the Bank might, depending upon the ultimate findings of the Court, have sought to establish. The convenient course may have been to adjourn the question of damages until the findings were known but that, apparently, did not occur. It seems to me that there has not been a proper consideration of the question of damages between the Bank and Mr Alidenes and the matter should be referred back to the Commercial Division for that purpose. I am encouraged to that view by Mr Alidenes' counsel suggesting that to be a proper and available option." (My emphasis.) 
On 19 March 1998 Mr Alidenes filed an Amended Defence, pursuant to leave granted on 13 March 1998. That raised the matters previously pleaded and added a claim for contributory negligence in the following terms:- "10. Further and alternatively if, (which is denied), the eighth defendant by his negligence caused the plaintiff any loss or damage, the eighth defendant says: 
The plaintiff was negligent in its assessment of the Loan Application submitted on behalf of Collins Wallis Properties Pty Ltd.

PARTICULARS 
The eighth defendant relies on the report dated 22 October 1993 of Mr P. Maltby filed on 10 February 1998.

No reasonable and prudent banker would have approved and advanced loan funds to Collins Wallis Properties Pty Ltd on the terms and conditions on which the plaintiff approved the loan and advanced funds to Collins Wallis Properties Pty Ltd in late 1988 and early 1989.

PARTICULARS 
The eighth defendant relies on the statement of Paul Tame dated 9 February 1998 and filed on 10 February 1998.

Any damage suffered by the plaintiff and claimed from the eighth defendant has been suffered as a result of the plaintiff's own fault.

The eighth defendant relies on [s.10(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s10.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1965](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/) and seeks a reduction of any award of damages on the basis of contributory negligence." 
The Issues Raised In The Present Proceedings 
There was a fundamental difference in approach to the essential issue raised, namely, assuming the plaintiff established that it had suffered loss, what was its cause. Mr Cashion submitted that Mr Alidenes had breached his retainer or been guilty of negligence in that he had furnished to the plaintiff the letter and attached documents of 28 February 1989, which represented to it that all legal matters, including the ability to enforce the guarantees against the second and third defendants, had been checked by him and found to be in order so that those guarantees, and hence all the guarantees, were valid and enforceable. He submitted that as a consequence of this representation the plaintiff advanced the loan to the first defendant, which it would not have done but for the representation, and, accordingly, all the loss it suffered as a result of doing so was recoverable by way of damages from Mr Alidenes. The loss, he submitted, was the amount lent together with interest thereon, either at the commercial lending rate if I was satisfied that the money could be lent elsewhere, or, alternatively, at the Supreme Court rates applicable from time to time, less the amount of realisations. These included the proceeds of sale of the factory premises and the homes owned by Mr Collins and Mr and Mrs
Wallis. The home owned by Mrs Collins has not been sold, notwithstanding that the enforceability of the mortgage granted over it did not appear to be in serious issue and was upheld expressly by the majority of the Court of Appeal.
It was not until the Court of Appeal made the orders in the Common Law proceedings, to which I have referred, that the orders I had made giving effect to that enforceability were, for some unexplained reason, set aside. Mr
Cashion also submitted that the plaintiff was entitled to receive, by way of damages, the costs it was ordered to pay at first instance by virtue of the
Court of Appeal's order, and the costs of the appeal, which it was ordered to pay.

Mr Pembroke submitted that the Court was required to look at and make a judgment as to the real cause of the loss, and that when that was done it was obvious that it was not the letter sent by Mr Alidenes. His submission was that the evidence made it transparently clear that even if Mr Alidenes had checked the trust deeds, as he was admittedly obliged to do, and found, as it was not in issue that he would or should have, that the trustees could not guarantee the liability of the first defendant because it was not a beneficiary, that would not have been an end of the matter. At that stage the plaintiff would not have refused to lend the money, but would have sought to have the situation remedied by an appropriate amendment to the trust deeds to name the first defendant as a beneficiary or to remove the condition that a guarantee could only be given for the benefit of a beneficiary, such that the second and third defendants could have given enforceable guarantees. Upon that happening, and the evidence established that such amendments were a fairly common occurrence, the transaction would have proceeded.

Nextly he submitted that the plaintiff had not taken any steps to ascertain the financial worth of the various guarantors and it was no part of the plaintiff's case that Mr Alidenes was under any obligation to do so. Mr
Cashion conceded these matters, and he conceded that had the guarantees been valid and enforceable the plaintiff would not have recovered any money under them. The simple reason for this was that apart from the realty owned by the guarantors, which was mortgaged, they had no assets of any substance. Mr
Cashion expressly disavowed a submission that the guarantees had some worth because they would have provided a mechanism whereby the plaintiff could have recovered a monetary judgment against the guarantors and, thereby, been in a position to enforce the mortgages. That the guarantees were not necessary for that purpose was made clear by the sale of the properties mortgaged by Mr
Collins, who, it was agreed, has died since the hearing before me, and by Mr and Mrs Wallis. The plaintiff had also obtained an order for possession against Mrs Collins.

Mr Pembroke submitted that it was clear beyond demonstration that had the plaintiff been made aware of the problems with the trust deeds, it would have afforded the borrowers the opportunity to remedy the situation; that the relevant parties would have amended the trust deeds for the purpose of ensuring the enforceability of the second and third defendants' guarantees; and that the enforceable guarantees would have been accepted but, because the guarantors lacked assets, the plaintiff would have derived nothing from them.
At the conclusion of submissions Mr Cashion accepted each of these three matters and, if I may say so with respect, the evidence compelled such conclusions. Accordingly, Mr Pembroke submitted that even if Mr Alidenes had performed his duties, the plaintiff would have obtained that which it required, viz valid and enforceable guarantees, but because it had taken no steps to ascertain the financial position of the guarantors, and had not required Mr Alidenes to do so, or, alternatively, because it appreciated that they had little financial worth but required the guarantees for other purposes, it would have derived no financial benefit from the guarantees. As I have said that was conceded. Hence, he submitted that even if Mr Alidenes had not breached his retainer or been negligent the plaintiff would have obtained the guarantees it sought, but that would not have precluded the loss of which it now complains, because the guarantees were financially worthless.

Mr Pembroke submitted further that the plaintiff had failed to minimise its loss by selling the property in which Mrs Collins resided, and that it had calculated the interest incorrectly, such that it had not proved its damages, notwithstanding that all the matters necessary to do so were well within its knowledge. I shall leave aside, for the moment, the issue of contributory negligence. He submitted finally that one cannot recover costs, at least in the circumstances of this case, by way of damages, and he noted that before the Court of Appeal no application had been made by the plaintiff that Mr
Alidenes should indemnify it for the costs at trial or before the Court of
Appeal, which it was required by the Court of Appeal's order to pay.

Would The Plaintiff Have Entered Into The Transaction If It Had Been Aware The Guarantees Were Not Enforceable? 
The concession made by Mr Cashion, relevant to whether the plaintiff would have entered into the transaction if it had been aware that the guarantees were not enforceable, was that the plaintiff would have given the borrowers a reasonable opportunity to remedy the situation. In other words the plaintiff would not, without more, have terminated the offer to lend. It would have only done so if the necessary amendments were not or could not be made.

In his statement of 29 July 1998, (Exhibit 3), Mr Alidenes said:- "5. If I had considered the trust deeds at the time of the transaction (which I recognise I should have done), I would have noted that the Borrower was not a nominated beneficiary. I would also have observed those provisions of the trust deeds relating to beneficiaries and the power to amend which I have set out in paragraph 4 above. . I would have formed the view that the requirements of the Lender could be simply satisfied. I would not even have immediately informed Mr Simic, who was the contact at the Lender. I would have telephoned the solicitor for the Borrower, Mr Willis and said to him words to the effect: `There is a problem with the trust deeds. Collins Wallis is not a beneficiary. You have a power to amend. You can either amend the power to give guarantees to include a person who is not a beneficiary or you can get your clients to appoint Collins Wallis as a beneficiary. Let me know when you have fixed it up. You had better send me copies of the stamped amended trust deeds'.
 . I would have reported to Mr Simic in words to the effect: `There is a problem that has to be fixed up. There's going to be a bit of a delay. There's no power in the trust deeds to guarantee the loan to the Borrower because the Borrower is not currently named as one of the beneficiaries. I have asked the Borrower's solicitor to fix it up'." 
No objection was taken to any part of Mr Alidenes' statement and he was not required for cross-examination. There was nothing inherently improbable in the evidence and it was not submitted that I should not accept it. I do accept it.

The Evidence Of Mr Lawless 
At all material times Mr Rodney David Lawless was employed as a credit officer by St George Building Society Limited of which the plaintiff was a wholly owned subsidiary. His principal responsibility was to assess submissions for finance referred to him by either the Corporate Account Executive, who in this case was Mr Simic, or by the Sales Manager, Mr Kevin Charles McBride. The purpose of doing so was to make an evaluation of the loan application.

In paragraph 4 of his witness statement of 20 October 1997, (Exhibit A), Mr
Lawless set out what he would have done, and, in paragraph 5, what he would have taken into account. This included security he would have required, and he said:- "I would verify and have valued the assets being provided by the applicant as security for the proposed borrowing and investigate the creditworthiness of all guarantors and third parties providing any security for the transaction." 
After making his evaluation Mr Lawless would refer the matter to the appropriate senior office, in this case Mr McBride, and once a decision was taken to accept the application Mr Lawless prepared the Letter of Offer. In the event of its being accepted he would be responsible for concluding the transaction after instructing the plaintiff's solicitor and valuer.

Mr Lawless considered the submission for the present loan, which was accompanied, inter alia, by unsigned and uncertified "management accounts" for the Collins Wallis Unit Trust for the years ended 30 June 1986 to 1988. In paragraph 9 Mr Lawless said that part of his understanding of the transaction was that Collins Wallis Pty Limited was the trading entity, which generated the cash "which would ultimately fund the borrowing proposed to be made by the plaintiff and provide the income for the Collins Wallis Group". He also formed the understanding that the income of Collins Wallis Pty Limited would be split between the second and third defendants, which he said was apparent to him from the management accounts for the Collins Wallis Unit Trusts.

In paragraph 11 he continued:- "In reviewing the Submission and the material provided with it I came to the view that the Plaintiff should require guarantees from Collins Wallis Pty Limited, A & B Wallis Pty Limited and Run-O-Waters Pastoral Co Pty Limited both in their own capacity and in their capacity as trustees in order to ensure that the Plaintiff would have access, should the need arise, to all assets and moneys otherwise available to all persons associated with the Collins Wallis Group and deriving income from the business which was proposed to be undertaken from the property referred to above. I formed the opinion that guarantees from all of those parties identified in the submission under the heading `Partners (including Spouses)' and `Other Guarantors' were integral to the transaction for the reason that the Plaintiff would then have the ability to attach moneys wherever those moneys may have been in the Collins Wallis Group should the need to do so arise." 
In the Letter of Offer dated 25 November 1988 there was a requirement for these guarantees and, in paragraph 13, Mr Lawless said:- "In preparing that letter of offer I was concerned to ensure that the guarantees to be obtained from Collins Wallis Pty Limited, A & B Wallis Pty Limited and Run-O-Waters Pastoral Co Pty Limited would enable the Plaintiff to have access to any property held by those companies or either of them whether as trustees or otherwise. In particular I was concerned that those companies as trustees might not necessarily distribute moneys which they or either of them might hold and was concerned to ensure that the plaintiff could have, if the need arose, access to those moneys whether retained by those companies or distributed by them. It was my understanding that moneys could have been diverted into those companies and without guarantees being provided by those companies which would enable the plaintiff to access the assets of those companies of which those companies were trustees those moneys might have been unavailable to the plaintiff." 
Mr Lawless said he satisfied himself that Mr Alidenes had made the necessary checks, by which he was obviously referring to legal checks, and, on that basis, allowed the transaction to go forward. In paragraph 19 he said:- "During the course of dealing with the Submission I formed the opinion that the requirement that Collins Wallis Pty Limited, A & B Wallis Pty Limited and Run-O-Waters Pastoral Co Pty Limited provide guarantees to the plaintiff of the liability of Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited which had the effect of making available the assets of the Barry Wallis Family Trust and Harold Glenn Collins Family Trust respectively to the Plaintiff was integral to the advance of those moneys by the Plaintiff to Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited. I regarded those respective trusts as possible recipients of moneys from the operation of Collins Wallis Pty Limited and/or Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited, and in the absence of a binding obligation on trust assets, a means by which the Collins and Wallis interests respectively could have secured, from recovery by the Plaintiff, assets which would otherwise have been applied in reduction of the indebtedness of Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited to the Plaintiff. I maintained that opinion throughout the transaction." 
In paragraph 20 he said that if he had been aware, before advancing the money to the first defendant, that Mr Alidenes had neither read nor sighted the trust deeds, he would have instructed him to procure access to and examine them, and to advise the plaintiff whether the guarantees provided by the second and third defendants were binding on each of those companies in their own rights and as trustees. He would not have recommended the advance until he was satisfied that the plaintiff had guarantees from those defendants, which would bind each of them in their own right and as trustee. He said that had he been advised of the absence of power he would have directed the first defendant to cause that to be remedied if possible, and if that could not have been done he would not have recommended any advance to the first defendant. He would have referred the matter to Mr McBride for consideration and:- "In my experience he would, had the facility been within his discretion, determine whether or not the plaintiff would proceed with the loan irrespective of that difficulty or not. In the event that the loan sum was outside his discretion he would have referred it to his superior being John Buchan-Ford for final determination." 
He concluded, in paragraph 25, by stating that if the second and third defendants were not able to give guarantees, he would not have recommended that the plaintiff withdraw the requirement for them because it was, in his opinion, "integral to the advance". This evidence, which was unchallenged, made it clear that so far as Mr Lawless was concerned he would have afforded the borrowers the opportunity of remedying the situation and, only if that could not be or was not done, would he have recommended that the lending should not proceed.

In a further statement made on 18 December 1997, (Exhibit B), Mr Lawless said that as at 2 March 1994 the plaintiff had been paid $1,460,022.14 in the reduction of the amount owed by the first defendant to it.

In paragraph 12, and based on certain assumptions set out in it, he calculated the amount which should have been payable as at 2 March 1994 at $2,079,293.52, leaving a shortfall of $619,271.38. He said that between 1 December 1994 and March 1995 a further amount of $612,248.92 was recovered.

In a further statement made on 2 July 1998, (Exhibit C), in reply to a statement of Mr Paul Maurice Tame dated 8 February 1998, Mr Lawless, in paragraph 1(vii), said that when he considered the loan application he did not regard the guarantees as "make weight security", because he was concerned to ensure that the plaintiff be in a position, in the event of default by the first defendant, to attach any income generated by the financial structure "in which the Borrower operated", and to be satisfied as to the good faith, bona fides and commitment of the persons associated with the transaction on the part of the first defendant. He said, in paragraph 1(viii), that it was his understanding that Collins Wallis Pty Limited was the trustee for the Collins
Wallis Unit Trust and that its management accounts produced to the plaintiff were of that trust. He was required to consider that the accounts were not signed, and he said he was satisfied that they had been prepared by the accountants for Collins Wallis Pty Limited "because their name appeared on the accounts", and that he had no doubt that they would have been signed by its directors "had I asked for that to be done". He continued:- "I did not see any need at the time. It is not the practice of commercial lenders nor was it at that time my practice or that within the plaintiff to require audited management and/or trust accounts for the purpose of considering a loan submission." 
He said it was his understanding, from an analysis of the information provided, that the trusts administered by the second and third defendants were to be used for the purpose of diverting income generated by the operating entity in the structure utilised by the Collins and the Wallis families, and, for that reason, he required the guarantees. He continued:- "For the purpose of my assessment of the loan application and submission I did not regard it as important nor did I investigate the financial position of the corporate trustees providing guarantees. It was my understanding they were newly formed and were without any financial history. My interest in them was their respective roles in the financial structure in which the Borrower operated and the ability of the Plaintiff to attach any income derived by them through that structure." (My emphasis.) 
This made obvious that Mr Lawless did not investigate the financial positions of the second and third defendants, and that he thought this was not worthwhile as he believed they did not have any financial strength. His interest was to obtain access, if need be, to moneys which may be directed through those trusts.

In sub-paragraph (xi) Mr Lawless said the security offered over real estate was $1,858,000 and:- "The amount to be borrowed was $1,185,000 and the priority agreed was $160,000. Adding the priority amount to the loan made a total of $1,345,000 to be compared against the value of security of $1,858,000. Irrespective of how the priority was allocated between the properties the plaintiff gave Westpac a priority of $160,000. Given the value of the respective properties how the priorities were allocated was of no relevance to my decision whether or not to approve the application because however the priority was allocated between the two properties the plaintiff was well secured." 
The plaintiff agreed to give Westpac a priority of $160,000 over the factory property at Padstow and Mr and Mrs Wallis' residence at Blakehurst. Mr Lawless said the Loan Value Ratio, ("LVR"), was 72.39 per cent, which was well within the plaintiff's requirement that it be less than eighty per cent. That was the percentage which $1.345m bore to $1.858m. Hence no financial worth was attributed to the guarantees.

In his oral evidence Mr Lawless was cross-examined as to the documents he had before him when he evaluated the loan application. He identified them. He was pointed to certain discrepancies in the management accounts, which he never resolved.

He was referred to the income tax returns of Mr and Mrs Collins and Mr and Mrs
Wallis, which he agreed reflected "fairly modest taxable incomes". He was also referred to the confidential statements of financial positions signed by Mr and Mrs Wallis and Mr and Mrs Collins and, in relation to Mr and Mrs Wallis, he agreed that the plaintiff, apart from real estate, had only recorded as assets $1,000 by way of cash and $1,300 for a deposit paid. He further agreed that in the case of Mr and Mrs Collins the only realisable amounts attributed to them, apart from real estate, was $9,000 representing cash on hand. In these circumstances it is not difficult to see why the concession was made that the personal guarantees would have been, effectively, financially worthless to the plaintiff. Mr Lawless had no other information before him in relation to the financial position of Mr and Mrs Collins and Mr and Mrs
Wallis, nor did he seek any.

At Tpp.10-11 Mr Lawless said there was nothing in the assets and liabilities statement of Mr and Mrs Wallis to show that they had the capacity to pay out a loan from Westpac Banking Corporation of $22,000.

At Tp.12 Mr Lawless agreed that his role, as a credit officer, was to ensure that in accordance with the plaintiff's guidelines and accepted practices for prudent lending those criteria of the plaintiff were met in relation to any particular loan submission. He was taken through a document he prepared, which was headed "Balance Sheet Analysis", and he agreed that his analysis of the balance sheet showed an excess of liabilities over assets in each of the three years ended 30 June 1986 to 1988.

At Tp.14 Mr Lawless agreed that in 1989 the plaintiff had accepted guidelines for the making of loans, and he was aware, in assessing a loan application, of a well established method of testing the credit risk of the borrower by reference to its working capital. He assumed that if the plaintiff's written guidelines in November 1989 provided a working capital ratio of 1.5 to 2 to 1, that would have been generally acceptable in March 1989. He said he assumed he took into account, when he considered the loan application, the working capital deficiencies which he had earlier identified, but he could not recall why they were not mentioned, although he agreed that the guidelines were designed to be firmly adhered to by credit officers, and that in assessing a loan application they should make selective and judicious risk assumptions.

At Tp.16 Mr Lawless confirmed that the valuation of the Engadine property, in which Mrs Collins has lived at all material times, was $210,000, and he said the plaintiff had not sold the property "this year" because it has been pursuing "another course of action to recover our moneys", namely the proceedings against Mr Alidenes.

He was cross-examined about the value of the factory premises, which was $800,000 subject to compliance with certain Council requirements, the costs of which he did not think "would be terribly great". He agreed, Tp.19, that to comply with the plaintiff's procedures in relation to credit risk and security assessment, it would have been necessary to require the condition attaching to the valuation to be complied with before the advance of moneys, which was not done. He identified a note whereby the borrowers had sought an early draw down and it was not in issue that they exchanged contracts on 21 December 1988.

At Tp.21 Mr Lawless said the plaintiff, so far as he was aware, had no financial information for any period after 30 June 1988; that it had no cash flow forecasts for the whole or any part of the five year period of the proposed loan for the business; that it had not requested any; that it had no budgets for the whole or any part of the five year period of the proposed loan; and that it had not requested any. He agreed, Tp.22, that no certification of the management accounts was received, although the Procedures
Manual stipulated that certified copies of accounts must be obtained from a borrower. He also agreed he did not have certified copies of the accounts of the Collins Wallis Unit Trust, and, at the time of the loan advance, there had been no compliance with the requirement in the Procedures Manual, which obliged the plaintiff to ensure that conditions attaching to the valuation were complied with before settlement.

He agreed that in making the credit assessment no allowance for interest rate movements over the five year term of the loan were made in assessing the servicing capacity of the borrower, although he did not agree that that necessarily reflected a failure to adopt prudent practice. However, at Tp.23, he agreed he was considering whether the borrower had the capacity to service a five year interest only loan, but that was done based on an assessment of the historical performance. He said it did not occur to him that it was prudent to look into the future to assess the serviceability of the loan.

Mr Lawless said he did not agree that if he had adhered to the guidelines that were subsequently brought in, this particular loan would not have been made.
He said that he did not firmly adhere to the guideline in relation to the working capital ratios in 1988 or up until March 1989. He sought to say that he observed prudent practice in relation to this loan, although he agreed that he required no cash flow forecasts and budgets, the requirement for which would have accorded with prudent practice in March 1989. He confirmed that he relied on the uncertified management accounts and did not look forward "in any way shape or form", and that he did not require compliance with the condition in the valuation and made no allowance for the possibility of adverse interest rate movements in the future. He did not seek or obtain any accounts for the period after 30 June 1988, and he never resolved whether the profit in 1987 was in fact a profit or a loss. He did not know how that problem was resolved.
At Tp.29 he said the assumption on which he worked in approving the loan submission was that Collins Wallis Pty Limited had shown sound growth over the past four years with a slight downturn in 1987 "which is not unusual". He based the latter comment on "the stock market crash", although he then agreed that that had nothing to do with it. He was shown a graph, Exhibit 1, which demonstrated rises and falls over the four year period. He agreed it disclosed very dramatic fluctuations in profit, but he did not know why he made no comment about that, although "perhaps" it would have been prudent to do so.

He was cross-examined about writing back one hundred per cent of depreciation into one year, which he said was normal practice for people applying for loans because it may make the ability to service the loan "look better": Tp.32.
Although he gave an explanation why he accepted this accounting treatment, it became somewhat implausible in the light of his answer that it could really only be justified by considering each piece of plant and equipment to see whether it would require replacement over the term of the loan, which he did not do. He gave no explanation for that.

He was cross-examined about writing back the whole of the bad debts for the year ended 30 June 1988. He said he considered it ordinary prudent practice to make allowance for some bad debts in relation to a business such as a shop fitting business, which would be even more necessary if it appeared that its debtors had increased substantially from the previous year, and he agreed that he would want to make a reliable estimate of any likely bad debts. He did not explain why he did not do that on this occasion.

Commencing at Tp.34 Mr Lawless was referred to a journal entitled "Applications Received and Statements Register", which he said recorded all applications for loans received by the plaintiff during the period it covered and disclosed that some were declined and some accepted. He said:- "Q. It doesn't show that there were any applicants for loan to the Bank who were rejected because the Bank was unable to fund that particular borrower? 
A. I don't know.

Q. I mean by that, that it doesn't show that there was some proposed borrower who came to the Bank and sought funds whose loan came within the Bank's guidelines but the Bank was unable to provide a loan to that applicant? 
A. Again, I haven't looked at that book for so many years. But if that's what it says." 
The purpose of this cross-examination was to show that the plaintiff always had adequate funds on hand to meet any loan applications which fell within its guidelines, so that if the first defendant had paid interest and repaid the loan, conformably with the contractual requirements, that would not have provided the plaintiff with money, which it otherwise did not have, to make loans. Accordingly, so the submission ran, interest on the outstanding money, if it was payable by Mr Alidenes at all, should not be calculated at contractual rates, because there was always sufficient money on hand to enable loans, which were acceptable, to be met, but rather on the lower interest rates provided by the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).

Mr Lawless had made some calculations and, at Tp.37, he was asked whether he agreed with Mr Maltby's calculations based upon Supreme Court interest rates of $296,331.52 to 17 August 1998. He said he arrived at some figures that were reasonably close "so I would accept his, yes".

The Evidence Of Mr McBride 
In his witness statement of 30 October 1997, (Exhibit E), Mr McBride said that at all material times he was the Manager, Commercial Lending of St George
Building Society, his principal responsibilities being to evaluate lending submissions, supervise the sales operations of the plaintiff and perform general managerial tasks. He reported to Mr Buchan-Ford. He set forth his general practice and said that if an applicant was unable to comply with any of the conditions upon which the plaintiff offered the loan the credit officer would, in the usual course, refer the matter to him for consideration. If it was within his discretion he would make a decision or, if it was not, refer the matter to Mr Buchan-Ford.

In paragraph 8 Mr McBride said that in considering a submission it was his usual practice to have regard to the nature and value of the security being offered and whether the proposed borrower had the ability to meet the repayments of interest and principal. He referred to the matters he would consider in relation to security and, in relation to guarantees:- "(iii) whether guarantees from directors were available and the financial position of the proposed guarantors. In particular I would want to know whether the respective guarantor had the capacity to meet the debt which it was proposing to guarantee; in the event that a trust was involved in the financial structure of the transaction the financial condition of that trust, its role in the transaction, whether the source of funds anticipated to meet the repayments to the plaintiff were proposed to be or could be diverted into or through such a trust and whether guarantees were available from those trusts which would provide the plaintiff with access to the assets of those trusts in the event of a default." 
In paragraph 11 he stated that it was his usual practice to require guarantees "as a matter of course" from directors of any corporate applicant, and the refusal by them to furnish such guarantees was regarded by him as "tantamount to an assertion by the director that he was not prepared to back the applicant for finance".

In paragraph 12 he said:- "In the event that a trust formed part of the financial structure associated with the loan being sought in my opinion good lending practice required and it was the usual practice both of the plaintiff and myself to require that the trustee would guarantee the repayment of the principal loan to the Lender both in its own right and as trustee so that the Lender has access to any assets which that guarantor might hold on trust." 
He said, in paragraph 13, that as the trustee companies were shareholders of the first defendant it was, in his opinion, "imperative" for the plaintiff to obtain guarantees "given that the Borrower could divert its income through those trusts and out of the reach of the Plaintiff". He added:- "I have no reason to doubt that I formed the same opinion when I reviewed the Submission." 
He said that had he been advised, prior to the moneys being advanced, that the guarantees given by the second and third defendants were not effective as against the assets "of the Barry Wallis Family Trust and Harold Glenn Collins
Family Trust respectively" he would have recommended to Mr Buchan-Ford that the plaintiff decline the transaction. He continued:- "I would have made that decision for the reason that: 
The fact that the respective shareholders in Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited were not prepared or able to guarantee the indebtedness of the Borrower to the Plaintiff would have given me some concern about the credibility of the people associated with the transaction; income from Collins Wallis Pty Limited could have been diverted into the respective trusts thereby removing that income from the reach of the Plaintiff. The income of the Borrower and the ability of the Plaintiff to attach that cash flow was an essential basis of the approval of St George of the application for finance made by the Borrower." 
Mr McBride said that his recommendation to Mr Buchan-Ford would have been to decline the transaction unless those guarantees were given, and if they could not be given he would not have recommended that the plaintiff withdraw the requirement. He was also of the view that the requirement was "integral to the advance". He made no comment about the ratio of security to the amount being lent. Accordingly, his evidence was that the borrowers should have the opportunity to amend the trust deeds.

Mr McBride recalled little of the detail of this transaction, but he agreed the working capital deficiency referred to in Mr Lawless' analysis demanded some comment by way of an explanation of figures, which on their face, did not appear "very happy". He also agreed that a ratio of between 1.5 and 2 to 1 was generally acceptable in relation to working capital in that it reflected more or less the substance of what was good practice prior to November 1989.

Evidence Of Mr Buchan-Ford 
In his witness statement of October 1997, (Exhibit F), Mr Buchan-Ford set forth his long history in the finance industry. He commenced his employment with the plaintiff in February 1988 and was generally responsible for its internal administration. He had a discretion to approve advances up to a limit of $1m, and, in certain circumstances, to $2m. He approved of this particular transaction, although he had no independent recollection of the submission, which he believed he approved "without question".

In paragraph 6 he said:- "I have been informed that A & B Wallis Pty Limited and Run-O-Waters Pastoral Co Pty Limited were the trustees for the Barry Wallis Family Trust and Harold Glenn Collins Family Trust respectively and were the shareholders of Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited. That is apparent from the Submission. I further understand that it was the position of the parties that Collins Wallis Pty Limited would occupy as tenant the property to be purchased with the moneys proposed to be advanced by the plaintiff to Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited and would generate the cash flow which would fund the repayments of moneys owed by Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited to the plaintiff pursuant to the facility proposed." 
Accordingly, on the basis of his understanding, the only obligation of Collins
Wallis Pty Limited to pay money to Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited was by way of rental. The trustee companies would then derive income in their capacity as shareholders of the first defendant.

Mr Buchan-Ford noted the condition that guarantees be given by the trustee companies and, in paragraph 8, he said:- "In my experience prudent lending practice requires a lender considering an advance of the amount lent by the plaintiff to Collins Wallis Properties Pty Limited in this matter to require as a condition of that advance that every party, other than the borrower, having an interest in or control over the proposed advance and/or the business of the borrower guarantee the repayment of the advance. By that description I mean to include directors of and shareholders in the borrower and any company and/or trust controlled by those persons and forming part of the business operations of the borrower. That was my practice as at November 1988 and has remained so." 
He said, in paragraph 12, that if he had been made aware prior to the settlement that the second and third defendants were unable to give guarantees binding on the assets "the subject of the respective trusts of which they were trustees", he would not have permitted the advance to proceed. His response would have been to investigate why that could not happen and, if the problem could not be solved, he would have declined the transaction. He added:- "In my opinion prudent lending practice at that time (and still does) required a lender to take guarantees from persons close to the transaction and trusts associated with it, particularly family trusts where income to which the lender would otherwise be looking for repayment could be directed away from those liable to the lender to persons not so liable." 
He would not have recommended that the plaintiff withdraw the requirement of these guarantees because in his opinion it was "integral" to the making of the advance.

Mr Buchan-Ford was taken to paragraph 12 of his statement and asked about the investigation:- "Q. I suppose one of the ways of investigating that would have been to request the Bank's solicitors to look at the question? 
A. I would imagine that I would have asked if it was possible for the trust deeds to be amended so that it could be effective for them to give guarantees.

Q. And you would have asked the Bank's solicitors to answer that question? 
A. Yes, yes, would have gone through our solicitor.

Q. And you would have expected him to communicate with the borrower's solicitor about any such amendment, if it were capable of being done, is that correct? 
A. I suppose that's - I can't really say. I presume something like that would have happened, but I can't recall that.

Q. On the hypothesis to which you were referring in paragraph 12, you were satisfied, as the senior approving officer, that the merits of the loan application were satisfactory; in other words, that apart from the lack of power all other aspects of the loan transaction were satisfactory to you? 
A. Subject to conditions that were laid down, I would have been happy with it having been accepted on that basis.

Q. You mean, subject to the condition which was stated in the loan submission and reflected in the loan approval? 
A. Correct.

Q. Can we take it that if you were satisfied that the lack of power could be simply remedied, there was nothing, to your mind, which would prevent the loan transaction proceeding? 
A. In regard to that particular matter, yes, could be remedied." 
Mr Buchan-Ford confirmed, Tp.42, that irrespective of the lack of worth of the trusts, he still would have required guarantees and, without guarantees from the trusts, he would have declined the application. His evidence made it quite clear that he would have allowed time for the lack of power to be remedied by the necessary amendments.

Mr Dennis Raymond Bluth, a partner of Messrs Abbott Tout, made a statement on March 1998, (Exhibit 4). He was asked for his opinion on the practice of lenders requiring amendment to deeds of Family Trust to enable loans to proceed, and for that purpose, to assume various facts. He was shown certain documents. He expressed the view that it would be necessary to amend the Deeds of Trust and, in paragraph 14, he said that once the defect had been established it would be usual for the solicitors to draft the necessary amendments and other documents to cure them. He added:- "This is a common practice for solicitors for lenders and I have received such documents from solicitors for lenders when acting for borrowers and have been so instructed to draft when acting for lenders." 
No objection was taken to Mr Bluth's evidence, which was not challenged, and it was not suggested that the assumptions had not been established.

The Submissions On Behalf Of The Plaintiff 
I have set forth the basis on which the plaintiff puts its case. At the risk of some repetition I repeat the submission that the negligent conduct of Mr
Alidenes upon which it relied was that he advised that the conditions of the loan had been satisfied when he had failed to check the position so far as the trust deeds were concerned; and that the plaintiff relied on that advice and advanced $1.185m. The submission continued that the causal breach was the giving of the certificate of 28 February 1989,and that it was the certificate which was the cause of the loss because it was on the basis of it that the payment was made. Mr Cashion submitted, further, that there was no justification to hypothesise what would have happened if Mr Alidenes had looked at the trust deeds. To some extent there is no need to hypothesise about this. The uncontradicted and unobjected to evidence of Mr Alidenes, which was supported by the uncontradicted evidence of Mr Bluth to which no objection was tken, was that if he had considered the trust deeds he would have noted the requirement to amend them either by adding the first defendant as a beneficiary, or removing the embargo on guaranteeing loans to entities other than beneficiaries. The evidence was that it often becomes necessary to amend trust deeds and, had Mr Alidenes become aware of the problem, he would have spoken, in the first instance, to the solicitors for the borrowers to arrange it. He said, and this was not disputed, that there would have been no difficulty in making that request. There was no suggestion that the power of amendment could not be exercised. The only question on this point, which could possibly arise, is whether the proper inference to draw is that the borrowers would have acceded to the making of the amendment. In the end, Mr Cashion did not suggest that that was not the appropriate inference to draw. It is, in my view, clear that the borrowers would have agreed. Firstly, contracts had been exchanged on 21 December 1988. Accordingly, the borrowers were dependent on these funds to complete. Secondly, the directors of Run-O-Waters Pastoral
Company Pty Limited and A & B Wallis Pty Limited resolved that the companies should enter into the guarantees, and guarantees by each company were signed. There was no suggestion that this was a ruse, but rather it was a genuine attempt by the borrowers to comply with the requirements of the letter of approval. Thirdly, they had signed the letter of approval, which included the obligations for the giving of these guarantees.

All these factors, together with the desire of Mr Collins and Mr Wallis to acquire the factory premises, point unerringly, in my opinion, to the inference that had amendments to the trust deeds been sought, they would have complied with those requirements. As I have said there was no suggestion that these amendments could not be made. No evidence was called from Mrs Collins,
Mr Wallis or Mrs Wallis that they would not have made the necessary amendments.

The other relevant point is that the evidence established beyond any doubt that the plaintiff was prepared to allow time for the amendments to be made.
The reason for this accords with the probability, namely that having arranged the loan and the borrowers having agreed to the terms and conditions, there was no point in not proceeding with it, provided the conditions were met. The evidence established that if the necessary amendments to the trust deeds were made the matter would have gone ahead. If they were not or could not be made, the plaintiff would not have lent the money. However, the findings favourable to Mr Alidenes, namely that they could and would have been made, were not in issue. The third relevant matter, namely that the guarantees, which the plaintiff would have received, would, if enforceable, have been financially worthless was conceded and, as I have said, it was expressly disavowed that they had any worth by providing a means of enforcing the mortgages. In these circumstances Mr Pembroke submitted that the cause of the loss was not the entry into the transaction, including the payment over of the money, but rather the failure to obtain valid and enforceable guarantees from the guarantors, which had financial worth. The submission continued that even if
Mr Alidenes had performed his retainer and not been guilty either of breach of it or of negligence, all the plaintiff would have received would have been enforceable, but financially worthless, guarantees, so that the loss, in so far as the plaintiff has established that it sustained any loss, would have been sustained in any event.

A Consideration Of The Legal Principles 
If I may say so with respect, I find a very convenient starting point for a consideration of the law to be the judgment of McLelland CJinEq in Trust Co of Australia versus Perpetual Trustees WA Limited & Ors [(1997) 42 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2042%20NSWLR%20237 "View LawCiteRecord" ) In all these cases it is necessary to consider the precise factual circumstances in issue. The headnote stated:- "A firm of solicitors was retained by a trustee company to advise it as to whether any conflict of duty would arise should it acquire a particular property. The firm mistakenly failed to advise the company of the existence of a conflict of duty. The company acquired the property and later suffered losses by reason of the commercial consequence of the purchase. A contribution claim was brought by the trustee company against the firm of solicitors to recover the losses sustained alleging that, had the firm of solicitors given correct advice on the conflict of duty issue, it would not have acquired the property." 
After setting forth the facts his Honour concluded, at p.245, that the acquisition of the property did involve a conflict of duty on the part of the trustee, which fact was not reflected in the advice by the solicitors.

After considering the position in relation to fiduciary duties, his Honour found that the solicitors were not negligent. He continued, p.248:- "Regardless of the correctness of that conclusion however, I consider that Perpetual's claim against Parker & Parker must fail on the basis of the absence of the requisite causal connection between the breaches of duty alleged against Mr Cole and Mr Atkins and the loss suffered by Perpetual. I accept that if Perpetual had been advised by Mr Cole or Mr Atkins that the acquisition of the Katherine property by Perpetual would involve a conflict of duty for Perpetual arising from its position as trustee of the NT Consolidated Dairies Partnerships and/or its position as trustee of the NT Enterprises Partnerships, it would not have proceeded with the acquisition and would therefore not have suffered the loss claimed as damages. This however is not sufficient to establish a legally causative relationship between any breach of duty by Messrs Cole or Atkins and Perpetual's loss." (My emphasis.) 
The submission, which his Honour rejected, is the submission made by Mr
Cashion, although in the present case it has less force because the plaintiff would not have refused to enter into the transaction unless the trust deed could not be or was not amended.

His Honour then quoted from the decisions of the High Court in Medlin v
State Government Insurance Commission <case>; <case>; [[1997] AC ] at p.214. He continued, at p.249:- "In the present case Parker & Parker's duty relevantly was to provide information (in the form of their opinion as to whether Perpetual would be in a position of conflict in particular circumstances) for the purpose of enabling Perpetual to decide upon a course of action (namely whether to acquire the Katherine property for the trust, and if so on what terms). Parker & Parker were not retained, and did not assume responsibility, to advise Perpetual as to whether it should take that course of action." 
Thus, in the present case, Mr Alidenes was instructed to inform the plaintiff whether its legal requirements for entry into the transaction had been met.
That was to enable the plaintiff to decide whether to proceed with it. Mr
Alidenes was not retained to advise the plaintiff as to whether it should take that course of action.

His Honour nextly considered whether Lord Hoffmann's statement in Bank
Bruxelles was inconsistent with Australian authority and formed the view that it may be taken as representing the law in Australia in a case of the present kind and, at p.249, he continued:- "The evidence satisfies me that even though Perpetual would not have acquired the Katherine property if it had not been for the mistakes by Messrs Cole and Atkins identified above, the real and effective cause of the loss to the unit holders in the Trust, and of Perpetual's liability to the Trust Co of Australia Ltd in respect of that loss, was Perpetual's own negligence in making an investment on behalf of the Trust which, as Mr Price ought reasonably to have known, was commercially hazardous and improvident, such negligence being unrelated to the breaches of duty alleged against Parker & Parker, who were not asked to concern themselves with, and indeed were expressly absolved by Mr Price from concern with, the commercial aspects of the proposed acquisition of the Katherine property. That loss, and Perpetual's liability, would have occurred even if Parker & Parker's mistaken opinions had been correct." 
In adapting his Honour's words to the present case, even if the loan would not have been made but for the mistakes of Mr Alidenes, (which is not the evidence in this case), the facts established, on the balance of probabilities, that the real and effective cause of the loss to the plaintiff was its failure to ensure that the guarantees for which it was contending were financially worthwhile, a matter on which Mr Alidenes was not asked to concern himself; or its willingness to accept guarantees that it knew were not financially worthwhile, for reasons its officers gave, a matter about which Mr Alidenes was not asked to advise. In the result the loss would have occurred even if Mr
Alidenes had taken the correct steps.

I have taken the liberty of referring to this decision first because the facts are closely akin to those of the present case. What that case established was that when one looks at the totality of the reasons for the loss, one must ask whether, on the facts of the particular case, it was the failure by Mr
Alidenes to check the trust deeds, or whether it was the fact that even if he had complied with that duty none-the-less the loss would have been suffered.
That is the matter on which the authorities demand a judgment be made.

From this point it is convenient to return to the earlier and later authorities. Before doing so, however, I should observe that this decision is the subject of an appeal to the Court of Appeal.

I should also observe that, in my opinion, the position would have been totally different if the plaintiff had satisfied itself, or if the fact had been irrespective of the plaintiff's satisfaction, that the guarantors, or any of them, had the financial wherewithal to meet the debt. In other words if Mr
Alidenes' negligence had led to unenforceable guarantees being obtained from financially worthwhile guarantors, the cause of the loss would have been the inability to enforce the guarantees by virtue of his negligence. There would, in those circumstances, have been a loss. However, the plaintiff had failed to satisfy itself that the guarantors were financially worthwhile, or was not concerned whether or not they were, it having other reasons for requiring the guarantees, and, it was conceded, they were not financially worthwhile.
Therefore, looked at in the way that McLelland CJinEq approached the problem, the real and effective cause of the loss was the absence of any capacity in the guarantors to meet the guarantees, not the failure of Mr Alidenes to ensure that enforceable guarantees were obtained. That, in my opinion, arises from a commonsense consideration of the cause of the loss.

The matter can be viewed in various ways. If Mr Alidenes had not breached his retainer or not been guilty of negligence the plaintiff would have obtained enforceable guarantees against all the guarantors. As those guarantees admittedly would have been financially worthless, the plaintiff would have suffered the same "loss" by having enforceable guarantees, as it suffered by not having them in consequence of Mr Alidenes' breach of retainer or negligence. The "loss" would have been the inability to derive any financial satisfaction from the enforcement of the guarantees. That inability would have arisen because, to the knowledge of the plaintiff, none of the guarantors had the financial means of meeting the obligations under the guarantees. As I have said this was to the knowledge of the plaintiff which, so far as the personal guarantors were concerned, required some earnest of good faith and commitment and, so far as the corporate trustee guarantors were concerned, wished to be assured that money would not be passed through the trust and thereby be diverted from the plaintiff. Mr Cashion's concession that the guarantees were worthless merely confirmed that the personal guarantors had no assets, as was known to the plaintiff, and the corporate trustees did not have available assets or money diverted through them.

To hold Mr Alidenes liable in these circumstances would put the plaintiff in a far better position than it would have been had he discharged his obligations properly. The reason for this strange result was the commercial decision, which was the plaintiff's alone, to require guarantees, which were of no financial use to it to its knowledge or because it did not make the necessary enquiries. Accordingly, when one is looking to the commonsense cause of the loss, one's attention is directed not to the defaults of Mr Alidenes, but rather to the requirement that guarantees, which would provide no financial satisfaction even if enforceable, were required by the plaintiff. Thus, as in
Trust Co of Australia, "the real and effective cause of the loss" was the plaintiff's decision, in making the loan, to require such guarantees, the requirement of which was unrelated to the breaches of duty alleged against Mr
Alidenes. However, it seems to me, that it is not necessary to characterise the conduct of the plaintiff as necessarily negligent. Its reasons for requiring the guarantees may have been commercially acceptable. The difficulty for the plaintiff is that the failure to obtain the guarantees was not causative of loss.

Another way of testing the matter is by comparing the present situation with one in which one or more of the guarantors had the financial ability to meet the obligations under the guarantee or guarantees, but was not required to do so because the guarantee or guarantees was or were not enforceable. I suggested to Mr Cashion, in the course of submissions, that that would have raised a very strong case against Mr Alidenes because, in those circumstances, one could look directly to the loss flowing from the inability to enforce the guarantee or guarantees. Mr Cashion submitted, however, that in those circumstances the only relevance of the financial capacity of the guarantor or guarantors would have been in relation to mitigation of loss. By that he meant, as I understood it, that it would have been open to Mr Alidenes to assert that the plaintiff was obliged to enforce its rights under the guarantee or guarantees to mitigate the damages it otherwise suffered. In my opinion, the example points up a circumstance in which it could be said that the loss was referable to Mr Alidenes' breach of retainer or negligence and, when it is compared with the actual circumstances, it demonstrates that the cause of the loss was the preparedness to take the financially worthless guarantees, rather than not having enforceable guarantees.

In March versus E & M H Stramare Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506] the High Court stated the principles in relation to causation in negligence cases. At p.515 Mason CJ said:- "The common law tradition is that what was the cause of a particular occurrence is a question of fact which `must be determined by applying commonsense to the facts of each particular case', in the words of Lord Reid: Stapley." 
Subsequently, at pp.515-516, his Honour said:- "Commentators subdivide the issue of causation in a given case into two questions: the question of causation in fact - to be determined by the application of the `but for' test - and the further question whether a defendant is in law responsible for damage which his or her negligence has played some part in producing: see, e.g., Fleming, Law of Torts, 7th Edition (1987) pages 172-173; Hart & Honore, Causation In The Law, 2nd Edition (1985), page 110. It is said that, in determining this second question, considerations of policy have a prominent part to play, as do accepted value judgments: see Fleming, page 173. However, this approach to the issue of causation (a) places rather too much weight on the `but for' test to the exclusion of the `commonsense' approach which the common law has always favoured; and (b) implies, or seems to imply, that value judgment has, or should have, no part to play in resolving causation as an issue of fact. As Dixon CJ, Fullagar and Kitto JJ remarked in Fitzgerald versus Penn `it is all ultimately a matter of commonsense' and `(i)n truth the conception in question (i.e. causation) is not susceptible of reduction to a satisfactory formula'.

That said, the `but for' test, applied as a negative criterion of causation, has an important role to play in the resolution of the questions." 
At p.516 his Honour referred to the difficulties the "but for" test created in cases involving two or more acts or events, which would each be sufficient to bring about the plaintiff's injury. He continued:- "The cases demonstrate the lesson of experience, namely, that the test, applied as an exclusive criterion of causation, yields unacceptable results and that the results which it yields must be tempered by the making of value judgments and the infusion of policy considerations. That in itself is something of an irony because the proponents of the `but for' test have seen it as a criterion which would exclude the making of value judgments and evaluative considerations from causation analysis .." 
At p.522 Deane J said:- "For the purposes of the law of negligence, the question of causation arises in the context of the attribution of fault or responsibility where an identified negligent act or omission of the defendant was so connected with the plaintiff's loss or injury that, as a matter of ordinary commonsense and experience, it should be regarded as a cause of it (cf Barnes versus Hay). The `but for' (or `causa sine qua non') test may well be a usual aid in determining whether something is properly to be seen as an effective cause of something else in that sense. In particular, the test will commonly exclude causation for the purposes of the law of negligence if the answer to the question it poses is that the accident which caused the injuries would have occurred in the same way and with the same consequences in any event: see e.g. Duyvelshaff versus Cathcart & Ritchie Limited. There are however, in my view, convincing reasons precluding its adoption as a comprehensive definitive test to causation in the law of negligence. First, the clear weight of authority is against the substitution of such a formularised test of causation or a `commonsense idea of what is meant by saying that one fact is a cause of another' .. Secondly, unqualified acceptance of the `but for' test as even a negative or exclusionary test of causation for the purposes of the law of negligence would lead to the absurd and unjust position that there was no `cause' of an injury in any case where there were present two independent and sufficient causes of the accident in which the injury was sustained. ... Thirdly, the mere fact that something constitutes an essential condition (in the `but for' sense) of an occurrence does not mean that, for the purposes of ascribing responsibility or fault, it is properly to be seen as a `cause' of that occurrence as a matter of either ordinary language or commonsense." (My emphasis.) 
At p.530 McHugh J said:- "Hence, for the purposes of the common law, a person may be causally responsible for damage even though his or her act or omission was one only of the conditions or relations sufficient to produce the damage. This is the basis of the `but for' test of causation which, apart from some exceptional cases, most writers and judges agree is the threshold test for determining whether a particular act or omission qualifies as a cause of the damage sustained. If the damage would have occurred notwithstanding the negligent act or omission, the act or omission is not a cause of the damage and there is no legal liability for it: Duyvelshaff versus Cathcart & Ritchie Limited." (My emphasis.) 
All of these judgments lead, in my respectful opinion, to the conclusion that on the facts of the present case, and it was acknowledged by Mr Cashion that each case has to be determined having regard to its own particular facts, the defaults of Mr Alidenes were not the commonsense reasons for the loss.

In Bennett versus Minister of Community Welfare <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 408] a ward of the State was injured in 1973 at an institution. It was common ground that he was entitled and would have sought to recover damages from the Minister if he had known of that entitlement, and it was accepted that the Director of Community Welfare was under a duty to obtain independent legal advice for him about his right to recover damages, which he failed to do. The cause of action became statute barred, but before that happened the wardship ceased and the former ward obtained legal advice, which incorrectly advised him that he had no cause of action against the Minister.
After the action became statute barred he received proper advice and sued the
Minister for damages. The Minister asserted that the subsequent inaccurate advice was the cause of the loss, rather than his failure to obtain independent legal advice. It was held that the Director's breach of duty was a causal factor, which continued to operate until the limitation period expired and was not superseded as the sole cause of the subsequent loss by the legal advice obtained after the wardship ceased.

At pp.412-413 Mason CJ, Deane and Toohey JJ said:- "In the realm of negligence, causation is essentially a question of fact, to be resolved, as a matter of commonsense. In resolving that question, the `but for' test, applied as a negative criterion of causation, has an important role to play but it is not a comprehensive and exclusive test of causation; value judgments and policy considerations necessarily intrude. The inadequacy of the `but for' test has emerged in cases in which a superseding cause, amounting to a novus actus interveniens, has been held to break the chain of causation which would have otherwise resulted from an earlier wrongful act or omission. In those cases, though the earlier wrongful act or omission may have amounted to an essential condition of the occurrence of the ultimate harm, it was not the true cause or a true cause of that harm." 
Their Honours were of the view that if one assumed that the Director had obtained correct independent legal advice and that the appellant had acted on it by commencing an action within time, the relevant loss would not have occurred and, in that sense and subject to two qualifications, the Director's breach of duty was causally related to the loss.

Accordingly, for the purposes of considering the Director's liability, the
Court was prepared to assume that he had acted in certain ways. The two assumptions were elaborated upon by it being stated that the Director had a duty to obtain legal advice from a competent legal practitioner based on adequate and accurate instructions, and that whilst the appellant bore the general onus of establishing that the Director's breach of duty caused or contributed to his loss, it was common ground that he would have made a claim and commenced an action for damages against the Minister, once he was legally able to do so, had he been made aware of his rights.

I refer to these assumptions because, as I have noted, Mr Cashion submitted that what would have happened, as disclosed by the evidence in the present case, if Mr Alidenes had looked at the trust deeds was nothing more than an hypothesis. However, it seems to me that the present case is a stronger case than Bennett in the sense that it is not necessary for the Court to make any assumptions, because the evidence established what Mr Alidenes would have done, and what would have happened as a result. However one puts it, the relevant point remains that the High Court considered it appropriate to look at what would have happened if the Director had complied with his duties.

This point is somewhat underscored by what their Honours said at p.416:- "In our view, for these reasons, the primary judge and the majority in the Full Court were mistaken in classifying the obtaining and the receipt of the 1976 advice as a novus actus interveniens. In reaching that conclusion, their Honours appear to have been of the opinion that, on account of the 1976 advice, the loss would have occurred notwithstanding the Director's breach of duty in omitting to obtain independent legal advice. That opinion proceeded, at least in part, on the footing that, by obtaining advice in 1976, the appellant achieved what he would have achieved had the Director discharged his duty to obtain independent legal advice. In the light of what we have already said, we cannot accept that line of reasoning." 
In the present case, regardless of the defaults of Mr Alidenes, the plaintiff would not have obtained guarantees, which were of any financial use to it.

Gaudron J noted, at p.419, that in certain cases questions of causation may be approached as though the positive act had, in fact, occurred. At p.421 her
Honour said:- "The question of causation was answered by the majority in the Full Court without regard to what would or would not have happened had the Director obtained independent legal advice for Mr Bennett. As already indicated, that approach was wrong. At first instance, Nicholson J, adverted to an aspect of what would have happened and observed that `(t)o find [that the Director's failure in this regard caused the loss sustained by Mr Bennett] is to assume that ... the advice would necessarily have been to the effect that he should issue proceedings'.

The precise advice that Mr Bennett would have received and the possibility that he might have received incorrect advice - a matter which loomed large in argument in this Court - are matters which cannot, in my view, be brought to bear in determining whether the Director's breach continued to be causally significant when Mr Bennett's action became statute barred.

There are two aspects to the question whether performance of a duty would have averted the loss or injury suffered. The first is the general sufficiency of the duty to avert or prevent harm of the kind in issue. The second involves a consideration of what would or would not have happened in the particular circumstances of the case. As has been seen, it is not always necessary to consider the second aspect of the question. And it is rare, indeed, that it is necessary to consider the first aspect. In the first place, proceedings are not usually brought for breach of a duty that is not or would not have been efficacious to avert or prevent the harm suffered. And so far as general sufficiency is involved in the question of causation, there is usually no reason to separate or distinguish the question of breach of a common law duty from that of causation. That is because a duty is imposed by the common law by reason that it is a precaution which a reasonable person in the position of the person sued would have taken to prevent a foreseeable risk of harm of the kind suffered. Thus, questions of the sufficiency of the precaution to avert the harm are inevitably subsumed in the finding that there was a duty; a precaution is not classified as `reasonable' unless it can be said that its performance would, in the ordinary course of events, avert the risk that called it into existence." (My emphasis.) 
Subsequently her Honour said, pp.422-423:- "It might be said that, where questions of causation depend on hypothetical considerations, allowance should be made, as in the assessment of damages, for the possibility that some event would not have occurred. Possibilities, if they are not fanciful, must be taken into account, at least in a general way whenever causation or the related issue of prevention is in issue. But questions of that kind are not answered `maybe' or even `more probably than not'. They are answered `yes' or `no' depending on the probabilities for or against." 
Thus, her Honour was of the view that hypothetical considerations or, as I would understand it, the type of assumptions to which the joint judgment referred, should be taken into account.

At p.428 McHugh J said:- "Whether or not a causal connection exists between a breach of duty and any harm suffered by the person to whom the duty is owed is a question of fact to be decided on the balance of probabilities. The existence of a causal connection is to be determined in accordance with commonsense notions of causation and not in accordance with any philosophical or scientific theory of causation or any modification or adaptation of such a theory for legal purposes." 
In Medlin versus The State Government Insurance Commission <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 1] Deane, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ made the statement, at p.6, which McLelland CJinEq adopted in Trust Co of Australia. The passage at p.6 commenced:- "For the purposes of the law of negligence, the question whether the requisite causal connection exists between a particular breach of duty and particular loss or damage is essentially one of fact to be resolved, on the probabilities, as a matter of commonsense and experience." 
Accordingly, the test is clearly stated and, in having regard to the particular facts of every case, which the Court is obliged to do, one may take into account hypotheses or assumptions and, if that is so, one may obviously act upon evidence as to what would, in the particular circumstances of any case, have occurred.

In Ampolex Limited versus Perpetual Trustee Company (Canberra) Limited &
Ors [(1996) 20 ACSR 649] I had occasion to consider the matter of causation and, in the course of doing so I noted that March had been expressly followed by the English Court of Appeal in Galoo Limited (In Liquidation) versus Bright
Grahame Murray (a firm) <case>; [[1994] WLR 1360.] At pp.667-668 I said:- "That was a claim by the liquidator of a company against its former auditors. Glidewell LJ, who delivered the principal judgment, referred to the English decisions on causation and the decisions in Alexander and March. His Lordship noted that in Alexander all of the members of the Court of Appeal considered the `but for' test was not enough: at 1373. At 1374 he posed for himself the question: `How does the Court decide whether the breach of duty was the cause of the loss or merely the occasion for the loss?' which he answered at 1374-5 thus: `The answer in my judgment is supplied by the Australian decisions to which I have referred, which I hold to represent the law of England as well as of Australia, in relation to a breach of duty imposed on a defendant either by contract or in tort in a situation analogous to breach of contract. The answer in the end is "By the application of the Court's commonsense".

Doing my best to apply this test, I have no doubt that the Deputy Judge arrived at a correct conclusion on this issue. The breach of duty by the defendants gave the opportunity to Galoo and Gamine to incur and to continue to incur trading losses; it did not cause those trading losses, in the sense in which the word "cause" is used in law'." 
The present case may be considered to be stronger from the defendant's point of view, because, irrespective of what Mr Alidenes did or failed to do the same consequences would have followed.

In The `Sivand' [1998] 2 LLR 97 the Court of Appeal considered Galoo and, at p.102, Evans LJ said, in relation to that case:- "The plaintiff companies alleged that the defendants had audited their accounts negligently and that carefully prepared accounts would have shown that they were insolvent: if they had known this, they would not have continued trading, incurring further losses, as they did. Adopting two Australian judgments, Alexander ... and March ..., the Court of Appeal held that a commonsense test should be applied to the facts of each case (per Lord Justice Glidewell at p.1374H). The alleged negligence had not caused the subsequent trading losses, though it had provided the opportunity for them to occur. The result therefore was the converse of the decision in Monarch SS Co versus Karlshamms though the same test applied.

I would add this. The reference to commonsense must be accompanied by a reminder that this is not a subjective test, which would be an unreliable guide. It implies a full knowledge of the material facts and that the question is answered in accordance with the thinking processes of a normal person. The reference to `material' facts means that some mental process of selection is required. It is not enough, in my judgment, to specify `commonsense' standards without identifying the reasoning involved. Lord Wright recognised this in The Oropesa [(1943) 74 LLRep 86] .. . He said .. that causation was essentially a question of fact, but he amplified this as follows .. : `To break the chain of causation it must be shown that there is something which I will call ultroneous, something unwarrantable, a new cause which disturbs the sequence of events, something which can be described as either unreasonable or extraneous or extrinsic. I doubt whether the law can be stated more precisely than that.' 
So Lord Wright found it necessary to go outside the dictionary, or at least to explore its furtherest corners, in order to identify the kind of circumstances in which the defendant might cease to be liable for what could otherwise be regarded as the consequences of his act." 
The additional significance of this case is to show that it is not necessary for the other act to be tortious or in breach of contract: it is sufficient that it is "unreasonable or extraneous or extrinsic". Thus, in the present case, even if it was appropriate to hold that the conduct of the plaintiff in requiring financially worthless guarantees was not negligent, that would not be determinative of the cause of the loss. One must look at what happened or would have happened.

In Banque Bruxelles Lambert SA versus Eagle Star Insurance Co Limited <case>; [[1997] AC 191] the defendant valuers considerably over-valued property, which they were required to value so that the plaintiffs could determine the amount to be lent on the security of it. The loans were made on the basis of the valuations and the borrowers defaulted. In the meantime the property market had fallen substantially, thereby greatly increasing the losses eventually suffered by the plaintiffs, which brought actions against the defendants for damages for negligence and breach of contract.

The principal speech in the House of Lords was delivered by Lord Hoffmann, with whom the other Law Lords agreed. At p.214 his Lordship said:- "I think that one can to some extent generalise the principle upon which this response depends. It is that a person under a duty to take reasonable care to provide information on which someone else will decide upon a course of action is, if negligent, not generally regarded as responsible for all the consequences of that course of action. He is responsible only for the consequences of the information being wrong. A duty of care which imposes upon the informant responsibility for losses which would have occurred even if the information which he gave had been correct is not in my view fair and reasonable as between the parties. It is therefore inappropriate either as an implied term of the contract or as a tortious duty arising from the relationship between them.

The principle thus stated distinguishes between a duty to provide information for the purpose of enabling someone else to decide upon a course of action and a duty to advise someone as to what course of action he should take. If the duty is to advise whether or not a course of action should be taken, the adviser must take reasonable care to consider all the potential consequences of that course of action. If he is negligent, he will therefore be responsible for all the foreseeable loss which is a consequence of that course of action having been taken. If his duty is only to supply information, he must take reasonable care to ensure that the information is correct and, if he is negligent, will be responsible for all the foreseeable consequences of the information being wrong." 
Approaching the present case from the two ways in which his Lordship propounded the proposition, the first point is that it would not be fair to impose on Mr Alidenes responsibility for the loss, which would have occurred even if he had advised the plaintiff properly; or if his duty was only to supply information, as in my view it was, he is only responsible for all foreseeable consequences of the information being wrong. On the evidence in the present case those consequences are limited to the fact that the guarantees would have been valid and enforceable, but no loss would have flowed because they were financially worthless.

In Bristol and West Building Society versus Mothew <case>; [[1997] 2 WLR 436] the facts, as stated in the headnote, were:- "In 1988 the defendant's solicitor acted for a husband and wife in the purchase of a house for 73,000 and also for the plaintiff to whom the purchasers had applied for a loan of 59,000 to finance the purchase. The plaintiff offered to advance the money on the express condition that the balance of the purchase price was provided by the purchasers without resort to further borrowing, and it instructed the solicitor to report, prior to completion, any proposal that the purchasers might create a second mortgage or otherwise borrow in order to finance part of the purchase price. The solicitor knew that the purchasers were arranging for an existing bank debt of 3,350 to be secured by a second charge on the new property but, due to an oversight, he stated in his report to the plaintiff that the balance of the purchase money was being provided by the purchasers without resort to further borrowing. The plaintiff advanced the loan and the purchase was completed. When the purchasers defaulted on their mortgage repayments the plaintiff enforced its security and the house was sold at a loss. The plaintiff sought to recover the whole of its loss on the transaction from the solicitor, alleging breach of contract, negligence and breach of trust. The District Judge gave the plaintiff summary judgment for damages to be assessed for breach of contract and negligence and for damages of 79,000 less the amount received on the sale of the property for breach of trust." 
In so far as the solicitor furnished advice to his clients he was in a similar position to Mr Alidenes.

Millett LJ, in allowing the appeal, said, at p.441:- "When the appeal was first argued before us it was still conceded by the society that it could not recover damages at common law for breach of contract or negligence unless it could show that it would not have proceeded with the mortgage advance if it had been informed of the facts. The society, however, maintained that it could escape this principle because the defendant was also guilty of a breach of trust and that common law rules of causation and remoteness of damage have no application in such a case. The critical questions, therefore, appeared to be whether the defendant was guilty of a breach of trust or fiduciary duty and if so whether the society needed to prove that it would not still have proceeded with the transaction if it had been told of the facts." 
After the Court of Appeal reserved its judgment the Society sought to resile from that concession and, thereafter, the decision of the House of Lords in
Banque Bruxelles was delivered.

At p.442 his Lordship, in dealing with the claims at common law, said:- "This question depends upon an alleged difference between the tests of causation and remoteness of damage at common law and in equity. In a case of the present kind, however, two different questions of causation are involved and it is necessary to distinguish between them. Where a plaintiff claims that he has suffered loss by entering into a transaction as a result of negligent advice or information provided by the defendant, the first question is whether the plaintiff can establish that the defendant's negligence caused him to enter into the transaction. If he cannot his claim must fail. But even if he can, it is not sufficient for him to establish that the transaction caused him loss. He must still show what, if any, part of his loss is attributable to the defendant's negligence. This is usually treated as a question of the measure of damages rather than causation, and for convenience I shall so treat it in this judgment, but it must be acknowledged that it involves questions of causation." 
Subsequently, at p.444, after referring to Banque Bruxelles, his Lordship said:- "In the present case the society must prove what (if any) loss was occasioned by the arrangements which the purchasers had made with the bank." 
He continued:- "The society was told that Mr and Mrs Towers had no other indebtedness and that no second charge was contemplated. The existence of the second charge did not affect the society's security. The absence of any indebtedness to the bank would not have put money in the purchasers' pocket; it would merely have reduced their liability. Whether their liability to the bank affected their ability to make mortgage repayments to the society has yet to be established, but given the smallness of the liability its effect on the purchasers' ability to meet their obligations to the society may have been negligible. It may even be, for example, that the purchasers made no payments at all to the bank at the relevant time, and if so it is difficult to see how any part of the loss suffered by the society can be attributable to the inaccuracy of the information supplied to it by the defendant. It would have occurred even if the information had been correct." 
The factual position posited by his Lordship is very similar to that in the present case, although I have before me the actual facts, which are relevant, and which disclose that the loss would have resulted because the guarantees would not have yielded any financial satisfaction to the plaintiff.

Otton LJ said, at p.456:- "The more complex issues are whether the inaccurate information given was causative of damage, and if so what measure. To my mind it is not necessary to adopt a particular procedural path to find the answer. I appreciate that Lord Hoffmann suggests that it is first necessary to decide the kind of loss to which the plaintiff is entitled. This may be appropriate in most cases where negligence/causation is involved. From a practical point of view in some cases it may be more expedient to establish the causal link between the negligent act or omission and the reliance by the plaintiff or the course of action which he was induced to take. The Judge may find as a fact that there was no reliance or that the plaintiff would have behaved in the same or substantially the same manner if he had been given accurate information; in either event the negligence had no causative potency. That is the end of the matter. The chain is broken, there is no loss at all and there is no need to consider or determine the kind of loss." 
In my opinion, and so much was not really in issue, if the correct advice had been given by Mr Alidenes the plaintiff would have proceeded and been left with the same guarantees.

Staughton LJ, at pp.456-457, said:- "The ordinary remedy of a client who has received wrong information or advice from his solicitor is to claim damages for negligence, whether as a breach of contract or as a tort. For such a claim to give rise to substantial damages the building society would have to show that the breach of contract or negligence caused them loss." 
In Kenny & Good Pty Limited & Anor versus MGICA (1992) Limited [(1997) ALR 568], the headnote stated:- "The appellant valuers, in a negligent and misleading manner, over-valued a property over which the mortgage (sic) insurer respondent, in reliance, provided security. A proportion of the losses subsequently incurred by the respondent was due to the downturn in the property market. The question for the Court was whether the respondent was entitled to recover losses attributable to the decline in the market in addition to other losses.

The primary Judge awarded the respondent full damages and found the valuers liable both in tort and pursuant to the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)." 
In their joint judgment Wilcox, Branson and Sackville JJ observed that the trial Judge had characterised the case as a "no transaction case", i.e. one in which the transaction would not have been entered into but for the negligence of the valuers. They referred to the fact, at p.577, that the trial Judge accepted that the whole of the loss was caused by the fall of the market after the making of the advance. On the facts of that case, it being accepted that the transaction would not have been entered into at all, their Honours were of the view that the measure of damages had been correctly assessed.

They dealt with causation in terms which followed the various authorities to which I have referred and, at pp.588-589, they considered, although expressly stating that one should be cautious in laying down "hard and fast rules for the assessment of damages", several general propositions relevant to the case before them. This was done, I readily acknowledge, in relation to the assessment of damages under [s.82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). However, there is no real, if any, difference between the method of assessing those damages and the assessment of damages for negligence. Their Honours said:- "* A person induced to enter a transaction by misrepresentations, generally speaking, must show that the losses claimed are related to the misrepresentation. It is not enough simply to show that the transaction was induced by the representation and the losses would not have occurred but for the transaction. The loss must flow directly from the inducement.
 * Where property acquired in a transaction induced by misrepresentation subsequently declines in value, damages are not awarded in respect of that decline if it is attributable to an independent, extrinsic or supervening cause. * If the applicant would have entered into the relevant transaction, even if the misrepresentation had not been made, any losses flowing from the transaction as such cannot be said to flow directly from the inducement. In such a case the applicant would have been exposed, in any event, to the precise risk that ultimately eventuated." 
Special leave to appeal from this decision has been granted by the High Court.

In Saad & Anor versus Barwick & Co (Hodgson J - 5 September 1996 - unreported) there was a claim made by the plaintiffs against the defendant solicitors on the basis that they breached a duty of skill and care, in acting for the plaintiffs as borrowers, by failing to ensure that there was no conflict of interests in the transactions and to explain adequately to the plaintiffs the legal effect of what they were doing. It was alleged against the solicitors that by that failure the plaintiffs became liable for more than that for which they believed they were making themselves liable and suffered damage. The solicitors acknowledged they were under a duty of skill and care, denied that they had breached it, and raised questions of causation and the calculation of damages.

In the result his Honour was not satisfied that a breach of duty had been established and he went on to consider the question of causation and damages on the assumption that the defendants were in breach. In doing this his Honour considered that evidence of what a party would have done in certain circumstances would have been admissible. Accordingly, there is further authority for the proposition that the evidence of what would have occurred had Mr Alidenes drawn the problem to the attention of the plaintiff was admissible. I should repeat, in this context, that no objection was taken to the evidence in any event.

Hodgson J was not prepared to infer, on the balance of probabilities, that the transactions would not have been entered into, even if a proper explanation had been given.

His Honour observed:- "During the hearing, I suggested to Mr Cauchi that I would need evidence in submissions as to how the Saads' position would have been different if they had not entered into the 1983 transaction, and this matter was again discussed during final submissions. Ultimately, Mr Cauchi submitted that I could infer that, if the 1983 transaction had not been entered into, the matter would have come to a head much earlier than it did; and the liabilities would not have blown out to the extent that the share of those liabilities referable to the parts of the advance used by the respective parties were not covered by the securities granted by those parties. In particular, he submitted, I could infer that in 1983 the share of the total liabilities referable to amounts used for Vincent's purposes would have been covered by the securities granted by Vincent. However, Mr Cauchi did not refer me to evidence quantifying, at or around the end of 1983, the total amount then owing in respect of the amounts used for Vincent's purposes, or the value of securities then provided by Vincent; and I do not believe there is such evidence before me.

If the evidence did satisfy me that the Saads were, in the result, substantially worse off than if they had not entered into the 1983 transaction, but did not enable me to calculate how much worse off, I would have been prepared to make my best guess, allowing for the circumstance that the necessity to guess arose from lack of evidence from the plaintiff: cf my decision in Jaffers versus Chief Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco), 22/7/93 at 40-42, and the cases there cited, in particular Jones versus Schiffman <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 303] at 83." 
His Honour was of the view that the Saads were not, in the result, worse off than if they had not entered into the 1983 transaction, and he continued:- "This conclusion also reflects back on their case on causation. If, on the evidence, it does not appear that they were worse off entering into the 1983 transaction, it makes it more difficult to infer that they would not have done so. This, to some extent, counterbalances the considerations more favourable to finding causation, at least concerning Mrs Saad, in relation to the 1983 transaction." 
The Court of Appeal has reserved its judgment in this matter.

In my opinion the facts as found or conceded in the instant case, and the legal principles to which I have referred, lead inevitably to the conclusion that notwithstanding that Mr Alidenes was in breach of his duty to the plaintiff, that breach was not in a relevantly legal sense, causative of its loss.

Damages 
The Plaintiff's Loss 
In the event of my conclusion that Mr Alidenes is not liable for the plaintiff's loss being held to be wrong, I shall deal with the question of the loss allegedly sustained. I should say at the outset that the plaintiff has not satisfied me what damages, if any, it has suffered. Various calculations were put forward in this regard but, at least in the first instance, the matter can be dealt with as one of principle.

The Failure To Enforce The Mortgage Over Mrs Collins' Property 
It was submitted by Mr Pembroke that the failure of the plaintiff to sell Mrs
Collins' property at Engadine, pursuant to the powers it had under the mortgage, constituted a failure by the plaintiff to mitigate its damages. The evidence was that the value of the property at about the time the transaction was entered into was some $210,000. Neither party called any evidence as to the present worth of it. One potentially most unfortunate consequence of its not having been realised, bearing in mind that I gave my judgment on 11
February 1994 and the Court of Appeal gave its judgment on 20 December 1996, is that interest on whatever the property would have realised has continued to run. If one takes the position as from the date I gave judgment that has been a period of some four years or, from the date when the Court of Appeal gave its judgment almost two years. The only explanation as to why that property was not sold is that the Court of Appeal, apparently inconsistently with the opinion of the majority, made an order setting aside the orders for possession and dismissing the Common Law proceedings. I can only assume this was done by consent, the Short Minutes of Order containing this term having been prepared by the parties. Thus, the proper inference is that the plaintiff not only put it out of its power to mitigate its damages, but also seriously eroded if it did not completely defeat the rights under the mortgage to which Mr Alidenes would be entitled if he is ordered to pay the plaintiff the damages it seeks.

I consider that the plaintiff failed to mitigate its damages both in relation to the recovery of the principal amount, which it would have received, and in relation to the amount of interest it claims on that amount. Prima facie the onus is on the defendant to establish a failure to mitigate. Mr Alidenes sought to do that by pointing to the valuation of the premises as at the date of the transaction; by asserting that I should infer that the value has, in all probability, increased since about March 1989; and by submitting that the only reason advanced at an evidentiary level for the failure to sell was that the plaintiff was relying on its action against Mr Alidenes, rather than enforcing its rights against Mrs Collins. In my opinion, that evidence was sufficient to discharge the onus, which Mr Alidenes carried. No attempt was made, in re-examination, to explain why that course had been taken, nor was any other evidence called on the matter. However, in my opinion, the evidence was the antithesis of the obligation to mitigate. It amounted to nothing more nor less than a statement that the obligation to mitigate had not been undertaken, or, perhaps, had been abandoned. The relevant orders of the Court of Appeal reinforce this view. I should add that whilst Mr Cashion referred to the fact that orders had been made in the Common Law Division possession proceedings, he did not seek to adduce any evidence as to why they had been set aside by the Court of Appeal, nor to submit from that that there was no failure to mitigate. I also consider it relevant that Mr Lawless stated in
Exhibit C, paragraph 16, that instructions had been given to pursue the Common
Law proceedings.

The plaintiff, of course, must prove what its damages are. It has produced various figures which do not, for the reasons to which I have referred, take into account the value of Mrs Collins' property nor calculations of interest based upon the receipt of that value. Once the failure to mitigate is established, the plaintiff has, at least in the circumstances of this case, failed to prove its damages. There could be little doubt that the plaintiff must have been aware of this obligation. At p.88 of my reasons I dealt, albeit shortly, with the claim for damages against Mr Alidenes in the following terms:- "The plaintiff's claim against the eighth defendant has succeeded in so far as it has established a breach of retainer but on the evidence before me the damages are nominal. I say this because there is no evidence either that the plaintiff after enforcing its other rights will suffer a shortfall, or that the trusts have any further assets. I award damages in the sum of One dollar. The claim based on negligence fails as no damage has been proved." 
Cole JA, relevantly for present purposes, dealt with the matter thus:- "The sum which the Bank would be entitled to recover against Mr Alidenes could not exceed the amount advanced less the value of moneys repaid and assets realised or otherwise valued for damages calculation purposes with interest adjustments.

Mr Alidenes contended that the Bank bore the onus of proving its loss in its claim against him and has not done so. Further, it had not called any evidence regarding the course it would have adopted had it known the trusts were not entitled to provide guarantees and thus it could not be assumed that the Bank would not have proceeded with the transaction. Further the Bank had not called evidence to establish the consequence of Mr Alidenes' negligence, namely, the assets within the trusts to which recourse may have been had and, presumably, the assets Mr and Mrs Collins and Mr and Mrs Wallis other than the realty mortgaged may have had available under the guarantees." 
It no doubt was in the light of these submissions that his Honour continued:- "With some hesitation and reluctance I have come to the view that the orders of Rolfe J in relation to the damages payable by Mr Alidenes to the Bank should be set aside and the matter remitted to the Commercial Division for further determination." 
I have quoted these passages to demonstrate that both the Court of Appeal and
I had pointed out deficiencies in the plaintiff's attempt to prove its damages against Mr Alidenes, and Cole JA had further suggested the appropriate amount, including not only assets realised but assets "otherwise valued". These statements pointed clearly to the need to mitigate the loss. Against this background I find it incredible that the plaintiff failed to mitigate its damages or prove that the mitigation would have involved it in difficult and complex litigation. Indeed Mr Cashion submitted that Mr Alidenes should not be allowed to raise mitigation at all as it had not been pleaded. Mr Alidenes denied damage. The whole of the present proceedings were concerned with that issue. Cole JA had made clear that the damages could not exceed an amount, which obviously contemplated mitigation. Mr Pembroke's written submission, albeit delivered on the morning of the hearing, raised the failure to mitigate. In all the circumstances I am of the view that Mr Alidenes was entitled to rely on the failure to mitigate. Mr Cashion did not seek an adjournment to enable him to meet this case.

I stress the word "prove" because Mr Cashion made certain submissions, to which I shall refer in due course, that any attempt to enforce the mortgage against Mrs Collins would have involved the plaintiff in complex and difficult litigation. In the light of what he acknowledged had happened I do not see how this submission could have been made. The plaintiff had an order for possession. It only lost it because it apparently consented to its being set aside. In any event, there was no evidence to found the submissions, and I was asked to infer, from my knowledge of the litigation, that any such litigation would have had those consequences.

In my opinion, as I expressed in my original judgment, the onus is on the plaintiff to prove its damages and, in this case, with particularity. In JLW v Tsiloglou <case>; [[1994] 1 VR 237], at p.241, Brooking J said:- "A plaintiff cannot recover substantial as opposed to nominal damages unless he proves both the fact and the amount of damage: The Commonwealth versus Amann Aviation Pty Limited .. If he proves the fact of the loss but does not call the necessary evidence as to its amount it cannot be awarded substantial damages (McGregor on Damages, 14th Edition pp.190 and 222): he must put the tribunal in the position of being able to quantify in money the damage he has suffered: Watts versus Rake .. It is often said that the amount of damage must be proved with certainty, but this only means as much `certainty' as is reasonable in the circumstances: Ratcliffe versus Evans .. Where precise evidence is obtainable, the Court naturally expects to have it; where it is not, the Court must do the best it can: Biggin & Co versus Permanit Limited .. But while in some cases guesswork may be permissible in assessing damages, in others it is not." 
His Honour went on to say that it depended on the circumstances. In the circumstances of the present case there was an obvious security against which the plaintiff could seek to recover some of its loss. It was, in my opinion, under an obligation to do so. Initially it sought to discharge that obligation, but ultimately it declined, in the way to which I have referred, to do so. It offered no explanation for this. Those failures mean that it has not established, nor has it sought to establish the amount by which, at any particular date, the principal indebtedness would have been reduced by virtue of a sale. From that, as I have said, it follows that it has not established the principal sum on which interest could be awarded.

Mr Pembroke, in this regard, also referred to the decisions in Enzed
Holdings Pty Limited versus Wynthea Pty Limited <case>; [(1984) 57 ALR 167]; Winning Appliances Pty Limited versus Dean Appliance Pty
Limited (Federal Court of Australia - Moore J - 22 August 1995 - unreported) and James versus Gain (New South Wales Court of Appeal - Gleeson CJ, Powell and
Beazley JJA - 26 February 1998 - unreported), and State Bank of New South
Wales versus Yee [(1994) 33 NSWLR 618.] 
At p.637, in the last-mentioned case, Giles J said:- "For the Bank, it was said that the hearing was conducted on the basis that it had suffered some loss, the exact quantum of which would be determined later. For Mr Yee, it was said that the Bank had accepted that it had to prove some loss and, having chosen the wrong way of doing so (expectation loss rather than reliance loss), had failed in that which it was required to do and should not have a second chance.

In a sense, both are right. Although there was an attempt at separation of quantum from liability, in truth (in the present case) there could not be a realistic separation. In order to know whether the recoverable loss exceeded the recoveries so that there was damage to complete the cause of action, the recoverable loss had to be known. The attempt at separation obscured the task which the parties should have addressed and, with the benefit of hindsight, the attempt at separation has produced a situation which, so far as appears, nobody anticipated at the time." 
Of course, in the present case there was no such problem. It was one confined to the amount of damages, if any, that Mr Alidenes is obliged to pay to the plaintiff. The plaintiff has had since at least 20 December 1996, when the
Court of Appeal gave its judgment, to prepare that case. It produced various evidence as to damage, but it simply failed to address the issues thrown up by the matters to which I have referred.

In the result I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has proved its damages.
Nor do I consider that this is a case in which it would be appropriate for me to make the best assessment I can of them. It would be grossly unfair, in my opinion, to Mr Alidenes, having regard to the history of this matter, for me to undertake that task.

Mr Cashion submitted that the plaintiff, in mitigating its damages, is not obliged to engage in complex or difficult litigation. There is no doubt about that principle: Pilkington versus Wood [[1953] Ch 770]; Segenhoe
Limited versus Akins [(1990) 29 NSWLR 569] and
Energy & Resource Conservation Company Pty Limited (In Liquidation) & Ors versus Abigroup Contractors Pty Limited & Ors (Rolfe J - 18 March - unreported).

The question which arises is what those difficulties may have been, particularly in the light of the fact that there was an order of the Court for possession. Mr Cashion submitted that in the proceedings before me the relief claimed against Mrs Collins was pursuant to the guarantee, which was found to be unenforceable, and that in those circumstances she may, if proceedings were taken to enforce the mortgage, seek to assert there was an estoppel by virtue of the Anshun principle; to raise issues concerning the validity of the mortgage; and to question, either pursuant to the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) or the general law, whether she was bound by the mortgage. One may accept, as a matter of possibility, that some such defences could have been raised.
However, there is not a skerrick of evidence to support the submissions, and they do not accord with the obtaining of the order for possession. The circumstances in which that was set aside no doubt would give rise to its own problem, but that was solely of the plaintiff's own making and for which it offered no explanation. The unfairness to Mr Alidenes of seeking damages, in these circumstances, is obvious. He may well be deprived through the unexplained, but apparently voluntary, acts of the plaintiff of any effective right of subrogation to the mortgage. Rather the evidence of Mr Lawless that reliance was being placed upon the claim against Mr Alidenes would lead to the inference that no proper regard was paid to his potential interests under the mortgage given by Mrs Collins.

A question was also raised in relation to a possible stay granted in favour of
Mrs Collins. I required the parties to furnish me with certified copies of the judgments, i.e. the documents reflecting the orders of the Court. My judgment made no reference to the mortgages, and the only stay I granted was for a period of twenty eight days from 19 May 1994. I had expressly found that each of the mortgages, including that given by Mrs Collins, was enforceable "in accordance with" its terms "... and the plaintiff is entitled to succeed on its claim under those documents and to have appropriate orders".

In relation to Mrs Collins I said:- "In so far as this may be necessary I would grant a stay of proceedings against the plaintiff exercising any rights against the seventh defendant, until the seventh defendant has had the opportunity of enforcing her judgment against the solicitors the proceeds of which, I anticipate, she will use to discharge her obligations to the plaintiff." 
The parties have not provided to me any evidence that I was asked to or did make an order granting such a stay.

The majority of the Court of Appeal, as I have said, considered that the mortgages were enforceable. Beazley JA considered they were not, and her
Honour noted, at the conclusion of her judgment:- "Mrs Collins also seeks an order that the orders made by the Court on 19 May 1994, in proceedings number 50051 of 1993, be set aside. Those proceedings were brought by St George seeking possession of the Engadine property. His Honour's judgment records that orders were made in that matter in accordance with the Short Minutes of Order brought in by the parties. The Short Minutes of Order were not part of the appeal papers. An examination of the Court file reveals that the Orders in the Short Minutes included judgment for possession and leave to issue a Writ of Possession. The file also reveals that a Writ of Possession was issued on 4 July 1994. If the writ has not been executed, I would propose a further order that orders made in proceedings number 50051 of 1993 be set aside." 
This makes it abundantly clear that as from at least July 1994 the plaintiff had issued a Writ of Possession in respect of Mrs Collins' property. However, her Honour was in the minority on this point, and, in any event there was no stay preventing the plaintiff exercising its power of sale at any time after May 1994.

There are various documents, which purport to be Short Minutes of Order brought in conformably with the Court of Appeal's request. The only order which appears to have been entered is that ordered on 7 March 1997 and entered on 14 August 1997. That provided, in paragraph 8, that the orders made on 19
May 1994 in proceedings 50051 of 1993 be set aside. There is a document dated March 1997, which it is agreed bears the initials of Cole JA, being Short
Minutes of Order brought in by the parties in the appeal as between Mrs
Collins and the first respondent. This sets out that the orders made on 19 May in proceedings 50051 of 1993 be set aside and that the Summons be dismissed with costs. Why this order was made has not been explained. By that
I mean that there is nothing in the judgment of the majority, which it reflects, the majority approach being stated thus by Cole JA at p.28:- "Each of the guarantors was thus released from their guarantee but not from their mortgage." 
I can only assume the plaintiff consented to forego the rights it had established.

The point of all this is that the plaintiff had an enforceable right against
Mrs Collins to possession of the property which, for some reason which does not accord with the majority judgments in the Court of Appeal, it gave up. I have not been assisted by any evidence as to why this course was adopted.
However, the fact that the orders have been made without any reference by Mrs
Collins to setting aside the mortgage, would indicate, prima facie, that there was no intention on her part to take that course. Beazley JA came to the conclusion that that was the appropriate course because of the view she took of the relationship between the guarantees and the mortgages.

However, even if one approached the question of mitigation without reference to the Common Law proceedings, the orders made in them and the setting aside of those orders, I would still have been satisfied by Mr Alidenes that the failure by the plaintiff to attempt to realise the security over Mrs Collins' property was a failure by it to take reasonable steps to mitigate.

Interest 
If it had become appropriate to calculate interest, then, in my opinion, that must be done on the basis that the plaintiff, at all material times, had sufficient money to make loans without having to have recourse to the moneys it was unable to recover from the borrower and the guarantors in the present case. Accordingly, it did not lose any contractual interest and, in those circumstances, it is only entitled to interest, if at all, on the basis of the rate provided from time to time pursuant to the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).

I also note a submission by Mr Pembroke that any damages must be discounted because had the money been lent out again there was a prospect that the borrowers would have defaulted. 
Costs By Way Of Damages 
It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that Mr Alidenes should pay its costs of the proceedings at first instance and on the appeal, by way of damages. In Appeal No 40353 of 1994 the Court of Appeal ordered the plaintiff to pay the appellant's costs of the Commercial Division proceedings, at first instance, and the costs of the cross-defendant to the second cross claim. It also ordered the plaintiff to pay that appellant's costs of the appeal.

In the appeal brought by Mrs Collins against the plaintiff in the proceedings in the Commercial Division No 50051 of 1993, it ordered the plaintiff to pay her costs of those proceedings, and to pay to the cross-defendant to the second cross-claim its costs of that cross-claim. It further ordered that the plaintiff pay Mrs Collins' costs of that appeal.

The reason these orders were made, essentially, was because the Court of
Appeal was of the view that the guarantees were not enforceable. The reason for that was the breach by Mr Alidenes. I appreciate that there was also an appeal by Mr Willis against my findings that he and his partners were liable to Mrs Collins, which was successful. It is obvious from the reasons of the
Court of Appeal that that was a substantial issue on the hearing of the appeal. On no reasonable view was it a matter brought about by the conduct of
Mr Alidenes.

In all the circumstances it seems to me that the plaintiff should have sought an order from the Court of Appeal that, in so far as it was obliged to pay costs that were consequential on the breach by Mr Alidenes, he should indemnify it against those costs. A moment's reflection would have indicated that was the appropriate application to make. That would have provided the
Court of Appeal with the opportunity of considering the submissions and making an order for costs, if it saw fit to do so. It may have well required that
Court to consider what, if any, loss the plaintiff had suffered by not having enforceable guarantees. I make these observations in the context that obviously the parties brought in Short Minutes of Order some time after the
Court of Appeal's judgment was delivered and when, presumably, they had had ample time to consider the ramifications of it. No such application was made.

In my opinion the plaintiff's claim for damages by way of costs must fail, as a matter of principle. I gathered what I understand to be the relevant authorities in Energy & Resource Conservation Company: viz Ritchie v
British Insulated Callender's Cables (Aust) Pty Limited & Ors [(1960) 77
WN 299]; Hobartville Stud Pty Limited versus Union Insurance Co
Limited [(1991) 25 NSWLR 358]; and
Cachia versus Hanes & Anor <case>; [(1993-1994) 179 CLR 403.] I also referred to what was said by Kirby P in Walton versus McBride [(1995) 36
NSWLR 440.] 
In the first two authorities to which I referred Manning J and Giles J respectively made clear that costs could not be recovered by way of damages.

I was also referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Underwriters at Lloyds & Ors versus Ellis & Ors (Court of Appeal - 25 February 1998 - unreported). Powell JA, with whom Meagher and Handley JJA agreed, referred to the various authorities and said:- "The rule does not preclude recovery as damages of costs of proceedings against third parties." 
However, it is clear that this exception is confined to separate proceedings, which a party has been required to undertake in order to establish a right on the basis of which the further proceedings are taken: McGregor on Damages (16th Edition) pp.508-511 and The "Tiburon" [1992] 2 LLR 26. At p.28
Parker LJ said:- "Mr Clark's submission is that if there had been a separate action against the underwriters in which the plaintiffs had been ordered to pay the costs of the underwriters, and a subsequent action against the brokers, he would have been entitled to claim as damages, first, the costs which he had been ordered to pay to the successful underwriters and, secondly, the costs that he had himself incurred in pursuing them unsuccessfully. I do not contest that that is so. But that would be a case which was within O.62 r3(2). Mr Clark submits that the rules cannot deprive him of his right to damages under those two heads.

In my judgment there is no question of him being deprived of his right to damages under those two heads. The first is incontestable and raises no question on this appeal. As to the second, it appears to me that the discretion which the Judge undoubtedly had over all the costs of the proceedings should be so exercised as to produce the same result as would be achieved if there had been a separate action." 
As Mr Pembroke submitted the relevant Order finds it counterpart in Part 52 rule 8 of the Supreme Court Rules, which provides:- "Subject to this Part, a party to proceedings in the Court shall not be entitled to recover any costs of or incidental to the proceedings from any other party to the proceedings except under an order of the Court." 
Accordingly the proper course for the plaintiff to have taken was either to seek an order from the Court of Appeal in relation to costs against Mr
Alidenes or, alternatively, have that matter remitted for decision by the
Commercial Division, if the Court of Appeal was minded to take that course.
The attempt to obtain the costs by way of damages is inconsistent with principle and the Rules.

In his written submissions, Mr Cashion submitted that the plaintiff was entitled to various costs as part of its damages upon the basis that they were losses, which it suffered "as a result of a reasonable attempt on its part to mitigate its loss by attempting to enforce the guarantees". The point which, in my opinion, the submission overlooks is that the reason why the plaintiff was not successful was because of the breach by Mr Alidenes. The position, therefore, cried out for the seeking of a special costs order against Mr
Alidenes. Further the proceedings against the borrower and guarantors were not properly seen at that stage as "mitigation of loss proceedings" qua another potentially liable party, viz Mr Alidenes, but as proceedings for the recovery of a debt.

Mr Cashion accepted the basic principles for which the authorities to which I have referred stand. He submitted that the true principle was that one party to proceedings cannot, under the guise of damages, recover from another party to the proceedings more costs than the Court has ordered that other party to pay to the first. He continued that the authorities do not preclude the recovery by way of damages of losses simply because they take the form of costs of proceedings against other defendants whether in the same or different proceedings. I do not accept this submission. In my opinion, there was adequate scope in the proceedings to seek an order for costs against Mr
Alidenes in proceedings the plaintiff had amended to join him as a defendant.
Part 52 rule 8 expressly so provides. It would, in all these circumstances, be contravening established principles to allow costs to be recovered by way of damages.

Mr Cashion submitted that the remitter left open the question of costs generally. I do not agree. The Court of Appeal has remitted the assessment of damages, not any general question of costs. I accept that implied in that I should determine the costs of the assessment of damages. I do not consider the remitter goes any further.

Contributory Negligence 
Mr Alidenes raised a further question, namely that the failure by the plaintiff to comply with prudent commercial lending practices constituted contributory negligence on its part, and that any damages which it suffered should be reduced by at least seventy five per cent by virtue thereof. The written submissions shall remain with the papers and I do not propose to repeat them. Suffice to say that there are a number of instances in which Mr
Lawless agreed that he did not comply either with the plaintiff's lending guidelines or prudent lending commercial practices in recommending this transaction. The fact that subsequently Mr McBride and Mr Buchan-Ford approved the transaction is not, in the circumstances, relevant, because they relied, essentially, on Mr Lawless' consideration of the matter. I am satisfied, for the reasons set out in the written submissions, that that evaluation was flawed in material respects, and Mr McBride made clear, in relation to the working capital ratio, that he would have required further information.

The essential submission made by Mr Cashion, in this regard, was that Mr
Alidenes had failed to call any expert evidence to show that what Mr Lawless did departed from prudent commercial lending practice. In my opinion this was quite unnecessary because it was accepted, and in any event the evidence established it, that Mr Lawless was an experienced credit lending officer. In so far as Mr Lawless conceded, which I consider he did in the manners set forth in paragraphs 2 to 11, that he had either not complied with the guidelines or, in so far as there was any difference, with prudent commercial lending practice, I am satisfied that he, and hence the plaintiff, was guilty of contributory negligence. Once the concessions were made by Mr Lawless there was simply no need for Mr Alidenes to call any further evidence on that.

In my opinion the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence to a quite substantial extent. Had the matters of concern been raised then that may have led to a very different evaluation of the loan application. Whether those matters could have been overcome by the borrowers is something which has to be weighed in the balance. Doing the best I can on the available evidence I would assess the degree of contributory negligence at fifty per cent.
 [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) 
The claim under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) was not abandoned. However, in my opinion, it must fail because the plaintiff has not proved any damages.

Orders 
The Court of Appeal set aside my order that Mr Alidenes pay the plaintiff the sum of $1 with no order as to costs. For the reasons I have stated I consider that whilst Mr Alidenes breached his retainer no loss flowed from that, and, in the absence of proof of damages, the claim in negligence must fail.
Although the plaintiff is entitled to this very limited success, I do not consider that the costs order I made originally remains appropriate. The claim for damages has been fought on far more wide ranging issues and, in my opinion, to all intents and purposes, Mr Alidenes has been successful. In these circumstances he should have his costs of the issue remitted to the
Commercial Division.

I order that:- 
The eighth defendant pay the plaintiff nominal damages in the sum of $1.00.

The plaintiff's claim for damages otherwise be dismissed.

The plaintiff pay the eighth defendant's costs of the issue remitted by the Court of Appeal to the Commercial Division.

The exhibits be returned at the expiration of twenty eight (28) days unless within that time an appeal against this decision has been brought.
 * * * 
