

B versus K Matter No 3892/98 [1998] NSWSC 437 (24 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 October 1998 
B versus K /98 September 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT The plaintiff and the first defendant are the parents of the child M born on 23 November 1997. On 22 July 1998 the second defendant, the Director General of the Department of Community Services, made an application under section 57 of the Children (Care and Protection) Act to the Children's Court for an order under s.72 of that Act in respect of the child. 
It appears that on 19 August 1998 the third defendant, a Magistrate of the
Children's Court, made an order directing the Director General to file an assessment report under s.74 of the Act. On 26 August 1998 the Magistrate apparently varied her direction so that it became a direction that the
Director General file a s.74 report, if the Director General was seeking orders under s.72(1)(c)(ii) or (iii), by a particular date, that is by 30
September 1998.

By the summons in these proceedings filed on 11 September 1998, the plaintiff seeks the following orders: . A declaration that the defendant Magistrate of the Children's Court does not have power to order preparation of a report by the Director-General, Department of Community Services for the purposes of s.74 [Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/).
 . An order in the nature of mandamus directing the Third Defendant to vacate existing filing directions then to set fresh filing directions in relation to establishment only.
 . An order in the nature of mandamus directing that the Magistrate assigned to hear the matter hear the matter in accordance with law.
 . An order quashing the order made by the Defendant Magistrate dated 19/8/98 and 26/8/98 requiring the Director-General, Department of Community Services to prepare a report pursuant to s.74 of the [Children (Care and Protection) Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/).

LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS 
The case raises questions which relate to various sections under the [Children (Care and Protection) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/), namely ss.10, 55, 70, 72, 73, 74 and 76, and also under [Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s17.html) of the [Children (Care and Protection) Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/). Those provisions are as follows: (1) For the purposes of this Act, a child is in need of care if: adequate provision is not being made, or is likely not to be made, for the child's care, the child is being, or is likely to be, abused, or there is a substantial and presently irretrievable breakdown in the relationship between the child and one or more of the child's parents.

Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), a child who is residing in a non-Government children's home is in need of care: if the child has been residing in the home for a period of 12 months or more, and if there has been no substantial contact during that period between the child and: any of the child's parents, or any person in whose care the child was immediately before the child began residing in the home.

Without limiting the generality of subsection (1), a child is in need of care if: the child is under the age of 6 months, and the child is in the care of a person who is fostering the child in contravention of [section 42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s42.html), and it appears that the person may continue to foster the child in contravention of that section.
 . The objects of this Part are to ensure that children in need of care are provided with assistance and supportive services, the provision of that assistance and those services being based on the premises that: the welfare and interests of children are to be given paramount consideration, children are entitled to special protection and to opportunities and facilities to enable them to develop physically, mentally, morally, spiritually and socially in a healthy and normal manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity, children, for the full and harmonious development of their personalities, need love and understanding and, towards that end, should, wherever possible, grow up in the care and under the responsibility of their parents, but if that is not possible, in an environment of affectation and moral and material security and, in the case of children of tender years, should not, except in exceptional circumstances, be separated from their parents, continuing contact between children and their parents should be encouraged in situations where, pursuant to legal proceedings, children have been separated from their parents, children should be protected against all forms of neglect, cruelty and exploitation, responsibility for the welfare of children belongs primarily to their parents, but if not fulfilled devolves upon the community, and except in exceptional circumstances or pursuant to legal proceedings, there should be no interruption of relationships between children and their parents contrary to the wishes of children and their parents. (1) Proceedings under this Part shall be conducted with as little formality and legal technicality and form as the circumstances of the case permit.

Proceedings under this Part are not criminal proceedings, but an order shall not be made under [section 72(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s72.html) or (c) in respect of a child unless the Children's Court is satisfied that it is very highly probable that the child is in need of care.

In any proceedings under this Part, the Children's Court is not bound by the rules of evidence but may, subject to [section 71](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s71.html), consider any statement, document, information or matter that may, in its opinion, assist it in relation to the proceedings, whether or not the statement, document, information or matter would be admissible in accordance with those rules.
 (1) If a care application is made with respect to a child, the Children's Court shall inquire into the matter and: if it is not satisfied that the child is in need of care, it shall make an order dismissing the application, if it is satisfied that the child is in need of care: it may make an order accepting such undertakings (given by a person responsible for the child) as it thinks fit with respect to the care of the child, it may make an order accepting such undertakings (given by the child) as it thinks fit with respect to the child's conduct, or it may make an order accepting undertakings referred to in both subparagraph (i) and subparagraph (ii), or if it is satisfied that the child is in need of care and that the making of an order under this paragraph is likely to result in a significant improvement in the standard of care being given to the child: it may make an order placing the child under the supervision of an officer (whether or not on the giving of undertakings referred to in paragraph (b)(i) or (ii) or both), where a suitable person is willing to have the custody of the child - it may make an order placing the child in the custody of that person (whether or not on the giving of undertakings referred to in paragraph (b)(i) or (ii) or both), or it may make an order declaring the child to be a ward under this Act, for such period expiring on or before the day on which the child attains the age of 18 years as it thinks fit.

In considering a care application in respect of a child, the Children's Court shall have regard to: the need to protect the welfare of the child, the views of the child, the importance of encouraging continuing contract between the child and the persons responsible for the child, the importance of preserving the particular cultural environment of the child, the practicability of services and facilities being provided to the child without the need for the making of an order under subsection (1)(b) or (c), and the objects of this Part.

The Children's Court may make an order under subsection (1)(b) or (c) in respect of a child even though the child is not then in need of care if the Children's Court is satisfied that: the child was in need of care when the circumstances that gave rise to the relevant care application occurred or existed, and the child would be in need of care but for the existence of arrangements for the care of the child made under [section 62](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s62.html) or [77](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s77.html).

An undertaking referred to in subsection (1) shall be in writing signed by the person giving it and shall remain in force for such period (expiring on or before the day on which the child attains the age of 18 years) as may be specified in the undertaking.

The Children's Court shall cause a copy of any undertaking referred to in subsection (1) to be served on the person giving it.

If the Children's Court makes an order under subsection (1)(c), it shall cause a copy of the order to be forwarded to the Director-General.

If: an order is made with respect to a child under subsection (1)(c)(ii), the person in whose custody the child is placed by the order is the principal officer of a private fostering agency, and no undertakings of the kind referred to in subsection (1)(b)(i) were given by the principal officer on the making of the order, the principal officer may place the child in the care of another person.
 (1) An order shall not be made under [section 72(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s72.html) in respect of a child unless: a child is under the age of 16 years, and the Children's Court is satisfied that the exercise of its power under [section 72(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s72.html) would be wholly insufficient to meet the child's need for care.

An order shall not be made under [section 72(1)(c)(iii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s72.html) in respect of a child unless the Children's Court is satisfied that the exercise of its power under a preceding subparagraph of that paragraph would be wholly insufficient to meet the child's need for care.

If the Children's Court is of the opinion that a child the subject of a care application has been brought up substantially in accordance with a particular culture or is regarded as belonging to a particular cultural group, the Children's Court shall not, unless the child has expressed a wish to the contrary, make an order under [section 72(1)(c)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s72.html) unless it has taken into account the practicability of making an order under that subparagraph placing the child in the custody of a person belonging to that cultural group.

The Children's Court shall not make an order under [section 72(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s72.html) in respect of a child if the order would be inconsistent with any order in relation to the child made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction with respect to the custody and guardianship of children.
 (1) The Children's Court shall not make an order under [section 72(1)(c)(ii)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s72.html) or (iii) unless: the Director-General has tendered to the Children's Court an assessment report, prepared in accordance with the regulations, with respect to the child, the Director-General has caused copies of the report to be given to the child (being a child who is of or above the age of 10 years) and to any other person appearing in the proceedings, and the Children's Court has taken into account the matters contained in the report and any submissions made in relation to those matters by the persons referred to in paragraph (b).

Such a report shall include, in relation to any case in respect of which the Children's Court has determined that a conflict of cultural factors exists, such advice as is appropriate to enable the Children's Court to make an appropriate order in relation to the child.

Nothing in this section requires a copy of the whole or any part of an assessment report to be given to a child or to any other person appearing in the proceedings (other than a barrister or solicitor representing the child or any other such person), if, in the opinion of the Children's Court, the prejudicial effect of the child being unaware of the information contained in the whole or that part of the report is outweighed by the psychological harm that is likely to be occasioned to the child if the child becomes aware of that information.

The Children's Court may make such orders as it considers appropriate to prevent a child from becoming aware of information contained in an assessment report if it is of the opinion that the prejudicial effect of the child being unaware of that information is outweighed by the psychological harm that is likely to be occasioned to the child if the child becomes aware of that information.

A person who fails to comply with an order made under subsection (4) is guilty of an offence.
 (1) (Repealed) 
The Children's Court: shall not adjourn proceedings on a care application for a period, or for periods in the aggregate, exceeding 8 days except with the consent of: in the case of a child who is of or above the age of 10 years - the child, and each person responsible for the child, being a person who is appearing in, or is represented at, the proceedings, given after they have received advice from a barrister or solicitor instructed to advise them on the question of the adjournment, and shall not adjourn any such proceedings for a period, or for periods in the aggregate, exceeding 42 days except where it is impracticable to determine the proceedings within that period.

If, in the circumstances referred to in subsection (2)(b), the Children's Court adjourns proceedings for a period, or for periods in the aggregate, exceeding 42 days, it shall forthwith furnish to the child (if the child is of or above the age of 10 years), to the Minister and to the Attorney General a statement of the reasons for its decision.
 [Regulation 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s17.html) 
For the purposes of [section 74(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/capr1996341/s74.html) of the Act, an assessment report: is to be in such form as the Director-General may from time to time approve, and is to deal with such of the following matters as are relevant to the circumstances of the person to whom the report relates: * the person's family structure, * the person's history, development and experience, * the person's parent or parents, * the relationship between the person and his or her parent or parents, * issues of social, cultural or economic significance to the person or his or her family, * the interaction between members of the person's family and capacity to adapt or deal with circumstances affecting the family, * the range of care orders that are available to the court in respect of the person, * the resources available within the Department to administer each kind of care order in that range, and is to deal with such matters as the Children's Court may require in relation to the person to whom the report relates, and may deal with such other matters as the Director-General considers appropriate to include in the report, and may contain recommendations with respect to the care order that, in the opinion of the Director-General, is appropriate for the person to whom the report relates.

Another relevant statutory provision in [s.15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/s15.html) of the [Children's Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/), which is in the following terms: 
The Court may in relation to all matters in respect of which it has jurisdiction, make such orders, including interlocutory orders, as it thinks appropriate.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
Evidence from the plaintiff's solicitors shows that the child was removed from the care of her mother on 17 July 1998 and placed with the parents of the child's father. The proceedings in the Children's Court, which I have said were commenced on 22 July 1998, sought an order on the basis of s. 10(1)(a) and/or (b).

At the hearing before the Magistrate on 19 August 1998, the proceedings were scheduled for hearing on 19 November 1998, with a pre-trial conference to take place on 16 October 1998. The Magistrate directed that the father file his evidence on both establishment and placement, that is, on both the question whether it was appropriately shown that the child is in need of care and the question what order should be made if that was shown, on or before 4 September ; and that the Director-General file an assessment report by 30 September
It appears that on the same day, that is 19 August 1998, the child was placed with her mother, and that the child has since remained with the mother.

On 26 August 1998 the matter was re-listed before the Magistrate, primarily for the purpose of an application on behalf of the plaintiff that the
Magistrate vacate the order she had made concerning the s.74 report.

Submissions were made by the plaintiff's solicitor to the effect that the question of whether the child was in need of care was very much in contest, and that even if that were established, the parties contemplated no more than a supervision order. The plaintiff's solicitor submitted that there should be no contemplation of a s.74 report unless and until a finding had been made that the child was in need of care, and then only if the Director-General was actually seeking an order under section 72(1)(c)(ii) or (iii). By itself ordering the s.74 report, the Court had prejudged the issue.

The Magistrate then dealt with the matter in a manner set out in the transcript on page 5 line 13 to page 7 line 34, a copy of which is annexed to this judgment.

SUBMISSIONS 
Before me Mr Anderson, Counsel for the plaintiff, provided a written outline of submissions which I will leave with the papers. He submitted that it was shown by Talbot versus The Minister for Community Services [(1992) 30 NSWLR ]
and Hartington versus The Director General of the Department of Community
Services [(1993) 17 FAM LR 126] that proceedings of this kind do not involve an inquiry in which the Court may inform itself in whatever way it might consider appropriate, or in which the
Court may conduct an inquiry when the parties do not wish such inquiry to be conducted. He submitted that it followed from cases such as Talbot that a
Magistrate does not have the power to order parties to produce evidence. The proceedings are in substance civil proceedings involving parties, not an inquiry which the Court conducts independently of the parties. This was emphasised by the important role suggested for parents in s.55, pars.(c), (d) and (g) of the Act.

In cases such as this, s.70 requires the Court to be satisfied that it is very highly probable that a child is in need of care before it can proceed to consider what order should be made. In those circumstances, to order a s.74 report at this stage gave the appearance of prejudging the issue. Furthermore, the preparation of such a report was very intrusive on the parents, and so should not be contemplated until a finding that the child was in need of care was made, and even then should not be contemplated unless an order under s.72(1)(c)(ii) or (iii) was actually sought by the Director-General.

As shown by cases such as J versus Lieschke <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 447] and H versus The Children's Court [(1988) 12 FAM LR 285], natural justice had to be provided to the parties. The case of The Director-
General of the Department of Community Services versus Cook, Bruce J, unreported 1
December 1995, suggested that [s.15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/s15.html) of the [Children's Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/) may permit a court to order a psychiatrist's report when this was requested by a party; but that section does not permit a Magistrate in a case such as this to make that kind of order on his or her own motion.

Mr Sperling, the solicitor for the mother, supported Mr Anderson's submissions. He also pointed to the danger of procedural unfairness that could arise if the report was prepared in advance of a finding that the child was in need of care, and was sought to be used in support of such a finding. The prospect of significant unfairness was emphasised by the fact that, under s.74(3) of the Act, it may not be possible for the report to be shown to the parties, so that the legal advisers for the parents may not be in a position to obtain instructions from their clients as to how to deal with the report.

Mr Singleton, solicitor for the Director-General, submitted that the direction or order which had been given was in substance only an order limiting the time in which a report should be filed, if the Director-General was seeking an order under s.72(2)(c)(ii) or (iii). He submitted that the Act did not require two distinct hearings or procedures for determining the two questions posed by s.72, rather there was one case which proceeded in two stages. Section 76 of the Act showed that the Act laid great stress on matters such as this being dealt with promptly and, if at all possible, within 42 days from commencement.
In those circumstances it was perfectly appropriate for the Magistrate to give directions so that, if the Court decided that the child was in need of care, it could proceed promptly and perhaps immediately with consideration of the question what order should be made.

Mr Singleton further submitted that, even though the question did not arise in this case, [s.15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/s15.html) was wide enough to authorise the Children's Court to make orders providing for the submission of evidence on the initiative of the Court. He submitted that this was supported by Regulation 17(c), which provides that a s.74 report is to deal with such matters as the Children's Court may require. He referred to the analogy of criminal proceedings and the case of The Queen versus Apostilides <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 563], in which the High Court held it was open to a judge in a criminal case in very limited circumstances to call evidence.

He submitted that there was nothing in the Act preventing a timetable being set, and the evidence did not show that the Magistrate's discretion had miscarried in any way. In particular, it did not show that procedural unfairness was involved in the timetable set by the Magistrate.

DECISION 
In my opinion Mr Singleton's submission that the substance of what the learned
Magistrate did, by her amended order, was to limit the time within which the
Director-General should file a s.74 report, if the Director-General was seeking orders under s.72(1)(c)(ii) or (iii) in the event that the Court should be satisfied that the child was in need of care, should be accepted. I do not think there is any doubt that an order of that nature is within the power of the Court under [s.15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/s15.html) of the [Children's Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cca1987176/). On that approach to the order that was made, it is not necessary for me to decide whether or not the Court can order such a report on its own initiative, and I do not think it would be appropriate for me to decide that question.

In my opinion, the remaining question is whether what the Magistrate did involved any prejudgment of the case, or any denial of procedural fairness, or perhaps showed a probability of a future denial of procedural fairness or even perhaps a breach of the Act, which would justify the intervention of this
Court.

It was submitted for the parents, in effect, that the Act contemplates a two stage process; that there should be no question of preparation of a s.74 report until the court is satisfied that the child is in need of care; that to contemplate the preparation of such a report before then is to prejudge an issue in the case; that it is unfair that parents face the intrusive process of the preparation of a s.74 report while they are still contesting and preparing for the hearing of the first stage of the process; that there should be no contemplation of the two stages being dealt with in one hearing; and especially, there should be no possibility of a s.74 report being introduced into the first stage, particularly when that report may not be made available to parties so that the legal advisers may not be able to get instructions about such a report.

It is plain that the Act contemplates two distinct decisions before an order under s.72, other than an order dismissing the application, can be made.
First, the Court must be satisfied to the appropriate standard that the child is in need of care; and second, if the Court is so satisfied, it must then make a decision as to what order to make. The Act does not expressly say whether this must involve two separate hearings of evidence and submissions, or whether the two decisions could be made after a single hearing of evidence and submissions.

In the present case it is not necessary for me to decide that question either.
The learned Magistrate in her decision plainly contemplated that there would be what she called "an establishment hearing", that is a hearing to determine whether or not the child was in need of care, and if it was then appropriate, a placement hearing, that is a hearing as to what order should be made; and the Magistrate contemplated that, if the Court was not satisfied by the first hearing that the child was in need of care, the Court would then dismiss the application without the need to have regard to any s.74 report.

Subject to general questions of procedural fairness, it seems to me that, if a court does make a decision that a child is in need of care, there is no reason why the Court should not proceed with the placement hearing immediately after making that decision.

There is, as Mr Singleton suggested, at least a remote analogy with the situation in a criminal trial as discussed in R versus Majors [(1991) 27 NSWLR ]
at 627, particularly in a case such as this where a hearing is affected by long delays, apparently because of commitments of the legal advisers of the parties. It seems to me to be reasonable for a Magistrate to give directions with a view to the Court being able to proceed immediately to the second stage, if that becomes appropriate, and in my opinion to give such directions as was done in this case involves no prejudgment of any issues.

I do not think any actual procedural unfairness has been shown, nor do I think any likelihood of procedural unfairness requiring the intervention of this
Court has been shown. The learned Magistrate herself did not contemplate that any s.74 report would be used in the first stage. If in the event there was some attempt to introduce such a report in the first stage, then there is no reason why questions of procedural unfairness that that attempt might raise could not be properly debated before the Magistrate and dealt with by the
Magistrate.

If, because of the pendency of the establishment hearing, the parents were to decide not to participate in the preparation of a s.74 report at that stage, then it seems to me any consequences flowing from that could also be debated before the Magistrate and dealt with by the Magistrate if necessary. One could speculate as to circumstances in which there might be procedural unfairness, but it seems to me no likelihood of such unfairness is shown, and no reason to suppose that any questions that arise could not appropriately be dealt with by the Court hearing the case.

Turning to the orders sought in the summons, for reasons I have given the question raised by the first order sought does not arise, and I do not think it appropriate to determine it; so I decline to make the order sought in the first order in the summons. It follows from what I have said that I would refuse Orders 2 and 4. As far as Order 3 is concerned, it seems to me that no occasion has been shown for making such an order. So for those reasons, I propose to dismiss the summons.
 [Counsel addressed] 
I have been reminded that there was a submission that procedural unfairness was involved in the direction that the parents provide their evidence on both aspects of the case before the provision of the Director-General's report. It was put, in effect, that any evidence from the parents on that aspect should really be evidence in response to the Director-General's report. If the directions were such that the parents would be prevented from putting on any evidence in response to the Director-General's report, there would be some force in that submission. However, on the material before me, I am not satisfied that directions have been given which would prevent the parents putting on evidence in answer to the Director-General's report.

I note that the matter is set down for a pre-hearing conference a little over a month before the hearing. I have to say it would be surprising to me, if the parents on that occasion indicated a wish to put on material in response to a report provided by the Director-General, that they should then be prevented from doing so. In essence, I would regard this matter in a similar way to other matters raised, namely, it is conceivable that procedural unfairness could arise, but at this stage no probability of procedural unfairness is shown; and I do not see any reason to believe that the matter would not be dealt with in a fair way by the Magistrate when the question arises.
 [Counsel addressed on costs] 
The Director-General has applied for an order for costs. That has been opposed partly on the ground of the nature of the proceedings, that is both the proceedings in respect of which the application was brought and the application itself, and partly on the basis that the parents are legally aided. I do not think the last mentioned consideration is a matter I should treat as relevant. However, I think it is relevant that it is extremely rare for the Children's Court to make any costs orders in relation to proceedings of the nature of the Children's Court proceedings, and that costs orders in those proceedings are generally made only if there is thought to be some misconduct by a party. The application in this case was not an unreasonable one; and I think in all the circumstances it is reasonable for the Court to apply that approach to this application and to make no order as to costs.

I dismiss the summons.

I make no order as to costs.
 
I certify this and the preceding fourteen pages to be a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Justice D.H. Hodgson 
Date 2nd October 1998 
Associate * * * 
