

R versus HART [2006] NSWSC 1501 (7 July 2006) 
Last Updated: 10 November 2008 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: R versus HART <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2005/857  
HEARING DATE{S): 5 July 2006  
EX TEMPORE DATE: 07/07/2006  
PARTIES: 
Regina 
Jay HART  
JUDGMENT OF: Hulme J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Crown: Mr McLennan 
Applicant: Mr Dawson  
SOLICITORS: 
S Kavanagh 
N/A  
CATCHWORDS:  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
I consent to the publication by the Australian Broadcasting Commission in the course of its series Australian Story publishing and broadcasting the names of
Evelyn Greenup, Clinton Speedy-Duroux and Colleen Walker, such consent to extend to any rebroadcasting of that programme.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HULME J /857 
Friday, 7 July 2006 
REGINA versus JAY HART 
Application by Australian Broadcasting Commission 
JUDGMENT HULME J: This is an application by the Australian Broadcasting
Commission for the Court's consent under <case>(b) of the Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act for the publication of the names of three children mentioned in criminal proceedings in this court.
 The Director of Public Prosecutions was served with notice of the application and indicated that it raised no objection to it. No other person was served and although at one stage I thought Mr Hart should be, ultimately I was persuaded that that was not required.
 So far as is presently relevant, <case> of the Act provides: "(1) The name of any of the following persons must not be published or broadcast in a way that connects the person with the criminal proceedings concerned: any person who: appears as a witness before a court in any criminal proceedings, or to whom any criminal proceedings relate, and was a child when the offence to which the proceedings relate was committed, ...

Subsection (1) does not prohibit: the publication or broadcasting of an official report of the proceedings of a court that includes the name of any person the publication or broadcasting of which would otherwise be prohibited by subsection (1), or the publication or broadcasting of the name of a person: in the case of a person who is a child under the age of 16 years at the time of publication or broadcasting with the consent of the court concerned, or in the case of a person who is of or above the age of 16 years at the time of publication or broadcasting with the consent of the person, or the publication or broadcasting of the name of a person who has been convicted of a serious indictable offence, if the publication or broadcasting is authorised by a court under subsection (4B).

The consent of the court referred to in subsection (4)(b)(i) shall not be given except with the concurrence of the child or (if the child is incapable of giving concurrence) where the court is of the opinion that the public interest so requires.

A court that sentences a person on conviction for a serious children's indictable offence may, by order made at the time of sentencing, authorise the publication or broadcasting of the name of the person (whether or not the person consents or concurs).

A court is not to make an order referred to in subsection (4B) unless it is satisfied: that the making of such an order is in the interests of justice, and that the prejudice to the person arising from the publication or broadcasting of the person's name in accordance with such an order does not outweigh those interests." Some issues of interpretation or construction of subsection (4) and (4A) arise. I am informed that the researches of counsel have not revealed any prior authorities that may be of assistance.
 Subsection 4(b) talks of persons in two categories, one where the person is a child under the age of 16 at the time of publication, the second where the person is of or above the age of 16 at that time. The words of the subsection indicate that prima facie it is talking of persons who are alive at the relevant time.
 Subsection (4A) envisages that a child under the age of 16 may give concurrence to his or her name being mentioned but then goes on to consider a situation where a child is incapable of giving concurrence. That could obviously occur for a number of reasons; the child might be too young for any apparent concurrence to be binding, or it could have a mental illness. I mention but two examples.
 However, a third possible situation, and probably the most likely, is where the child is dead and, considering subsection (4A) in isolation I would infer that it was intended to encompass that situation. Does subsection 4 in prima facie talking of persons who are alive at the relevant time, compel a different conclusion? In my view it does not.
 Section 11 is obviously primarily directed to the protection of children from publicity. It may be inferred that Parliament considered that such publicity might be adverse or have a deleterious effect on them, although the inclusion of subsection (1)(a) makes it clear that this cannot have been the only harm that Parliament had in mind. Given that the prohibition which subsection (1)(a) effects does not seem limited to living children, there is no reason in logic for the exception in subsection (4) not to extend also as far. When one adds to this that subsection (4A) is clearly wide enough to encompass the Court giving consent in the case of someone who is deceased, the conclusion at which I have arrived is that subsection (4) should also be construed so as to extend to persons who are deceased at the relevant time.
 The second question is as to the operation of the words in subsection (4A), "where the court is of the opinion that the public interest so requires". It was submitted on behalf of the Australian Broadcasting Commission that they should be interpreted as "where the court is of the opinion that to consent is in, or will serve, the public interest." However, it does not seem to me that the words can be read down to this extent.
 Subsection (4C), dealing with the question of whether the Court should make an order consenting to the name of someone convicted of a serious children's indictable offence, provides that such an order should only be made when it "is in the interests of justice".
 The difference in the formulation of the two just quoted passages has, in my view, to be regarded as of some significance. Ignoring for present purposes the difference between "interests of justice" and "public interest", it seems to me that the use of the words "so requires" imposes a more demanding test than that contended for by counsel for the Australian Broadcasting Commission.
No clear guidance is provided as to how the test "the public interest so requires" is to be applied, although it is relevant to bear in mind that in the case of a child who has attained 16 years at the time of publication all that is required is the consent of that person, a circumstance which suggests that it is the potential for detriment to be suffered by that person which is probably the most relevant or weighty factor.
 In this case the children whose names the plaintiff wishes to publish all come from one community at Bowraville in northern New South Wales. Two of them were probably murdered. Criminal proceedings in that regard were brought against Mr Jay Hart but in two separate trials he was found not guilty. The third child disappeared and no body has ever been found, thus clearly raising the possibility that that child also was murdered.
 The context in which this application is made is that the ABC desires to publish a programme dealing with the deaths as one of the episodes in its series of Australian Story. The application is supported by a sister of one of the children, the mother and aunt of a second and a sister-in-law and a father of the third. A brother, whose apparent consent was given pursuant to a power of attorney by one of the other signatories, may also be supporting the application. All of these persons have signed or had signed on their behalf a letter to that effect.
 That said, it is proper to recognise that the letters are all in the same form and one may infer drafted on behalf of the plaintiff. Each says inter alia, "It is my hope that the programme may help a satisfactory outcome to be reached and justice be done for the memories of the deceased children." If there was no other evidence which really tended to establish that publication of the childrens' names is in the public interest nevertheless it takes no great imagination to so conclude once one has regard to nothing more than the seriousness of the apparent offences of murder and to the fact that the children all came from the same community. It is clear that the children whose names are sought to be mentioned can suffer no detriment from the programme.
 In these circumstances the conclusion at which I have arrived is that the test the public interest so requires is satisfied. Accordingly, I consent to the publication by the Australian Broadcasting Commission in the course of its series Australian Story publishing and broadcasting the names of Evelyn
Greenup, Clinton Speedy-Duroux and Colleen Walker, such consent to extend to any rebroadcasting of that programme.  
LAST UPDATED: 10/11/2008 * * * 
