

Kelly Byrne by her tutor Keryn Byrne versus Lawrence Byrne Matter No 14520/84 [1998] NSWSC 194 (22 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
KELLY G BYRNE by her tutor KERYN G BYRNE versus LAWRENCE G BYRNE /84 May 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced in 1984. The plaintiff suffered injury in a motor vehicle accident when she was three years of age. She brings a claim for damages arising out of that injury. It is not an accident to which the Motor Accidents Act, 1988 applies. 
The parties are litigating the questions of liability and quantum. At the outset, there was not much common ground between them. The progress of the hearing saw a narrowing of issues and the emergence of some consensus.

The plaintiff was born on 27 March 1977 (she is now 21 years of age). The accident occurred on 9 April 1980.

The plaintiff was a back-seat passenger. She had been placed in a booster seat positioned near the centre of the back-seat section of the vehicle. She had a lap-sash seat-belt which was being worn at the time. Her parents occupied the bucket seats in the front of the vehicle, with her father driving the vehicle.

The vehicle (there was evidence elicited from the defendant that it was a Ford
Falcon) was travelling between Lithgow and Mudgee. The plaintiff's father was then a Minister of Religion (Seventh Day Adventist) and they were proceeding to Mudgee where he was to give a public lecture. The accident took place in or about Ilford.

Both the plaintiff and her father were rendered unconscious in the accident.
The evidence contains a version of it given by her mother. In chief, she said:- "Q. What happened? 
A. On the way Lawrie and I talked, as we all did, in the car. Kelly liked sitting in the middle of the back so she could see right through rather than having to bend her neck, that's why she sat there. I presumed she fell to the side, I'm not sure, she was quiet at the time of the accident.

Q. Did something direct your attention? 
A. We were just coming into Ilford and Kelly made a noise.

Q. What happened when she made a noise? 
A. I had started to turn round and being 20 weeks pregnant and quite large,
Lawrie said, `You hold the steering wheel and I'll turn round and fix Kelly' and I went to hold the steering wheel as Kelly made another noise and instead of, I didn't take hold of the steering wheel, I turned round to see Kelly and the car went straight ahead instead of being steered, down a water ditch about feet deep and straight into the telegraph pole.

Q. Do you remember that sequence of events or is it something you reconstructed from the car accident? 
A. No, I remember I was conscious the whole time.

Q. When the car hit the telegraph pole what was the immediate result that you observed? 
A. There was a funny sort of, prior to that there was a funny sort of quiet sensation and then there was a very loud bang and total silence." 
The accident occurred in circumstances where there was no other traffic. Mr
Byrne could have slowed down and/or pulled over and stopped the car. It was said that they were not in a hurry.

Mrs Byrne suffered injury and was unable to move. The three of them were taken to Mudgee District Hospital. Mrs Byrne did not become aware of the injury of the plaintiff until sometime later.

The plaintiff suffered injuries to the skull, small bowel and left femur. The injuries to the small bowel and femur have resolved without any problems. It is claimed that the head injury has left her with, inter alia, brain damage, scarring and behavioural problems. Also, she has little use of her right arm.
It is claimed that the head injury has reduced her capacity from that of being superior to that of being average. It is said that, but for the accident, she would have completed tertiary education and become employed in the professional area earning a salary in the range of $50-60,000 per annum. It is claimed that she is unemployable and has a continuing need for care (involving both domestic assistance and supervisory care). It is said that she needs care for six hours for six days and for eight hours on one day. This formulation of the care claim was made on the first day of the hearing.

The plaintiff remained in a coma for about five weeks. She was first transferred to Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children. Later, she was transferred to Sydney Adventist Hospital.

She has undergone procedures and has had various treatment and therapy. She continues to take medication. She is currently receiving treatment.

There have been behavioural changes since the accident. The plaintiff was seen to be aggressive, withdrawn and unco-operative. She has rage attacks. She has fits which were later diagnosed as epileptic. She has memory problems. She has difficulty making friends. There is an abnormal need for personal contact (described as "tuddles"). She has mood swings. There is depression. She has suicidal thoughts. She sleeps excessively.

There was a separation between the parents (for about five years during the period 1986-1990). In more recent times, they have been "reunited".

Past care has been provided by the parents (mainly the mother). It seems that father and daughter "have some difficulties". Mrs Byrne proposes to provide future care for as long as she can.

There is evidence that the plaintiff had early menstruation. There is evidence that she has been sexually active since about the age of 9 years. There is some evidence to suggest that this situation may be related to the accident.
It was not a matter agitated during submissions.

She commenced her schooling in 1983. She completed her schooling in 1995. She obtained her HSC. Her TER was in the bottom 15%.

In 1995, she completed a part-time nanny course and later commenced employment as a nanny. Her work performance was unsatisfactory and the employment came to an end. In 1997, she became a trainee enrolled nurse studying at the
Meadowbank TAFE and working at the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. She obtained her qualifications. Her employment was terminated as she was not able to cope with the work. Since then, she has not worked. At the moment, she is doing some part-time courses (at the Art Gallery and University).

This is one of those cases in which the credibility of one witness assumes importance. I have closely observed the demeanour of the witnesses during the giving of evidence. In assessing credibility, I have had regard to both demeanour and evidence.

Counsel for the defendant has informed the Court that, if it accepts the evidence on the question of liability given by Mrs Byrne, then that is an end to the dispute as to negligence on the part of the defendant. Her version clearly involves a want of attention and exercise of proper control over the vehicle which was causative of the damage suffered by the plaintiff. The Court was urged to reject her version and find that the plaintiff had failed to discharge the onus of proving negligence.

Mrs Byrne may be described as the principal witness in the case. She impressed me as a witness who did her best to give honest and reliable evidence.
Largely, I accept her evidence. Mr Byrne was not an impressive witness. He said, "I think I have a strong sense of integrity". The evidence reveals a number of instances in which, at the very least, it could be said that he demonstrated a lack of candour. These included occasions when he executed documentation (inter alia, reporting the accident to his insurer and making monetary claims). It does not seem to be necessary to dwell on the matter of his credibility, as ultimately, it did not assume much importance. It suffices to say that, where there is conflict, I do not accept his evidence.

I first turn to the question of liability. This is a case which has some unusual features. Indeed, the case propounded on behalf of the plaintiff has a touch of the bizarre. On behalf of the defendant, it is said that the mother's version is simply unbelievable and that the Court could not accept that intelligent people like the mother and father would conduct themselves in the manner described by her. Counsel for the plaintiff embraces the proposition that the behaviour of both of them could be described as gross stupidity. It is said that, if the mother and father wanted to invent a story, they would have invented a simple story and not one which was so personally embarrassing.

The manner in which this litigation must be conducted throws up a somewhat unsatisfactory situation. The plaintiff's mother has brought these proceedings as tutor for the plaintiff. Her father is the person named as the defendant in the proceedings. Although the proceedings were commenced in 1984, the Court was given the task of hearing the question of liability about 18 years after the accident. Evidence is no longer available and recollection can be expected to have dimmed. The question of liability was left to be determined largely on the recollection of the only witness to the accident.

During those many years, various versions of the accident have been offered.
An analysis of the versions reveals differences and inconsistencies.

The insurer having the conduct of the proceedings on behalf of the defendant has called him as a witness. He has been cross-examined on behalf of the plaintiff. He said that he has no recollection of the accident and this evidence has not been challenged. Both the father and mother have provided versions of the accident which designates a tyre blow-out as the cause or possible cause. The mother has said in her evidence that, unequivocally, it was not the cause of the accident. The suggestion of a tyre blow-out was said to originate from statements made by a policeman from Kandos. It would seem that the police officer may have inspected the vehicle after the accident. He saw the father about four days after the accident. The father says that he told the police officer he did not know what had happened because of amnesia.
He did this even though about a day earlier, his wife had given him a version of the accident. The policeman was said to put forward the possibility of a blow-out because the rear driver's tyre had come off the rim.

The mother has said that the tyre blow-out explanation was used as an excuse and a kind of cover-up for their guilt. It was described as a lovely escape from telling people how it really happened. She said that persons close to them were always told the truth. She said that she did not give the plaintiff's solicitors instructions as to how the accident occurred. Further, she said that the concept of fault was not known to her until sometime before the earlier arbitration of these proceedings (in August 1997).

In addition to the oral evidence, the plaintiff relies on a Statement from
Ross Baines (a brother of Mrs Byrne), certain photographs (Exhibits A and B) and a Traffic Accident Information Report.

The Statement made by Mr Baines records a conversation had with his sister in
June 1980. The Statement provides evidence of a version being given to him at that time which has similarities to that given by Mrs Byrne in her oral evidence. It was not sought to cross-examine Mr Baines. No cross-examination of Mrs Byrne was directed to this matter.

Exhibit A shows the rear wheel on the driver's side of the vehicle. The tyre can be seen to have at least partly come off the rim.

The Traffic Accident Information Report describes the responsibility for the accident in the following terms:- "Accidental - No Police action. rear offside tyre and rim damaged".

It was common ground that there was no other police documentation available to the parties. No doubt, it has been destroyed by reason of the time that has elapsed since the accident. It was also common ground that the police officer who investigated and prepared the report was not available to give evidence.

The defendant has tendered documentation signed by Mr Byrne during the period -1984 (Exhibits 1-4). These documents comprise a Report of Motor Vehicle
Accident, a letter from Mr Byrne, a claim made upon the Mudgee Medical Centre and a Statement given to a GIO investigator.

The defendant looks to the possibility of a tyre blow-out as an explanation for the vehicle leaving the road and colliding with the telegraph pole. There is no evidence to suggest that the tyre was frayed or was otherwise than intact. It was merely seen to be partly off the rim after the accident. This is consistent with what can be seen from Exhibit A. There is no evidence to suggest that the car itself went out of control. There is no expert evidence to assist the Court on the matter. In my view, the evidence falls well short of showing that a tyre blow-out was the cause of the accident. Indeed, it falls short of showing that it can be seriously entertained as a possible explanation.

Whilst there is material which arouses a sense of unease, the Court must determine the case on the evidence placed before it. It provides the Court with a difficult task and I have only come to a decision after considerable reflection. On the balance of probabilities, I find that immediately prior to the accident, when the car was travelling at a speed of about 80km/h on a public road in or about Ilford, both parents had turned their attention from the roadway to the plaintiff whilst the steering wheel was not kept under control. As a result, the vehicle left the road and ultimately hit a telegraph pole. It was the driver's responsibility to ensure that a proper lookout was maintained and that proper control was exercised over the vehicle. I should add that, even if the Court had taken the course of disregarding the mother's evidence, the remaining material would have justified the Court reaching the view that the accident was caused by the defendant's negligence (Davis v
Bunn <case>; [(1936-7) 56 CLR 246).] In the circumstances, I find that the defendant has been guilty of negligence.

I now turn to quantum. By agreement, the out of pocket expenses have been assessed in the sum of $14,535.36. The defendant has already paid most of this sum, in an amount of $13,323.76. The Court has been informed that the plaintiff has earned the sum of $16,770 net from employment since the accident. There seems to be no dispute about this amount.

Both parties have tendered medical reports. Other documentation has been placed before the Court. Dr Bell has given supplementary oral evidence and has been cross-examined.

It is not a case where there is any need to analyse the medical reports. It became common ground that there is no significant medical issue between the parties. The reports did see the emergence of a conflicting view as to whether or not brain damage could cause early dementia. It is now common ground that this matter can be disregarded for the purposes of assessing the plaintiff's damages.

At the end of the evidence, the areas really in dispute then seemed to be of a limited nature. There was no issue that the plaintiff has suffered brain damage (it has been described as diffuse cerebral impairment, with bilateral frontal lobe involvement). She has behavioural, personality and emotional problems consistent with frontal lobe syndrome (including emotional lability, proneness to severe depression, poor social judgment and deficits in planning, organisation and self-monitoring). It may be that, prior to the accident, her intellectual capacity was in the high average range. It now appears to be towards the lower end of the average range. She has an awareness of her post accident situation and evinces extreme frustration in the circumstances. In addition to these problems, she has the physical loss of most of the use of her naturally dominant right hand. She has a life expectancy of about 61 years.

Her problems have rendered her largely unemployable. She does have some minimal residual working capacity. It is limited to the performance of simple tasks. Any employment that she may obtain would probably be only of short duration. Her prospects of obtaining employment will diminish with time. There has been past economic loss. There will be future economic loss. She has a need for care. Provision has to be made for both the past and the future. She will continue to need treatment and medication.

The assessment of damages in this case is also a difficult task. In many respects, the process requires arbitrary determination. Counsel have prepared written schedules of damages. These schedules merely highlight the enormity of the task confronting the Court. The range thrown up by the respective assessments is huge.

The plaintiff claims $350,000 for general damages. The defendant says that only $200,000 should be allowed. In the circumstances of this case, it seems to me that the proper figure is $250,000.

There is a claim for interest on that part of the general damages allowed for the past. I allow the sum of $39,600 ($110,000 x 2% x 18 years).

There is a claim for past and future medical expenses. As I have said, agreement has been reached as to the past in the sum of $14,535.36. There is dispute as to the future. The plaintiff claims $92,935 and the defendant is prepared to allow $10,000.

The plaintiff has been receiving psychiatric services. It seems that she has counselling with Dr Cameron about once a fortnight or once every three weeks.
Dr Cameron has prepared a report dated 14 April 1998. It expresses her views on the question of the possibility of any need for further treatment. Largely,
Dr Bell was prepared to go along with whatever Dr Cameron thought was necessary. A significant component of the claim for future medical expenses is for the cost of psychiatric services into the future ($82,935). There is a real issue as to whether or not the plaintiff will persist with these services. Dr Bell was of the view that she would not continue with them. There is evidence that she has been pretty resistant to going to anyone for help.
The extent to which she will continue with further services that she may need is a large imponderable.

Again, the Court can only make some arbitrary assessment. Doing the best that can be done in the circumstances, I assess this head of damage in the sum of $20,000.

It is agreed that past economic loss should be allowed in the sum of $10,000.
This figure takes into account matters such as interest and actual past earnings.

As to the future, initially the plaintiff and the defendant were well apart.
Ultimately, a consensus emerged and, by consent, the Court was asked to allow the sum of $530,000 for the loss of future earning capacity.

Associated with the claim for economic loss, is a claim for loss of superannuation. In the light of the consensus reached on the question of economic loss, the plaintiff reduced her claim for loss of superannuation to $138,000 (from $170,000). The defendant maintains the view that only the sum of $70,000 should be allowed for this head of damage. In dealing with this head of damage, it may be helpful to look at the approach taken by the parties in making their calculations for economic loss.

The plaintiff's calculations were founded on a report prepared by Mr
Weatherly. The calculations were made on the basis that the plaintiff would have worked until the age of 65 years. The Court was told that it took into account the residual earning capacity which the plaintiff retained and that she would probably pursue a tertiary education.

The defendant's calculations were made having regard to the average weekly earnings for females in New South Wales and the fact that she would have only worked until 60 years of age.

It may also be helpful to look also at how the parties viewed the compromise reached between them. The plaintiff saw it as reflecting an entitlement to recover more than average weekly earnings by a person that had acquired tertiary qualifications.

The plaintiff's calculations are founded on a report provided by Furzer
Crestani Services. These calculations have been made on the basis of certain specified assumptions. Counsel for the defendant concedes that his client's figure reflects no more than what Counsel sees as being reasonable in the circumstances.

In assessing a claim for loss of superannuation, there are various factors which may have to be taken into account. Without seeking to be exhaustive, I shall mention some of them. The plaintiff may have obtained some professional status. A member of a profession is often self-employed. Whatever her vocation may have been, there is always the possibility of some form of self- employment. This is a head of damage which has its own imponderables. It cannot be treated as simply a mathematical exercise. There is necessarily some imprecision.

Again, it is necessary for the Court to make a somewhat arbitrary decision.
Doing the best that I can in the circumstances, I allow the sum of $100,000 for loss of superannuation.

As to past care, the plaintiff now claims $566,534.27 (there is now a return to the original quantification). As to future care, the plaintiff claims $1,386,422. The defendant is prepared to allow $172,340 for the past and $471,808 for the future. There is a claim for interest on the amount allowed for past care.

This head of damage was the subject of brief oral submissions during the hearing. I expressed some concern at the level of the assistance being given particularly in the light of the magnitude of the claim and the enormity of the dispute between the parties. The parties took the opportunity to supplement them by further submissions in writing. The written submissions from the plaintiff saw a change of position. There was the reversion to the original quantification for past care and the introduction of the claim for interest on the amount allowed.

The claim is brought pursuant to the Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer doctrine (to recover damages for services rendered gratuitously by relatives). The doctrine was the subject of further explanation in Van Gervan versus Fenton <case>; [(1992) 66 ALJR 828.] 
The gulf between the parties is enormous. There are differences as to the estimates of time required for the performance of services. There are differences as to the rate of charge to be applied. The task of assessment imposed on the Court is invidious. As is generally the case in claims of this nature, there are unsatisfactory aspects to the evidence. The task itself is by nature usually imprecise. It is conceded that it is to some degree artificial. The result may have to be an arbitrary one. The material is short on the guidance that could have been provided by reliable expert evidence.

The plaintiff's claim was conducted on the basis that the care would be provided by her mother (at least for as long as she was able to provide those services). What should happen in the event that her capacity to provide services came to an end was not really pursued. The case relies on material provided by her mother (including evidence as to time spent in providing physical and emotional services) together with such support as may be gathered from Dr Bell's evidence (whilst he gave it some support, his evidence revealed that he did not regard the question as really falling within his field of expertise). The material provided by Mrs Byrne in substance provides, inter alia, her estimate of the time expended in doing the things that she does for the plaintiff. I bear in mind that her estimate was that of a mother providing services for her daughter. Her estimate may not necessarily equate to that which would be regarded in all circumstances as being reasonable. There is some material provided by Dial-An-Angel but it is not really apposite to the claim that is now being put on behalf of the plaintiff. The defendant has not placed any evidence before the Court on the question of the need for services.
There is no dispute that there is a need for services (including domestic assistance and supervision). The dispute is limited to the extent of that need ("the amount and cost of the care").

The recoverable damages are measured by the reasonable cost (the market cost) of the services required to satisfy the need brought about by the defendant's tort. The task for the Court includes the identification of the services that are required to satisfy that need and the value of those services.

At best, the time estimates provided by Mrs Byrne provide a rough guide. The level of services has varied according to the plaintiff's need for care. In the past, the need has varied according to the circumstances in which she was placed from time to time. There has been a stabilisation of the required level. However, in the future, variation can still be expected. The calculations are pitched a little higher than the evidence upon which they are based. The services have an emotional component and there may be some overlapping.

There seems to be a competitive market for the providing of care services. The defendant's calculations are founded on the rates charged by Macquarie Nursing
Service. The plaintiff has put in evidence the rates charged by Dial-An-Angel.
The plaintiff's claim is founded on these rates. The plaintiff has also put forward a figure of $1,236,726 for future care. This figure represents a compromise between the competing rates. I am not satisfied that the Court should prefer the more expensive Dial-An-Angel rates to those charged by
Macquarie Nursing Services.

Doing the best that can be done in the circumstances, I allow the sum of $370,000 for past care and the sum of $900,000 for future care.

As I understand the position, the law as it presently stands requires me to allow an interest component on the sum allowed for past care. If the parties are unable to reach agreement as to the sum to be allowed, I will assess a figure.

The sum total of the previously mentioned heads of damage is $2,234,135.36 (excluding the amount to be allowed for interest in respect to past care).
There is also a claim for fund management costs. Hopefully, the amount of this head of damage can be resolved by the parties and the Court can then enter judgment for the plaintiff.
 * * * 
