

Kent versus Derrick Matter No 12430/98 [1998] NSWSC 619 (23 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 December 1998 
IAN WAYNE KENT versus DALE DERRICK /98 November 1998 
David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This matter comes before the court as a stated case from a Magistrate sitting in Moree, Mr Christopher Bone. 
On 21 May 1998 an application was made on behalf of Mr Kent (the plaintiff) to adjourn the matter which was listed before Mr Bone for hearing that day. The claim had been commenced in the Dubbo Local Court by way of statement of liquidated claim. The plaintiff alleged that on 19 August 1996 he was driving a lorry along the Newell Highway at Boggabilla when he collided with cattle owned by the defendant, Mr Dale Derrick.

The plaintiff alleged that the collision occurred because of the negligence of the defendant. He claimed the cost of the repairs of his lorry, the loss of fuel amounting to $22,352.15, as well as loss of income of $4,102.80.

A defence was filed on behalf of Mr Derrick in which he acknowledged that he was the owner of the cattle. However, he maintained that the collision was caused through the negligence of the plaintiff. Liability was therefore denied. The defendant, moreover, filed a notice of cross-claim. He sought $4,735.28, being the value of eighteen animals which were lost as a result of the collision.

As mentioned already, and for reasons which I will shortly describe, the plaintiff sought an adjournment of the matter when it came before Mr Bone on May 1998. The defendants refused to consent to that adjournment. The learned Magistrate, having heard argument from a person who appeared on behalf of the plaintiff, and from Ms Collins, who appeared on behalf of the defendant, refused the adjournment. The matter proceeded in the absence of the plaintiff, and indeed in the absence of any representative of the plaintiff.

The learned Magistrate entered a verdict for the defendant on the plaintiff's action. He entered a verdict for the defendant on the cross action in the sum of $4,735.28, together with interest and costs.

The issue identified in the stated case is expressed in these terms: "The matter to be determined by the Supreme Court of New South Wales is whether my determination to refuse the plaintiff's application for adjournment and my subsequent determination to hear the case on an ex parte basis entered a judgment for the defendant on the claim and cross-claim were erroneous in point of law." 
I should set out the section of the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/) which was relevant to the issue which His Worship was obliged to determine. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s75.html) is in these terms: "75(1) The court may on such terms as to costs or otherwise from time to time adjourn proceedings before it as it sees fit." 
Written submissions were prepared on behalf of the respondent/defendant which identified the precise issue which this court is obliged to consider in these terms: "To successfully appeal from a judgment involving the exercise of a discretion the appellant must establish the following propositions: the Magistrate acted on incorrect principles of law; that the Magistrate failed to take into account relevant considerations; that the Magistrate made some error of fact; that the Magistrate reached a result that was plainly unreasonable or unjust." 
These propositions, however, are alternatives. They reflect the principle emerging from the well-known case of House versus R <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] per Dixon, Evatt and McTeirnan JJ at 504, 505.

Before dealing with the reasons provided by the learned Magistrate in the stated case, for the decision that he made, it may be helpful to set out the chronology of events relating to this litigation.

The accident which gave rise to the litigation occurred, as I have said, on 19
August 1996. On 27 August 1997 proceedings by way of liquidated claim were commenced by the plaintiff in the Dubbo Local Court. One gathers that the plaintiff lives in Dubbo, and the solicitors who commenced that action on his behalf likewise come from Dubbo.

On 31 October 1997 a defence was filed on behalf of the defendant together with a cross-claim.

On 3 December 1997, upon the application of the defendant, the matter was transferred from the Dubbo Local Court to the Moree Local Court.

On 16 January 1998 a certificate of readiness was filed.

On 2 March 1998 the matter was called over in Moree and a hearing was fixed for 21 May 1998.

Some time in April 1998 the plaintiff served upon the defendant's solicitors a notice to admit facts, and to admit the authenticity of certain documents.

On 17 April 1998 the defendant, through his solicitors, responded to that notice. Both the facts and the documents were notified as matters in dispute.

On 12 May 1998, that is a little under ten days from the hearing, the plaintiff notified the defendant that it no longer claimed the loss of income which formed part of the original claim. In other words, the plaintiff sought the cost of the repairs and the loss of fuel, totalling $22,352.15.

It seems plain enough that, as at that date, the plaintiff intended to prosecute his claim, and was preparing to do so.

However, on 18 May 1998 the plaintiff became aware that a witness whom he intended to call on the issue of damages would be unavailable. The witness came from Dubbo. The hearing of course was fixed for Moree on 21 May. The witness had apparently provided a quote concerning the cost of repairs to the vehicle sometime shortly after the accident occurred, that is to say sometime in 1996. The plaintiff had provided notice to the defendant that an update of that quote would be furnished at some point. However, no update was ever provided. The repairs were apparently never undertaken.

The witness who became unavailable was apparently embroiled in problems of his own. They were said to be in the nature of matrimonial difficulties, arising from the departure of his wife for Sydney, leaving him with a child. This witness had not been subpoenaed by the plaintiff. However, he had apparently given an assurance that he would be there, which he later countermanded, once his own difficulties arose. He indicated that, even were he to be served with a subpoena, he would not attend.

In these circumstances the solicitors for the plaintiff sought agreement from the defendant's solicitors as to quantum. Had there been agreement, there would have been no need to call the person who was no longer available.
However, the defendants would not agree. One can well understand why the defendants chose to disagree, the repairs having not been undertaken.

The next day, that is 19 May 1998, it is said that the plaintiff's solicitors notified the defendant's solicitors that they would be seeking an adjournment by reason of the unavailability of their witness. The defendant's solicitors refused to consent to that adjournment. They also indicated that they would be filing amended grounds of defence, alleging contributory negligence on the part of the plaintiff. It appears that later the same day, although the timing is uncertain, the solicitors for the plaintiff instructed an agent in
Narrabri, a Mr Johnson, solicitor, to attend upon the Magistrate, who was then sitting in Narrabri, and foreshadow the plaintiff's application for an adjournment of the case then listed two days hence.

The Magistrate naturally could not entertain that application in the absence of the defendant, or his representative. However, he indicated that, should the defendant consent to the adjournment, he would consider the application the next day, that is 20 May, in Narrabri. That invitation, however, was not taken up by the plaintiff.

On 20 May 1998, being the day following Mr Johnson's application in Narrabri, the defendant duly served the grounds of defence alleging contributory negligence as it had foreshadowed. An amended response to the notice to admit was also served. In the amended response the authenticity of the quote was admitted, but no admission was made on quantum.

On 21 May 1998 the matter was listed for hearing in Moree before the learned
Magistrate. The defendant was present, both personally, and through his solicitor, who had come from Goondiwindi, and through counsel, Ms Collins, who had come from Sydney. The plaintiff, however, was not present. Nor was the plaintiff's solicitor. However, the plaintiff's solicitor had arranged for Mr
Pearson, whom one gathers is a solicitor at Moree, to appear on their behalf.
Mr Pearson made an application for an adjournment. The matters were put before the Magistrate as set out in the stated case. Mr Pearson drew to the court's attention the various matters emerging from the chronology above. He indicated that the witness who had provided the quotation could not come to court, and the plaintiff was therefore not in a position to prove his case, there being no admission as to quantum. He outlined the various steps which the plaintiff had taken to secure the consent of the defendant to an adjournment, and the failure to obtain that consent.

In circumstances where it was apparent that the defendant had come to court with three witnesses, he questioned the need for that expense, given the nature of the application which had been foreshadowed. He also drew attention to the amended grounds of defence which had only been served a day or so before.

Ms Collins, on behalf of the defendant, responded with a number of arguments.
First she drew attention to the fact that the repairs had not been carried out, and the promised update of the quotation had not been provided. Secondly, she drew attention to the absence of subpoena to secure the attendance of the mechanic, and the fact that her client was ready, willing and anxious to proceed having arranged for his witnesses to be present, and having arranged for counsel to come from Sydney. She commented upon the absence of the plaintiff, which she characterised as an attempt to force the court's hand in respect of the application for adjournment. She said that the amended grounds of defence raised no new issue. The issues between the plaintiff and the defendant, so far as the accident was concerned, emerged clearly from the competing cases on the plaintiff's claim and the defendant's cross-claim. It was in these circumstances that the learned Magistrate refused to grant the adjournment, and proceeded to hear the defendant's response to the plaintiff's claim and his cross-claim ex parte.

In the stated case the learned Magistrate provided his reasons for taking that course. He identified the test which he was obliged to consider in these terms: "Whether justice can be done to both parties by granting the application, but making an appropriate order for costs." 
He identified as a relevant consideration the disruption of a court's business by the adjournment referring to the judgment of Gleeson CJ in State
Pollution Control Commission versus Australian Iron & Steel [(1992) 29 NSWLR ]
where his Honour said this: "The courts of this state are overloaded with business and their workload has over a number of years increased at a greater rate than any increase in resources made available to them. The inevitable consequence has been delay.
This in turn has brought an increase in responsibility on the part of judges to have regard in controlling their lists. The interests of the community and of litigants in cases awaiting hearing and not merely to the concerns of the parties in the instant case. The days have gone when the courts would automatically grant an adjournment of a case simply because both parties consent to that course or when a decision to grant or refuse an adjournment sought by one party is made solely by reference to the question of whether the other party can adequately be compensated in costs." 
The learned Magistrate also felt that the absence of the plaintiff, his counsel and solicitor had pre-empted a partial hearing of a case. Had they been present, he could have given consideration to dealing with the matter, as far as could be done, and then adjourning the matter, on a part heard basis, to take the evidence of the mechanic on a later occasion.

He was also concerned by the absence of any subpoena upon the witness who had refused to attend. In his words: "Had he been served with a subpoena he may have given information to the court about his predicament, whereas I had received only a third hand version of this predicament." 
Moreover the Magistrate felt uneasy about the evidence to be given by this witness, given the failure of the plaintiff, notwithstanding his promise, to provide an update of the quotation. For all these reasons the learned
Magistrate refused the adjournment, and proceeded to hear the case ex parte.

The appellant complains that His Worship was wrong in law for a number of reasons. First, it is suggested that the decision in State Pollution
Control Commission versus Australian Iron & Steel only has application to a criminal prosecution. The matters raised by the Chief Justice should not be a consideration in litigation between parties in a civil matter.

The argument was that in a criminal case, such as the prosecution by the State
Pollution Control Commission, the community had a vested interest in the matter proceeding to determination with dispatch. However, in a civil case, where parties are seeking to litigate a particular issue, there is no such interest.

Secondly, though His Worship may have enunciated the correct test, nonetheless the discretion had plainly miscarried because the Magistrate had, by his decision, ensured that justice could not be done to the plaintiff's claim, he being absent to present that claim.

Dealing with these arguments, it seems to me that the first ground of objection to His Worship's decision cannot be sustained. First, as a matter of commonsense, and leaving aside authority, there is an interest in the community in ensuring that court time is used efficiently. That interest may not be as great as in the case of a criminal matter, where other considerations come into play. However, there is that interest. The loss of court time must be a consideration, in my view, that the Magistrate was obliged to consider, as he did on this occasion.

Secondly, looking at the matter in terms of authority, the principles as enunciated by the majority of the High Court in Sali versus SPC Limited and Anor <case>; [(1993) 116 ALR 625] are in these terms at p 628 (per Brennan, Dean and McHugh JJ): "In Maxwell versus Keun the English Court of Appeal held that although an appellant court will be slow to interfere with the discretion of a trial judge to refuse an adjournment it will do so if the refusal will result in a denial of justice to the applicant and the adjournment will not result in any injustice to any other party. That proposition has since become firmly established and has been applied by appellant courts on many occasions.
Moreover the judgment of Atkin LJ in Maxwell has also been taken to establish a further proposition, an adjournment which if refused would result in a serious injustice to the applicant should only be refused if that is the only way that justice can be done to another party in the action. However, both propositions were formulated when court lists were not as congested as they are today and the concept of case management had not developed into a sophisticated art it has now become.

In determining whether to grant an adjournment the judge of a busy court is entitled to consider the effect of an adjournment on court resources and the competing claims by litigants in other cases awaiting hearing in the court as well as the interests of the parties. As Dean J pointed out in Squire v
Rogers this, `May require knowledge of the working of the existing system of the particular court or judge and the importance in the proper working of the system of adherence to dates fixed for hearing.' What might be perceived as an injustice to a party when considered only in the context of an action between parties may not be so when considered in a context which includes the claims of other litigants and the public interest in achieving a most efficient use of court resources." 
That passage, when speaking of case management, and using the terms which it does, appears to have in mind civil proceedings, as much as criminal proceedings. That, in my belief, is entirely appropriate. Hence, I do not detect any error in principle by His Worship, and would not uphold the appeal upon the first ground.

I turn then to the second matter, and that is whether, in the circumstances which confronted the learned Magistrate, it can be said that his discretion miscarried when he refused to adjourn the proceedings, and thereafter proceeded to hear the matter ex parte.

A number of matters suggest that an adjournment was appropriate. First, the problem which beset the presentation of the plaintiff's case emerged very shortly before the hearing. As indicated already, it is clear that less than ten days before the hearing, the plaintiff was preparing for that hearing, and apparently anxious to proceed.

In this respect the circumstances which confronted the court were rather different from the circumstances which confronted the Land and Environment
Court when the matter came before Cripps J in State Pollution Control
Commission versus Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd. In that case there were certain rules which required one party to give notice to another party of intention to lead further evidence. It appears that there had been a failure to comply with those provisions. That failure was material in the difficulties which ultimately developed, which caused that party to then make application for an adjournment in order that they could cure those difficulties. In other words, there is the difference between that case, and the case which I am considering. The problem that the plaintiff had, in the present case, was not of his own making, and was late in its arrival.

In Sali versus SPC Limited the grounds for the adjournment were flimsy indeed. It appears that the Queens Counsel of the party's choice was not available. One party sought a date when he would be available. One can well understand why a court would refuse, in those circumstances, to give an adjournment.

Secondly, the Magistrate in this case was concerned with the waste of court's time. For the reasons I have given, I believe he was correct to be so concerned. However, even had the matter proceeded part heard on 21 May, it would have required further time to be set aside to take the evidence on quantum in order to do justice to the plaintiff's claim. In other words, two court days at least, in part, would have been occupied with the claim. On the other hand, the parties were confident, apparently, that the case could be completed in one day were all evidence called on that day. Hence if the matter were adjourned to a day suitable to the parties, and to the missing witness, one could reasonably predict that it would be completed at that time. That is not to say that some time may not have been sacrificed on 21 May. This is not a case in which days had been set aside for the hearing of the matter.

The third matter relates to the failure of the plaintiff to appear, and the failure of his solicitors to appear. It was suggested in argument by Mr Berry, counsel for the appellant, that their failure, which presumably was based upon an assumption that an adjournment would be given, was "casual". Casual, it seems to me, is perhaps too polite a word. It was discourteous, more especially in circumstances of the crisis, as it developed on 21 May. When the matter proceeded, it was first dealt with at approximately 11.30 am. It was then fixed for 2.00 pm, and there being no appearance for the plaintiff, proceeded at that time.

Were this a Sydney court, one may be inclined to treat the matter rather differently than the way in which I believe was appropriate in the circumstances of this case. The plaintiff was from Dubbo. His solicitor was from Dubbo. The case had been set down in Dubbo, although eventually transferred to Moree. Moree is apparently three hours by road from Dubbo.
There were difficulties, therefore, in the plaintiff and/or his solicitor attending at short notice. The solicitors had attempted to have the matter adjourned, first, by securing the agreement of the defendant's solicitors, as to which they were unsuccessful, and then by somewhat ineptly having the matter mentioned in the absence of the defendant before the Magistrate at
Narrabri. Ultimately the plaintiff's solicitors had arranged for an agent to deal with the matter on their behalf in Moree on 21 May, apparently assuming that an adjournment would be given, no doubt, with costs being awarded against the plaintiff.

The fourth matter was this, without the plaintiff's version on the facts it was almost inevitable, and certainly likely, that the defendant would succeed on the cross-claim, and that the plaintiff would fail in his action. It would be very difficult to do justice to the plaintiff's claim in his absence, and in the absence of evidence in support of that claim. Consequently it was apparent that, or it ought to have been apparent, that, if the adjournment were refused, and the matter permitted to proceed, then there could be no consideration of the plaintiff's claim, or his defence to the cross-claim.

Finally, the stated case does not suggest that there was any prejudice to the defendant which could not have been cured by costs. Ms Collins, on behalf of the defendant, did not suggest that there was prejudice that could not have been cured by an award of costs against the plaintiff.

In these circumstances, notwithstanding the waste of some court time, and notwithstanding the casual nature of the conduct of the plaintiff's solicitors, which may even have been legitimately characterised by the learned
Magistrate as discourtesy, it seemed to me that justice demanded that the matter be adjourned in order to enable the plaintiff to present his case, including his defence to the cross-claim. The plaintiff would clearly be responsible for the costs thrown away, including the costs of the solicitor coming from Goondiwindi, the costs of counsel coming from Sydney, and the costs of the defendant and his witnesses. Nonetheless, it seems to me that the application of the test which the learned Magistrate correctly identified made it appropriate, in the circumstances, to grant the adjournment upon that basis, and subject to costs.

For those reasons, I believe that there was an error of law. The discretion, one can infer, must have miscarried, and therefore the appeal should be allowed. The matter should be remitted to the Magistrate in order to determine the plaintiff's action and cross-claim.

The orders I make are these:
That the orders made by the learned Magistrate at the Moree Local Court on May 1998 are vacated.
That the plaintiff pay the costs thrown away by the proceedings on 21 May , including the costs of the solicitor, counsel, the defendant, and witnesses.
That the matter be remitted to the Magistrate, both the action and the cross action, to be determined according to law.
That the defendant (the respondent before me) pay the plaintiff's (the appellant before me) costs on the appeal; but that the respondent should have an Indemnity Certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
 * * * 
