

Regina versus Dominic Idato [1998] NSWSC 1023 (15 May 1998) 
REGINA versus Dominic IDATO /94 
Wednesday 22 May 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, ABADEE J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an application for leave to appeal by the prisoner, Dominic Idato, against the severity of his sentence. 
The applicant was tried in the District Court before Johnson DCJ and a jury on an indictment containing three counts of armed robbery. On 10 March 1994 the jury convicted him on two counts and acquitted him on the third.

The offences for which he was convicted occurred in December 1991 and March .

On 10 June 1994, Johnson DCJ sentenced the applicant on each count to a minimum term of six years imprisonment to be served concurrently and an additional term of two years. The sentences were ordered to date from 15 May
The applicant will be eligible for parole on 15 May 1998.

The applicant has relied upon a number of matters in support of his application for leave. He draws attention to the absence of any relevant criminal record in this country prior to the offences for which he was sentenced; to the fact that he had no criminal record in Italy prior to migrating to this country at the age of thirty-two in 1964. He also draws attention to the increased severity which his sentence has had on him because of his age, education and intelligence in comparison with the impact of the same sentence on his co-offender, Wayne Sneddon, who pleaded guilty to three counts of armed robbery, co-operated with the police and gave evidence for the
Crown against the applicant.

Wayne Sneddon pleaded guilty to three counts of armed robbery, but the applicant was convicted on only two of those counts. However, in accordance with established principles, Sneddon was entitled to a discount because of his early plea of guilty and because of the substantial assistance he gave the prosecuting authorities. He originally received a minimum term of seven years and an additional term of two years four months, which this Court reduced to six years and two years.

It will be seen, therefore, that Johnson DCJ was careful to pass sentence on the applicant which in nominal terms was the same as that imposed on his co- offender who had pleaded guilty and given evidence for the Crown.

The circumstances of the applicant's other co-offenders are not relevant and, indeed, the applicant did not rely upon those sentences as establishing any relevant disproportion with his own which might attract the intervention of this Court.

The applicant suggested that the learned sentencing judge was unaware that he had no criminal record in Italy prior to migrating to this country. However, in his remarks on sentence his Honour said that he assumed the applicant had no criminal record in Italy. He said that he accepted that apart from a minor conviction in this country in 1976, which he disregarded, the applicant had led a crime-free life.

He also referred to the applicant's education in Italy, including the Higher
School Certificate and his training in radio-calligraphy in connection with his service in the Italian Navy and his subsequent employment in this country by the Overseas Telecommunication Commission. In these circumstances, it is clear that his Honour could not have overlooked the applicant's intelligence and higher education. His Honour stated in his remarks on sentence that the applicant was then aged sixty-two and his appearance in the dock must have served as a constant reminder that the applicant was not a young man and that prison might therefore be harder for him than for someone like Sneddon, who was very much younger.

The learned sentencing judge recommended that the prisoner serve his sentence at the Malabar Training Centre so that he could continue with his education programme and his writing. Unfortunately, it appears that by reason of the length of his sentence and his attendant security classification it has not been possible for the prison authorities to give effect to this recommendation. This, however, in my judgment does not constitute a ground for intervention by this Court.

His Honour's remarks on this matter were only a recommendation and the fact that the recommendation has not been accepted and acted upon cannot invalidate the sentence or indicate that it was in any respect erroneous. Because it was only a recommendation, it was clear that it might not be carried out for one reason or another.

His Honour referred to the subjective matters in favour of the prisoner and to the fact that this would be the applicant's first experience of prison at a relatively mature age.

Nevertheless, the objective criminality of the offences involving robbery of law-abiding citizens in their own home with violence and terror, and the fact that the robbers were armed, were serious objective features of the applicant's criminality which called for a heavy custodial sentence.

I can discern no error of principle in the sentence and I have not been persuaded that it was unduly harsh or in any way inappropriate, having regard to the objective criminality involved, and the circumstances of the offences and the prisoner.

I therefore propose that leave to appeal against sentence be refused.
 
ABADEE J: I agree with the proposed order of the presiding judge and the reasons for that order.
 
HANDLEY JA: The order of the Court is application for leave to appeal against sentence refused.

HANDLEY JA: The Court will now give brief reasons for dismissing this appeal against conviction.

The appellant was sentenced on 10 June 1994, on two counts for armed robbery, to minimum terms of six years with additional terms of two years, all to be served concurrently, with the minimum terms to date from 15 May 1992 when the appellant went into custody following his arrest.

The appellant appealed against his conviction on 14 June 1994 but in the intervening period has failed to provide grounds for appeal or written submissions.

Letters were sent by the Registrar to the appellant on this topic on 21
December 1995, 20 February 1996 and 4 April 1996. At a later date the
Registrar advised the appellant that his appeal against severity on sentence had been listed for hearing today and his appeal on conviction had also been listed so that consideration could be given as to whether this appeal should be summarily dismissed.

The appellant has been unable to provide grounds of appeal or written submissions and has been unable to indicate that he can do so in the near future.

In these circumstances the appropriate course for this Court to take is to summarily dismiss the appeal against conviction.

That is the order of the Court.
 * * * 
