

Maltese versus The Nominal Defendant Matter No 13308/89 [1997] NSWSC 587 (27
November 1997) 
Maltese versus The Nominal Defendant /89 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /89 - Maltese versus The Nominal Defendant 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff suffered personal injury in a motor vehicle accident that took place at about 6.50am on Wednesday, 2 November 1983. He brings this claim for damages in proceedings that were commenced in 1989. 
The circumstances of the case are unusual. The plaintiff was driving his vehicle in a northerly direction along the Pacific Highway near Byron Bay. At that location, the Highway comprised two lanes. One was for northbound vehicles, the other was for southbound vehicles.

At the time of the accident, the traffic was light and the weather conditions were fine. It was daylight. The speed limit was 100km/h.

The plaintiff's vehicle (which was a Sigma GSR sedan) collided with a dog which was lying across the roadway. The vehicle left the road and collided with a tree. The plaintiff's father was a passenger in the vehicle. He was killed in the accident.

The proceedings came on for hearing on 3 November 1997. By consent, an order was made that the questions of liability and quantum be determined separately.
The Court then proceeded to determine the question of liability. The plaintiff, himself, gave oral evidence. He called Sergeant Keough, Dr Holmes and Mr Drew. There was a tender of affidavit evidence. Both parties tendered documentation.

Sergeant Keough is a police officer who attended the scene of the accident. He later assisted in a Coronial investigation. Dr Holmes has training and experience in the area of animal behaviour. He gave opinion evidence as to the behaviour of dogs on highways (Exhibit E contains, inter alia, his written report). Mr Drew was the driver of another vehicle which was travelling in a southerly direction at the time of the accident. There are no known other witnesses to the accident. There is no direct evidence as to the circumstances which brought about the dog being on the road.

Both the parties and the Court face considerable difficulties when a claim such as this has to be determined about 14 years after the accident took place. Recollections have dimmed and documentation has been destroyed (including the police notebook). Fortunately, the Statements made following the accident by the plaintiff, Sergeant Keough and Mr Drew remained available and were tendered in evidence. However, overall, there were areas of significance in respect of which evidence was either parsimonious or lacking.

There was a challenge made to certain of the evidence given by the plaintiff.
There was a challenge to opinion expressed by Dr Holmes.

The plaintiff was now unable to recall certain significant matters (including the position of the dog on the road). There was conflict in his oral evidence.
There was conflict between oral evidence and what was said in the Statement made by him on 9 January 1984 (Exhibit 1).

His recollection of the accident did not recover until the Sunday following the accident. The accident and the death of his father were distressing events. He gave evidence to the effect that he was in shock when he made his
Statement.

His Statement contains, inter alia, the following:- "I cannot remember exactly just prior to the accident happening but I can remember passing through plantations and seeing houses but then I remember my father saying to me, `Watch out for the dog'. I can remember braking and turning the steering wheel to the right. I can also remember that the steering wheel was very light at this time. That is all I can remember.

Q. Can you remember how far the dead dog was from your car when your father called to you, or when you saw it? 
A. Very close, my father was still saying the words when we hit it. I seem to remember that we were coming around a bend when it happened. I can't remember seeing the dog on the road." 
The plaintiff now disagrees with what appears in the answer recorded in the
Statement. The Statement was read and signed by him. He said that the policeman prepared the Statement and that he must have misunderstood what the plaintiff had said to him. He has not taken any steps to have the Statement corrected. The purported explanation for the conflict was not persuasive. If it be necessary to express a preference, I prefer the version found in the
Statement.

In oral evidence, the plaintiff maintained that he had seen the dog and he said that he had done so at about the time his father had said to "Watch out for the dog". He was shown a photograph of the dog. The photograph did not assist his recollection of it. He did not know the road distance within which the dog would have been visible to him.

In his report, Dr Holmes expressed the following opinion:- "In my opinion, given the circumstances and consideration of other possible causes, it is very highly probable that the dog had sustained an injury on the
Highway as a result of which it was either concussed or dead at the time of accident." 
In his oral evidence, Dr Holmes appeared to go further and express the view that the injuries sustained on the Highway, were sustained by impact with a motor vehicle.

Dr Holmes had limited information made available to him. Largely, his opinion seemed to be based on recognised behavioural patterns of dogs. He seems to have given little weight (if any) to relevant circumstances (inter alia, he does not appear to have given weight to the matter of the condition of the dog's body prior to impact with the plaintiff's vehicle and the lack of marks on the road surface). Whilst his report contained material that was helpful, I am not satisfied that I should accept his ultimate opinions.

At the time of the accident, the plaintiff was travelling about 100km/h. He came around a slight left-hand bend and proceeded downhill. The accident scene is depicted in Exhibit A and various photographs. Exhibit A, which was prepared by Sergeant Keough, contains the words, "Clear View". In oral evidence, Sergeant Keough referred to the effect of shadows from the poplar trees on the side of the road. He said that the plaintiff would have come upon the dog suddenly. This view was apparently based on his knowledge and experience. It seems that, during the investigation of the accident, he had not put his mind to the extent of the visibility had by the plaintiff in his approach to the dog on the road. He gave oral evidence to the effect that there was a distance of about 55 metres from the top of the curve to the point of impact.

The Statement made by Sergeant Keough contains the following:- "15. My inquiries in this matter have revealed that Carlos Maltese, 19 years of age was the driver of a 1983 Sigma G.S.R., sedan registration number
MMQ.579 (N.S.W.) which he drove north on the Pacific Highway, in route
Brisbane with his father and deceased one Jose MALTESE, as a front seat passenger. When Carlos reached a point on the Pacific Highway, Ewingsdale Via
Byron Bay., 258 metres south of the Ewingsdale Rd his vehicle which is said not to have been driven excessively and at a speed of about 100km/h, drove over a large brown dead dog which was on the tarred roadway surface and in the path of vehicle No. MMQ.579 ... the owner of this dog which I have been unable to establish and said dog thought to have been a stray. As a result of this vehicles wheel(s) striking this dog the vehicle skidded to the nearside off the tarred road surface and skidded 3 metres in the gravel on the western side of the highway and then the vehicle broadsided sidewards across the tarred roadway in a north/easterly direction and off the tarred road on the eastern and offside of the road proper and the vehicle skidded completely around facing south and the nearside portion came into collision with a large tree on the eastern side of the roadway, approximately 3 metres off the road edge.
Total distance travelled/skidded from where the dog was positioned on the roadway 58 metres ... to the point of impact." 
In the circumstances of this case, it was common ground that it mattered little whether or not the plaintiff had seen the dog prior to impact. If he did see it, it was not until about the time of the warning from his father about the presence of the dog. The warning was given shortly before impact.
Even after taking into account the matters raised in the evidence given by
Sergeant Keough, I am satisfied that the presence of the dog should have been observed at an earlier time. If this had been done, the impact may have been avoided.

Sergeant Keough has said that, from enquiries made by him, he received information which led him to the belief that the dog had been dead at the time of the impact. The nature of these enquiries is somewhat unclear. When he first saw the dog, its carcass had been removed to the western side of the roadway. There is other evidence which supports the belief formed by Sergeant
Keough. In the circumstances, I shall proceed on the assumption that it was dead at the time of the accident.

The question of when the dog came to be on the road is a debatable one. The answer is far from clear. If the presence of the dog was due to some impact with a vehicle, it is possible that the impact may have happened prior to sunrise. Other road users may have been able to avoid hitting it. There are circumstances (such as its undamaged condition and the frequency and volume of traffic) which would tend to support the view that its presence on the road surface happened shortly before the accident. It has been said that no firm evidence could be obtained regarding the length of time that the body of the dog had been on the roadway (see Exhibit H). I do not consider that I can safely reach a view on this matter.

There is a photograph of the body of the dog (or at least part of it) after it had been removed from the road surface following the accident. The photograph is Exhibit C. There are photographs of the innards of the dog and stains on the road surface following the accident (Exhibit D).

It has been described as a large brown dog. Dr Holmes gave an estimate of -30kg or perhaps more. He thought that it may have been of a kelpie breed or that of a cattledog. The possibility of it being a crossbred was raised.

Mr Drew saw the object, which he later identified as a dog, at a distance of about 200 metres away. It appeared to him to have no observable damage.
Because of peculiarities concerning its position, he formed the view that it was dead. It was lying on its side with its back facing the oncoming northbound traffic. Its head was towards the middle of the road. Its legs were pointing north. He thought that nose to tail it stretched over about 2 metres.
Upon impact, the dog's body was split apart with pieces flying.

Mr Drew said that, in his approach to the accident scene, he overtook a
Department of Main Roads vehicle. He said that, every couple of minutes, he would pass a vehicle travelling north. He had no particular recollection of passing any other vehicle prior to the accident.

Counsel for the plaintiff has prepared written submissions. These were handed to the Court. They were supplemented by oral submissions.

This case falls to be determined according to the provisions that were in force prior to the amendments made to the Motor Vehicles (Third Party
Insurance) Act, 1942 by Act, No. 86 of 1984 (section 30(2)(a)). It is contended that the plaintiff could enforce a claim for damages founded on negligence against the driver of an unidentified motor vehicle. The statutory provision enables the bringing of proceedings against the nominal defendant, where the death of or bodily injury to any person is caused by or arises out of the use of a motor vehicle upon a public street, but the identity of the motor vehicle cannot, after due inquiry and search, be established.

In his submissions, Counsel for the plaintiff contended the following:- "4. That negligence may have arisen either because of the manner of driving of the driver of the vehicle which struck the dog or the failure of that driver having so struck it to take steps to remove the dog from the roadway or else have it removed from the roadway." 
This contention provoked less than full argument. It may be that the first limb of the contention was abandoned during the course of oral argument. If that not be the case, it is appropriate to briefly express views I have formed in the light of the limited argument that took place.

If it be assumed that there was a collision between the dog and a motor vehicle at an earlier time, in the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that some negligence in the manner of the driving of itself could be said to give rise to the duty of care allegedly owed to other road users. It seems to me that the duty of care could not be said to exist unless additional circumstances were present. As I understand the course that was taken during oral submissions, this state of affairs appeared to be accepted by the plaintiff. I may add that it is arguable that there are circumstances in which a duty of care could exist even though the presence of a dog on a highway was not due to impact with a motor vehicle. In this case, the circumstance of impact between the dog and a motor vehicle is a necessary factual ingredient to found a potential claim against the nominal defendant. I now put these matters aside, as they need not be further pursued.

In substance, the relevant duty of care was expressed in terms of a duty to take steps to remove the dog from the roadway. The existence of such a duty of care (in circumstances where it had been established that the dog had been hit by the driver of an unidentified motor vehicle) was not in dispute. It seemed to be common ground that the plaintiff's case was dependent upon the circumstance that the person said to be owing the duty should have been aware that the dog had been struck and that its body may have been on the roadway.

The principal question agitated was proof of breach of duty by the driver of an unidentified motor vehicle. I shall first deal with that matter.

The plaintiff bears the onus of demonstrating such breach of duty on the balance of probabilities. In my view, the plaintiff has failed to discharge that onus.

The submissions canvassed certain past decisions (including Holloway v
McFeeters <case>; [(1956) 94 CLR 470).] It was said that the decisions "have been confusing and, in some cases, not enlightening". For present purposes, it is not necessary to embark on the exercise of examining these decisions. The evidence has its deficiencies. This material leaves room for conflicting conjectures. The success of the plaintiff's case depended on the drawing of various inferences.
I am not satisfied that those inferences can be drawn. I shall now briefly refer to some of the matters raised during the submissions.

The reason for the dog's body being on the roadway is largely a mystery. There is an abundance of possible explanations. Some of these were canvassed during submissions. It is not necessary to deal with all of the matters that were raised.

The balance of the evidence favours the view that, prior to impact, the body of the dog appeared to be largely undamaged. Evidence of skid or other marks relating to an earlier accident was lacking. If the presence of the dog on the road was due to injury, it does not seem that the injury was caused by the dog being run over by another vehicle.

Before turning to a mention of the possibilities, I should dispose of one particular matter. I consider that the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate that the dog was on the road because of fault on the part of a driver of an unidentified vehicle.

I shall now mention some of the possibilities. The dog may not have been struck by a motor vehicle at all. If it had sustained some injury, it may have not occurred on the roadway. It may have not been injured at all. It may have collapsed by reason of natural causes (such as by a heart attack). Some person may have simply placed it on the roadway.

On behalf of the plaintiff, it has been said that the circumstances demonstrate that it is unlikely that the dog had been hit by a northbound vehicle. This proposition was not disputed. The defendant has taken the view that there has been a failure to demonstrate that the presence of the dog on the road was caused by it being hit by another vehicle.

The plaintiff's submissions favour the likelihood of the dog having been struck by the driver's side of a southbound vehicle (see paragraphs 8.3 and 9 of the written submissions). In my view, this contention is little more than conjecture. It is not an inference that can be drawn on the balance of probabilities.

I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has demonstrated that the presence of the dog on the roadway was due to impact between it and an unidentified vehicle. This finding is sufficient to dispose of the plaintiff's claim.

As I have earlier said, the case was conducted on the basis that it must also be demonstrated that the driver of the unidentified vehicle should have been aware of the impact. If it was now necessary to determine that question, one of the relevant matters may be the time at which the collision took place. I have earlier expressed views on this matter. Any impact may have taken place during darkness. I have had regard to the contents of the affidavit of Mr
Sciffer and to other evidence. I do not consider that the material enables the
Court to safely draw any inference as to the nature of the vehicle that would have been involved. The Court is left to speculate as to what other relevant circumstances may have been present.

In my view, the plaintiff has not demonstrated that there was a driver of an unidentified vehicle who should have known of an impact and the presence of the dog on the roadway and who failed to take steps to have it removed from the roadway.

If the plaintiff had discharged the onus of proving negligence, the circumstances of this case would have justified a finding of contributory negligence. There was clearly a failure to keep a proper lookout. In my view, the Court would have been justified in attributing a significant proportion of the blame to the plaintiff. Because of the other views formed, it is not necessary to go through the processes of apportioning the blame.

There are other hurdles for the plaintiff. The defendant has sought to agitate the question of whether or not the bodily injury to the plaintiff had been caused by or arose out of the use of a motor vehicle. Also, the defendant has put due inquiry and search in issue.

There was some argument between the parties as to whether or not the question of the injury being caused by or arising out of the use of the motor vehicle had been put in issue by the pleadings. It is said that the plaintiff's injury arose out of the failure to remove the carcass from the roadway and not out of the use of a motor vehicle. This is a question which turns on the particular facts of each case. The question was not fully argued. Accordingly, I do not propose to express any final view. However, I can say that I was left with the impression that there may well be some force in what the defendant was seeking to put before the Court. If the plaintiff's injury was not caused by or did not arise out of the use of a motor vehicle upon a public street, then he may not enforce his claim against the Nominal Defendant.

Neither the plaintiff nor his legal advisers have carried out any inquiry or search. The plaintiff relies on what was done by the police in their investigations. Further, it was said that it would have been futile to take any further steps to identify the unidentified vehicle.

The plaintiff did not give instructions to the solicitors until 1988. The proceedings were not commenced until shortly before the limitation period was due to expire.

Before proceeding with the determination of this issue, it is appropriate to briefly mention certain other matters.

This litigation has had a long history. There has been an arbitration. It had been previously fixed for rehearing and had not been reached.

When the matter came on for hearing on 3 November 1997, it became clear that the plaintiff's legal advisers had not put their minds to the question of dealing with this issue.

At about 3pm on 3 November 1997, after the defendant had drawn the attention of the matter to the plaintiff, an adjournment was sought to the following day to enable the preparation of an affidavit by the plaintiff's solicitor. This application was granted and the Court arose prior to 4pm. On 4 November 1997, leave was given to file an affidavit sworn by Mr Farrugia. Ultimately, this affidavit was not relied on. Later during the day, a further adjournment was sought. The plaintiff then asked for the proceedings to be stood over to 5
November 1997, so that Sergeant Keough could be called. I should add that
Sergeant Keough had already been recalled once (on 3 November 1997) after he had been earlier released. The recalling of Sergeant Keough involved bringing him down once more from Byron Bay. This involved considerable expense and delay. It would have adversely affected the prospects of other litigants obtaining a hearing. From what the Court was told, the proposed further material seemed to be of limited probative value. This further application for an adjournment was refused.

The contents of Exhibit B give little support to the contention that there were police enquiries directed towards establishing the identity of any unidentified vehicle that may have struck the dog. The plaintiff also relies on Exhibit H. It contains the following:- "You will note that Police investigations concerning the origin of the dog mentioned were unsuccessful (viz. statement of Sen/Const. J.C. Keough the investigating Officer). I have been further informed by Byron Bay Police that a check of Byron Shire Council records also failed to elucidate any information concerning dog ownership. The dog had apparently been struck by some other motor vehicle at some time prior to the accident involving Mr.
Maltese however no firm evidence could be obtained regarding the length of time the carcass had been on the roadway." 
Steps were taken to identify the dog and its owner. Evidence of the taking of steps to identify any vehicle that may have hit the dog is lacking. The observation made in Exhibit B, as to the dog apparently being struck by some other motor vehicle, may have been little more than surmise made by the author of the document some time after the accident.

The evidence as to the location of the accident scene is sparse. The case was conducted on the basis that it was near Byron Bay. Any collision between the dog and an unidentified vehicle may have taken place in daylight (this is the contention advanced by the plaintiff). There is evidence of a frequency of traffic. The plaintiff's Statement contains a mention of "seeing houses".
There is a real prospect that any such collision may have been observed and that inquiry and/or search may have been productive of relevant information.

The relevant law is well established (see, inter alia, Harrison versus Nominal
Defendant [(1976) 50 ALJR 330] and
Nominal Defendant & Anor versus Beattie (Court of Appeal, unreported, 26
September 1996)). The satisfying of the provisions is a question of fact.

There must be such inquiry and search as is reasonable in the circumstances.
It must be as prompt and as thorough as the circumstances permit. In my view, the evidence fails to satisfy those requirements. In my view, this is not one of those cases in which it can be said that inquiry would have been futile (Harrison at p 332).

I consider that the condition precedent to the plaintiff's right of action against the Nominal Defendant has not been made out. For this further reason, the plaintiff's claim fails.

For completeness, I should mention that section 30(2)(b) required the giving of notice of intention to make a claim. Whilst it would seem that no such notice was ever given, the point was apparently not taken.

There will be judgment for the defendant. The plaintiff is to pay the defendant's costs.
 * * * 
