

Regina versus Kenny Matter Nos Cca 60385/98; Cca 60386/98 [1998] NSWSC 774 (10
December 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 February 1999 
REGINA versus NILS JOHN EDWARD KENNY 
CCA 60385/98 
CCA 60386/98 December 1998 
Grove J, James J, Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Downs DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 060385 of 1998  of 1998 
DELIVERED: Thursday 10 December 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 30 November 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus Nils John Edward Kenny 
JUDGMENT OF: Grove, James, Kirby JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT- S J Odgers 
RESPONDENT- R D Cogswell 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - Meredith Richardson & Associates 
RESPONDENT- SE O'Connor 
RESULT: Appeal allowed 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - 
Appeal under s5F of Criminal Appeal Act against orders refusing stay and refusing separate trials of charges involving two complainants - denial of procedural fairness in holding in reserved judgment that evidence given on hearing of application should be ruled inadmissible - incorrect approach on application for separate trials in trial judge himself deciding whether there had been concoction between complainants.

NO. OF PAGES: 12 
REGINA versus NILS JOHN EDWARD KENNY 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I agree with James J. 
JAMES J: This is an appeal by Nils John Edward Kenny pursuant to s5F of the Criminal Appeal Act against orders made by his Honour Judge Downs in the District Court on 14 July 1998, refusing an application for a permanent stay of criminal proceedings against the appellant and refusing an application for separate trials of (1) four offences allegedly committed by the appellant against a complainant who I will refer to as "C" and (2) four offences allegedly committed by the appellant against another complainant who I will refer to as "W". Judge Downs gave a certificate under s5F(3)(b) in respect of the appeal from the order refusing a permanent stay but did not give such a certificate in respect of the appeal from the order refusing separate trials. 
The two complainants W and C are brothers. All of the offences were allegedly committed in 1986, when W was eleven or twelve years old and
C was nine or ten years old. All of the offences were allegedly committed on occasions when a Mrs Nelson, who was the appellant's grandmother, was baby sitting W and C. Mrs Nelson, with whom the appellant was living, lived only a short distance from W and C's home. With one exception, all of the offences were allegedly committed at W and C's home, the other offence being allegedly committed at Mrs Nelson's house while she was baby sitting W and C there.

The four charges relating to the complainant C are that the appellant committed an act of indecency with C (charge 1), that the appellant had homosexual intercourse with C (charge 2), that the appellant attempted to have homosexual intercourse with C (charge 3) and that the appellant committed an act of gross indecency with C (charge 4). On the Crown case,
W was present when the offence the subject of the first charge was committed. W was not present when the offences the subject of the second, third and fourth charges were allegedly committed. On the Crown case, the conduct by the appellant constituting the fourth offence was interrupted, when
Mrs Nelson, who was outside the room in which the appellant and C were, attempted to open the door to the room. The appellant held the door handle so that the door would not open, until the appellant and C had both put all their clothes back on and the appellant then permitted Mrs Nelson to enter the room.

The four charges relating to the complainant W are that the appellant had homosexual intercourse with W (charge 5), that the appellant committed an act of indecency with W (charge 6) and two further charges that the appellant had homosexual intercourse with W (charges 7 and 8). There is no clear evidence from the other complainant C that he was present when any of these offences were allegedly committed.

As I have already stated, all of the offences were allegedly committed in
However, no complaint was made for nine years. In May 1995 the complainant's father spoke to the police and in June 1995 the police took statements from the complainants. On 25 July 1995 the police officer in charge of the investigation spoke to Mrs Nelson but did not take a statement from her. In September 1995 the appellant attended at a police station. He denied the allegations and exercised his right to decline to be interviewed.

There have already been two trials of the present, or substantially similar, charges. In the first trial held in August 1996 the jury was discharged before the trial was completed. In the second trial held in February 1997 the appellant was found guilty of all charges. However an appeal against conviction to the Court of Criminal Appeal was successful and a new trial was ordered. Mrs Nelson did not give evidence in either of these trials.

The present applications for a permanent stay of proceedings or, alternatively, for an order that there be separate trials of the charges relating to C and the charges relating to W came on for hearing before
Judge Downs on 13 July 1998. As was appropriate, the application for a permanent stay was heard first. It is an unfortunate feature of the record of the fairly lengthy discussions between Judge Downs and counsel on the hearing of the application that the record of these discussions put before this Court is not a verbatim record of what was said but only an attempted summary by a court reporter of what was said.

The basis of the application for a permanent stay was that a fair trial of the charges was not possible, because Mrs Nelson was not available to give evidence. Evidence was given before Judge Downs that Mrs Nelson was eighty years old, that she was blind, that she suffered from Paget's disease and dementia and that she had been living in a hostel since September 1996. It was common ground on the hearing of the application that Mrs Nelson was "not available" to give evidence, within the meaning of that expression in the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).
Judge Downs is recorded as having made a remark to the effect that there was no evidence before him of what evidence Mrs Nelson could have given, if she had been available to give evidence, which would have supported the defence case. Counsel for the appellant on the application is then recorded as saying that he would call as a witness on the application Mrs Kenny, who is Mrs
Nelson's daughter and the appellant's mother, to give evidence "regarding that matter", which I take to mean what evidence Mrs Nelson would have been able to give at a trial of the charges, if she had been available to give evidence.
Counsel for the appellant is then recorded as having said that evidence by Mrs
Kenny might not be admissible at a trial of the charges, because, while evidence by Mrs Kenny of what Mrs Nelson had told her might be prima facie admissible under [s65(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s65.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) by way of an exception to the hearsay rule, such evidence by Mrs Kenny might be excluded at a trial in the exercise of the trial judge's discretion.

Mrs Kenny was called and proceeded to give evidence, none of which was objected to by the Crown. After she had completed her evidence in chief she was cross-examined by the Crown. Mrs Kenny gave evidence in her evidence in chief that she had had a conversation with her mother, Mrs Nelson, in early
August 1995. Mrs Nelson had said to Mrs Kenny that police had been around and had made allegations against the appellant. Mrs Nelson did not say that the allegations were of a sexual nature but Mrs Kenny understood from what her mother said that the allegations did refer to something of a sexual nature.
The part of Mrs Kenny's evidence principally relied on in the present appeal was the following:- "I believe, mum said to me it was, I think she said they originally said, mum said to me, it was supposed to have happened in 1984 and I said when and my mother said to me `I don't know when because Neil only called in about twice.'
Two, two occasions she said, `I can remember him calling in once to give me a
TV Guide on his way out and she said there was another time when I telephoned him and I asked him to bring my cardigan up on his way out".

It was submitted that evidence by Mrs Nelson, if she had been available to give evidence at a trial, that, when she was baby sitting at C and
W's house, the appellant had visited her on only two occasions and then only briefly, would have confirmed evidence the appellant had himself given at the second trial and would have strongly supported the defence case.

After the conclusion of the hearing on 13 July 1998 his Honour reserved giving his decision. On the following day his Honour delivered a reserved judgment.
In his judgment his Honour observed, correctly, that it was not alleged that
Mrs Nelson had been present when any of the alleged offences had been committed but that, in relation to one offence, it was alleged that the appellant had prevented Mrs Nelson from entering the room where the appellant and the complainant were. In his judgment Judge Downs summarised Mrs Kenny's evidence and then continued:- "Before considering the application for a permanent stay it is necessary for me to decide if the evidence of Mrs Kenny is admissible.

Mr Burns submitted that the conversation between Mrs Kenny and Mrs Nelson would be admissible pursuant to [s65(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s65.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) because Mrs Nelson suffers from dementia and is therefore unable to give evidence.

As there is not any dispute that Mrs Kenny heard what her mother said, the conversation is admissible and it remains in the circumstances for me to resolve if, in the exercise of my discretion, I should admit this conversation.

The facts before me disclose the following: Firstly, that the conversation between Mrs Kenny and Mrs Nelson occurred in August 1995, that is, approximately ten years after the incidents that are alleged.

Secondly, that the conversation did not refer to any specific facts but was only a general statement from which Mrs Kenny inferred that they related to sexual matters.

Thirdly, Mrs Kenny gave her evidence before me and so three years had elapsed from when she had the conversation with her mother, Mrs Nelson.

Fourthly, the earliest medical evidence before me discloses that in January Mrs Nelson was suffering from dementia with impaired memory and this condition continues.

There was not any medical evidence before me as to her medical condition prior to or in August of 1995. Presumably, however, she was well in 1985 because she repeatedly babysat not only for the McDonald boys but other children in the area.

Mrs Kenny's evidence was that she first noticed any deterioration in her mother's health after her mother sustained a fall some time in 1996. However, when Sergeant Devine spoke to Mrs Nelson in July 1995, that is to say, a month earlier, he did not take any statement from her and apparently this is because he was satisfied that she was not in a condition to assist his inquiries.

In these circumstances, I would reject the evidence of Mrs Kenny because it would be unfairly prejudicial, misleading and confusing..." 
A little later in his judgment Judge Downs said:- "In the absence of Mrs Kenny's evidence, it is mere speculation as to what Mrs
Nelson's evidence might have been if she had had an opportunity to give evidence before the onset of her dementia whenever that might have been.
Consequently, there is not any evidence of specific prejudice and so there is not any fundamental defect which goes to the root of the trial that would justify a permanent stay of proceedings".

After his Honour had delivered his reserved judgment, counsel for the appellant protested against his Honour's decision to exclude Mrs Kenny's evidence in the application for a stay, whatever the position might be about its admissibility in a trial of the charges.

On the hearing of this appeal it was submitted by counsel for the appellant that the four matters set out in Judge Downs' judgment did not form a proper basis for excluding Mrs Kenny's evidence in the application for a stay, in the exercise of the discretion under s135 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). Inter alia it was argued that there was no evidentiary basis for the inference drawn by his Honour that Sergeant Devine did not take a statement from Mrs Nelson in
July 1995, because he was satisfied that she was not in a condition to assist his inquiries. I note, however, that counsel for the appellant on the application is recorded as having said that the police officer "discovered that she was incapable of taking the matter any further for either side".

I consider, however, that there was a more fundamental objection to the course followed by his Honour. Mrs Kenny had been called in an application for a stay of proceedings to give evidence of what evidence Mrs Nelson would have been able to give, if she had been available to give evidence in a trial. Mrs Kenny gave evidence of her conversation with her mother in August 1995 and of certain other matters. The Crown Prosecutor did not object to any part of Mrs
Kenny's evidence and cross-examined Mrs Kenny on her evidence. Judge Downs did not make any ruling that any part of Mrs Kenny's evidence was inadmissible and did not give any indication during the hearing on 13 July that he would regard any part of Mrs Kenny's evidence as being inadmissible in the application (as distinct from the trial). In my opinion, in these circumstances it was a denial of procedural fairness to the appellant for Judge Downs, without giving any prior warning and without giving counsel any opportunity to put submissions about the admissibility of Mrs Kenny's evidence in the application, to hold in his reserved judgment that Mrs Kenny's evidence was inadmissible on the application.

It may be that what Judge Downs intended to say was that, while Mrs Kenny's evidence was admissible, he would not accept it as being reliable evidence of what evidence Mrs Nelson could have given at a trial. However, this is not what his Honour said. In his judgment his Honour consistently used language, indicating that in the exercise of a discretion under s135 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) he had decided not to admit Mrs Kenny's evidence.

Because of the fundamental irregularity which I consider occurred in the decision by Judge Downs not to admit Mrs Kenny's evidence and the effect of that decision on his Honour's decision generally, I would uphold the appeal against Judge Downs' order on the application for a permanent stay of proceedings, quash the order made by his Honour and remit the application for a permanent stay to the District Court for determination.

I turn to the application for separate trials of the charges relating to W and the charges relating to C.

In his judgment in refusing the application for separate trials Judge Downs said:- "The allegations of the complainants relate to one joint incident. Other incidents occurred when either both were present or at least they were involved to such an extent that the trials should be joint..." 
His Honour did not elaborate on this conclusion. As I have already stated, the only clear evidence of both complainants being present when an alleged offence was committed was evidence relating to the first charge. For the most part, this was not a case where the charges arose out of alleged conduct on the part of the appellant against one complainant in the presence and sight of the other complainant or out of conduct towards both complainants virtually simultaneously.

His Honour then proceeded to deal with a submission made on behalf of the appellant "that there should be separate trials because the brothers have had an opportunity to collaborate". His Honour went on to say that evidence before him disclosed that members of the family had discussed the alleged events between themselves. His Honour referred to some of this evidence and then concluded:- "Consequently, I am satisfied that the evidence before me only amounts to discussion between the members of the family as one would normally expect and not connivance, collusions or collaboration".

On this appeal against the decision of Judge Downs not to order separate trials, counsel for the appellant submitted that evidence by one of the complainants of the offences allegedly committed against him would not be admissible on a trial of the offences allegedly committed against the other complainant and hence there should be separate trials of the charges relating to each complainant (see DeJesus versus The Queen <case>; [(1987) 61 ALJR 1.)] 
In support of this submission, counsel for the appellant referred to the decisions of the High Court in Hoch versus The Queen (1988) 165 CLR especially at 296 and Pfennig versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 461], which have been held to be applicable to the requirement under s101 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) that tendency evidence about an accused which is adduced by the prosecution "cannot be used against the (accused) unless the probative value of the evidence substantially outweighs any prejudicial effect it may have on the (accused)". R versus AH [(1997) 42 NSWLR 702]; R versus Fordham [(1997) 98 A Crim R 359.] 
In Hoch versus The Queen, which was approved in Pfennig versus The Queen, the majority of the High Court (Mason CJ, Wilson J and Gaudron J) said at 296:- "...that to determine the admissibility of similar fact evidence the trial judge must apply the same test as a jury must apply in dealing with circumstantial evidence, and ask whether there is a rational view of the evidence that is inconsistent with the guilt of the accused".
 * * * "In cases where there is a possibility of joint concoction there is another rational view of the evidence. That rational view - viz. joint concoction - is inconsistent both with the guilt of the accused person and with the improbability of the complainants having concocted similar lies. It thus destroys the probative value of the evidence which is a condition precedent to its admissibility.

Thus, in our view, the admissibility of similar fact evidence in cases such as the present depends on that evidence having the quality that it is not reasonably explicable on the basis of concoction. That is a matter to be determined, as in all cases of circumstantial evidence, in the light of common sense and experience. It is not a matter that necessarily involves an examination on a voir dire. If the depositions of witnesses in committal proceedings or the statements of witnesses indicate that the witnesses had no relationship with each other prior to the making of the various complaints, and that is unchallenged, then, assuming the requisite degree of similarity, common sense and experience will indicate that the evidence bears that probative force which renders it admissible. On the other hand, if the depositions or the statements indicate that the complainants have a sufficient relationship to each other and had opportunity and motive for concoction then, as a matter of common sense and experience, the evidence will lack the degree of probative value necessary to render it admissible. Of course there may be cases where an examination on the voir dire is necessary, but that will be for the purpose of ascertaining the facts relevant to the circumstances of the witnesses to permit an assessment of the probative value of the evidence by reference to the consideration whether, in the light of common sense and experience, it is capable of reasonable explanation on the basis of concoction. It will not be for the purpose of the trial judge making a preliminary finding whether there was or was not concoction." 
It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that Judge Downs had proceeded incorrectly. Instead of deciding whether there was a reasonable possibility of joint concoction, the trial judge had proceeded himself to make a finding that there had not been any concoction.

In my opinion, these submissions on behalf of the appellant should be upheld and because of the erroneous way in which Judge Downs proceeded, leave to appeal against his Honour's decision refusing the application for separate trials should be granted and the appeal should be upheld. This application also should be remitted to the District Court for further consideration.

DAVID KIRBY J: I agree with James J. * * * 
