

Fitzpatrick and Anor versus Parker and Anor [1996] NSWSC 429 (16 September )

FITZPATRICK & ANOR V PARKER & ANOR /93 DC 1062/90 SEPTEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA GILES AJA SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS: SOLICITORS - DUTY TO CLIENTS - INSURANCE -  
CAUSAL CONNECTION 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
SOLICITORS - DUTY TO CLIENTS - BREACH OF DUTY - purchase of commercial premises - purchase handled by plaintiffs' solicitors - exchange of contracts and completion of purchase effected without insurance - premises damaged by earthquake - plaintiffs only then discover premises not insured - proceedings for negligence brought against solicitors - plaintiffs had assumed insurance would have been taken care of by solicitor or bank manager - solicitor admits insurance should have been seen to.

INSURANCE - DUTY TO ADVISE - solicitor had not explained requirement for insurance to plaintiffs - plaintiffs argued they should have been advised as to insurance - trial judge finds solicitors in breach of duty.

NECESSITY TO SHOW CAUSAL CONNECTION BETWEEN BREACH OF DUTY AND LOSS SUSTAINED
DUE TO PROPERTY NOT BEING INSURED - trial judge finds causal connection not proved.

ON APPEAL - whether trial judge had drawn correct inferences on materials before him in coming to his conclusion - whether correct inference to be drawn was had the plaintiffs been properly advised by the solicitor they would have been insured. Held: There was nothing in trial judge's factual findings precluding the court on appeal from looking at the question of what, on the balance of probabilities, would have happened had proper advice been given; accepting the judge's factual findings and reconsidering the materials, the proper inference to be drawn was that there was a causal connection between the breach of duty by the solicitor and the loss sustained by the plaintiffs.

ORDERS 
Appeal upheld, judgment below set aside and judgment in its place for $58,368.00, such judgment to take effect from the date of judgment of the
Court of Appeal.

PRIESTLEY JA: The plaintiffs in this case brought proceedings for negligence in the District Court against the firm of solicitors who had acted for them in the purchase of commercial premises in Newcastle. Nothing in the case turns on whether the plaintiffs cause of action was in contract or tort. The trial and this appeal were both conducted on the footing that the issues were substantially the same in either event.

Shortly after conclusion of the purchase the premises were damaged in the
Newcastle earthquake of 28 December 1989. The plaintiffs then discovered the premises were not insured. They spoke to their solicitor, who said: "You're not insured, one of us me or Tas should have informed you about the insurance, anyway there are no worries because we're covered against this sort of thing".

The plaintiffs then brought these proceedings. Their case was heard and dismissed by Luland J. His reasons for that decision fell into two parts which
I will both summarise and quote from.

The first part of the Judge's reasons dealt with the first defendant's duty to his clients and whether there had been a breach of it. The premises were bought subject to lease. The first plaintiff was the active one of the two plaintiffs. He gave evidence and was referred to by the Judge as the plaintiff which I shall also do. He arranged the finance for the purchase directly with
Mr Hughes of the Commonwealth Bank. Mr Hughes is the person "Tas" referred to in the quotation above from the plaintiff's evidence.

The plaintiff's solicitors were Messrs Parker and Randall, the first of the two defendants was the solicitor the plaintiff dealt with. Mr Parker gave no evidence. The Judge considered the credibility of the plaintiff's evidence. He accepted the plaintiff's statement that Mr Parker had not explained the contract or the lease or the requirement for insurance to the plaintiff.

A little later the Judge went on and here I will set out that part of his
Honour's reasons: "He adhered to his evidence that he was not told by either Hughes or Parker of the insurance requirement notwithstanding being shown two letters from the bank dated 27th September, 1989 and 12th December 1989 both being pro forma letters which informed the Plaintiff of his loan approval and also said an adequate insurance cover must be maintained. The Plaintiff said he received these letters but did not read the contents. He was only interested in the loan approval.
 
The Plaintiff said in cross-examination he knew the premises had to be insured because he knows all property has to be insured. However, although he said he knew this he had relied upon Mr Parker because in the past either he or the Bank did it. He later said he was not sure who arranged the insurance with Mr Saddington.
 
Upon this evidence Counsel for the Plaintiff argues the Defendant is liable for the Defendants damages because in his capacity as a Solicitor he had a professional obligation and duty in the performance of that duty to advise the
Defendant in all aspects of the transaction so as to protect the Plaintiff's interests. That after all, argues the Plaintiff, is why he engaged a professional. Included in this duty was a duty to ensure that the Plaintiff was aware of his insurance situation.
 
It is argued that the Plaintiff needed to be advised, particularly as to
Insurance and this obligation of Mr Parker arose in 2 ways.
 ) The general duty of a Solicitor to advise on all aspects of risk, including insurance.
 ) Specific advices in respect of the lease and aspects of insurance relevant thereto.
 
Counsel for the Plaintiff argued the Defendant failed in both respects.
 
In support of this argument counsel relied upon the evidence given on behalf of the Plaintiff by Mr Neville MOSES, Solicitor whose qualification as an expert in conveyancing was not contested. A report of Mr Moses was tendered as
Exhibit C." 
Luland DCJ then summarised Mr Moses' evidence ending that summary by referring to Mr Moses' opinion that "It would have been normal practice to have fully informed the client of the position regarding insurance".

The trial judge then continued: "I accept the Plaintiff that no advice was given to him by Mr Parker nor were his obligations pursuant to the lease explained to him. The Plaintiff's evidence in respect of this matter has gone unchallenged. Indeed the
Plaintiff's evidence that Mr Parker said to him after he made enquiries at the bank that, 'Your insured. One of us me or Tas should have informed you about the insurance. No worries we're covered by this sort of thing' also goes unchallenged and amounts to an admission by the Defendant that he himself recognised the duty, he had to his client to inform him of the risk.
 
Upon the evidence I am satisfied that the Defendant was in breach of his duty of care as a solicitor to advise the Plaintiff in all aspects of risk including that of insurance. I also find that the advice should have been given in respect of the lease. In holding himself out as possessing the special knowledge and skill of a Solicitor he should have regarded the failure to give advice regarding the lease and insurance as an act involving probable risk.
 
That was the end of the first part of the trial judge's reasons. The second part dealt with causation. On this the Judge said the plaintiff's evidence was deficient for the following reasons: "The earthquake occurred some six days after the completion of the contract.
The plaintiff said in evidence he knew he had to have his premises insured.
Indeed as Mr Moses observed even the most naive client would understand that once they own the property outright it is prudent to insure it. The plaintiff appears to have a degree of commercial sophistication. On the evidence I'm satisfied he assumed the insurance would be taken care of by either the defendant or his bank manager both of whom the plaintiff said knew of his insurance broker Mr Saddington. The evidence of the plaintiff was not that he had been told by the defendant he had to insure his property he would have done so, his case was that he was not told but in any event he knew he had to have insurance and assumed it was done by either the defendant or the bank manager. There is no evidence that the defendant was required to take out the insurance. As I am not satisfied that the plaintiff has shown a cause of connection between a breach of duty by the defendant and the loss sustained by him due to the property not being insured, I therefore find he has not proved his case".

It is the Judge's reasoning in what I have called the second part of his reasons which is attacked in this appeal. The defendants have not sought to challenge the Judge's reasoning and conclusions to the effect that Mr Parker had a duty to advise in the terms of which Mr Moses gave evidence and was in breach of that duty. The defendants have sought however in the appeal to support the second part of his Honour's reasons relating to causation.

The plaintiff's submission on this issue is a brief one. It refers to the evidence given by the plaintiff and says that had the defendant solicitor complied with his obligation and raised the question of insurance with the plaintiff and given him appropriate advice about it, the inference is strong that the plaintiff would then have seen to it that at least prior to completion of the contract the premises to be bought would be insured.

It is unnecessary to go into the question of what should have happened at the time of exchange of contracts in view of the time when the actual loss occurred.

For the defendants it was said that the Judge was entitled to draw the conclusion that it had not been shown at the level of the civil onus of proof that had the plaintiff been properly advised there would have been insurance obtained for the property at relevant times. The basis of this submission was that no direct question had been asked of the plaintiff at the trial of what he would have done had the advice been given.

The second step in the submission was that in view of evidence given by the plaintiff about past insurances, and his assumptions that insurance would be looked after otherwise than by him in conveyancing transactions, the conclusion was not only open but the better conclusion on the evidence, that given the proper advice he would nevertheless have done nothing further concerning the matter of insurance beyond relying on his past assumptions that somebody else would look after it. The question whether such an inference is the more probable one on the evidence as it was left before the trial judge is the central question in the case.

The fact that the question which would have clinched the matter was not asked at the trial is not in any way conclusive of what the proper inference to be drawn should be. It was necessary for the trial judge to ask what on the probabilities would have happened had the proper advice been given. That is the question which this Court also must ask itself. There doesn't appear to be anything in the trial judge's factual findings which precludes this Court from looking at that question for itself. The Court is in as good a position to consider the materials as the trial judge was, taking into account his view of the plaintiff which, to put it broadly, was a favourable one so far as his credibility was concerned.

Based simply on what I have said so far, in my opinion the inference is a clear one that had the proper advice been given then the insurance would have been obtained and the damage which the plaintiff suffered from the want of insurance, would not have occurred. That seems to me to be, looking at the matter broadly, almost an inevitable inference.

The chief argument relied upon for the defendant in opposing such a conclusion was that the trial judge had failed to take into account a concession that was made at the end of the trial by the plaintiff through his counsel. At the opening of the hearing before the trial judge it appears that the plaintiff's counsel had indicated he would be calling evidence from which he would be asking the Judge to conclude that there had been a course of dealing between the plaintiff and the first defendant which was that first defendant actually looked after the obtaining of insurance by himself speaking to the insurance broker.

Once the evidence was complete it was clear that it could not justify the
Court being asked to draw the conclusion which had been indicated would be asked for in the opening. Plaintiff's counsel made a concession to that effect. The concession was that the plaintiff would not be able to cross- examine the solicitor if he was called to give evidence to suggest that he had himself made insurance arrangements on the plaintiff's behalf with or through the broker.

This concession was said to be inconsistent with the Judge's finding that on the evidence he was satisfied that the plaintiff assumed the insurance would be taken up either by the first defendant or the bank manager. It was then said that the trial judge had failed to take into account that inconsistency, or alternatively, that this Court in considering for itself the questions what inference should be drawn on the available materials about what would have happened had the first defendant given appropriate advice should take into account that concession as a material matter going to what the defendants' counsel said was the likelihood that the plaintiff would simply have done nothing about insurance notwithstanding the solicitor's advice. (In putting it this way I do not mean to suggest that the defendants' counsel here was making any concession about the onus position, which was that the plaintiff bore the burden of proof, at the level of the civil standard.

For the defendants it was contended that taking into account what was said to be the inconsistency of the concession with the Judge's finding of fact already mentioned, the Court would not be satisfied on the available material that the inference necessary from the plaintiff's point of view should be drawn.

There are one or two things to say in response to this submission. The first is that the finding that I have repeated from the Judge's reasons concerning the plaintiff's assumptions is not in my opinion inconsistent with the concession that was made by the plaintiff's counsel at the end of the trial.
The concession concerned the inability to prove a state of fact. The Judge's finding went to the question of the plaintiff's belief at the time of the completion of the purchase. There is no inconsistency between the plaintiff's belief that one or other of the solicitor or the bank manager would take care of the insurance and the concession that the evidence did not prove his solicitor had, on any occasion, directly arranged insurance for the plaintiff on a conveyancing transaction.

The argument however made it necessary to consider with some precision what would be the possible inferences on the materials before the trial judge and on the facts as he found them to be. Analysed in a logical way as was done by
Giles AJA in the course of the argument, there are a number of possibilities.
Everyone of them in my opinion, with one exception, leads to the conclusion that the plaintiff properly advised by the solicitor would have been insured at the completion of the conveyancing transaction.

The one exception is the possibility that had the advice been given the plaintiff would have said in effect "I know all about the insurance position,
I'm going to leave it to the bank manager in the usual way," or alternatively, "I'm going to leave it to be done in the usual way," and that nothing thereafter would have been done.

This seems to me to be an extremely unlikely hypothesis. The possibilities seem to me to be strongly against that kind of conversation having taken place had the solicitor been correctly advising his client.

My view therefore is that, accepting the Judge's findings of fact, and looking at the materials for myself in the light of those findings, I would draw the inference that there was a causal connection between the breach of duty by the solicitor and the loss sustained by the plaintiff.

In my opinion therefore the appeal should be upheld, the judgment below set aside and in its place judgment entered for the amount, which I think is agreed, being the amount of damage suffered by the plaintiff as at the date of the judgment given by the trial judge, 2 June 1993.

I'll wait to clarify that aspect of the matter until the other Judges have given their reasons.

GILES AJA: The question was, if the defendant had given the advice which Mr
Moses said he should have given would the property have been insured. That question was to be decided on the probabilities, and it is not to be decided against the plaintiff simply because the plaintiff did not give direct evidence that he would have insured the property if the defendant had told him he had to insure it. I am not sure that the trial judge asked himself the right question, and I am inclined to think that he was distracted to a narrower question by the absence of the direct evidence last mentioned.

However that be, in the circumstances of this case as recounted by the Acting
President the question of causation can and should be determined (or redetermined, as the case may be) by this Court, and the usual constraints against interfering with the trial judge's findings of fact do not apply. In the circumstances outlined by the Acting President, in my opinion advice given by the defendant would have led to following up insurance and the property would have been insured.

I agree with the orders proposed.

SIMOS AJA: I agree with Priestley J.

PRIESTLEY JA: Mr McVay and Mr Stevenson is the amount readily statable? 
McVAY: It is your Honour. It's $35,425 plus interest from 16 February 1990.

PRIESTLEY JA: Isn't that amount quantifiable? 
McVAY: I thought we hadn't reach an agreement on it.

PRIESTLEY JA: The interest I'm speaking about. Has the interest been agreed between you in the event that we got to this position? 
STEVENSON: There was also an issue apparently as to the excess that Mr Fitzpatrick would have had to pay under any policy of insurance that he affected, but if we can agree on that and the interest it may be I just can't agree with the figure.

PRIESTLEY JA: Would you be in a position to give us the figures at 2.15? 
STEVENSON: Yes, your Honour.

PRIESTLEY JA: We will then announce the judgment finally.

LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: Following the delivery of the Court's reasons for upholding the appeal this morning in this matter, the parties have agreed, and the court also agrees, that the following orders will implement what the Court had in mind: 
The appeal be upheld.
The judgment below be set aside.
There be judgment in favour of the appellants against the respondents in the sum of $58,368.00.
The respondents pay the appellants' costs of the trial and of the appeal.
Judgment to take effect as from today's date.

Those are the orders of the court.
 * * * 
