

Regina versus David Corrigan [1997] NSWSC 642 (12 December 1997) 
REGINA versus David CORRIGAN /95 
THURSDAY 20 June 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, ABADEE J, LEVINE J 
JUDGMENT 
ABADEE J: The applicant seeks an order for extension of time to seek leave to appeal against a sentence imposed upon him by Judge Coleman in the Newcastle District Court on 12 December, 1994. The reasons for delay are explained in the applicant's affidavit of 14 June, 1996. The Crown raises no opposition to the extension of time application.

At the same time the applicant also seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by his Honour. On 15 September, 1994 the applicant appeared before
Judge Coleman and pleaded guilty to a charge of carnally knowing a girl, J, then being under 10 years of age and in fact aged 4 years. The offence is alleged to have occurred between 6 June, 1972 and 6 June, 1973. The applicant also pleaded guilty to indecently assaulting the girl again in the same period.

At the time that the offence of carnal knowledge of a girl under the age of 10 was committed, the maximum penalty for such offence was penal servitude for life (now repealed) - see former <case> of the Crimes Act. The penalty at the relevant time for the indecent assault of a female under the age of 10 years was penal servitude for five years - see former <case> of the Crimes
Act.

The sentence proceedings before Judge Coleman took place on 31 October, 1994 and 16 November, 1994. It appears that his Honour reserved his sentencing decision. On 12 December, 1994 Judge Coleman imposed a sentence of eight years in relation to the carnal knowledge offence, the subject of the first count.
That sentence consisted of a minimum term of four years commencing 12
December, 1994 and an additional term of four years. On the second count his
Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for a fixed period of 12 months.

His Honour found special circumstances, for reasons that his Honour stated in the sentencing judgment. The short statement of facts tendered before his
Honour reveals that the complainant (date of birth 6 June, 1968) made a signed statement of complaint to police on 9 September, 1993. She was then aged 25 years. The facts and circumstances surrounding the commission of the offences were essentially not disputed by the applicant. Indeed, he also gave oral evidence during the course of the sentencing proceedings.

In his record of interview it appears that he agreed with much of the materials or matters that were put to him by the investigating police officers.

At the time the offences were committed the complainant, or victim, lived next door to the applicant. The applicant was then aged 16 or 17. He was her uncle, being the brother of her mother. In the circumstances I propose to take the facts from his Honour's reasons for judgment which, to a significant extent, were based upon the facts sheet that was tendered during the course of the sentencing proceedings.

The offence of carnal knowledge took place when the victim was between four and five years of age. His Honour found that the applicant took the complainant inside his home and put her over a chair. He then removed her underpants and knelt in front of the chair level with her vagina. He then placed his penis inside her vagina moving it back and forth. The applicant then ejaculated over the vagina.

In his reasons for sentence his Honour said: "He was interrupted by the victim's mother who came in the back door and confronted him about his actions, according to the record of interview. The child was then taken to the doctor and it was necessary for her to undergo some repair on her vagina as a result of that action." (my emphasis), 
The emphasised words acquire a degree of significance in this appeal. In relation to the facts pertaining to the second count of indecent assault his
Honour said that such was omitted in the record of interview.

The relevant act, the subject of the second charge, involved the applicant rubbing his penis on the outside of the victim's vagina. His Honour, however, found that, on that particular occasion, the applicant did not proceed to ejaculation.

His Honour found that both offences were committed over a period of time against the child and, to quote his Honour: "Were part of a pattern of sexual gratification which the prisoner indulged in." 
His Honour took that material into account to the extent that the offences to which the applicant had pleaded guilty were not isolated offences. It is also correct to say that the applicant admitted to the police that the sexual assaults upon the complainant had extended over a period of twelve months.

In his sentencing reasons his Honour considered that the carnal knowledge of the victim at her age, involving some penile penetration was an extremely serious offence, calling for the strongest possible deterrent sentence.
Undoubtedly this was a correct statement. Clearly, on the statement of facts that had been presented to his Honour, a grim picture was portrayed of the conduct of the applicant. Clearly the offence as shown on the statement of facts so tendered was a serious offence. Indeed, one might think, it was a somewhat horrendous offence on a child of that age. His Honour concluded that this was a case where general deterrence needed to be considered despite the applicant's age at which time the offence took place. His Honour concluded that the applicant's intellectual ability was not of such a quality as to reveal a deficiency of intelligence, or illness such as to affect the consideration of general deterrence. His Honour had regard to the question as to whether particular deterrence was required, but ultimately concluded it was not.

His Honour had regard to the fact that the applicant had submitted himself to rehabilitation processes to counselling in respect of his problems, to treatment by a psychologist as well as treatment from time to time by two psychiatrists.

The evidence accepted by his Honour established that the applicant had been a victim of child abuse but his Honour concluded - and in my view it was open to his Honour to so conclude - that such child abuse provided no justification for what the applicant had done to the child.

His Honour also had regard to the effects of the assault upon the victim, that such effects had been severe, and that the complainant was still left with significant and frequent symptoms associated with the recollection of these offences, committed when she was but a young child.

His Honour took into account the fact that the applicant was 16 or 17 when the offences took place. His Honour was fully cognisant of the fact he was sentencing the applicant at a point of time when the applicant was aged 38 years. His Honour accepted that the applicant had suffered depression due to shame and remorse and had attempted suicide on two occasions. His Honour accepted that the applicant had been, and was in fact, in receipt of an invalid pension.

His Honour considered and dealt with the matter of delay in the institution of proceedings. That is a matter I will return to in greater detail in due course. His Honour acknowledged the principle of totality. His Honour fully gave the applicant credit for the plea of guilty that had been entered at an early stage in the proceedings.

Before this Court a number of arguments were advanced in support of the applicant. It was submitted that a number of errors of fact and principle were committed in the reasons for sentence. It was submitted that there was a demonstrable, and indeed incorrect, error of fact made by his Honour, particularly in relation to what care the complainant received following upon the offence. It will be recalled that his Honour had made a specific finding of fact that after the offence had taken place the applicant had been taken by her mother to a doctor where it was necessary for her to undergo some repair on her vagina as a result of that action.

In my view this finding that it was necessary for the complainant to undergo some repair of her vagina as a result of the action on the part of the applicant, must have influenced, and did influence, the sentence that was ultimately imposed by his Honour.

There was no reference to the medical treatment contained in the statement of facts that were tendered during the course of the sentencing proceedings. One might infer that the absence of reference to such a matter was because there was disputed evidence as to whether or not the complainant did in fact undergo such repair on her vagina in consequence of the offences committed upon her of carnal knowledge.

The applicant has submitted to us that this finding of aggravation, ie. that medical treatment was required, was not one open upon the material or, at the very least, had not been established beyond reasonable doubt. I agree with that submission. It seems to me that when one has regard to the complainant's evidence, and when one has regard to the mother's evidence, it could not be said that, following the act of carnal knowledge, it was necessary for the complainant to undergo some repair on her vagina. That finding appears to be one not based upon any matter contained in the statement of facts but, rather, is a finding allegedly based upon a matter that arose during the course of the record of interview that was conducted in 1993 between the applicant and the police authorities. It appears that the suggestion that the complainant had undergone some repair on her vagina as a result of his action, the subject of the first count, emanated from the applicant himself, who in turn, only aware of that fact because of something that he had been told subsequent to the event by his father.

It seems to me that the evidence does not support the proposition, or the statement, that the complainant had to undergo some repair on her vagina as a result of the act giving rise to the first charge. At the very least such has not been established beyond reasonable doubt. I would regard that statement of his Honour's, therefore, as being a demonstrably incorrect error of fact.

True it is, as Mr Sides QC submitted, that he cannot prove that it must have influenced the judge in determining the appropriate sentence. He cannot illustrate it in terms by reference to the reasons for judgment. However, having regard to the way in which that finding arose, the fact that it was stated by his Honour as being a fact relevant to the objective facts pertaining to the first offence, I am satisfied that such a finding discretely influenced the sentence that was imposed. At the very least I am satisfied that the very fact that his Honour made specific reference to it would suggest that it, at the very least, subtly influenced the sentence that was ultimately imposed in the circumstances of this case.

It is for this reason, and this reason alone, that I would conclude that error has been revealed on the part of the sentencing judge and that it is an error of such significance that would warrant this Court intervening and re- sentencing the applicant.

Other submissions were put on behalf of the applicant relating to other matters. One such matter was that his Honour failed to give due and adequate weight to the plea of guilty. In my view his Honour gave the appropriate weight to it, took into account the relevant considerations, and I am unable to see that there is any substance in the complaint made in relation to that particular matter.

Further, it has been submitted that his Honour failed to give due and adequate weight to the delay that occurred between the time of the offence and the time when the applicant was charged in early 1994. However, it does not appear to me that his Honour's approach to the matter of delay was one where he completely ignored matters that had arisen during that delay period.

His Honour, from time to time during the course of the sentencing reasons, referred to the applicant's contrition, his remorse, his shame, his treatment, his rehabilitation and other things that had been done by the applicant during the delay period.

As regards the reasons for the delay I am unable to find that there was any reason for delay that can be laid at the feet of the prosecution authorities.
I am unable to conclude that there was any reason for delay which can be reasonably laid at the feet of the complainant.

I have said enough to indicate that I do not consider that his Honour's approach to the question of delay reflects any error on his part. I do not see any transgression of any of the principles that have been laid down, either in
Regina versus Todd [(1982) 2 NSWLR 517] or by the recent decision of this Court in Regina versus Thompson, (18 June 1996, unreported).

For these reasons I do not consider that the applicant has made good his complaint that there was error reflected in his Honour's approach to the subject of delay. The only point of substance that I consider has merit is the point to which I have made reference.

The demonstrable and incorrect error of fact found by his Honour, in my view, justifies this Court re-sentencing, and for that reason alone. For these brief reasons I would propose that the court should grant the applicant an extension of time for leave to appeal against sentence and allow the appeal in respect to the sentence imposed on the first count.

I would propose that this Court, in re-sentencing, should impose a sentence of six years consisting of a minimum term of three years and an additional term of three years. In my view there are special circumstances to be found in this case and they are of the type that were dealt with by the trial judge in his sentencing reasons. I consider that the proposed sentence reflects the approach that was adopted by the trial judge in dealing with the subject of special circumstances.

The orders that I would, therefore, propose are as follows:
Extend time for leave to appeal against sentence.
That the appeal against sentence imposed on the first count be allowed.
That the sentence in respect of the first count be quashed.
In lieu thereof the following sentence be imposed in respect of the first count. The applicant to be sentenced to penal servitude for six years comprising of a minimum term of three years commencing on 12 December, 1994 and expiring on 11 December, 1997 and to an additional term of three years commencing on 12 December, 1997. The earliest date the applicant will be eligible to be released on parole is 11 December, 1997.

PRIESTLEY JA: I have had some difficulty in arriving at a conclusion in this application. On the one hand there is no doubt, in my opinion, that the sentencing judge assumed, as established, a fact very adverse to the applicant about which there was conflicting evidence before him and which he was not entitled to act on in the way that he did. It is not clear whether this was the judge's fault. It may be that the advocates present at the sentencing hearing in some measure contributed to the error but, however it happened, it was, in my opinion, a mistake that this Court cannot overlook.

On the other hand had the same sentence been imposed on the applicant on the basis of the facts the sentencing judge was entitled to take into account and an application for leave to appeal been brought to this Court then, on the basis of the way criminal justice is administered in this community, I would not have considered the sentence was open to challenge.

It seems to me to have been fully appropriate to the evil and harmful offences committed by the applicant.

With these conflicting considerations in mind the question is - what is the appropriate step for the court to take? One thing seems to be clear and that is that the court must, as Mr Justice Abadee has proposed, consider for itself an appropriate sentence for the applicant, that is, the error I have mentioned is such that the sentence of the sentencing judge must be set aside. This
Court must then undertake the sentencing process itself.

Mr Justice Abadee has, I think, mentioned all the considerations appropriate for this Court to take into account in carrying out the sentencing process.

There seems to me to be much to be said for the court arriving simply at a similar conclusion to that arrived at by the sentencing judge. However, there would be an element of anomaly in that, at least to the perception of those affected by the sentence, in that the court would be arriving at the same sentence on the basis of the proper facts that the sentencing judge had imposed, which he appears arrived at impeccably, but for the influence the one mistake he made will have had on that sentence. Thus it is for the sake of an appearance of regularity that I come to the conclusion that I should agree with what has been proposed by Mr Justice Abadee.

This result seems to me to be appropriate on the basis that, taking the sentencing judge's approach as correct, except for the extent to which it was influenced by the mistake, then this Court should follow the same approach.
Then, bearing in mind that the sentencing judge had some advantages that this
Court does not possess in the way of having seen the applicant and had, as it were, a closer stance to the original facts than this Court does, this Court therefore, operating on the same premises, as his Honour must have operated on, should arrive at the ultimate sentence by an adjustment of the sentence that he arrived at under the influence of the error that has become the focus of this application first for extension and then for leave to appeal.

I agree with the orders proposed by Justice Abadee.

LEVINE J: I agree with the orders proposed by Justice Abadee and with his reasons therefore.

PRIESTLEY JA: The orders proposed by Justice Abadee are the orders of the court.
 * * * 
