

Twenty-First Australia Inc versus Shade and Anor Matter No 2428/98 [1998] NSWSC (31 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
TWENTY-FIRST AUSTRALIA INC versus SHADE & ANOR /98 July 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between a former employer and employee over a contract restraining the employee from taking certain employment after termination. 
The proceedings were heard by me on 4 and 5 June, 1998. On 14 July, I delivered a set of reasons for judgment partially finding for the plaintiff.
On 20 July, 1998, Mr David Robinson, of counsel for the plaintiff, respectfully and properly put, that those reasons for judgment did not deal with two matters, namely (a) the proposition that the covenant in question prohibits the defendant from soliciting anyone who was a broking client of the plaintiff; and (b) reasons as to why the injunction should only go to 1
January, 1999.

When I considered those reasons, I thought that there was some force in that submission. Mr Robinson submitted that I withdraw my reasons or add to them.
Mr PT Russell, of counsel for the defendant, opposed any further steps being taken by the plaintiff. I gave reasons on that day allowing the application: for convenience, the revised reasons are contained in the appendix to this judgment. The matter was then made the subject of further submissions. I withdrew my reasons, and granted a further interlocutory injunction until I could reconsider the matter. These present reasons (which are basically those delivered on 14 July with additions) replace the previous set.

The plaintiff is an overseas corporation which runs a small business in
Sydney. Initially it was operating a business as a derivatives dealer, but later it took on the business of a discount dealer in shares as well. However, its main trade at present appears to be the conception, development and marketing of what it calls "strategies" to increase the wealth of its clients.
It says that it specializes in sophisticated strategies or products and that it acts for a fair percentage of the 200 wealthiest people listed in Business
Review Weekly. Its schemes tend to involve arbitrage contracts, hedging and short selling (at least so far as still permitted by <case> of the Corporations
Law). The schemes are sophisticated as was shown by one example which was given during the evidence whereby an investor (and the plaintiff company) made a considerable profit merely by transferring shares or derivatives from one person to another through 13 different transactions in four different countries.

There was no issue in the case between the parties as to whether the plaintiff's activities were of any public benefit or whether they at least strayed into the area of illegality or whether they offended [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/s260.html) of the [Income Tax Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/). As there is no obvious matter of public policy involved here, I must just assume that the plaintiff's business is one which is entitled to protection under the law of this State.

There are two defendants in this case. I will refer to the first defendant Mr
Shade, simply as "the defendant". The second defendant is a company which employed Mr Shade for a short time but which has since ceased to employ him.
The second defendant plays no real part in these proceedings.

The defendant commenced employment with the plaintiff on 14 September 1992. On September 1992, the plaintiff entered into a document called "Employment
Agreement". This was drafted by an American lawyer for American conditions and the plaintiff, being an American corporation recently commencing business in
Australia, did not consider that it need modify its documentation for
Australian conditions. Mr Russell stressed this point, but, except for one matter, I cannot see ultimately how it has any validity because if the agreement is a contract which is not contrary to NSW law, it matters not that it was drafted by an American in America.

The one matter worthy of note mentioned in the preceding paragraph is that, under [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the [Restraints of Trade Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/), certain consequences may follow if there is a manifest failure by the person who created the restraint to impose only a reasonable restraint.

The Employment Agreement contained an acknowledgement that the employer would make available to her (sic) information of a confidential nature including information about the employer's products and trading strategies and that such informations were confidential. It then continued: "Employee covenants and agrees that, during a period of eighteen months following the termination (for any cause or no cause) of 
Employee's employment, Employee shall not (i) solicit business from or render services to any Customer of Employer ... or attempt to induce any personnel of
Employer to leave the employ of Employer to work for Employee or any other person, firm or corporation within the areas where Employer now or hereafter does business. Employee further covenants and agrees that Employee, at any time after termination (for any cause or no cause) of Employee's employment with Employer, shall not utilize or disclose, directly or indirectly, any trading strategy that constitutes confidential information or a trade secret of 
Employer, or any variation thereof, that Employer utilized during the period of Employee's employment with Employer." 
The defendant's employment terminated on 25 March 1998. At one stage there was an issue before me as to whether the employee was wrongfully terminated so as to raise the point of law referred to in General Billposting Co Ltd v
Atkinson [[1909] AC 118], 121 and 122 and Kaufman versus McGillicuddy <case>; [(1914) 19 CLR 1], but this was withdrawn because the defendant had commenced proceedings in another tribunal and did not wish there to be any issue estoppel as a result of this case.

The amended summons seeks orders restraining the defendant from making use directly or indirectly of the plaintiff's products or strategies or disclosing any confidential information for 18, or alternatively 12, months from 25 March and from rendering services to any person who was a customer of the plaintiff during the period of the defendant's employment. There are several variations of these orders, but I will not burden these reasons with them.

The plaintiff became aware that the defendant had been offered employment with another securities dealer and was to commence work on 11 May 1998. The plaintiff also received information which caused it to believe that some of its valuable clients would follow the defendant to his new employment. The proceedings were commenced and interim orders were made.

The evidence showed that during Mr Shade's employment, the plaintiff developed many "strategies" as it called them. Sooner or later, usually sooner, these strategies became known to competitors and in order to keep ahead, new strategies had to be developed. At the moment there is only one strategy which is confidential and which is still used by the plaintiff and was used in the time when Mr Shade was employed by the plaintiff, and that is a strategy which can be referred to by the initials SATB.

There is, however, some suggestion that there is another confidential strategy which is coded SD. Both SATB and SD were the product of the fertile mind of Mr
Chris Pederson of the plaintiff. The defendant's role did not involve marketing those strategies though he was involved in effecting the underlying transactions involved in the strategies including the sale and settlement of the various transactions that had to be put in place to effect the strategies.

The plaintiff says that if Mr Shade is permitted to use his knowledge of SATB and the identity of suitable clients to enable a competitor to duplicate that strategy and approach those clients, it would have a significant impact upon the plaintiff's business.

Mr Owen, another employee of the plaintiff gave evidence on affidavit that the defendant had openly boasted that he would take clients with him when he left the plaintiff's employ. Mr Owen was not cross examined. However the defendant denied that those conversations took place. For the reasons I give later, I do not consider that I should fully accept the defendant's evidence. I thus tend to accept Mr Owen's evidence.

Without going into the evidence surrounding the circumstances, it is clear that Mr Shade was dismissed as opposed to leaving voluntarily. It may thus be that even if he had any earlier plans to leave with half the clientele, those intentions were to some extent frustrated. However, there is sufficient material both in what happened before Mr Shade left his employment, and afterwards, to indicate that there is a real fear that he will make use of
SATB for himself or other interests and may well approach former clients.

The main defence that Mr Shade mounted was to say that the restriction imposed by the employment contract was invalid. He further said that in any event he was only a "bit player" who carried out the mechanics of certain parts of complex transactions and he did not have the skill or know-how to implement the strategies even if he had wanted to. He says that it is imperative to understand that the plaintiff's business really has two arms, (a) the sophisticated transaction side; and (b) the discount broking side. He says that he was employed to assist Mr Pederson in the strategy side of the business and only in relation to that business. He further says that the plaintiff's idea of commencing a discount dealing business was not conceived until after the contract was entered into and it would be wrong to restrain him from taking part in the discount sharebroking business elsewhere. He says that the company that was going to employ him was a full service broker and was not a competitor of the plaintiff in respect of its sophisticated strategies business. In any event, the plaintiff has not shown any irreparable damage in the defendant being involved in the broking business, or even in the discount broking business, and in those areas there is no confidential information because all that is happening (at least in the discount broking business) is that the operator merely puts through some mechanical transaction without offering advice to the client.

I need to deal with a couple more matters of fact before dealing with a discussion of the points raised.

The evidence was that most discount brokers have a system whereby there are a number of operators who answer the phone in rotation and spend as little time as possible with the customer. The system with the plaintiff was different in that there were only a couple of operators but those operators sought to establish rapport with the plaintiff's client base. Mr Shade would have spent time with most of the clients because even though the operators took calls on a rotation basis, over time he would have spoken to most of them as far as can be gathered from the material. Mr Pederson says that most of the discount brokerage customers only trade twice a year, though others trade more regularly.

A list of customers was drafted by Mr Shade from memory which is annexure A to affidavit PA09. Mr Shade says that 12 of the 76 people on the list were in fact close friends of his and dealt with the plaintiff only because they were close friends of his.

Mr Shade said that at 8 o'clock each Monday morning there was a meeting with all the staff. The discount broking side of the business for the previous week was discussed including the number of enquiries, the number of new accounts and the number of dealings. Then, new strategies were discussed and there was a discussion as to who might be interested in the strategies. There was then an update of the position of the strategies. He said that although he was involved initially with forward conversion, leverage treasury notes transactions, leverage bonds transactions and SATB, his role was merely to gather data or information such as the current market prices, manipulate the data to try and make the transaction viable and then present the data to Mr
Pederson who, if he thought fit, would market it. Then if the customer decided to proceed with the transaction, Mr Shade may have to take part in putting through the transaction including firming up the price, going into the market and placing an order and trading the relevant stock. He says that from his observation marketing of the strategy was done through accounting firms, legal firms and financial planners. He denied what Mr Owen had said regarding taking clients with him when he left the plaintiff's employ. He denied he had any interest in participating on the sophisticated strategy side of the business or disclosing anything that happened on that side, only wishing to continue employment as a retail broker.

After his employment was terminated, Mr Shade says that he went around looking for a job. One of the people to whom Mr Shade resorted for the purpose of getting a job was a person who was involved in the deployment of personnel in the area, a Mr McCann. In cross examination Mr Shade admitted that he told Mr
McCann that he had an existing client base, experience in hedge derivatives, money market and foreign exchange transactions and an in-depth knowledge of bank provisions. He also mentioned by name the strategy to which I have referred in these reasons as SATB. Mr Shade admits that this was a disclosure of confidential information. He said he told Mr McCann all the things which he thought would enhance his chances of employment. Mr Robinson then asked him: "So I want to put a proposition to you. You told Mr McCann that you were responsible for the execution and settlement of 
Twenty-First's proprietary rate based trades and equity based trades, forward conversions and (SATB). Do you agree you told him that?" 
A. "I may have said that, yes, I probably did say that." 
Mr McCann wrote down what was told to him by Mr Shade and that report went, amongst other places, to the second defendant, Taylor Collison.

I do not have to deal with whether the defendant's termination of employment was rightful or wrongful. However, some of the evidence that came out in that area has some bearing on the defendant's credibility. The defendant generally did not present well in the box. He tended to be over-confident and only faced up to reality after careful questioning in cross examination. The plaintiff's case is that the defendant's employment was terminated for unsatisfactory performance. It would appear the last straw for the plaintiff occurred in the last few days of the defendant's employment when Mr Shade made a mistake by buying instead of selling or vice versa, and then went out for a night on the town with his solicitor and one of his clients. All three got so drunk that the next day the defendant was found asleep under his desk. The defendant denied that he was asleep saying that he was just playing with two men in the dealing room and may have lay down under his desk for 15 minutes; he did not know exactly how long because he didn't have a stop watch. Mr Robinson put that this was just a lie and in fact Mr Shade was in a drunken sleep for more than 15 minutes. I do not make any finding of fact on these matters, but it seems to me that the strange response to the cross examination would make me discount Mr Shade's credibility value as a witness.

I return now to the Employment Agreement. The document recites that the employee's services are of a special, unique, unusual, extraordinary and intellectual character. Whilst that might be so to an extent with a sophisticated trading business, it certainly is not so with a discount broking business. The recital thus supports the defendant's argument.

However, the passage from the Employment Agreement which I set out earlier specifically refers to "the areas where Employer now or hereafter does business". Some paragraphs lower down, in a passage I have not previously set out, there is a covenant by the employee not to become interested in "any business activity that is competitive with ... the current or contemplated business of Employer, as reasonably known to Employee." These two provisions seem to me to show that what the employer was thinking to protect by the contract, and what the employee agreed to keep confidential, was not only the business in which he was employed immediately after the contract was signed, but all other aspects of the employer's business to which the defendant was assigned during the terms of his employment. Accordingly, I would find that if the contract is otherwise enforceable it applies to both lines of business of the plaintiff, that is, sophisticated trading transactions and discount broking.

Mr Russell then puts that the agreement is bad at common law as an unreasonable restraint of trade. Mr Robinson says that that is not the approach. Because of the operation of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/), the court looks at the particular breach of covenant sought to be restrained and will issue an injunction to restrain that breach "even though the covenant is expressed in terms so wide as to be void against public policy at common law."
Kone Elevators Pty Ltd versus McNay (1997) 19 ATPR 41-564 at 43,833. I think Mr
Robinson's approach is the way in which modern courts deal with this particular problem and I will follow it.

In the amended summons the plaintiff claims an injunction for the purpose of preventing the defendant from using directly or indirectly information of a confidential nature, including trading strategies, as well as the identity of the plaintiff's customers.

Dealing with this claim before mentioning the others, to an extent it is not opposed. Mr Shade says that he does not intend to divulge any confidential information, though he says that not all the information which the plaintiff seeks to protect could be called confidential. Whichever way one looks at it, the strategies are confidential. Mr Shade has already mentioned SATB to Mr
McCann and it would seem to me that an injunction should go to prevent Mr
Shade from further disclosing the full name of SATB or its content to any person for an appropriate period. As to an appropriate period, the evidence is that the strategies, no matter how closely kept to the chest of the inventor, do become known to the relevant community within six months or so. I would have thought that the plaintiff can be properly protected if the injunction goes for the balance of 1998.

There is not much use making an order which just mouths the words "confidential information" because there may very well be a dispute as to what is confidential information. Accordingly, the orders should be limited to the trading strategies.

I have considered whether the names of the customers are confidential.
Ordinarily, I would not have thought that this is so; see Metrans Pty Ltd v
Courtney-Smith [(1983) 1 IPR 185.] There will, however, be circumstances where confidentiality will exist, such as the case where there is a very small market for the employers' product or service. It does not, in my view, affect the position that the employee may know in general terms from his or her own knowledge rather than from any information deliberately abstracted from the employer's documents or databases, the general requirements of the customer.

After deep consideration, I do not consider that the names of the customers in the instant case come within the class of confidential information. This is because of a number of factors that are present in this case. The first is that the marketing is done not directly, but through solicitors, accountants or financial advisers, or at least that is the principal way of marketing.
Secondly, even if the defendant were involved in processing some parts of the sophisticated transactions, the name that he had would doubtless be the name of some company or nominee rather than the natural person behind it all.
Thirdly, the defendant would have been involved in speaking to almost all the discount broking clients. However these people were merely small share traders who were putting through two or three transactions a year. Although these clients were receiving more personalized attention than they might have received from the plaintiff's competitors, they were not receiving any financial advice from the defendant or any other operator. In my view, I should regard these transactions in a similar way to transactions effected over the counter at a local bank. A further important factor is that a significant proportion of the persons who dealt with the defendant were in fact people of his acquaintance rather than people who resorted to the plaintiff as such.

I then have to deal with three other matters. The first is whether, independently of the concept of confidentiality, the plaintiff is entitled to enjoin the solicitation by the defendant of the discount broking clients. The second is the length of time for which any injunction should be granted. The third is the question under [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the [Restraints of Trade Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/) contained in the defendant's counter-claim. This raises the question as to whether the plaintiff has manifestly failed to create a reasonable restriction and the consequences of such a failure should it be held to exist.

Dealing with solicitation, as JD Heydon says in The Restraint of Trade
Doctrine (Butterworths, London, 1971) at p 84, the first question to ask for both employee covenants and goodwill covenants is whether the covenantee has a legitimate or proprietary interest to protect. Confidential information or trade secrets are such an interest, goodwill is another. What is the interest protected by a covenant against solicitation? 
Heydon at p 92 suggests two possible answers, (a) that the employer has some property in the trust and confidence in the employee whom the employer has placed in a position to get to know the customers or (b) the prevention of unjust enrichment. There are difficulties with each theory. At p 108, Heydon deals with "customer contact" as a legitimate interest to protect, but notes that courts appear to be retreating from fully embacing this notion.

In Stenhouse Australia Ltd versus Phillips <case>; [[1974] AC 391], the Privy Council considered the case of a five year non- solicitation covenant by a former managing director of an insurance broking company. At p 400, Lord Wilberforce said, "...the employer's claim for protection must be based upon the identification of some advantage or asset inherent in the business which can properly be regarded as, in a general sense, his property, and which it would be unjust to allow the employee to appropriate for his own purposes, even though he, the employee, may have contributed to its creation." One must look carefully at the scope of the covenant bearing in mind all the circumstances and the "property" of the employer that needs protection.

The doctrine of customer connection requires the employee to be in a class where the customers regard the employee as the face of the employer's business. As Hoover, J put it in Arthur Murray Dance Studios of Cleveland
Inc versus Witter [105 NE (2d) 685], 706 (Ohio, ), "the personal relation between the employee and the customer (is) such as to enable the employee to control the customer's business as a personal asset." 
Nonetheless, courts seem to enforce some covenants against solicitation, though not others. There is then the further difficulty that injunctions against solicitation are very hard to enforce in practice. These are the principal reasons why in modern Australia the usual covenants are against trading in a particular field for a set term, rather than against solicitation. However, the instant covenant is against solicitation, and I must deal with it according to its terms.

Mr Robinson only seeks limited relief. The plaintiff asks for an injunction to restraint soliciting only in respect of persons who were customers of the plaintiff within the last two (or, alternatively, one) years of the plaintiff's employment.

Heydon analyses many of the cases on pp 110 et seq. That analysis shows that a court is more likely to hold the employer to have a proprietary right where the employee is in frequent face to face contact with the customers, where the employee alone knows the customers and their requirements and where the contact takes place away from the employers' premises. Furthermore, it is even more difficult for an employer to maintain that a covenant against solicitation protects a legitimate interest in the case of an employee who is in a subordinate position working under the supervision of others.

The fact that the employee has been extremely pleasant to customers so that in the natural course of events the customer might prefer to deal with him or her is usually considered not to be a result deriving from any property or property rights of the employer, but because of the employee's ingratiating personality, in which the employer acquires no property interest: Love v
Miami Laundry Co [160 So 32], 36 (Florida) (1935). It would not seem to me to be material that the employee was hired partly for his or her ingratiating personality or that the employee was instructed to be pleasant.

There is probably little to be gained by citing the cases referred to by
Heydon as one really has to build up the overview by an inductive process.
Again, it must be recognized that there are cases which reach a result outside the general rules. There are two reasons for this. First, each case must be looked at according to its own particular facts, secondly, cases based on public interest will to a considerable degree, be decided according to the culture of the age in which they are decided. As to this latter point, it is interesting to note that, even in 1936, this discounting factor was being applied to older cases, see Taxation Services of Australia Ltd versus Townsend <case>; [(1936) 37 SR 98], .

An example of this circumstance is Lyddon versus Thomas [(1901) 17 TLR ], where a judge restrained, pursuant to a covenant to that effect, a stockbroker's clerk from carrying on business within 50 miles of Cardiff,
Wales, for 20 years on the basis that that was a legitimate protection for the employer, the judge adding that "When a person of adult age and ordinary intelligence entered into a covenant a subsequent plea of unreasonableness came from him with a bad grace." 
Solicitation covenants by employees were more likely to be upheld before 1930 than afterwards. However, there have been reported cases since then upholding covenants, the most significant being the Taxation Services case, and the Stenhouse case mentioned above, Cash Orders (Amalgamated) Ltd v
Haynes <case>; [(1937) 37 SR 157](/cgi- bin/LawCite?cit=%281937%29%2037%20SR%20%28NSW%29%20157 "View LawCiteRecord" ); McLachlan Consultants Pty Ltd versus Boswell [(1988) 30 IR 417] and Barlow v Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd [(1995) 17 ATPR 41-376.] These cases generally fit within the general principles noted earlier.

Mr Robinson puts store on the words of Latham, CJ in Lindner versus Murdock's
Garage <case>; [(1950) 83 CLR 628], 633-4 that, "...an employee who is brought into personal contact with the customers of his employer may by agreement effectively bind himself to abstain after his term of service has been completed from soliciting the customers of his former employer. In these cases the covenant in restraint of trade is not a covenant against mere competition but is a covenant directed to securing a reasonable protection of the business interest of the employer, and in the circumstances is not unjust to the employee."
However, this passage assumes that the employer can establish a business interest that requires protection. As I have demonstrated, this will only be able to be shown in certain types of cases.

Mr Robinson also refers to cases such a Curro versus Beyond Productions Pty Ltd [(1993) 30 NSWLR 337] where the Court of Appeal considered the analagous covenant by an employee that she would not work for a competitor after termination. The case does contain some broad statements, but is distinguishable on the basis that it was in the special class of case connected with the entertainment industry.

I cannot see any legitimate interest of the employer in the instant case that needs to be protected by a non-solicitation covenant. The defendant is a relatively unskilled person who dealt over the telephone at the employers' premises with discount broking clients who traded relatively infrequently.
Thus, I do not consider that the non-solicitation covenant is valid.

The next question is the time for which the injunction should be granted. Mr
Robinson suggested first two years, or, alternatively, one year and, in argument weaked to nine months. He submits that the real question is, how long would it take a new employee to put himself or herself in a position to make sure that the customers would resort to the plaintiff rather than to the defendant? 
This would be the test where the covenant was against trading in a particular field or against non-solicitation. However, with a covenant designed to prevent misuse of confidential information, the real question is how long the information will remain confidential. This is an industry where information goes "off the boil" quickly. I cannot see how an injunction for more than about six months can be justified. I will grant an injunction in limited form up to 1 January 1999.

It follows that the plaintiff is entitled to some relief, but not the full relief which it seeks. Indeed, the orders which are set out in the amended summons even to the extent to which the plaintiff has succeeded are in such a form that it would be very difficult to enforce them.

In the earlier version of these reasons, I did not deal with the cross claim as I could see no real purpose in doing so. However, Mr Russell has asked me to deal with it specifically, and I will do so.

The cases which I reviewed in Kone Elevators Pty Ltd versus McNay [(1997) 19
ATPR 41-563] at p 43,828 show that the employee must establish as a pre- condition for relief that there was a manifest failure by the person who framed the covenant to create a reasonable covenant. I consider that this pre- condition has been made out. This is principally because the American drafter did not take Australian law into account, and thus made no real attempt to create a reasonable covenant by Australian standards.

However, the cross claim does not succeed merely because the pre-condition has been made out. The cross claimant must establish also that the covenant should be treated by the court as totally invalid or valid up to a certain extent only.

Because the plaintiff only seeks to enforce the covenant within certain limits, it is quite otiose to consider whether or not, had the plaintiff taken some other attitude, the Court would or would not have invalidated some or all of such parts. Thus the question is whether I think fit to invalidate that part of the covenant which the plaintiff seeks to enforce.

I cannot see any valid reason for doing so. The defendant was in a business involving some confidences. He threatened to breach confidence if he left the plaintiff's employ and he has in fact breached confidence already. The employer is entitled to have its confidential material protected. Thus the cross claim should be dismissed.

As the final injunction is in narrower terms than the interlocutory order and as the defendant may well have suffered damage by that fact, the defendant is entitled to an enquiry as to damages if he so requires.

I will hear counsel as to the form of the Order that should be made. I would think that it should be such as the following:-
The first defendant by himself his servants and agents is restrained from disclosing to any person up to and including January 1999 any details including the name of any trading strategy method or operation of the plaintiff.
The defendant may, if he files a notice of motion no later than 31 August have an enquiry before the Master as to the damages caused to him by the interlocutory injunction being in wider terms to that which the plaintiff was entitled.

I will then hear counsel on costs.

APPENDIX 
Mr Robinson, for the plaintiff, seeks me to withdraw or supplement the reasons
I delivered on 14 July, 1998. He says that I have overlooked some of the matters which he argued last month.

Mr Russell, for the defendant, says that I should not permit Mr Robinson to raise these matters. He says, and his submission is based on the decision of the High Court in Autodesk Inc versus Dyson <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 300], that leave to reopen a matter after reasons for judgment have been handed down, even though there has been no formal entry of the judgment, is something to be given only in exceptional circumstances.

The first thing to note is the decision relied on is a decision of the High
Court. The High Court has for many years adopted the policy that not even submissions made in writing the day after the court's oral hearing will be take into account, and that counsel either says what needs to be said on the day or not at all.

The practice in the Equity Division of this court has not been so severe.
Indeed, it quite frequently happens in this Court that counsel uninvited put in further written submissions before the judge delivers judgment. Leave, as far as I know, has never been sought on these occasions, though if counsel does not communicate with the Judge's Associate, counsel runs the risk judgment will be delivered before the written submissions are seen. Indeed, this is a tactic often used by counsel to remind the judge that he has been sitting on the judgment too long.

Further, the procedure in the Equity Division has been that because counsel are in court to assist the judge, rather than with the prime purpose of winning the case, a freer attitude is taken to reopening decisions than may be the case elsewhere.

Accordingly, although the Autodesk case does set out some general principles, it is important that one apply those principles in the facts and circumstances of the procedure of each particular court.

However, in any event, where counsel says that the court has not dealt with his client's arguments and has not given proper reasons for the decision the court has made, then in my view counsel is entitled to be heard because the court has not yet got to the stage where there has been finality in the litigation. That is what Mr Robinson says has happened, and I believe that I am duty bound to hear him. If I were not so bound, then I would give leave.

The alternative to not hearing Mr Robinson is for him to make an application to the Court of Appeal and then, perhaps, years down the track, the Court of
Appeal will decide that inadequate reasons have been given and send the matter back to me. It is far more convenient to keep to the existing practice in this
Division, and that is, when these applications are timeously made to deal with them.

I should note that the matters which Mr Robinson says he raised last month accord with my brief notes of argument. I believe part of the problem was that the argument advanced at such a fast pace, that some matters were put in a shorthand way. This may have led to the opponent not appreciating their full significance and my overlooking them. I do not consider that this is a case where the plaintiff, having lost on some issues, is seeking to put arguments which could have been put previously, but were not.

Accordingly, I rule against the submission that I should not hear Mr Robinson further.
 * * * 
