

Cigna Insurance Australia Limited and Others versus Csr Limited and Others No.
/1995 [1995] NSWSC 64 (9 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
ROLFE J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 26, 27, 31 July and 1 August 1995 #DATE 15:8:1995 #ADD 9:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs    Mr R.R. Stitt QC
Mr J.T. Gleeson and 
Mr Andrew Bell 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs  Phillips Fox 
Counsel for CSR Limited   
Mr T.F. Bathurst QC and
Mr J.T. Kelly SC 
Solicitors for CSR Limited    Freehill Hollingdale and Page 
Counsel for CSR America     Mr F.M. Douglas QC 
Solicitors for CSR America    Allen Allen and Hemsley
ORDER
Injunction granted 
INDEX
Introduction  (a) The Parties para. 1
The Circumstances Giving Rise To The Present Litigation para. 8
The Proceedings Brought In New Jersey para. 11
The New South Wales Proceedings para. 24
The Course Of The
New South Wales Proceedings para. 32
The Present Issue para. 35
Objections To Foreign Jurisdictions para. 45
The Contract Contended
For In The New South Wales Proceedings para. 50
The "Exclusive Jurisdiction" Clause para. 127
Estoppel para. 130
Vexation, Oppression and Harassment para. 141
Negative Declarations para. 154
Conclusions Thus Far And The Balance of Convenience para. 165
Orders para.

JUDGE1
Introduction
The Parties
ROLFE J CSR Limited, ("CSR"), is an Australian public company with its principal place of business at 1 O'Connell Street, Sydney. It is engaged, inter alia, in the sugar and building materials businesses and, from approximately to 1966, it acted as sales agent for one of its subsidiaries, Midalco Pty Limited, in selling raw asbestos fibre mined at
Wittenoom in Western Australia to certain companies carrying on business in the United States. A major buyer was JohnsManville International.
Part of Annexure "C" to the affidavit of Paul William O'Brien is a copy of
CSR's motion to dismiss, for lack of personal jurisdiction, certain proceedings commenced against it in the United States District Court, Northern
District of Illinois, Eastern Division. Part of that motion is an affidavit of
Mr P.H.T. Lovell, who was then the secretary of CSR. He deposed, inter alia, that CSR is an Australian limited liability company with its principal place of business in Sydney, is a holding company for a subsidiary which has previously mined raw asbestos in Australia, and has never been licensed to do business in the State of Illinois. In paragraph 7 he said:- "Prior to 1966, CSR acted as a sales agent for Australian
Blue Asbestos Limited, a subsidiary of CSR, in connection with shipments of raw asbestos fiber, mined in Western
Australia, FOB Fremantle, Australia to Johns-Manville
International then headquartered in New York City ... CSR has no knowledge that any raw asbestos mined by its subsidiary was ever in fact transferred from the State into which it was originally delivered into the State of Illinois.
CSR had no knowledge and never anticipated that said raw mined asbestos, which was shipped by its subsidiary FOB Fremantle,
Australia to American based buyers, would be transferred into the State of Illinois."
He deposed that CSR did not have any office or business facility in the
State of Illinois, has never had any employee in that State, has never owned any real or personal property in that State, does not solicit any business and has never negotiated nor entered into a contract or substantially performed a contract in that State, and has not committed any tortious act within the
State.
CSR America Inc, ("CSR America"), is organised under the laws of the State of
Georgia, was incorporated in 1981, and has its registered and principal office in Atlanta, Georgia. It has no office, place of business or operations in Australia. It is a wholly owned subsidiary of CSR Investments Overseas
Limited which, in turn, is a wholly owned subsidiary of CSR. It is governed by a Board of Directors of whom all, save one, are resident in the United
States,, and none of its senior management is an employee of CSR. It is solely responsible for paying its employees and providing benefits for them. It has no employees, who are also employees of CSR.
CSR America has assets of $US1.4b in the United States, where it maintains manufacturing and processing facilities. It is a major supplier of materials to the North American building and construction industry, and is the largest producer of concrete pipe, concrete block and pre-mixed concrete and the fourth largest producer of aggregate product in the United States. An affidavit by its Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer, Mr Richard Robert
Peacock, sworn on 25 July , sets out the matters to which I have referred and, further, that it has "a business focus distinct from CSR", and is in no way a conduit for the transaction of CSR's business.
CIGNA Insurance Australia Limited, ("CIGNA Australia"), is an insurer carrying on business in Australia, which is not authorised to conduct insurance business in New Jersey. It offers insurance, from time to time, on a world-wide basis and carries on insurance business "in a substantial way". It appears from the evidence that CIGNA
Australia is probably a wholly owned subsidiary of CIGNA International Holdings which, in turn, is a wholly owned subsidiary of CIGNA
Corporation, although it may be, and for present purposes it does not seem to matter particularly, that CIGNA Australia is a wholly owned subsidiary of CIGNA Corporation, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of
CIGNA International Holdings. There was evidence that within the CIGNA organisation the Insurance Company of North America "is a part of" CIGNA
Australia, although the nature of the relationship is not clear. Once again, for present purposes, I do not think that matters.
On 19 July 1995 CIGNA Australia and a number of other insurers set forth in Schedule A of the Summons issued a Summons in proceedings 50133 of 1995 in the Commercial Division of this Court, ("the New South Wales proceedings").
CIGNA Australia and each of the insurers set forth in Schedule A were lead insurers, which had insured CSR and, in a number of instances, its subsidiaries, on and after 2 November 1978. The New South Wales proceedings joined CSR as the first defendant and CSR America as the second defendant. The third defendant is stated to be Excess Insurance Company
Limited and the entities set out in Schedule B. Those are all excess layer insurers, which provided such insurance to the lead insurers.
The excess layer insurers were joined as defendants because the New South Wales proceedings were brought on, for reasons to which
I shall refer, at very short notice and, within the available time, it was not possible for the plaintiffs in the New South Wales proceedings to obtain the concurrence of the excess layer insurers to be joined as plaintiffs and, in consequence, they were Joined, in the first instance, as defendants. As they have agreed to become plaintiffs the Summons has been amended to reflect the change of status. It will, in due course, be necessary to consider the position of the insurers and CIGNA Corporation in more detail.
 
The Circumstances Giving Rise To The Present Litigation
CSR has been engaged, over a lengthy period, in litigation brought by many thousands of people who allege they have suffered illness as a consequence of inhaling asbestos fibre, or by the relatives and dependants of persons who have died, allegedly as a consequence of illness caused by the inhalation of asbestos fibre. CSR has been engaged in the litigation mainly as a third party or cross-defendant in circumstances where those suffering from such illness, or their dependants, have sued their employers, which required them to work with asbestos material thereby enabling asbestos fibre to be inhaled. In some cases CSR has been sued directly. These proceedings caused CSR to consider its position as against its insurers from time to time.
On 1 May 1992, in proceedings 50166 of 1992 in the Commercial Division of this Court, CSR and Midalco Pty
Limited, as plaintiffs, instituted proceedings against The New Zealand Insurance Company Limited, NZI Corporation Limited,
NZI Insurance
Australia Limited, South British Insurance Company Limited and
The United Insurance Company Limited. Those proceedings were settled on 7
March 1995 but, during their currency, CSR instituted proceedings in the
Superior Court of New Jersey, Law Division, Middlesex
County, seeking to have determined the liability of The New Zealand Insurance Company Limited and NZI
Insurance Australia Limited to indemnify it for claims made in the United
States. On 2 November 1994 I granted a permanent injunction restraining CSR from continuing with those proceedings: CSR Limited and Anor versus The New Zealand
Insurance Company Limited and Ors (2 November 1994 - as yet unreported).
It will be necessary to refer to my judgment in those proceedings, to which I shall refer in this judgment as "CSR versus NZI".
 .
After the settlement of those proceedings CSR and CSR America instituted proceedings against the insurers, being the plaintiffs and the defendants in the New South Wales proceedings, in New Jersey. Those insurers were on risk at times different from those when the defendants in proceedings 50166 of 1992 were on risk. CSR and CSR America did not give any prior notice to the insurers of the intention to commence the proceedings in New Jersey.
 
The Proceedings Brought In New Jersey
By a Complaint issued on 23
June 1995 out of the United States District
Court, District of New Jersey, being case number 95- 2947(HAA), ("the New
Jersey proceedings"),
CSR and CSR America, as plaintiffs, sued a large number of insurance companies being the lead and excess layer insurers to which
I have referred. In the summary of the Complaint it is stated:- "This action seeks damages, as well as declaratory and injunctive relief, with respect to defendant insurers' failure to defend and indemnify CSR and CSR America in the more than forty thousand claims that have been asserted against one or both of them in the United States alleging bodily injuries as a result of exposure to asbestos fiber sold by CSR and/or one of its subsidiaries."
It is stated that "to date" CSR has expended more than $20m in settlement of approximately two thousand asbestos claims in the United States, of which approximately $18m was to settle ,800 claims by New Jersey plaintiffs arising out of alleged exposure to CSR asbestos at or near a plant in that State.
It is further stated that although CSR America has never been involved in the asbestos business, and its existence post-dates all the sales of fibre by
CSR, CSR America has been sued for CSR's alleged torts in more than 2,000 claims in the United States and:- "Despite the fact that CSR had broad general and products liability insurance coverage with the defendants containing no asbestos-related exclusions for many years beginning
November 2, 1978, defendants have failed and refused to pay any of the
Plaintiffs' costs in connection with the defense or settlement of any of the asbestos-related claims."
There is no evidence that any such claims against CSR America are pending in New Jersey.
The Complaint is divided into sections dealing with Jurisdiction and
Venue; The Parties; The Asbestos Litigation Against CSR and CSR America;
Inception Of The INA/CIGNA Coverage Programme; The 1981
Retroactive Coverage
Endorsement; The Policies To CSR; and The Events of 1991/1992. It sets forth various counts for breach of contract; declaratory and injunctive relief-, tortious interference with contractual relations and with prospective economic advantage; misrepresentation; violation of Section 1 of the Sherman Act; and violation of NJ Stat. Ann. Section 56:9-3.
Firstly, CSR and CSR America seek to make the insurers, being both the lead and the excess layer insurers, liable in so far as CSR and CSR America have been found to be or may be found to be liable for asbestos-related claims instituted in the United States under the various policies of insurance, which were issued.
Thereafter the Complaint deals with the various claims for damages, the third count asserting tortious interference with contractual relations. In paragraph 46 it is alleged:- "In the event CIGNA is not the alter ego of the other
CIGNA
Organisation defendants named in this Complaint, CIGNA, with the purpose of forcing CSR to withdraw the 1991 Claims, and as part of a scheme to limit coverage of asbestos claims in the United States, directed or persuaded CIGNA Australia not to provide coverage for the 1991 claims, (ii) to misrepresent to CSR the nature of its historical coverage, not to renew CSR's general and products liability coverage for 1992-1993 unless CSR withdraw the 1991 Claims, and (iv) to gather the support of Other Underwriters in refusing to provide such coverage unless the 1991 Claims were withdrawn." .
To appreciate the allegations being made it is necessary to understand that "CIGNA" is earlier defined in the Complaint as CIGNA
Corporation and "CIGNA Organisation" is intended to refer collectively to CIGNA Australia,
INA, ("Insurance Company of North America"), and CIGNA. The words "Other
Underwriters" is defined as meaning "a number of other insurers", which provided primary and excess liability coverage to CSR. They are set forth in
Exhibit A to the Complaint to the extent they are known to CSR.
There is an allegation in the Complaint that a letter written by the
Deputy Managing Director of CSR to CIGNA Australia dated 17 March 1992, with which
I will have to deal in detail later, was written as a consequence of duress and coercion brought to bear upon CSR by the CIGNA Organisation.
The duress and coercion is said to have arisen from conduct by CIGNA Organisation threatening not to renew CSR's 'insurance for the /1993 period, and the letter is referred to in the Complaint as "The Coerced Withdrawal Letter", on the basis that it withdrew claims made in a letter of 29 November 1991.
Against this background I note paragraph 47 of the Complaint, which states:- "If coverage for the 1991 Claims is barred in whole or in part by The Coerced Withdrawal Letter, then CIGNA's wrongful and coercive conduct intentionally and maliciously interfered with CSR's contractual relations with CIGNA Australia and 
Other Underwriters and deprived CSR of the economic advantages to which it was entitled and which it reasonably expected to obtain in the future from its agreements with CIGNA Australia and Other Underwriters."
In these circumstances it is alleged CIGNA, i.e. CIGNA Corporation, is liable to CSR for damages caused by its wrongful conduct: paragraph 48.
The next count deals with tortious, interference with prospective economic advantage and, in reliance on The Coerced Withdrawal Letter, alleges that if it operates to bar coverage the conduct of CIGNA and/or CIGNA
Australia "intentionally and maliciously interfered with CSR's reasonable expectation of economic advantage from potential agreements with insurers who, in the absence of interference from the
CIGNA Organisation, would have provided general and products liability insurance to CSR without requiring withdrawal by CSR of the Claims". In these circumstances CIGNA and/or
CIGNA Australia are said to be liable to CSR for damages. The next count is for misrepresentation and once again CSR claims damages from CIGNA and/or
CIGNA Australia.
The next two counts are based respectively on violation of s.1 of the
Sherman Act and of NJ Stat Ann Section 56:9-3. They rely, essentially, on the facts to which I have referred, and each alleges that the CIGNA Organisation is liable to CSR for statutory damages. CSR America does not claim any entitlement to damages under these various count.
 
The New South Wales Proceedings
By the Summons to which I have referred CIGNA Australia and the lead insurers, as plaintiffs, sued CSR, CSR America, and Excess Insurance Company
Limited "and those entities set out in
Schedule B hereto", they being the excess layer insurers: ("the New South Wales proceedings").
The Summons, in reliance upon events in late 1991 and early 1992 seeks a declaration as to the form in which the various policies of public and/or product liability insurance were issued by the insurers to CSR on and after 2
November 1978, including the terms and exclusions contained in those policies; and an order "to the extent necessary" rectifying the wording in the policy so as to include certain exclusions in relation to asbestos claims in the periods of coverage provided by the various policies. A declaration is sought that the policies, on their proper construction and after rectification (if necessary), do not respond to any of the claims that have been asserted against CSR and
CSR America in the United States in relation to asbestos-related claims. In the alternative a declaration is sought that in letters dated 17 March 1992 and 28 April 1992 from CSR to CIGNA Australia, CSR agreed with the insurers (or some of them) that the policies in question did not and were not intended to extend to asbestos-related claims with respect to the operation of the
Wittenoom mine and/or the sale of asbestos mined thereat; the policies excluded any liability in respect of personal injury or property damage resulting from asbestos and/or related disease directly caused by or contributed to by the manufacturing, mining, processing, removal, transport, distribution and/or storage of asbestos, asbestos products or use of any product containing asbestos; and CSR would not make any further claims or commence litigation under the policies in relation to asbestos claims in either the United States or Australia.
In the alternative a declaration is sought that CSR is estopped from denying that the policies entered into by it with the insurers (or some of them) contained an exclusion for asbestos-related claims with respect to the operation of the Wittenoom mine and/or the sale of asbestos mined thereat; claims made against CSR in respect of personal injury or property damage resulting from asbestos and/or related disease directly caused by or contributed to by the manufacturing, mining, processing, removal, transport,, distribution and/or storage of asbestos, asbestos products or use of any product containing asbestos; and the asbestos claims brought in the United
States or Australia.
Declarations are sought that the insurers are entitled to avoid the policies on the grounds of non-disclosure by CSR, and that none of the insurers are obliged to indemnify CSR in respect of claims asserted by it and
CSR
America in the United States or in Australia or elsewhere arising out of asbestos-related claims.
A declaration is sought that the insurers are entitled to refuse to indemnify CSR and CSR America on the grounds of failure to notify them of the claims; failure to prove loss; the unauthorised and unreasonable settlement of such claims in the United States; other exclusions and the occurrence based language of the policies.
A declaration is sought that none of the insurers is liable to CSR and
CSR America for tortious interference with the contractual relations of the first and second defendants; tortious interference with the prospective economic advantage of CSR and CSR America; misrepresentation in relation to the extent of the coverage provided by the insurers under the policies; any breach of duty of good faith and fair dealing; and any violation of the
Sherman Act or other United States anti-trust legislation or any other United
States legislation asserted and, further, that the United States statutes and general law "do not have any application to any of the conduct of" the insurers in relation to the United States asbestos claims and/or the policies.
A declaration is claimed that CSR America was never an insured under any of the policies and cannot recover any indemnity from the insurers; and that
CSR and CSR America have breached [ss.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s42.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) respectively by falsely representing to CIGNA
Australia the time within which it had to file an Answer in New Jersey.
Certain consequential relief is sought.
A submission was made that the relief sought by the insurers was, essentially, for negative declarations and that was a typical indicium of "forum shopping".
 
The Course Of The New South Wales Proceedings
The New Jersey proceedings were instituted without any prior notice to the insurers, which only became aware of them when service was sought to be effected.
In these circumstances they made application for urgent ex parte relief. On 19 July 1995 I granted an anti-anti-suit injunction on an ex parte basis restraining CSR, by itself or through CSR America, from taking any steps to obtain from the New Jersey Court or any other United States District or
Federal or State or Superior Court an order restraining or purporting to restrain the insurers from commencing and continuing proceedings 50133 of 1995 or seeking other relief which, in general terms, would have that effect.
I extended the operation of the injunction until 4 pm on Friday, 21 July 1995, or earlier further order, and I made it returnable at 11 am on 21 July 1995.
On that day the injunction was not continued in circumstances to which I referred in a judgment I gave.
I made certain orders and, in the result, a
Notice of Motion for the continuance of an anti-suit action by the 'insurers against
CSR and CSR America was made returnable at 10 am on Wednesday, 26 July
On that day Mr R.R. Stitt of Queen's Counsel, Mr J.T.
Gleeson of Counsel and Mr A. Bell of Counsel appeared for the insurers, Mr T.F. Bathurst of
Queen's. Counsel and Mr J.C. Kelly of
Senior Counsel appeared for CSR, and Mr
F.M. Douglas of Queen's Counsel appeared for CSR America. The appearances by on behalf of
CSR and CSR America was on the basis that they would not be filing a Notice of
Appearance, such as to make them amenable to the jurisdiction, but would be resisting the continuance of the anti-suit injunction and seeking a stay and, to that latter end,
Notices of Motion were filed in Court, although they have not, as yet, been argued. The hearing of the insurers' anti-suit injunction took place on 26, 27 and 31 July and 1 August 1995 on which latter date I reserved my decision.
In the meantime the status quo is being maintained by various orders and undertakings.
 
The Present Issue
The issue before me is whether I should grant an anti-suit injunction at the suit of the insurers restraining CSR and CSR America from proceeding with the Complaint brought by them in New Jersey. The grant of an anti-suit injunction, whereby a litigant is restrained from instituting or continuing proceedings in a foreign jurisdiction, has been described as the affording of an extraordinary remedy, which will only be granted in most exceptional circumstances and after the exercise of great judicial restraint. In CSR versus NZI
I traced the authorities, which enunciated those principles, and described how, in my opinion, effect should be given to them. I do not find it necessary, in these reasons, to repeat the lengthy reference to those authorities, which I made in that judgment. These requirements are not, however, applied with such stringency if it can be established that there is an agreement not to sue, or an agreement only to sue in the jurisdiction in which the injunction is sought.
The matter has been presented to me for determination on the basis that an interlocutory injunction is being sought.
In those circumstances it seemed to be common ground that the plaintiffs must establish that there is a serious issue, or that there are serious issues, to be tried, and that the balance of convenience favours the grant of relief The applicable principles are set forth in Kolback Securities Limited versus Epoch Mining NL [(1987) 8 NSWLR 533.] At p.536 McLelland J, after referring to the Court's not normally undertaking a preliminary trial, recognised there were some cases where it was appropriate to see where the balance of the risk of doing an injustice lay to evaluate the strength of the plaintiff's case for final relief. One such circumstance is where the grant of interlocutory relief will in a practical sense determine the substance of the matter in issue. There may be, because of the principle of comity and the position of various of the parties in the New Jersey proceedings, other discretionary considerations to which regard must be had.
A basal requirement to attract the jurisdiction is the establishment by the plaintiffs of an equity or equities, which will ground the grant of injunctive relief In this case it has been submitted by the insurers that the equity arises in the following ways.
Firstly, it was submitted that CSR agreed it would not bring any proceedings against the insurers based on the policies of insurance. This agreement, at least initially as
I understood it, was said to be based on two letters written by CSR dated 17 March and 28 April 1992. If it can be shown that there is a serious issue to be tried as to the existence of such an agreement the task of the insurers will, for the reasons I have suggested, be the easier.
Secondly, it was submitted that on a proper construction of the policies there was an agreement by CSR that it would only sue the insurers in a Court in Australia, with one possible exception where, in a printed form, it was provided for action to be taken in the United States. The insurers submitted this was clearly an error, such that that policy should be rectified.
Thirdly, it was submitted that CSR is estopped by its conduct from bringing the New
Jersey proceedings, the facts allegedly giving rise to the estoppel arising from the same matters as are said to give rise to the contract as initially formulated.
Fourthly, it was submitted that the New Jersey proceedings are and will be oppressive for the following reasons:- 
The New Jersey Court has no natural connection with the dispute between the insurers and CSR and CSR America, and is "an inconvenient forum".
The New Jersey proceedings duplicate the New South Wales proceedings in circumstances where New South Wales is the natural forum with the consequence of increasing costs, making it difficult to conduct both sets of proceedings, and giving rise to the possibility of inconsistent findings of fact and decisions of law.
It will be necessary for parties seeking to challenge the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Court and, thereafter, if such challenge is unsuccessful, to defend those proceedings, in so far as the parties are not authorised to carry on insurance business in that State, to lodge a bond before they will be permitted to challenge the jurisdiction and there will be a significant risk of a bond's being required even if CSR and
CSR America do not request the lodgment or posting of it.
There will be considerable expense, including loss of executive time, in challenging the jurisdiction of the New
Jersey Court and, if that is not successful, in defending the proceedings.
No costs will be recovered by the successful party or parties in the New Jersey proceedings. This, of course, works both ways.
In this area of the law vexation, oppression or harassment is not, per se, considered a reason for granting injunctive relief, it being recognised that to be sued, even once, may lead to those consequences, and to be sued twice will exaggerate the situation. For vexation, oppression or harassment to operate to give rise to the necessary equity, it must be shown that the proceedings in the Court of a foreign jurisdiction have been brought with that express purpose or, alternatively, have that effect and, thereby, impact adversely on the preparation and presentation of the proceedings in this Court and, in that way, interfere, or seek to interfere, with the judicial processes of this Court. Thus the interference is defined as unconscionable.
In CSR v
NZI I said that the first matter for decision was whether the proceedings were commenced "to put pressure on the defendants and to assist CSR overcome the dilemma in relation to the preparation of its case". After considering the facts I concluded that whilst CSR did not act improperly, in the sense of making a deliberate decision to bring pressure to bear on the defendants, its conduct had that result, with the consequence that the defendants were vexed and oppressed such that the conduct of CSR was vexatious and oppressive thereby creating the equity and justifying the grant of the injunction.
The factual matters raised by the insurers, in the context of proceedings having been commenced first in New Jersey, go to vexation and oppression of the first type to which
I have referred, rather than the second. By that I mean the matters to which I have referred and of which complaint is made are, essentially, what one would expect to find if a party is sued in a foreign
Court. It will be necessary to look at those matters in a little more detail later.
However Mr Stitt also presented a submission predicated on the question as to why CSR would wish to commence proceedings in New Jersey having regard to the facts that it is an Australian-based company, that it entered into the policies of insurance in Australia, that by proceeding in Australia it can proceed only against the lead insurers and thereby bind the other insurers, that the allegations of duress and oppression on which it relies took place in
New South Wales and that CSR America does not appear to have any liability in the United States for an asbestos-related claim, notwithstanding that it has been sued, and, perhaps more importantly, it is not seeking damages under the
Sherman Act or the other provisions upon which CSR relies. In these circumstances Mr Stitt has submitted that the only inference to be drawn from the commencement of the proceedings in the United
States, which are bound to be confronted with objections as to jurisdiction and forum at the threshold, and which, for reasons to which I shall refer, will lead to fragmentation in the proceedings, is that it was done for the purpose of vexing, oppressing and harassing the insurers. He contrasts this with the fact that the New South
Wales proceedings will enable all issues between the parties to be determined and, at least implicit in his submission, is a reference to the decision taken by the Board of CSR on 11 April 1995 that:- "The Board considered and approved the recommendation that legal proceedings be commenced in the United States against its former insurer, CIGNA, seeking indemnity in respect of asbestos related claims against the Company." 
The heading to the Board Minute is:- "CIGNA Proceedings - Asbestos Litigation Update".
Mr Stitt pointed out that all the Board had approved was the commencement of legal proceedings against CIGNA for indemnity, which, on its face, would lead to the conclusion that all that was being sought was recovery under the policies, and not the additional claims for damages.
 
Objections To Foreign Jurisdictions
The usual way in which the jurisdiction of a foreign country is attacked is by seeking a stay of the proceedings on the basis that that Court does not have jurisdiction or is a forum non conveniens. These concepts are thoroughly well understood and applied in the Courts of New Jersey. By taking this course the Court in which the proceedings have been instituted is able to determine for itself whether it will entertain them. It is not entirely clear whether the Courts of New Jersey have adopted the test propounded by the High Court in
Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited and Anor <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538], namely that a New Jersey Court must be "a clearly inappropriate forum", rather than a test depending on a comparison of the appropriateness of two possible Courts.
I have referred to the way in which an anti-suit injunction must be considered, it being regarded as a more "aggressive" remedy than an application for a stay. Whilst it acts to restrain the litigant in another
Court, by doing so, it impinges upon the ability of the other Court to exercise jurisdiction in a certain case and, in those circumstances, the principle of comity becomes one to which careful regard must be had. The authorities to which I referred in CSR versus NZI emphasise this.
 .
There is no principle that a Court, considering whether it should grant an anti-suit injunction, may look at the matter on a simply "administrative" basis. that I mean there is no authority for the proposition that, in the absence of the ability to stay proceedings or to grant an anti-suit injunction, with all the findings the providing of such relief necessitates, the Court of one jurisdiction can simply say that as a matter of administration, e.g. of preventing the fragmentation of proceedings with the inconvenience that involves, it is obviously sensible, at least in that
Court's opinion, that all the proceedings be heard in one jurisdiction rather than another or rather than partially in two. Bearing in mind the pressure on courts to hear cases, as I understand it, all over the world, it seems strange that no such test has ever been propounded. On the other hand one is appreciative of the fact that there are many policy reasons, which may preclude that approach being taken. Whatever my view about the sensibleness of an "administrative" approach the law does not allow me to adopt it and the principles I have to apply in considering whether to grant an anti-suit injunction are well established.
I think it should also be noted that injunctive relief of the type sought in the present proceedings, when granted on a final basis, does not determine substantive rights between the parties, as normally a final injunction does, but determines only that the proceedings are to continue in one Court, rather than another. The granting of interlocutory relief, however, leads to the further enquiry as to whether relief should be granted on a permanent basis.
In the context of these general considerations I think it appropriate to refer to the fragmentation of proceedings. As matters presently stand the New
Jersey proceedings and the New South Wales proceedings will go ahead in a parallel fashion. That may be altered by the grant of an anti-suit injunction or by the grant of a stay but, assuming it is not, essentially the same issues will be raised in New South Wales and New Jersey.
In the New Jersey proceedings the Court will be limited to determining whether CSR and CSR
America, or either of them, is entitled to relief in the United States under the policies, and whether the actions of the insurers, or some of them, alleged to have taken place in New South Wales, give rise to the tortious consequences and consequences under the Sherman Act and other similar United
States legislation for what CSR and CSR America contend. The New South Wales proceedings will involve a consideration of whether the insurers are liable at all for any claims made upon them by CSR and CSR America and, to that extent, and subject to a matter to which I shall refer, there will be a duplication of the proceedings. The matter I just mentioned was that if judgment is recovered in one Court, prior to its being recovered in the other, there would arise defences, arguably, of res judicata, and, perhaps, issue estoppel. One has, therefore, the somewhat quaint notion of parties seeking a determination of issues in two Courts with the possible consequence that the first Court, which determines the issue or issues, may well determine it for the proceedings in the second Court.
This, to me, leads to a strange conclusion as one contemplates parties busying themselves to fight the same issues, no doubt at vast expense, in two jurisdictions. But, as I have said, that will not be prevented simply by reference to an administrative type decision, but rather by reference to legal principles involving stays of proceeding and antisuit injunctions. To some extent, however, these considerations add weight to Mr
Stitt's submission as to why CSR, in all the circumstances of this case, is persisting with proceedings in New Jersey, which cannot determine all the issues and which will confront the difficulties to which he referred, when the
New
South Wales proceedings provide what, he submits, is a far more convenient forum for that to be achieved.
 
The Contract Contended
For In The New South Wales Proceedings
Against this background and conformably with the relevant principles, as
I understand them, it is convenient to consider the various bases upon which
Mr Stitt sought to satisfy the Court of the existence of an equity or equities entitling the insurers to the relief sought. Firstly, he relied upon a contract which, in his submission, constituted a release and an agreement not to sue in respect of the same subject matter, which now forms the basis of the
New Jersey proceedings.
It is necessary to deal with the way in which it is submitted this contract arose.
In paragraph 12 of the original Summons it was pleaded that by letter dated 29 November 1991 to CIGNA Australia, CSR sought indemnity from various of the insurers in respect of the Australian and the United States asbestos claims, and other asbestos claims, and, in paragraph 13, that after that indemnity was sought negotiations took place between representatives of the parties in New South Wales. In paragraph 14 it was pleaded that following those negotiations CSR, by its letter to CIGNA Australia dated 17 March 1992:- "... withdrew the claims and acknowledged that its liability insurance coverage under the policies between the years 1979 and 1988 did not and was not intended to extend to asbestos-related claims with respect to the operation of the Wittenoom mine and/or the sale of asbestos mined at
Wittenoom."
Paragraph 15 pleaded that by letter dated 28 April 1992 from CSR to CIGNA
Australia, CSR acknowledged certain exclusions in the policies, which were then expiring. Upon this basis rectification and other declarations were sought and, in paragraph , it was pleaded that the letters "constituted a contract" between CSR and the insurers (or some of them). Paragraphs 20 and 21 pleaded respectively a written and an implied term of that contract.
There was no allegation, in the pleadings, of the consideration to support the contract moving from CSR. In his oral submissions in chief on 27
July 1995 Mr Stitt submitted the consideration for the bargain was that the insurers would take no action against CSR under the existing policies as was envisaged in a letter written by Mr Scotford of Messrs Ebsworth and Ebsworth dated 20 February 1992 and, in particular, they would not seek to cancel the policies pursuant to [s.58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s58.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/).
Mr Bathurst submitted that there was no consideration, of the type for which Mr Stitt contended, because in the letter of March 1992 there was noted an express reservation by the insurers of all the rights asserted by them in Mr Scotford's letter.
Accordingly, so the submission ran, there was no agreement by the insurers not to take the action contemplated in that letter, because any such agreement was in direct conflict with the statements in the letter. Subsequently, on 1 August 1995, Mr Stitt added that the consideration included that the insurers would consider renewal, provided terms and conditions were acceptable, and that they did not move the Court for a declaration of entitlement to avoid the policies or to cancel them.
In the course of his submissions in reply, in the context of which Mr
Stitt added the consideration to which I have just referred, he submitted, at one stage, that the letter from Mr Scotford of 20 February 1992 was an offer made on behalf of all insurers and that paragraph 8 thereof constituted the consideration. He submitted the letter from CSR to CIGNA Australia of 17 March constituted an acceptance of that offer.
It seemed to me that this was neither the case pleaded nor did it accord with the way in which the case had been presented in chief.
Mr Stitt considered this matter and then sought to amend the Summons by adding certain words in paragraph 19 and a fresh paragraph
A. He sought to amend paragraph 19 to read:- "The plaintiffs further contend that the letters from the first defendant to the first plaintiff referred to in paragraphs 14 and 15 in the context of the negotiations between the parties (including the letter of Ebsworth and
Ebsworth dated 20 February 1992, the letter of CSR dated 12
March 1992 and the meeting of 5 March ) and the subsequent actions and omissions of the insurers above constituted a contract between the first defendant and the plaintiffs and the third defendants (or some of them)."
I have underlined the amendment.
Paragraph 21A was completely new and it provided: - "The consideration for the contract was:
The insurers not avoiding the pre-1986 policies ab initio for non-disclosure and/or misrepresentation;
The insurers not refusing to pay claims under the pre-1986 policies;
The insurers not commencing proceedings against CSR in relation to the pre-1986 policies;
The insurers not issuing a notice under [s.58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s58.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) notifying they would not renew the policies for the coming year;
The insurers considering renewing the policies for the current year and subsequently renewing the insurance."
Mr Bathurst and Mr Douglas objected to the amendments and, for reasons I gave at the time and which I find it unnecessary to repeat for present purposes, I granted leave to make them. However
I think I should say at this point that that was on the basis, in part, of Mr Stitt's statement that the amendments did nothing more than accommodate the submissions, which had been made, and that they did not change the nature of the case, which the insurers had at all times brought, and they merely answered the submission that there was not adequate consideration.
It is now convenient to turn to the precise terms of the documents.
By letter dated 29 November 1991 Mr Mutton, a solicitor employed in the
Legal
Department of CSR, wrote to CIGNA Australia in relation to "Asbestos
Related Claims" made upon CSR and its "Subsidiaries". The letter stated CSR had received counsel's advice that it may be entitled to indemnity from its insurers in respect of compensation paid by it and its subsidiaries, and which may, in the future, be payable by it or its subsidiaries, to persons suffering asbestos related conditions as a result of the inhalation of asbestos fibres.
The letter enclosed two schedules setting out, firstly, the policies issued by
CIGNA Australia, "which may respond", and a list of claims made against CSR and Midalco Pty Limited in the United States, by employees of Midalco Pty
Limited at Wittenoom, by Wittenoom residents, by contractors to Midalco Pty
Limited, by dockside employees and Main Roads Department employees, and by users of asbestos products or employees of subsidiaries manufacturing asbestos products.
The letter stated:- "We formerly notify you of these claims."
The letter set out the way in which the United States claims had been processed and, under the heading "Indemnity", continued:- "CSR's insurance cover for the period 1955 to date is complex, having a multiplicity of insurers and varying policy terms.

This company does not suggest that your company is the only insurer which may be liable to indemnify it in respect of the claim.

Although your company was not necessarily our insurer at the dates the claimants inhaled the fibres, medical evidence shows that injury to the lungs does not necessarily occur on inhalation (and indeed may never occur). It may in fact occur on a later date.

We seek an admission from your company that it was our insurer under the policies listed in the schedule and a formal indication whether it (in conjunction with other insurers):- will indemnify CSR Limited (and each of its subsidiaries) in respect of claims now completed and paid by it; will assume conduct of the defence of all current claims and provide indemnity to CSR Limited in respect of those claims; assume conduct of the defence of any future claims and provide indemnity to CSR Limited in respect of those claims."
The letter requested a reply within twenty-eight days "setting out the grounds upon which you have based your decision".
It has been submitted, I think correctly, that this was a formal claim being made upon CIGNA Australia by CSR in respect of all asbestos related claims for which CSR and its subsidiaries were or may become liable, whether arising in the United States or elsewhere.
Thereafter there appears to have been further correspondence and, on 20
February 1992, Mr Scotford of Messrs Ebsworth and Ebsworth wrote to Mr Mutton.
The letter is headed "Asbestos Related Claims". It refers to Mr Mutton's having written a number of letters dated 29 November 1991 to insurers of CSR's liability insurance programme and the instructions received by Messrs Ebsworth and Ebsworth to respond on behalf of CIGNA Australia (including INA and
Monarch) and its co-insurers in various layers of that insurance programme between 1979 and 1988, they being the ones identified in the policy schedules by CSR.
The letter stated this was the first notification of those claims to the underwriters and that having regard to "the great passage of time" the insurers"must reserve all their rights to rely on the policy conditions which deal with the obligations of the insured to give notice of circumstances or occurrences".
The letter stated that no admissions would be made and that the insurers flare not prepared to grant indemnity to CSR or relevant subsidiaries, importantly Midalco, in respect of the claims that have been paid (without the knowledge or consent of Underwriters), or in respect of claims currently being defended or which may arise". The letter stated CSR and its subsidiaries should act accordingly as uninsured in relation to those claims and any future claims.
It continued:- "4. At the outset, in providing some comment on the claim for indemnity, we are instructed to make it abundantly clear that all Underwriters for each of their respective interests reserve all of their respective rights under the relevant policies and/or generally, and that in making these comments, or indeed responding at all to your letters, no inference should arise that any of the
Underwriters are waiving any rights, in particular, any rights to avoid contracts of insurance or deny liability thereunder on the basis of non-disclosure or misrepresentation.
Underwriters say, without equivocation, that the policies of insurance to which you refer, do not and were never intended to respond to the claims which you have identified in the correspondence and the attached schedule. We are instructed that this has always been made plain to and accepted by CSR.
From time to time proposal forms have been submitted to
CIGNA for the umbrella liability insurance, these having been signed by CSR's
Group Risk Manager. We take it that CSR would not resile from the information it provided year after year in utmost good faith in relation to its insurance requirements, in particular, reference to the fact that residual or contingent liability for CSR's operation at the Blue Asbestos
Mine in Wittenoom was specifically excluded from the liability programme.
 .
You will be well aware of, and we do not need to set out in this correspondence, the terms of the policy exclusions that have been introduced to deal specifically with the Wittenoom and asbestos-related personal injury claims."
The letter continued that Mr Scotford was instructed that if CSR or any of its relevant subsidiaries persisted in their claims the insurers:- "... will be obliged to consider further their respective positions and may well be obliged to avoid pre-1986 policies ab initio for non-disclosure and/or misrepresentation or to refuse to pay the claims on the basis of non-disclosure and/or misrepresentation in accordance with the provisions of the [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (1984)."
The letter stated that the insurers had always contended the policies did not respond to such claims and:- "CSR and its brokers have taken a similar position in proposing for liability insurance by stating that the only claims which may affect the proposed insurances were those set out in loss experience schedules, none of which as CSR will readily know, has any connection with asbestos-related claims. Underwriters contend that in these circumstances CSR and its subsidiaries are estopped from making these claims."
The letter concluded that the insurers were not prepared to make the admissions and said "that they are not prepared to indemnify or assume conduct of the defence of claims as requested".
On 12 March 1992
Mr Mutton replied to that letter and referred to a meeting at the offices of Messrs Ebsworth and Ebsworth on 5 March 1992, which he said he left with the broad understanding that he would provide "a briefing note concerning all asbestos matters that were the subject of notification previously given" and "would submit a proposal for the 'management' of the matter".
The letter said:- "This week I have been advised indirectly through CSR Limited's insurance broker that CIGNA has expressed a position with respect to this matter whereby it will not entertain a proposal for the renewal of the insurance programme until the resolution of the asbestos issue is achieved. From this I gather that
CIGNA's suggestion concerning an extension of the current insurance programme, albeit very tentative at the time it was raised, is now considered totally out of court."
Mr Mutton also said:- "As I have understood the matter the fundamental objection taken by CIGNA rests on a view that the Wittenoom exclusion was intended to appear in all post-1979 policies of insurance.
Our copies of the policy do not contain this exclusion for all of the policy periods in question. I BELIEVE THAT IF THIS
IS THE ONLY ISSUE CSR LIMITED WOULD CONCEDE THE MATTER
BY
ACCEPTING THAT THE WITTENOOM EXCLUSION SHOULD BE DEEMED TO
HAVE BEEN INCORPORATED IN ALL POLICIES NOW UNDER CONSIDERATION.
As a consequence of such acceptance by CSR Limited it would be necessary to withdraw the notification previously given. You will appreciate that a review of the matter gave rise to a need to give another notification which accorded with the policy terms as conceded." (My emphasis.) 
The letter requested a confirmation of Mr Mutton's understanding and said:- "If my understanding is correct or an agreement is reached on the correction that is provided it seems to me that the only possible issue that will remain will be on the interpretation of the words.

I am sure that your clarification of this point would enable this matter to be progressed."
It was not suggested that this letter was written under any duress or coercion.
On 17 March 1992 a letter was written on the letterhead of CSR from its
Legal Department, which was signed by Mr W.A. Bennett, the Deputy Managing
Director, to CIGNA Australia. It was headed "Asbestos Related Claims" and referred to the correspondence of 29
November 1991 and 20 February 1992. It said:- "I now wish to state on behalf of CSR that
All claims' notifications and requests for indemnity referred to in the correspondence of 29 November 1991 are hereby withdrawn unconditionally.
 .
CSR acknowledges that its liability insurance between the years 1979 and 1988 pursuant to the policies referred to in that correspondence and thereafter does not and was not intended to extend to asbestos related claims with respect to the operation of the Wittenoom mine and/or the sale of asbestos mined at Wittenoom.
CSR notes the underwriter's assertion as to their rights under the liability policies referred to above, and as set out in Ebsworth and Ebsworth's letter of 20 February 1992, are being fully maintained including the assertion by the underwriters that the said policies do not and were not intended to extend to asbestos related claims with respect to any activities whatsoever associated with the manufacture, processing, transportation, distribution, storage, handling and supply among any person of any asbestos materials or products." .
The first two paragraphs of this letter pick up, essentially, what appeared in Mr Mutton's letter of 12 March 1992. Neither Mr Mutton nor Mr
Bennett gave evidence on this application and there was no suggestion neither was unavailable.
On 28 April 1992 Mr
Bennett wrote another letter to CIGNA headed "CSR
Liability Program". The letter referred to that of 17 March 1992 and stated
CSR was "happy" for the asbestos exclusions in the liability policy to be re-drafted. Prima facie this letter is not consistent with a complaint of coercion and duress. It referred to certain claims, which had been made and details of which Mr Mutton was able to supply if required, and continued:- "As you can imagine, we have read and re-read the proposed exclusion a multitude of times. I believe that as an attempt to exclude all 'asbestos' coverage it could be more simply re-worded.

We acknowledge that the clause relative to asbestos contained in the expiring programme excludes "any liability in respect of personal injury or property damage resulting from asbestos and/or related disease directly caused by or contributed to the manufacture and mining, processing, removal, transport, distribution and/or storage of asbestos, asbestos products for use in any product containing asbestos."
A qualification on the policies to 31 March 1989 was noted.
Thereafter the present plaintiffs received no further notification of any claim in relation to asbestos related claims, which had been made against CSR or any of its subsidiaries and for which indemnity was sought from the insurers, until the Complaint filed in the New Jersey proceedings came to their attention. No such claim was made in the CSR versus NZI proceedings notwithstanding that they related, inter alia, to the same claims made in the
United States against CSR, which are the subject of the present proceedings.
It is now asserted by CSR and CSR America that the arrangements reached between CSR and the insurers in New South Wales, and set forth in the letters of 17 March and 28 April , were reached only as a consequence of economic duress and coercion practised by the insurers and CIGNA Corporation on CSR, such that whatever the nature of the arrangement it should not be set aside, but damages in respect of such conduct should be awarded.
The economic duress and coercion alleged are threats by the insurers not to renew CSR's and its subsidiaries' insurance without the undertakings and acknowledgments given by
Mr Bennett in the letter of 17 March 1992 which, of course, has to be read in the light of the earlier correspondence and, further, in my opinion, which has to be considered having regard to the failure by CSR and CSR
America to assert any entitlement to rely upon those policies thereafter until the institution of the New Jersey proceedings, notwithstanding that CSR had other proceedings on foot seeking indemnification from other insurers for the same asbestos-related claims.
Mr
Stitt submitted that in viewing this correspondence it was also necessary to bear in mind that there are lead insurers and excess liability insurers. He submitted that the latter were bound to follow the lead insurers, i.e. that if the lead insurers are found to be liable the excess layer insurers will become, by virtue of that finding, liable also, provided the proceedings were brought in an Australian Court of competent jurisdiction.
Clauses of the policies, to which I will refer later, make it clear that if
CSR elects to bring proceedings against the lead insurers in New South Wales this will be the result. On the other hand it is not a consequence of bringing proceedings in New Jersey. In the New Jersey proceedings all the excess layer insurers have been joined because the terms of the policies do not provide that if the lead insurers are sued, other than in an Australian Court, the excess layer insurers follow the lead insurers, i.e. are bound by any adverse result, or take the benefit of any beneficial result, to those insurers.

It is on this material that Mr Stitt has submitted there is a serious issue as to the existence of a contract to be tried. I shall trace through the correspondence to determine, at least at a prima facie level, the effect it should be given. In doing so I shall bear in mind that the contract, essentially, is alleged to arise from the correspondence and, therefore, this issue must be decided by considering the proper interpretation to be placed on it.
Mr Stitt submitted the letter from Mr Scotford of 20 February was an offer and it contained in paragraph 8 the consideration. Mr Bathurst submitted, albeit in a non-pejorative sense, that it was a threat. In my opinion the letter cannot be construed as an offer. It was a straightforward blunt statement of the position the insurers took and it asserted, without equivocation, that unless the asbestos-related claims were withdrawn the insurers would "be obliged to consider further" their positions in relation, put generally, to avoiding or seeking to avoid the policies. The letter made it clear that each and every right of the insurers was being reserved in respect of each and every claim by CSR and any of its subsidiaries. I reject the submission the letter was an offer.
I then go to the way in which Mr Stitt firstly asserted the consideration, viz that in consideration of CSR withdrawing its claims, the insurers would not take the action suggested by Mr Scotford in paragraph 8.
The difficulty I have with this submission is that the letter of 17 March , which was drafted by Mr Scotford, does not indicate any such consideration, nor, on one view, does it evidence any contractual intention.
To appreciate all the submissions the letter must be analysed with some care.
Paragraph 1 is an unconditional withdrawal of the claims notified on 29
November
Paragraph 2 is an acknowledgment by CSR that its liability insurance cover pursuant to policies referred to in that correspondence, which is obviously a reference to the letters of 29 November 1991 and 20 February referred to in the opening paragraph of the letter, did not and were not intended to extend to asbestos-related claims "with respect to the operation of the Wittenoom mine and/or the sale of asbestos mined at Wittenoom". Prima facie, and I do not understand the contrary to have been contended, this related to all asbestos-related claims. It was submitted by Mr Stitt that paragraph 2 was separate from and unrelated to paragraph 3, which was dealing with another category of claims, namely those arising from "any activities" as then more fully set forth. Accordingly, he submitted, it was only in respect of those claims that there was any reservation of rights referred to in the letter and that paragraph 2 alone constituted the acceptance. I do not accept this interpretation of the letter.
Paragraph 3 refers to the policies "referred to above" i.e. in paragraph , and notes the insurers' assertions "as to their rights" as set out in the letter of 20 February 1992, and that those rights were being fully maintained.
The sentence is joined by the word "including" whereafter are set out further assertions by the insurers. This, in my opinion, was emphasising the rights being reserved and not dealing with a separate category of right or with different policies.
When the letter is so read, which in my opinion is the only sensible way in which it can be, it shows that far from the insurers giving up any rights in consideration of CSR's withdrawal of the claims, they are maintaining the rights, which would mean that notwithstanding the withdrawal of the claims the insurers could still, if so advised, exercise the rights Mr Scotford asserted on their behalf. It seems strange that CSR would withdraw its claims without any quid pro quo. This apparent quandary is sought to be explained by CSR by asserting that it would never have given up the rights but for the threat of the insurers not to renew shortly before the policies fell due and at a time when it would have been very difficult for CSR to renew its insurance.
Although part of the consideration was suggested as being the considering of the renewal of the policies and the not giving of notice under [s.58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s58.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/), no reference was made to these matters in Mr
Scotford's letter. If the letter had said that the insurance would only be renewed if the claims were withdrawn, or that consideration would only be given to the renewal of insurance, if the claims were withdrawn, there may have been consideration for the withdrawal of the claims stated in the letter.
But it did not say this.
This analysis calls into play the significance of the letter from Mr
Mutton of 12 March 1992. It refers to "the possibility of extending the current insurance program", and continues:- "This week I have been advised indirectly through CSR Limited's insurance broker that
CIGNA has expressed a position with respect to this matter whereby it will not entertain a proposal for the renewal of the insurance program until the resolution of the asbestos issue is achieved. From this I gather that
CIGNA's suggestion concerning an extension of the current insurance program, albeit very tentative at the time it was raised, is now totally out of court."
The first sentence indicates that there had been a communication to the effect that CIGNA Australia would only consider a renewal if the asbestos claims issue was resolved. The second sentence seems to be predicated on the extension of the current insurance programme, i.e. the programme without the resolution of the asbestos issue. Unless the paragraph is so read there is an internal inconsistency. On the basis of what Mr Mutton had been told, CIGNA
Australia would consider a renewal if the asbestos claims issue was resolved.
The letter of 17 March 1992 did resolve it. The reservation of rights is, accordingly, explicable on the basis that whilst the claims were withdrawn by
CSR, the insurers wished to ensure that such rights as they had under those policies were reserved, either not as a separate category of right but in aid of the withdrawal of the claims, or in respect of any claims not notified in the letter of 29 November 1991.
Therefore, whilst I do not consider that the matters pleaded in paragraphs 21A(a) to (d) constitute consideration for withdrawal of the CSR claims, I am of the opinion that paragraph 21A(e) can, subject to its being read as meaning that the insurers would bona fide consider the renewal of the policies. Mr Bathurst said that it was not clear from the terms of paragraph
A(e) whether it was being alleged that such a contract was made on 17 March , or upon the renewal of the contract.
In my judgment the relevant contract was made on 17 March 1992 when CSR accepted the insurers' offer, which is referred to in Mr
Mutton's letter, to reconsider the renewal of the policies by withdrawing the claims and, hence, the impediment to the reconsideration of the renewal. Obviously the granting of the renewal could not be guaranteed because, no doubt, other matters would have to be considered.
However, without the withdrawal of the claims the insurers would not even have considered the matter.
This conclusion derives support from the evidence of Mr Damien Gordon
Lovell, a solicitor employed by the solicitors for CSR. In paragraph 83 of an affidavit sworn on 21 July 1995 he deposed to having been informed by Mr E.A.
Smith, CSR's Manager, Group Financial Reporting, that CSR's broker advised in early March 1992 that obtaining alternative liability cover at such short notice would be extremely difficult and, on March 1992, Mr King had sent a facsimile to Mr Smith advising him of CIGNA Australia's threatened cancellation of the policies and that there were few alternative insurers available. In paragraph 84 he deposed to having been informed by Mr Smith, inter alia, that Mr Smith was aware that:- "CIGNA was insisting on the withdrawal of CSR's notification of the asbestos claims before it would consider renewal of the then current public liability insurance program"; and "CSR therefore had only 3 weeks in which to resolve the dispute before it was left without public liability insurance and was being told it must withdraw its claims by 12 March (i.e. 6 days away) or CIGNA would 'cancel' the insurance program."
These matters are consistent with what appears in Mr Mutton's letter of March 1992. In paragraph 87 Mr Lovell deposed to having been informed by Mr
Mutton that on 16 or 17 March 1992 Messrs Ebsworth and Ebsworth sent a draft copy and a re-draft copy respectively of the letter, which ultimately became the letter from CSR of 17 March 1992.
Commencing at paragraph 90 and under the headings "Reasons for sending the 17
March 1992 letter", Mr Lovell deposed to being informed by Mr Bennett that he knew, as at 17 March 1992, that CSR's public liability policies expired on 31 March 1992; that CIGNA Australia was "strongly representing" that the policies did not respond to the asbestos-related claims; that CIGNA
Australia was insisting that the notification of claims, made on 29 November , be withdrawn as a pre-condition to insurance cover being offered; and that CSR had no prospect of obtaining alternative insurance by 31 March 1992 at the levels necessary to protect its interests. Mr Lovell stated that Mr
Bennett was not aware of certain negotiations Mr Elfvesson had with representatives of CIGNA Australia prior to the entry into the public liability policies, as set forth in paragraphs 24, 25 and 26 of his affidavit and, in paragraph 92:- "I am informed by Mr Bennett and verily believe that he decided to send the 17 March letter demanded by CIGNA having regard to the matters referred to in paragraph 83 above. I am further informed by Mr
Bennett and verily believe that if
CIGNA had not threatened to withdraw or to cancel or not to renew the insurance policy on 31 March 1992 he would not have signed the 17 March 1992 letter."
Mr Bathurst submitted that this evidence gave rise to the inference that the letter of 17 March 1992 was procured by duress or coercion. It was not submitted that it was possible to determine that issue at this stage. There is a countervailing inference, namely that in consideration of CSR withdrawing the claims, the insurers would consider the renewal of the insurance. It is not suggested that the renewal would be automatic but, rather, that
CIGNA
Australia would "consider renewal": paragraph 84(a). Therefore, contrary to the inference for which Mr Bathurst contends, there was the possibility that even if the claims were withdrawn the insurers would for valid reasons not renew the insurance.
If it be correct for Mr Bennett to say that as at 17 March 1992, or perhaps earlier, CSR was in a position whereby it could not obtain other insurance, that position would have been made the more difficult if, after a consideration of the renewal proposal, renewal had been refused.
On any view of what happened the insurers were insisting on a withdrawal of the claims as a condition to their considering renewal of CSR's public liability policies, and CSR withdrew the claims in order to have the renewal considered.
That to my mind supports the creation of a contract that in consideration of the withdrawal of the claims, the insurers would consider the renewal.
The implication is assisted when, in the present proceedings, no attempt is made by CSR to set aside the agreement on the ground of duress or coercion.
On the other hand the implication of a contract may not be assisted by the way in which the insurers have pleaded their case because, to a large extent, the pleading proceeds on the basis that claims may still be made on the policies but, in answer to those claims, the insurers would be able to rely on the right to avoid the policies and other similar relief This, however, may merely be reflective of an alternative position.
I have said sufficient to indicate that in my judgment there is on this point a serious issue to be tried.
CSR and CSR America submitted the letter of 17 March 1992 was obtained by coercion or duress, but they do not seek to have it set aside. Rather, CSR is claiming damages in the New Jersey proceedings of the type to which I have referred. In these circumstances, it seems to me, it is not necessary to consider further whether the letter of 17 March 1992 was brought about as a result of coercion or duress as, in effect, derogating from the question to be answered as to the existence of the contract not to sue. Mr Bathurst did not seek to put a submission to that effect. In fact Mr Bathurst deliberately took a different approach. He submitted that if there was only an action for damages, which did not seek to challenge the contract, the insurers could not obtain an injunction to restrain the proceedings on the basis there was an agreement not to sue, because the cause of action being pleaded in the foreign jurisdiction was extraneous to the contract, being based upon actions in the nature of coercion, duress or misrepresentation. He submitted that the claim for misrepresentation is a claim for damages, which is extraneous to the contract, and that CSR and CSR America do not seek to set the contract aside.
In these circumstances it is clear, if Mr Bathurst's basic submission that there was no contract not to sue failed, that he was not relying on any conduct entitling his clients to have it set aside. Rather, so he submitted, there was a different cause of action which was "extraneous" to the contract, and which CSR wished to pursue in New Jersey. However, it seems to me that one must look at the totality of the proceedings in New Jersey which, as I have said, are predicated, at least initially, on claims for Indemnity under the policies. The claims for damages are predicated upon the coverage for the claims noted in the letter of 29 November 1991 being barred by the letter of March 1992.
I shall now consider certain of the authorities, which are referable to the granting of an injunction to restrain the breach of a contract not to sue, although, before doing so, I should note certain submissions made by Mr
Bathurst. He submitted:- if there was an admitted contract not to sue, whether express or implied, there is no difficulty presented in granting injunctive relief to restrain the taking of such proceedings even in a foreign court; if there is a disputed contract, allegedly containing a
covenant not to sue, and litigation is brought in a foreign court, the principle this Court should invoke is to decide whether there is a serious issue to be tried and, if there is, whether the balance of convenience favours the grant of an injunction and, if it does, whether other discretionary considerations should lead to a different conclusion; other discretionary matters, which would be relevant, will include whether it is appropriate to take the exceptional step of restraining proceedings in a foreign court.
These submissions raise for consideration the extent to which the granting of interlocutory relief constitutes the taking of an exceptional step, where the grant is made so that the serious question as to whether there is a contract not to sue can be determined finally. I say that because if, as the authorities state, correctly in my opinion, it is not an exceptional step to hold a party to that party's bargain and, in doing so, to grant final injunctive relief, it seems to me that it is far less an exceptional step to do so, where the injunctive relief is not final, but in aid of determining on a final basis whether relief should be granted.
In Apple Corps Limited versus Apple Computer Inc [(1992) RPC 70] there was a dispute between two companies, each of which was entitled to use a certain trade mark on its goods by virtue of an agreement, which was expressed to be governed by English law and conferred exclusive jurisdiction on the English
High Court. It was alleged by the plaintiff, ("Apple"), that the defendant, ("Computer"), had breached the agreement. There were some negotiations, which broke down, and on 21 February 1989 Apple issued proceedings against Computer and its United Kingdom and German subsidiaries claiming an injunction to restrain them anywhere in the world from acting in breach of the agreement. At p.74 Hoffman J said there was no dispute, on the pleadings, that in certain respects Computer was acting in breach of the agreement, but its defence was the agreement was invalid for various reasons. Apple sought interlocutory relief and submitted the Court undoubtedly had jurisdiction to restrain foreign proceedings instituted in breach of a contractual obligation. Hoffman
J noted Computer asserted the contract was void, which is different from the present case, and that Apple asserted there was, "at lowest a triable issue as to whether it is valid". Hiss Lordship continued:- "If the defendants are allowed to prosecute the existing or further cancellation proceedings in other parts of the world,
Apple will not only be put to trouble and expense in defending these proceedings, but may suffer harm which cannot adequately be compensated in damages." 
He gave certain examples, which he said was not "really disputed".
At p.75 he commenced to deal with a submission on behalf of the defendants that the case was not governed by the decision of the House of
Lords in American
Cyanamid Co versus Ethicon Limited <case>; [(1975) AC 396] but that:- "It was an application for an injunction to restrain proceedings in foreign jurisdictions and therefore fell to be decided according to different principles." 
The defendant placed reliance upon the decision of the House of Lords in South
Carolina Insurance Co versus Assurantie Maatschauppij "De Zeven Provincien" NV [(1987) AC 24.] At p.76, after distinguishing that decision, his Lordship continued:- "It is a common feature of applications for injunctions to restrain other proceedings, whether domestic or foreign, that although they are interlocutory in form, the issues which they raise will not subsequently be litigated at the trial.
Thus in the case of an application to enjoin foreign proceedings on the ground that England is the natural forum and that the foreign proceedings would be vexatious or oppressive, as in the Aerospatiale case, the grant of the injunction will finally determine the question of forum which will not subsequently be re-examined at the trial. Similarly, in the South Carolina case, the grant or refusal of the injunction finally determined whether or not the defendants were to be allowed to use the United States proceedings to obtain discovery for the purposes of the English action. That question could not arise again at the trial. The effect of this feature on the applicability of the Cyanamid rules was considered by Buckley LJ in Bryanston Finance Limited versus De
Vries (No 2) 119761 ChD 63, and also adverted to by Dillon LJ in Midland Bank Pic versus Laker Airways Limited [(1986) QB 689] at
Buckley LJ in particular drew attention to the features to which I have referred, and said that the kind of case which
Lord Diplock had in mind in Cyanamid was very different: 'His attention was not addressed to the kind of action in which issues relating to the issues of a right to claim by the plaintiff and the existence or threat of some infringement by the defendant of that right are for the time being uncertain but will be investigated and determined at the trial.'"
His Lordship held that the case before him was one in which the matters in issue on the hearing of the interlocutory injunction would be very much in issue at the trial.
It was submitted on behalf of Computer that before such an injunction could be granted the Court must be satisfied that England was the natural forum and that it would be vexatious and oppressive for the defendants to pursue the proceedings abroad. His Lordship noted a submission that despite the express choice of exclusive jurisdiction clause in the agreement, it would not be vexatious or oppressive for the question of its validity to be decided in each of the foreign jurisdictions.
His Lordship identified the issue at pp.76-77:- "In my view, this is not a correct analysis of the issue on this application. Apple seeks no injunction to restrain foreign proceedings on the issue of whether or not the agreement is valid.
It seeks an injunction to restrain the trade mark proceedings, and these are proceedings which cannot be brought in England.
The issue on this motion is not whether the trade mark proceedings should be tried here or in a foreign jurisdiction, but
WHETHER THEY SHOULD BE TRIED AT ALL. The question of where the validity of the agreement should be tried would have arisen if, for example, the defendants had applied for a stay on the grounds of forum non conveniens.
At present, however, the fact that the plaintiffs could litigate the validity of the agreement in the foreign jurisdictions is a factor to be considered in deciding whether to injunct the proceedings abroad: compare on that point Settlement Corporation versus Hochschild [(1966) Ch 10], but it is not an issue in the motion." (My emphasis.)
The distinction his Lordship was drawing was made clear when he said:- "They" (the criteria laid down by Lord Goff in the Aerospatiale case) "have no application to a case in which the plaintiff says that the bringing of this action infringes his contractual right not to be sued."
After considering a number of submissions made as to the validity of the agreement, his Lordship concluded there were serious and difficult questions to be determined at the trial, but if, pending the hearing, Computer was not restrained, Apple may suffer harm not easily capable of being compensated for by money, and that if Computer was held up pending the hearing it would not suffer discernible prejudice.
He posed the question whether the conclusion was effected by the need for caution in enjoining foreign proceedings and continued:- "The reason for such caution is because, although the order operates in personam against a particular defendant, it is indirectly an interference with the foreign Court. That reason is particularly strong in a case in which the English jurisdiction is preferred on the ground that England is the natural forum and the foreign Court is conversely being rejected on the ground of its unsuitability as a forum. But in a case like this in which a party has expressly contracted not to sue, the argument that the order merely operates in personam is at its strongest. It involves no finding whatever about the suitability of the foreign forum but merely the universal principle that until some good contrary reason has been shown, men should be held to their bargain."
In one sense a distinction may be drawn that the Apple case was not determining finally that proceedings may never be brought, because that would remain an issue at the trial. It was submitted that was an important distinguishing feature in the present circumstances. However, if an interlocutory injunction is granted on the basis that there is a serious issue to be tried as to the existence of a contract, the question of the validity of the agreement may be put in issue, so that on the hearing to make any interlocutory injunction granted final there will be a contested issue as to whether the agreement should be avoided.
On the other hand CSR and CSR America may not wish to put that in issue in the New South Wales proceedings and, if that be so, it will leave on foot an agreement not to sue on the policies in respect of the claims now being pursued, which has been stated to be a ground for restraining a party from departing from its bargain, even if it is doing so or purporting to do so by suing in a foreign
Court.
The relevant authorities were gathered and considered by the English
Court of Appeal in The "Angelic Grace" (1995) LLR 87. At p.94 Leggatt LJ said:- "The present case is, as my brother Lord Justice Steyn would say, the paradigm case for the prompt issue of an injunction.
The charter here is governed by English law. According to
English law, the arbitration clause extends to claims in tort.
Proceedings in a foreign Court are in breach of contract, so an injunction can issue to restrain them."
His Lordship went on to consider what would happen if an injunction did not issue. However, relevantly for present purposes, his Lordship had no difficulty concluding that an injunction would issue to restrain the institution of proceedings in breach of an exclusive jurisdiction clause. That must be the more so, in my opinion, where the agreement is one not to sue at all.
At p.96 Millett LJ, after instancing circumstances where care must be taken, said:- "But in my judgment there is no good reason for diffidence in granting an injunction to restrain foreign proceedings on the clear and simple ground that the defendant has promised not to bring them." 
Shortly thereafter his Lordship said:- "I cannot accept the proposition that any Court would be offended by the grant of an injunction to restrain a party from invoking a jurisdiction which he has promised not to invoke and which it was its own duty to decline." 
Subsequently:- "In my judgment, where an injunction is sought to restrain a party from proceeding in a foreign Court in breach of an arbitration agreement governed by English law, the English
Court need feel no diffidence in granting the injunction, provided that it is sought promptly and before the foreign proceedings are too far advanced. I see no difference in principle between an injunction to restrain proceedings in breach of an arbitration clause and one to restrain proceedings in breach of an exclusive jurisdiction clause ... The justification for the grant of the injunction in either case is that without it the plaintiff will be deprived of its contractual rights in a situation in which damages are manifestly an inadequate remedy. The jurisdiction is, of course, discretionary and is not exercised as a matter of course, but good reason needs to be shown why it should not be exercised in any given case."
Lord Justice Neill agreed and, according to the editor's note, a petition for leave to appeal to the
House of Lords was dismissed by the House of Lords.
In my opinion there is a serious issue to be tried. It was submitted by
Mr Stitt that damages would not be an adequate remedy with which I agree.
Accordingly, subject to a consideration of other discretionary defences, it seems to me that the interlocutory injunction should be granted restraining
CSR from pursuing the proceedings against the insurers, in so far as those proceedings seek indemnity under the policies of insurance.
On the question of the inadequacy of damages Mr Stitt submitted, firstly, that if the New Jersey proceedings are not restrained the insurers will be put to the additional expense of fighting the issues in New Jersey, to which they should not be subjected because of the agreement. Secondly, he submitted, the insurers should not be put at risk in relation to the types of damages, which could be granted for infringement of the Sherman
Act and other anti-trust legislation relied on, once again because by the contract the proceedings should not be brought in New Jersey.
Thirdly, he submitted that there was no guarantee the New Jersey Court will apply the law of New South
Wales, rather than the law applicable in New Jersey. Fourthly, he relied on the risk of issue estoppel findings, or perhaps also res judicata, and of a bond being imposed on those insurers not authorised to carry on business in
New Jersey if they sought to challenge jurisdiction and, if necessary, defend the proceedings on the merits. Fifthly, Mr Stitt submitted that in New Jersey costs could not be recovered by the successful party. Finally, Mr Stitt submitted that if some insurers were not amenable to the New Jersey proceedings or, for other reasons, were released therefrom, there would be difficulties in bringing contribution proceedings.
If I may say so all these various reasons may be boiled down to the basic proposition that by breaching the contract and suing, CSR and CSR
America were exposing the insurers to the potentiality for loss and expense, which they had not anticipated and for which it could not be said that damages would constitute an adequate remedy. This may have been the reason this issue was dealt with so summarily in "The Angelic Grace".
Mr Bathurst's basic response was that if CSR and CSR America were acting in breach of contract, which presupposed the insurers were ultimately successful, the damages would cover the expenses about which Mr Stitt complained. I do not agree that such damages would necessarily be an adequate remedy for requiring a party to fight a case, let alone fight one out of the jurisdiction contrary to the contract. There would, of necessity, be many other indirect expenses for which damages for breach of contract may well not be appropriate compensation.
In relation to the requirement for the bond Mr Bathurst submitted, firstly, that it would only be sought from non- authorised insurers in New
Jersey. However, in addition to that, he referred to the affidavit of Mr
Coughlin, who did not deal with the question as to what would happen in relation to a bond if some of the defendants were authorised insurers in New
Jersey and, therefore, were not required to give a bond. By way of example Mr
Bathurst suggested that one authorised insurer may make an application challenging the jurisdiction and, whilst that was on foot, the others could seek a stay pending a decision.
Of greater potency, in my view, was the reference by Mr Bathurst to the evidence of Mr Coughlin. He submitted, I think correctly, that Mr Coughlin went nowhere near saying that for a challenge to jurisdiction to be brought, the party or parties bringing it, if not an authorised insurer in New Jersey, would be required to furnish a bond. In paragraph 20 of his affidavit Mr
Coughlin said:- "That is to say, there is a risk such a bond must be posted even in order to make the preliminary jurisdictional challenges..."
In paragraph 21 Mr Coughlin stated the matter with more certainty but, in paragraph 22 he said:- "A literal interpretation and application of NJSA 17.51-2 may preclude an alien insurer without assets in the United States from asserting a lack of personal jurisdiction defence and related issues such as forum non conveniens unless it has posted the bond in an amount sufficient to secure payment of any judgment which may be recorded against it."
Mr Bathurst also noted the failure by
Mr Coughlin to deal with sub-clause (b) of that law and, in particular, sub-sub-paragraph (2) thereof.
He submitted that, at least prima facie, those provisions may well exculpate one from giving a bond if making a jurisdictional challenge.
In an affidavit sworn on 25 July 1995 Mr Robert D. Chesler, a director of a law firm in New Jersey, who was admitted to practice in 1982 and has been practising law in New Jersey since August 1983, states that he has worked continually in the environmental insurance area and has devoted himself almost entirely to it since approximately 1987. He furnishes his qualifications and, in paragraph 3, refers to
NJSA paragraph 17:51-2, which he says is not the same as its California counterpart referred to in the affidavit of Mr
Coughlin.
He continues:- "In the actions that I have been involved, numerous unauthorised insurers have been parties and numerous forum non conveniens and jurisdiction motions have been brought.
No party has ever raised the New Jersey Bonding Statute in any form whatsoever. No Court has ever mentioned it either.
Not only has it never been a factor, I reiterate that it has never been mentioned in any way. It has never been offered by either a party or a court either offensively or defensively against any insurer. Unauthorised insurers such as Lloyds of
London and Allianz have appeared, made motions, including motions based on jurisdiction and forum, and fully conducted themselves in every way in the State and Federal Courts of this State and have never been inhibited by the Bonding
Statute in any way whatsoever. Because my practice is entirely concerned with insurance I carefully keep track of what is happening in other insurance litigation in this State, and the statements made above apply not only to actions in which
I am personally involved, but in every action of which I am aware. This involves literally dozens of actions."
In these circumstances Mr Chesler stated he believed a Judge would not raise this issue "sua sponte, and that a waiver by the insured would suffice".
He continued:- "I am aware that in the BOC environmental insurance litigation, involving both authorised and unauthorised insurers, certain unauthorised foreign insurers were dismissed on grounds of jurisdiction without the bonding issue ever being raised."
He concluded by stating the affidavit was in response to that of Mr
Coughlin and, in my opinion, it fully justifies the submissions made by Mr
Bathurst as to the apparent hesitation Mr
Coughlin had in stating a bond would be required. I am not satisfied, having regard to all this evidence, that a bond will be required for the purpose of challenging the jurisdiction.
Mr Stitt submitted that Mr Coughlin's view of the law had not been challenged by Mr Chesler, but, rather, Mr Chesler was relying on the practice.
From this he submitted that a Judge may not, for some reason, follow the practice so that a bond would be required. The evidence satisfies me this is highly unlikely particularly if CSR and CSR
America adhere to their present view and do not seek the lodgment of a bond. Mr Bathurst submitted that if, contrary to the practice, a bond was required, the insurers could move this
Court for an anti-suit injunction on that ground. I think that merely points up the problem about suggesting that damages would be an adequate remedy. It presupposes the expenditure of much time and effort in bringing on a challenge to jurisdiction on a motion based on forum non conveniens, which could, arguably, be wasted by the requirement for a bond and the added problems of reapplying to this Court. It highlights but one of many problems, which may arise and for which damages would not be an adequate remedy.
On behalf of CSR America Mr Douglas, while asserting that CSR America was an insured, submitted it was not a party to the contract entered into on or about 17 March 1992. It is correct that the letter from CSR did not, on its face, purport to have been written on behalf of the subsidiaries. On the other hand the withdrawal referred to in paragraph was of "all claims' notifications and requests" set out in the letter of 29 November 1991, which made claims on behalf of CSR and its subsidiaries. Further, CSR had entered into the insurance policies on behalf of itself and its subsidiaries and, in these circumstances,
I am of the opinion that there is a serious issue to be tried that the agreement is binding on CSR America. I appreciate it was a subsidiary of a subsidiary of CSR but, in my opinion, in the context of litigation of this type, that does not preclude the serious issue from arising. It took the benefit of that agreement by being a party to the 1992 insurance policies.
 
The "Exclusive Jurisdiction"
Clause
Mr Stitt submitted that all, save one, of the policies contained what he described as an exclusive jurisdiction clause.
It is sufficient to take an example appearing at p.227 of Exhibit A. Under the heading "Service of Suit
Clause (Australia)" appears:- "The Underwriters hereon agree that:- 
In the event of a dispute arising under this Policy,
Underwriters at the request of the Insured will submit to the jurisdiction of any competent Court in the Commonwealth of
Australia. Such dispute shall be determined in accordance with the law and practice applicable in such Court.
Any summons notice or process to be served upon the
Underwriters may be served upon the person (or firm) as stated in Item 7 of the Declarations who has authority to accept service and to enter an appearance on Underwriters' behalf, and who is directed at the request of the
Insured to give a written undertaking to the Insured that he will enter an appearance on Underwriters' behalf.

If a suit is instituted against any one of the
Underwriters all underwriters hereon will abide by the final decision of such
Court or any competent Appellate Court."
It was submitted by Mr Stitt these clauses were inserted in the policies at the request of CSR, although there was no evidence to support this. Rather, the clause on its face provides that the insurers shall "at the request" of
CSR submit to the jurisdiction of any competent Court in Australia. Mr Stitt submitted this construction of the clause was assisted by the other underwriters noted on the policy being required to abide by the decision against any one of the underwriters.
In my opinion the clause does not provide for the exclusive jurisdiction of Australian Courts unless, which has not occurred,
CSR requests the submission to them. I have some difficulty in adding to this conclusion, which
I do not think is affected by the requirement that other insurers noted on the policy will have to abide the event. It may be that clause makes it more difficult to understand why CSR has instituted proceedings in New Jersey, rather than in Australia, but that does not go to the point of construction.
I would, accordingly, reject this submission as raising a serious issue to be tried.
 
Estoppel
Mr Stitt submitted that if there was no contract the representations contained in the letter of 17 March 1992 were sufficient to found an estoppel in circumstances where the insurers had acted to their detriment, by failing to take the various steps referred to in paragraph 8 of Mr Scotford's letter, in reliance upon the representations.
Mr Bathurst submitted, correctly in my view, that there is no evidence what the insurers would have done had CSR said it would not sign the letter of March 1992. On one view it may be open to say that the inference should be drawn that the insurers would have taken the type of action to which Mr
Scotford referred. However, on a consideration of the evidence it is not clear that would have occurred. The reason for this is that there is evidence that whilst Mr Scotford, no doubt conformably with his instructions, put forward the best view possible for the insurers, they, or some of them, harboured some reservations as to the correctness of the posture being adopted. Some of the problems were pointed up in various internal memoranda, which were tendered as part of Exhibits 3 and 4. Mr Bathurst pointed to a letter from CIGNA Australia to another insurer dated 6
January 1992 (part of Exhibit 3) which, in his submission, indicated some concern as to the insurers' position. I think the proper interpretation of that letter is that advice was being sought in relation to that position. However, an earlier memorandum of 16
December 1991 from an officer of CIGNA Australia (part of Exhibit 4) reveals far less confidence in the position of the insurers.
In an internal memorandum of CIGNA Australia of 18 February 1992 reference was made to the renewal being due on 31 March and to the receipt from CSR's broker of an underwriting submission. It was stated that it was felt that Messrs Ebsworth and
Ebsworth "should be involved in this exercise" and assist "in drafting a letter outlining our intentions concerning renewal". It continued:- "Among other aspects we plan to inform CSR that renewal will be declined unless and until a formal retraction of the asbestos claims are received prior to March 15, 1992."
On 21 February 1992 a letter was written by NZI Insurance to CIGNA
Australia stating its concern as to the contents of Mr Scotford's letter and, in particular, a concern about stating "without equivocation" that the policies were not intended "to respond to the claims identified in the correspondence". The letter concluded:- "I feel strongly, however, that the statement made in paragraph and, to the extent to which it applies to the underlying policies, in paragraph 7 goes too far if it is in fact a statement asserted on behalf of all underwriters."
On 29
February 1992 a memorandum was sent by CIGNA Australia to other insurers stating CSR wanted a meeting and referring to known problems
CSR had in establishing the terms of the insurance, and:- "We cannot overlook this opportunity of confronting Mutton and doing our utmost to convince him that CSR does not have a case. Selected material could be shown to him. This meeting is critical - if we convince Mutton the major claim has been defused. If Mutton believes our position is weak, the claim will be pursued aggressively."
The course of action suggested is then set forth. However, it was submitted, this gave a clear indication that the position of the insurers may not be as strong as was set forth in Mr Scotford's letter, which, I repeat, I assume was written on instructions. Further, the reference to showing Mr
Mutton "selected material", and the criticality of convincing him so that "a major claim has been defused" was very much in the forefront of the insurers' thinking. On one view that may be equivocal, but considered overall I think it was a recognition of some problems with the stance being taken.
On 10 April 1992 QBE Insurance
Limited wrote to CIGNA Australia stating its pleasure that CSR had withdrawn all claims but "we must say that we doubt that the matter will go away which obviously would appear to have been the general consensus at the meeting. There is far too much at stake for a
Company such as CSR to let the matter rest".
The letter continued that "in anticipation of possible further action by
CSR" the author wished to be advised of various matters. The letter from CIGNA
Australia to QBE Insurance Company Limited of 11 May 1992 (part of Exhibit 3) does not indicate total confidence in the situation.
On the basis of this evidence Mr Bathurst submitted it was by no means a foregone conclusion that if CSR had refused to write the letter of 17 March , the insurers would have taken the steps referred to in Mr Scotford's letter. There are obvious enough signs that may not have occurred although, on the evidence,
I cannot come to a final conclusion on that. However, as the evidence presently stands I am not satisfied for that reason, and for another to which I shall refer in a moment, that the insurers acted to their detriment in not taking the various steps articulated in paragraph 23 of the Amended
Summons. In any event I do not consider that the failure by the insurers to take those steps constituted an acting to their detriment. Indeed, as was submitted in a slightly different context, the taking of those steps, notwithstanding that this claim is made in the alternative, would have been contrary to the principal assertion put forward by the insurers that there was an agreement with CSR not to pursue the claims. I say that because the various steps are predicated on the basis that the claims are still amenable to being pursued, although liable to be met by the assertions to which I have referred.
In this context I think the position in which some of the insurers perceived themselves to be tends to support their desire that the claims should be withdrawn as a condition of their considering the renewal.
Mr Bathurst also submitted that it must be shown, for an estoppel to arise, that it is unconscionable for CSR to resile from its letter, and that it is necessary for the insurers, as plaintiffs, to approach the Court with clean hands: Official Trustee in Bankruptcy versus Tooheys Limited [(1992-1993) 29
NSWLR 641], particularly at p.649. These are not issues which can be determined on the present application, and there was no suggestion they could. However, in my view that is not necessary, because for the reasons I have given I am of the view there is not a serious issue to be tried on the question of estoppel as the evidence presently stands.
 
Vexation, Oppression and Harassment
As I have stated, for matters of alleged vexation, oppression and harassment to be relevant, in the present context, it must be established that the conduct of the parties sought to be restrained will have the effect of creating such vexation or oppression or harassment as to adversely affect, in a substantial way, the approach which can be taken by the other party in the furtherance of the proceedings. If that is established the conduct becomes unconscionable, which may lead to the creation of the necessary equity. Whilst it is obvious that the continuance of proceedings in two jurisdictions, involving essentially the same issues, will cause a number of problems such as division of resources, additional time, additional legal representation, additional cost, and other such matters, that seems to me to be merely an incidence of two sets of proceedings in two jurisdictions.
The question for consideration is whether the conduct of CSR and CSR
America gives rise to a serious question to be tried, in the sense that it amounts to vexation, oppression and harassment, which is unconscionable. To decide this it is necessary to look at certain of the facts. 
CSR is an Australian company and, so far as the evidence discloses, its principal place of business is in Sydney. 
The policies of public liability insurance were entered into by CSR on behalf of itself and its subsidiaries in New South Wales. The principal insurer is CIGNA Australia, which carries on business in New South Wales. 
CSR has the right to require proceedings in relation to the policies to be litigated in a competent Court in Australia and, if that occurs, CSR may sue the lead underwriter and, thereby, bind all other underwriters to the policy. 
All the matters which gave rise to the writing of the letter of 17 March and, in so far as relevant, of April 1992, in which I include all the preceding correspondence and meetings and negotiations, took place in New
South Wales.
All the witnesses, who may be called to give evidence, appear, so far as the evidence discloses, to be resident in New South
Wales. 
The institution of proceedings in New South Wales by CSR would have enabled all issues between CSR and the insurers relating to the policies of insurance to be determined in one set of proceedings.  . The law to be applied for the determination of those proceedings would be New South Wales law, which is totally appropriate for a dispute being litigated by CSR.  . The solicitors retained by CSR for the purposes of the litigation in New
South Wales are the same as those retained by it, ultimately, in CSR versus NZI. As that case was only settled shortly before the hearing was due to begin those solicitors obviously achieved a close familiarity with the issues involved which, if proceedings are to go forward in New Jersey, will have to be imparted to legal representatives there.
Against this background Mr Stitt asked rhetorically why was it that CSR and CSR America sued the insurers in New Jersey rather than New South Wales.
The consequences of so doing, he submitted, were: 
All the advantages of proceeding in New South Wales, to which I have referred in the above catalogue, will be lost.
There would, inevitably, be a fragmentation of the proceedings, it being conceded that all matters in issue between the parties cannot be determined in the New Jersey proceedings. By that I mean the New Jersey proceedings do not encompass claims in parts of the world other than the United
States.
Obviously there will be threshold questions in the New
Jersey proceedings of jurisdiction and forum non conveniens, the litigation of which could take some time.
One answer to a number of these points may have been that the claims against
CSR and CSR America, in respect of which indemnity is being sought, were made by United States citizens in the United States and, accordingly, it was appropriate that the question of indemnification under the policies be litigated there. I can appreciate the force of that submission, particularly having regard to the vast amount of documentation which has to be discovered, were it not for the fact, as Mr Lovell agreed, that there is a substantial overlap between the claims being made in the present proceedings and the claims being made in CSR versus NZI and, in respect of that case, all documents relevant to it, which were discoverable, were brought to Sydney and have remained in Sydney. appreciate Mr Lovell gave evidence that it will be necessary for him to consider the precise allegations made in the present case to decide whether there should be any further discovery given, which may lead to the conclusion that the discovery given in CSR versus NZI cannot simply be replicated in this case. Discovery was one of the great difficulties from the point of view of CSR in CSR versus NZI but, on the evidence presently available, I do not see it constitutes anything like that difficulty.
Further, if additional discovery has to be given in the present case that will have to occur whether the proceedings are heard in
New South Wales or New Jersey. The evidence satisfies me that the number of documents involved in discovery will be relatively small, because of the previous discovery process, such that this is no longer, in itself, a reason for thinking it would be better, from
CSR's point of view, to litigate in New Jersey rather than in Australia. Once again the familiarity of those retained by CSR with the documentation, together with the steps which have been taken to index and marshal it must, in my view, make proceedings in Australia far easier than proceedings in New Jersey where, presumably, the discovery exercise would have to be repeated by those retained there.
I am satisfied, subject to several matters to which I shall refer, that there is a serious issue to be tried as to the reason why CSR would choose to institute proceedings in New Jersey rather than in New South Wales. I also have regard to the fact that the sole explanation proffered by CSR for doing this is in the Board minute of 11 April 1995. That minute only makes reference to seeking indemnity and not to claiming damages under the Sherman Act and the other legislation upon which reliance is placed.
However, it is said, that CSR and CSR America wish to claim damages in relation to the various counts to which I have referred. The first point I find strange about this is that CSR America is not claiming any such damages or relief This submission was put by Mr Stitt and, so far as I can see, the
Complaint does not seek that relief on behalf of CSR America and no submission was put to the contrary.
It was submitted that CSR America was entitled to bring such proceedings in New Jersey for that relief but, as I read the
Complaint, it has not done so. The damages are sought by CSR, so that I am confronted with a situation in which CSR is seeking to recover damages conformably with the law of the United States, including the legislation to which I have referred, notwithstanding that neither it nor many of the parties alleged to have perpetrated the misconduct are in the United States, in any relevant way, and that the activities said to give rise to the misconduct occurred in New South Wales.
It is further submitted that CSR America is entitled to seek indemnity in the United States. On any view CSR America's potential exposure to claims must be very limited. It was not incorporated until 1981 and, according to the outline of submissions on its behalf, it ceased being an insured in 1984-1985.
The role the claims against it in any litigation are likely to play must, almost of necessity, be quite small.
Perhaps the most compelling point in favour of the bringing of proceedings in New Jersey is that CIGNA Corporation, which is undoubtedly resident in America, is a party and, as matters presently stand, it has not, for reasons which are totally unexplained, chosen to join as a plaintiff in the present proceedings. However, it has been submitted, that certain other of the excess layer insurers have not joined in the present application for an injunction and, accordingly, strange results may flow from injunctive relief being granted, which would preclude proceedings going forward against parties not seeking the injunction. This raises the question of parties to which I referred.
Mr Stitt suggested the answer to his rhetorical question was that when one has regard to all the circumstances it is that CSR knows and intends that the New Jersey proceedings will lead inevitably to fragmentation; it does not even assert that they are capable of determining the claims made outside the
United States; and it knows and intends that by pursuing the New Jersey proceedings it will place "enormous pressure on the insurers to force them to settle" and it will severely disadvantage them legally and commercially.
In my view the evidence does not explain the many questions raised as to why CSR has commenced proceedings in New Jersey, rather than in New South
Wales. The inference for which Mr Stitt contends is open and, in those circumstances, there is, in my opinion, a serious issue to be tried. It has some relationship to the type of issue which would anise on a stay application. However it is different from that. Of course, on a final hearing of the present application, the evidence may mean the inference is no longer open.
It was submitted on behalf of CSR America that it is an American
Corporation seeking recourse under American law against corporations, some of which are American and some of which are international, such that there is no justification for describing its conduct as being in any way vexatious or oppressive. It was submitted that it could not be suggested, save in exceptional circumstances, that recourse by an American company to the benefit of an American statute in America could ever be vexatious such as to justify an antisuit injunction. It would only be necessary to determine this point if
CSR America was seeking such relief As I have said it is not.
It was also submitted on behalf of CSR America that it is not amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court, in that it has not submitted to it, it is a foreign corporation not carrying on business in Australia and it has no assets within the jurisdiction.
It was, perhaps, with this in mind that the principal relief sought by the insurers was against CSR acting through CSR America. In any event CSR America has come into the jurisdiction to the extent of opposing the grant of interlocutory relief and, when certain earlier interlocutory relief was granted against it it did not seek to be heard on that notwithstanding it was represented. In these circumstances it is appropriate to grant interlocutory relief against it, if the grant of such relief is otherwise justified.
 
Negative
Declarations
CSR and CSR America submitted that much of the relief being sought by the insurers was negative in nature, in the sense that it was directed towards declarations precluding CSR and CSR America enforcing the policies or enabling the insurers to avoid the policies, and, it was submitted, this was recognised as the type of relief sought where a party was "forum shopping".
This submission is, of course, linked to the submission that all the matters raised can be dealt with by way of defence in the New
Jersey proceedings. In relation to the declarations and orders sought concerning the insurance it seemed to me during the hearing, and it still does, that the insurers, of necessity, had to seek relief of a "negative" nature. If the insurers had instituted proceedings initially then the relief sought would have been of the same type as is sought in relation to the policies. The "true" negative relief sought by the insurers is that which seeks to establish the absence of liability for the allegedly tortious, conduct, and for the conduct allegedly in breach of the Sherman Act and the other legislation. If this was the only relief being sought one would have to look with even greater care at whether the institution of the proceedings by the insurers should be described as "forum shopping".
But, as I have said, it is added to the other relief, which the insurers are clearly entitled to have litigated, and, in my opinion, if it had not been it would have led to the objection that the New South Wales proceedings were themselves likely to fragment the litigation. All of this, of course, has to be appreciated against the background of the fact that the proceedings were instituted by CSR and CSR America without. any prior notice to the insurers and, in circumstances where a swift response was required from them.
The appropriate response to the claims on the policies was that the policies were not enforceable.
The first decision upon which Mr Douglas relied in support of the negative declaration argument was The "Volvox Hollandia" (1988) 2 LLR 361. At p.365 Kerr
LJ identified the issue thus:- "He" (counsel for the shipowners) "then rightly abandoned any attempt to deprive the plaintiffs of their right to pursue their claims on liability and quantum in London. What he maintained, however, was that the plaintiffs should not be entitled to proceed in the English Courts with their claims for negative declarations that the shipowners were not entitled to limit their liability, given that, before the institution of any proceedings here, the shipowners had properly instituted limitation proceedings in Rotterdam. That became the sole issue before this Court."
At p.366 his Lordship expressed the view that certain submissions made it "even clearer that the claims for the negative declarations in the plaintiffs' writs served in Holland cannot properly be maintained". To explain his reasons for that conclusion he considered, firstly, the international position and referred to the 1957 Convention on the limitation of liability of shipowners. At p.369 he said that the right of shipowners to claim limitation was "ancient and reconised internationally" and it is one whereby shipowners may claim a decree of limitation against all actual and potential claimants.
His Lordship referred to the ability of the shipowner to plead limitation by way of a defence, although that would not secure to a shipowner a decree of limitation "which is good against the world". He concluded, at p.370:- "What matters for present purposes is, first, that the right to claim limitation, whether by action or defence and/or counter claim, is a right which belongs to the shipowner alone. Secondly, a shipowner is not obliged to plead limitation by way of defence and/or counter claim, but is generally entitled to bring a separate limitation action if he is held liable in damages, whether by action or arbitration, at any rate once he has given security by the payment into court of the appropriate limitation fund."
His Lordship noted that it was not either unjust or inconvenient for liability and limitation to be tried separately. It was against this background he came to consider whether negative declarations should be granted. He said the grant of such declarations was discretionary and should be exercised with caution and:- "The refusal to grant negative declarations which might be premature or hypothetical or might unfairly prejudice a defendant, is an important illustration of the proper limits of the rule."
He was of the view that an anticipatory claim for a negative declaration as to rights or obligations was different from an application for a declaration that a person is under no obligation to do what is demanded of him.
At p.371 he continued:- "Claims for declarations, and in particular negative declarations, must be viewed with great caution in all situations involving possible conflicts of jurisdictions, since they obviously lend themselves to improper attempts at forum shopping. I have already said that in my view the present case provides a blatant example of this. Another illustration, though much less extreme, can be seen in the decision of this Court in Midland Bank Plc versus Laker Airways
Limited [(1986) QB 689.] The plaintiffs sought a declaration that they were not liable under English law for or in connection with the collapse of
Laker Airways, because they wanted to have such declaration for the purpose of proceedings which might be brought against them in the United States.
But following in Re Clay, this Court refused to grant such a declaration, since no claim to this effect had been asserted by the liquidator.."
I think I have quoted sufficient to point up the distinction his
Lordship was drawing. In my view, in the circumstances which existed when the
New South Wales proceedings were instituted, none of the declarations sought could be said to be anticipatory or hypothetical in any sense, or an attempt at forum shopping.
Mr Douglas referred also to the decision in Kawasaki Steel Corporation and Ors versus Daeyang Honey [(1994) 120 ALR 109.] In that case Gummow J was concerned with a situation where a bulk ore carrier, Daeyang Honey, had foundered in typhoon conditions east of the Philippines. The vessel was under a time charter by one company, Pan Ocean Shipping Co Limited, the applicant on the motion, to Navix Line Limited and under a voyage charter by that company to Kawasaki Steel Corporation, the respondent to the motion.
The plaintiffs issued a Writ in Rem claiming damages against, inter alios, the applicant, which, in August 1993, filed both a Notice of Conditional Appearance and a
Motion seeking various relief In particular, it sought an order staying the proceedings on the ground of forum non conveniens, on the basis that it had already commenced proceedings in the Tokyo District Court in which the relief sought was stated to be judgment "to confirm" that it owed no liability to any of the defendants in the Tokyo proceedings for loss of the cargo. It was recognised the issues which would be tried in an action for that type of negative declaration would essentially include the same issues as would arise in the proceedings before his Honour. The motion was dismissed and, in the course of so doing, his
Honour said, at p.114:- "The nature of the proceedings thus is what, in recent parlance in Anglo-Australasian law, would be identified as a suit for a 'negative declaration', see, for example, the use of that expression by Kerr LJ in The 'Volvox
Hollandia'..., by
Staughton LJ in Soho Supply Co versus Gattoil (USA) Inc (1989) 1 LLR at 593, and by Hirst J in Charman v
WOC Offshore BV (1993) LLR 378 at 385. Such a proceeding was described by Cooke P as having 'a degree of artificiality':
McConnell Dowell
Constructors Limited versus Lloyds Syndicate 396 <case>; [(1988) 2 NZLR 257] at 268."
At p.115 his Honour said:- "I should add that on the motion before this Court, counsel for the plaintiff submitted that in the absence of evidence to the contrary it should be taken that where there is an issue as to the appropriate forum the law of Japan regards the institution of proceedings for negative declarations with the same disfavour as is apparent in the above authorities. I would accept that submission, but on the footing that the disfavour, properly understood, is a reflection of what Sir Robin Cooke identified as the degree of artificiality in the negative declaration suit in a situation such as the present. (That is not to deny the utility of such a proceeding in some domestic disputes.)"
It seems to me that in determining whether the negative declaration is merely a forum shopping device or whether it is otherwise inappropriate to allow proceedings seeking a negative declaration to go forward, one must look at the totality of the matters upon which reliance is placed. In the present case I do not consider that the declaration sought in relation to the insurance issues can be characterised as negative declarations, which have no utility and are hypothetical. As I have said it is the only way in which the insurers can have those matters resolved.
There is, however, a problem about the other declarations in that a decision by this Court as to the applicability of the relief claimed to the facts proved may not be binding upon a Court in New Jersey. It was submitted on behalf of CSR America that any such decision would not, strictly speaking, be binding and, I think, this must be correct. Whether it would be of any persuasive authority may also be a matter of debate, although obviously this
Court would not wish to embark upon an exercise which failed to bring finality to the situation. However, I do not regard that as a reason for not granting interlocutory relief.
 
Conclusions Thus Far And The Balance Of Convenience
I am satisfied there are two serious issues to be tried: firstly, whether CSR agreed with the insurers it would not sue on the policies of insurance for the indemnity now sought; and secondly, whether by suing in New
Jersey CSR and CSR America are acting vexatiously and oppressively such as to constitute unconscionable conduct.
In the first issue I include whether CSR entered into the contract on behalf of CSR America. The question then is whether the balance of convenience favours the granting of an interlocutory injunction pending the final hearing of the injunction proceedings. In my view it does. I have come to that conclusion for the following reasons: 
If the insurers can make good either of the claims
I have just identified the law favours the grant of an injunction notwithstanding the close regard which must be had to comity.
If the insurers can make good either of these claims it will be possible for all the proceedings to be determined in the New South Wales proceedings and fragmentation will be avoided, save for the claims by CSR under the Sherman Act and the other American legislation. However, those claims are essentially dependent upon the issue as to whether there was a contract and whether it was induced by coercion or duress.
I appreciate the relief sought is said to be "extraneous" to the contract, but that will, in all probability, require CSR to decide precisely how it will frame its case on this point.
There is no suggestion that any delay in the final hearing of the injunction proceedings will prejudice CSR and 
CSR America or of any other prejudice to them. In any event in this Court there will be little delay in bringing about a
final hearing. In so far as there has been any delay CSR contributed to it substantially by failing to join the insurers in CSR versus NZI.
The objection that defendants in the New Jersey proceedings, which have not joined as plaintiffs in the present proceedings, may wish the New Jersey proceedings to proceed against them can be accommodated by granting leave to any party to apply to dissolve the injunction qua that party on the giving of appropriate notice.
I do not consider
CSR America, having regard to the way in which its case is formulated, will suffer any prejudice pending a final decision on the injunction issue.
For these reasons I am satisfied the insurers are entitled to the interlocutory anti-suit injunction they seek.
 
Orders . Upon the plaintiffs in proceedings 10133 of 1995 giving to the Court the usual undertaking as to damages
I order that CSR Limited by itself or through the second defendant CSR America Limited and CSR America Limited be restrained until further order from taking any further steps to prosecute civil action no 95-2947(HAA) in the United States District Court, District of
New Jersey. 
I grant liberty to any party to apply on seven days' or such shorter notice as a Judge of this Court may allow.
 . I stand the matter over until Friday, 18 August 1995 at 9.30 am to enable the parties to bring in Short Minutes of Order for the further conduct of these proceedings and of the Notices of Motion for stays brought by CSR
Limited and CSR America Limited. 
I order CSR Limited and CSR America Limited pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings for this interlocutory injunction.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/64.html  
