

Taylor Johnson Garrett versus Preston International Pty Limited Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 198 (1 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
TAYLOR JOHNSON GARRETT versus PRESTON INTERNATIONAL PTY LTD /98 May 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER : The Plaintiffs are the partners of a firm of solicitors practicing in the United Kingdom. The Defendant is a company incorporated in this state. The Plaintiffs provided legal services for the Defendant in the United Kingdom. There was dispute concerning the question of payment of the costs claimed by the Plaintiffs for those services. 
The Plaintiffs commenced proceedings in the High Court of Justice, Queens
Bench Division. The Defendant purported to file a defence in the proceedings. The documents were rejected by the Court (inter alia because of the Defendant's refusal to provide an address for service in the United Kingdom). The Defendant did not rectify the documentary problem. The Plaintiffs obtained default judgment.

The Defendant was advised by the Court that an application could be made to have the default judgment set aside. The Defendant was also advised of the need to act promptly in seeking such relief.

The Defendant did not proceed to take advantage of the advice given by the
Court. It still has not made any application to set aside the default judgment.

These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 28th January 1998. They were brought to have the default judgment (which was obtained on 24th November ) registered as a judgment of this Court pursuant to the Foreign Judgment
Act 1991 (Cth) .

Orders were made in the Registry and entered on 18th February 1998. Apart from the order for registration, the orders also enabled the defendant to apply to set aside the registration.

On 5th March 1998, a Notice of Motion was filed purportedly on behalf of the
Defendant. It sought the setting aside of the registration. On the same day, a
Notice of Appearance was purportedly filed on behalf of the Defendant.

The Notice of Motion has been before a Registrar on two occasions. On the second occasion, it was referred to me as being ready for hearing.

At the outset, the Court raised two matters for the consideration of the parties. These matters arose out of the circumstances involving Mr Preston (who says he is a director of the company) purporting to appear on behalf of it in these proceedings. There is a problem as to whether or not the bringing of the Notice of Motion has been validly authorised by the Defendant. There is a problem as to whether or not Mr Preston should be allowed on behalf of the company.

The relevant provisions for the entry of an appearance by a corporation may be found in pt 11 r. 1A Supreme Court Rules.

The defendant does not have a solicitor. There is a real question as to whether or not the defendant has satisfied the relevant requirements to enable an appearance otherwise than by a solicitor.

Counsel for the Plaintiffs has submitted that the application must fail for reasons of substance. The view was taken that the procedural problems were merely peripheral to the matters of substance. The amount in issue between the two parties is extremely modest. As there was a readiness for hearing and the parties were urging the Court to proceed, it was considered to be in the best interests of justice that the matter be disposed of without further adjournment. This would avoid the incurring of further costs. It was a case where the costs, in any event, would be disproportionate to the amount involved in the proceedings. The Plaintiffs do not accept that Mr Preston is entitled to appear on behalf of the Defendant. However, the Plaintiffs did not oppose the taking of a course whereby Mr Preston was allowed to put before the
Court such materials and submissions as he wished on behalf of the defendant.

Mr Preston read a bulky affidavit which had been sworn by himself. He also addressed at considerable length. The plaintiffs relied on affidavits sworn by
Mr Klotz.

For present purposes, the relevant statutory provisions may be found in section 7 of the Act. Subsection (2)(a) sets out the circumstances in which the Court must set aside the registration. Subsection (2)(b) sets out the circumstances in which the Court may set the registration aside.

In the circumstances of this case, the provisions of subsection (2)(b) had no application. I should also add that Mr Preston propounded an argument founded on a provision of the [Foreign Judgments Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fja1973192/). The argument was misconceived as that Act had no application in the circumstances of this case.

Mr Preston spent some considerable time directing submissions to the question of his entitlement to have the original United Kingdom judgment set aside. He levelled many complaints against the Plaintiffs (including complaints of work being down without instructions and the fees being excessive). There was a deficiency of evidence in the material to support the submissions that were made. Indeed, if it had been necessary to express any view on the matter, I would not have been satisfied that there was shown to be a bona fide defence on the merits that was arguable. In any event, nothing has been done to set aside the original judgment and these submissions of Mr Preston are not to the point in the present application.

In addition, Mr Preston submitted that the Defendant had demonstrated an entitlement to have the registration set aside by reason of any of the circumstances referred to in (iv), (v), or (vi) of subsection (2)(a). The submissions laboured under misconception. All of them suffered from a deficiency in supporting evidence. Indeed, the balance of the evidence demonstrated that a contrary conclusion should be reached in each instance.

The onus rests with the applicant to demonstrate that the registration should be set aside. In the circumstance of this case the onus has not been discharged. Accordingly, the application fails.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The Defendant is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
