

Australian Maritime Safety Authority versus Quirk Matter No 1755/96 [1998]
NSWSC 150 (13 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 
AUSTRALIAN MARITIME SAFETY AUTHORITY versus PATRICIA QUIRK /96 May 1998 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
The Parties, the Litigation.
 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff (AMSA) and the defendant Mrs Quirk are lessor and lessee in Lease 0664869T of Lot 2 in Deposited Plan 8949249; Lighthouse Cottage No.1 and surrounding curtilage on Barranjoey Head, formerly a lighthouse keeper's cottage. For many years the lighthouse has not been manned, and the plaintiff has occupied the cottage since 1964 under various arrangements with the Commonwealth Government and with AMSA, to which the Commonwealth transferred the land after AMSA was formed in 1991. When Mrs Quirk first went into occupation the cottage was derelict, and it has been made habitable by many repair and renovation works carried out by her, or at her expense or by her son as a service to her. As a result of these works over many years the cottage is now in a restored condition, suitable for occupation as her home. The lighthouse cottage is in many ways unlike an ordinary suburban cottage. The cottage is part of the National Estate under the [Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ahca1975311/). Palm Beach suburb, its services and residential streets, with many very expensive houses, are a little over one kilometre away. There is no town water and no town sewerage service. Electricity and telephone service are available and used; Mrs Quirk had these put in some years ago. The site and outlook on Barranjoey are magnificent. The cottage is rather isolated. 
Access to the cottage is very difficult. A vehicle must proceed north from
Barranjoey Road through the public land on the western or Pittwater side of the sandspit, then some distance along the beach, then along an access track over land owned by the State up the southern face of Barranjoey. The access track and the beach can only be used by 4-Wheel drive vehicles. The access track is poorly formed and extremely rough, and is maintained only by Mrs
Quirk; it is not a public roadway and the Local Government authority is not responsible for it. It runs over the site of a Right of Access appurtenant to
AMSA's land over a section of the Ku-Ring-Gai Chase National Park.

After a series of other arrangements the Commonwealth, then registered proprietor under the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) of approximately 11 hectares of land on Barranjoey Head, leased the cottage and curtilage to Mrs Quirk by a Deed of 31 January 1991. The words of grant were (cl.1) "... The lessor hereby grants to the lessee a lease of cottage No. 1, and curtilage ... for use as a residence for herself and for members of her immediate family during her lifetime." The Deed was not in form registrable under the [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/), and was not registered, but in my opinion the interest granted may be effectually granted by the Commonwealth by Deed. Although the Commonwealth can take advantage of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) to give effect to its land transactions, it is not obliged to do so. AMSA is not in the same position. The Commonwealth transferred the land to AMSA, which in effect adopted the previous grant by lease 0664869T executed on 15 September and later registered. The document was in form a lease, the expressed term being "life tenancy", the commencing date 16 October 1991 and the terminating date "death of lessee". Annexure A to the lease adopted the terms of the Deed of 31 January 1991, a copy of which is Annexure B to the Lease.
Annexure A made amendments to some provisions of the Deed. One amendment reduced the area of land leased. Another added a final sentence to cl.2 of the
Deed. With that addition, and omitting some formal expressions, cl.2 as amended is in these terms: "2. The Lessee shall pay to the Collector of Public Monies ... during the continuance of this Lease, the annual sum of one thousand two hundred and forty eight dollars ($1,248), payable annually in advance, the first payment to be made on the date hereof but subject to review every three years on the basis of ground rent only. Both the Lessor and the Lessee are to participate in the review and agree on the varied rent. In the event that they cannot reach agreement as to the varied rent, it is to be fixed by the Supreme
Court." 
Clause 4 established that the first rent review under the Deed was in respect of the three years commencing on 1 February 1994 and the next rent review was in respect of the three years commencing on 1 February 1997.

The Deed and the Lease contained a number of unusual special conditions. The factual matrix of these special conditions was that over many years before Mrs Quirk had restored the cottage from its derelict condition, and since she had paid a rent which represented ground rent and did not represent any return to the Commonwealth for the value of the improvements. This is reflected in the reference to ground rent in cl.2 and in several other ways.
By Annexure A cl.3 Mrs Quirk was not required to erect or repair fencing outside the cottage precinct and incurred no liability in respect of occurrences outside the cottage precinct. The recitals to the Deed included the following: "B. Erected on the land is a cottage known as Cottage No. 1 which has been declared part of the National Estate pursuant to [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ahca1975311/s23.html) of the [Australian Heritage Commission Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ahca1975311/); 
C. Cottage No. 1 has been occupied by the Lessee with the consent of the
Lessor for a number of years during which time the Lessee and her son, Thomas
Quirk, have carried out substantial restoration and maintenance work without cost to the Lessor;" 
By Deed cl.3 Mrs Quirk was to maintain and repair the premises without cost to the Lessor and comply with Conservation Orders.

By Deed cl.4 the Lease was not assignable. The whole of cl.4 should be noticed, particularly its reference to the lessee's son Mr Thomas Quirk.
 "4. The lease hereby granted is not assignable by the Lessee and any purported assignment or sub-lease or parting with possession shall cause this lease automatically to determine without any obligation on the part of the Lessor to give notice or to pay compensation of any kind to the Lessee provided that in the event of the Lessee's death, the Lessor shall grant to the Lessee's son,
Thomas Quirk, at his written request made within three months of the death of the Lessee, a lease for a term of five years, and thence from year to year, terminable on 12 months prior notice in writing by either party, and otherwise on the same terms and conditions, so far as applicable, as this present lease." 
The nature of any right thereby conferred on Mr Thomas Quirk, who is not a party to the Deed or the Lease, is open to further consideration and not presently important. The proviso does not purport to confer any lease on him, and gives no more than an opportunity or option to make a written request for a five year lease if he should be living at the time of Mrs Quirk's death.

By Deed cl.5 Mrs Quirk was to have a right of access by means only of the existing 4-Wheel drive track and the lessor was not obliged to maintain the track or warrant that it was suitable for use.

By Deed Clause 6 Mrs Quirk was liable for the safety of persons on the premises, and she gave an indemnity by cll.6 and 7.

Mrs Quirk was also (cl.8) to maintain insurances for the benefit of the lessor, to repair fences and keep them in good condition, and to provide and maintain sanitary conveniences.

In litigation brought by Mrs Quirk against the Commonwealth in this Division,
Quirk versus The Commonwealth & Anor [1995] 6 BPR 13989, Windeyer J on 1 May made declarations establishing the operation of some provisions of the
Deed. Mrs Quirk claimed a declaration to the effect that the reviewed rent on the first review was to bear the same relationship to the unimproved value of the land as the rental of $1248 reserved by the Deed bore to the unimproved value of the land as at 31 January 1991. The Court held that this was not appropriate.

Thereafter the parties entered into the lease, and the provisions of Deed cl.2 as amended are not in exactly the same form as considered by Mr Justice
Windeyer. The amendment makes it even clearer than before that there is not an unenforceable agreement to agree, and that it was intended that Deed cl.2 as amended should establish a basis for review which could be decided objectively and fixed by a court.

The term of the Lease.

The interest granted is expressed to be a lease for the term of Mrs Quirk's life and the Deed did not follow the formula of granting a lease for a fixed number of years but determinable if a named person should die before those years expire. There is a need for the duration of a term created by a lease to be certain both as to commencement and as to termination: a lease "for the duration of the War" was held not to create a good leasehold interest in Lace v Chantler [[1944] 1 KB 368] at 370-371. See too Re Lehrer & Ors and The Real
Property Act 1900-1956 [[1961] SR 365] and
HH Halls Limited versus Lepouris (1964)65 SR 181. However a grant of a right of possession for the lifetime of a person, whether or not expressed to be a lease, is not void for uncertainty on the ground that the length of the person's life cannot be known; the consequence of that uncertainty is not the consequence which emerged in Lace versus Chantler, but the grant creates a freehold estate for life. This appears from judgment of Jacobs JA in Borambil
Pty Limited versus O'Carroll [[1972] 2 NSWLR 302] and authorities which his Honour examined at 305D to 307E. These authorities show that it is very common, indeed usual to speak of an estate for life created in terms appropriate for a lease as a lease. The [Real Property Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) [s.53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s53.html) speaks in these terms and contemplates the creation of an estate for life by a document which in form is a lease and authorises its registration as a lease.
The [Landlord and Tenant (Amendment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lata1948257/) under consideration in the Borambil case was treated in the Court of Appeal as including a freehold estate for life created in this way within its statutory definition of a lease, and this holding was affirmed by the Privy Council [[1974] 1 NSWLR 1.] 
Subsection 149(6) of the Law of Property Act 1925 (United Kingdom) provided that a lease at a rent for life will take effect as a lease for 90 years and recognised the earlier effectiveness of such a lease. By the time Lace v
Chantler was decided the effectiveness of such a lease no longer required consideration in the law of England. This provision was not one of the provisions of s.149 adopted in New South Wales: see [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) [s.120A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s120a.html)
For the position in Victoria see Greco & Anor versus Swinburne Limited <case>; [[1991] 1 VR 304] and the examination of the authorities, including the Borambil case, by Gobbo J at to 316.

In the circumstances, the fact that the lease was granted to Mrs Quirk for the term of her life is not a ground on which it should be held to be void or to operate only as a tenancy at will terminable on a month's notice. On the other hand it cannot be said that the lease was for a term of years; it was for the unknowable term of Mrs Quirk's life from the date of commencement, whether that should be a few days or 40 years. It could not be said either that the interest of Mr Thomas Quirk referred to in the proviso was a lease for a term of years; that interest is contingent on his surviving Mrs Quirk and his exercising an option, he has no present right to possession and it could not on any fair use of language be described now as a lease.

Application of the [Residential Tenancies Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/) 
The Deed and Lease do not take effect according to their terms. This is established by applying to AMSA the law as it appears in the decision of the
High Court of Australia in Re Residential Tenancies Tribunal: Ex parte
Defence Housing Authority (1997) 71 ALJR 1254.

Although the issue before the High Court was whether the Tribunal had jurisdiction to make orders against the Defence Housing Authority, the reasoning in the majority judgments shows that the whole of the [Residential
Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/) (RT
Act) applies to AMSA. The plaintiff's counsel conceded that the whole of the [Residential Tenancies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/) applies to the plaintiff. In my opinion the concession was appropriate.

The key expression in the RT Act is "Residential Tenancy Agreement" defined in subs.3(1) thus: "`Residential Tenancy Agreement' means any agreement under which a person grants to another person for value a right of occupation of residential premises for the purpose of use as a residence: ..." The Deed clearly falls within this definition having regard to cll.1 and 2.

The terms of the RT Act show no sign that those who drafted it adverted to problems and injustices which can result from its application to a building lease for residential premises. Such leases are very uncommon for residential premises; evidence of valuers dealt with the practice and showed that building leases at the present time are usually granted only for commercial and industrial premises, for which they are a common aspect of development projects. When building leases of residential premises are encountered they are often leases for 99 years or other long terms granted many years ago, but this case illustrates that there are modern examples. Characteristically, building leases reserve to the lessor far less than an economic return on the improvements, in recognition that it is the lessee who builds the improvements; typically the lessee is responsible for maintaining the improvements, the lessor is not and covenants in the lease reflect this arrangement, providing for liability for charges and other obligations in ways markedly different from those usually seen in short-term lettings of residential premises where the full rack rent is charged. In the present case the workings of the Act produce an obvious and gross injustice for the plaintiff by avoiding the defendant's obligation to pay repairs maintenance and other expenses and placing that obligation on the plaintiff, while not enhancing the return for the plaintiff which is limited to the ground rent.

Apart from the obvious economic injustice to a lessor in this situation, there can be expected to be unfortunate social effects where lessors are subjected to repair and maintenance obligations but are not given sufficient return on the property to provide funds to meet these obligations; it is only to be expected that buildings will not be properly repaired and maintained, with adverse results for the comfort, health and welfare of the occupants. The Act does not seem to contain any exception or provision for administrative exclusion of premises. The situation appears to call for consideration of law reform by the State so as to exclude long term building leases, or to enable lessors affected to recover an economic rent in excess of the contractual rent. Alternatively the Commonwealth could relieve itself from the RT Act by legislation.

The RT Act applies to Residential Tenancy Agreements made after commencement on 30 October 1989 - subs.5(1). Part 3 Division 1 - Sections 17 to 23 prescribes rights and obligation of landlords and tenants, most significantly s.25 which, among other things, obliges the landlord to provide and maintain the residential premises in a reasonable state of repair. Inconsistent terms of a Residential Tenancy Agreement are void - see s.11. The following provisions of the Deed are inconsistent with provisions of Pt.3 and void: 
Clause 3 - Lessee's obligation to repair - see s.25(1)(b).

Clause 4 - Not assignable. See subs.33(1).

Clause 5 - Maintaining access track - see s.25(1)(b)(ii).

Clause 9 - Repairing fences - see s.25(1)(b)(ii).

Clause 11 - Maintenance of sanitary conveniences - s.25(1)(b).

There may be other inconsistencies. Forms were prescribed under s.9 by the [Residential Tenancies (Residential Premises) Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/rtpr1995499/) which commenced on 31 August 1995, but the prescribed forms relate to "an agreement which creates a tenancy for a term of up to three years" and to agreements for a term exceeding three years: see Regulation cl.6(1), and the lease for life does not fall within either class. For that reason the prescribed forms do not apply.

Valuation of the Ground Rent.

Determination of the ground rent is a valuation problem of unusual difficulty.
The land leased is unique and in many of its circumstances quite unlike an ordinary suburban cottage. It does not have good negotiable road access, and lacks some ordinary suburban services. Agreements for ground leases of residential premises where the lessee is not called on to pay a rent representing the value of the improvements are now extremely rare, although some occurred many years ago. The valuer witnesses were unable to refer to anything which could be regarded as a comparable transaction. The valuers brought forward particulars of transactions and processes of reasoning which could not have had much claim for my attention if anything cogent had been available, but like the valuers I must use the material which exists. In these circumstances I need to consider what confidence is to be placed in the judgment and opinions of valuers, rather than to consider whether I am convinced by the bases of their opinions in supporting material.

The effect of Deed cl.2 with the amendment is that the varied rent is to be fixed "on the basis of ground rent only". The Deed does not state that the initial rent of $1248 was a ground rent, or give it any particular description, and there is no reason on the terms of the Deed to regard $1248 as a ground rent or as a starting point for fixing the varied rent. I was referred to evidence of the history of the parties' earlier dealings which showed that $1248 was adopted in 1982 on the view held by Government officers that $1248 was then the ground rent, and again adopted in 1989 on what appears to have been the view that it was still the ground rent. The Deed does not however establish that it was to be so regarded in 1991; the elapse of time suggests that it probably was not then the objectively ascertainable ground rent because there had been no change since 1982.

I was referred to a number of authorities in which lease or other contractual provisions relating to ground rent have been considered by courts. In each case the contractual provisions were applied according to their terms and setting in the then relevant document, and it is difficult to move readily from the exposition of one document to the exposition of another. Where land only is leased there is no difficulty in seeing what the ground rent means, but where reference is made to "ground rent" in a context of leasing land which has been improved by erecting a residence, as in this case, the expression appears to require determination of what part of the whole rent which the property can yield is appropriately to be allocated to the land itself and the economic advantages associated with making it available, and what part is appropriately allocated to the improvements and the economic advantages of their availability. This is an allocation problem from which it is not possible to exclude an arbitrary element of judgment, as in the nature of things there cannot be significant experience of transactions in which only one of these elements is dealt with; in the real world you have to take them both.

This is an allocation problem such as occurs in economics and accountancy where there is joint production and one process produces several products; any allocation of the cost of the whole process among the products must have an arbitrary element. Rent cannot be gained by leasing out improvements without the land or by leasing out the land without the improvements; as both exist they must be leased together, and to attribute the rent to one or the other can only be done by selecting some method of allocation.

The exercise does not require any artificial assumptions, such as assuming that the land itself was leased without any improvements and asking what return it would bring; obviously vacant residential land without a residence would bring next to nothing and the assumption is unjustly distorting, while the counterpoint assumption that improvements were leased without land is obviously absurd.

Overall, the impact of the RT Act and its avoidance of a number of the provisions of the Deed have had a large impact on the relationship between the parties and on the understanding of that relationship which was brought to bear on their valuation task by the valuer witnesses. However this impact is very largely related to burdens and advantages which, in my view, should be allocated to the improvements and not to the ground rent. An exception is the provision relating to the access track; an effect of s.25 of the RT Act is that financial responsibility for the access track does not rest on the defendant but on the plaintiff, and access is in my opinion an affair of ground rent.

In Bartlett versus Salmon (1855) 6 De Gex Manning & Grainger 33 <case>; , [43
ER 1142] at 1145
Lord Cranworth LC said: "The term ground rent is well understood and has a definite meaning: it is the sum paid by the owner or builder of houses for the use of land to build on, and is therefore much under what it lets for when it has been built on." This is a good general indication of what is involved in a ground rent, although it cannot be applied directly where the houses had already been built at the time of the letting. "Owner" in this passage means "leasehold owner." I was referred to observations in Email Limited versus Robert
Bray (Langwarrin) Pty Limited <case>; [[1984] VR 16](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1984%5d%20VR%2016 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 20 and 21, where the lease provided that the rent on review was to be "such annual rental ... as determined as a reasonable rental by a single certified valuer ...". The Court said at 20: "The parties have selected the word `reasonable'. We agree ... that the expression `reasonable rental' is not a term of art. It has no fixed or precise meaning. It is of a quite different character from `market rental';" and at p21: "This in our opinion means a rental which is reasonable in the light of all the relevant circumstances." 
I was also referred to Thomas Bates & Son Limited versus Wyndham's (Lingerie)
Limited <case>; [[1981] WLR 505] at 517-518; Lear versus Blizzard [[1983] 3 All ER 662] at 669 and Bank of South Australia versus SA Health Commission [(1996) 65 SASR ]
at 418-419. I have also noticed the decision of the House of Lords in
Ponsford & Ors versus HMS Aerosols Limited [[1979] AC 63.] In none of these cases was the review to take place "on the basis of ground rent only" or on any generally similar test, and where there is an express or implied standard of reasonableness the disposition of judges, including the minority in
Ponsford versus HMS Aerosols Limited, to have regard to the fact that the lessee paid for the improvements can readily be understood. That circumstance should, in my opinion, have no influence in this case because the defendant's contribution to improvements was fully recognised by adopting a test which left them out of consideration for fixing varied rent and by providing for payment of a ground rent only. The burden of improvements has no place in determination of the ground rent, whether the burden falls on the defendant as appears from the terms of the lease or on the plaintiff as is the effect of the RT Act. The plaintiff is very much advantaged by the RT Act over the apparent position under the Deed, but this produces no impact on what constitutes the ground rent.

I was also referred to Basingstoke & Deane Borough Council v. Host Group
Limited [1988] 1WLR 348 and to the judgment of Windeyer J in the earlier proceedings. In the Basingstoke case the test did refer to ground rental but was amplified by the detailed provisions requiring artificial assumptions.

The rent review provision, by bringing the variation of the ground rent under consideration every three years, strongly supports the view that the state of the market is for consideration on the review, because that is the factor which is most likely to change with time. There is no provision limiting variations to upward variations, and the state of the market could work to the advantage of either party.

The advantage which the defendant has gained from her past expenditure is complete and cannot be improved on. In my opinion her past expenditure has no bearing on what constitutes the ground rent. The defendant is in a meritorious position in having spent significant sums of money and personal endeavours in restoring a heritage property, but the Deed recognises the merits of her position by allowing her to take the property at an initial rent which had been determined to be the ground rent nine years earlier, and to hold it at that rent for three years, and thereafter to be liable for a ground rent for which the value of the improvements and liabilities connected with them would not be a relevant matter. In my opinion there is no room for any further recognition of the merits of her position to enter into an ascertainment of what the ground rent is from review to review.

This mechanism is what parties chose to adopt when the negotiations came to agreement and they resolved the considerations on both sides which bore on what should be done about recognising ownership of the improvements: the
Commonwealth owned them but they were derelict, the defendant restored them and paid for the restorations but did not own them, the defendant was to have the use of them and enjoy the benefit of them for the rest of her life, the plaintiff was eventually to be unimpeded in the benefits of ownership, and it cannot be known how long this will be deferred. All of these and any other considerations were balanced out by the terms in the lease relating to rent and other matters, and in my opinion they are not open for further consideration on rent reviews.

A considerable part of the evidence of Mr Valuer Dempsey, who was called by the defendant, appears to be based on or influenced by the view that, on the true construction of the lease, fixing the varied rent was to be based on or significantly influenced by the previous history of the parties' dealings including the fact that the defendant had restored the property from a derelict condition and spent considerable sums on doing so. In my opinion this is not a correct view of the operation of the Deed, although it is, on the evidence, an explanation for the parties' having entered into the Deed on the terms they did and having adopted the ground rent of 1982 as the rent initially payable under the Deed of 1991. Thereafter, the influence on the rights of the parties of recognition of the defendant's expenditure is to be found in the terms of the Deed itself, and its provisions about how obligations are to fall on each party, and are not to be found elsewhere. In particular, the varied rent was to be "on the basis of ground rent only" and not on any other basis.

Mr Dempsey's method was to take the initial rent of $1248 and project it to the review date by reference to the Consumer Price Index. He explained the basis for adopting this method in terms in which the earlier history of the parties' dealings and the fact that Mrs Quirk had paid for the renovations were elements in some way which Mr Dempsey was not able to make me understand.
Adverse to the adoption of Mr Dempsey's method are several factors: that, on what in my view is the true construction of the Deed, the defendant's earlier expenditures are not relevant for consideration in determining the ground rent, that it is not established by the terms of the Deed or in any other way that $1248 per year was the ground rent at the time of commencement of the lease or at any date relevant to fixing the varied rent, and that variations in the Consumer Price Index have no necessary relation to variations in land rents or other land values.

In favour of Mr Dempsey's method is the consideration that his method would, at the least, give the lessor the same return in money values and Consumer
Price Index terms as was available when the lease commenced, and if no other useful information whatever were available it could be supposed that at least keeping up the constant money value of the rent was appropriate. I do not regard this consideration as one which I should act on because it is not a means of ascertaining the ground rent on the review date; it does not relate to that subject.

In the evidence of the plaintiff's valuers, splits and allocations of market rent between the land and the improvements are significant only in a check valuation. The principal valuation method was to proceed from the land value to ground rent by applying a percentage; determination of land value and determination of the appropriate percentage are valuation exercises arrived at as a matter of judgment, and neither is affected by financial burdens which relate to the improvements. Much of the valuers' material related to valuations for the first review date on 1 February 1994. The second review as of 1 February 1997 is the only review which can now have an influence on events, as rent increases cannot be made retrospective; for this reason the plaintiff by amendment to the summons claimed determination relating to the second rent review, and did not press for a decision relating to the first rent review.

The valuers' first reports in evidence were prepared in relation to the first rent review date, and there is later material which must be read with the first reports. Mr Valuer McNeilly was of the view that the current market value of the part of Lot 2 which is subject to the Lease as of 31 January 1997 was $500,000, which he split between $200,000 for improvements and $300,000 for the land. Mr McNeilly would allocate $7,500 of the rental value to the land. He referred to sales evidence. Several sales in November and December were considered when producing his earlier valuation in which land was valued at $280,000 at the first review date. In Mr McNeilly's opinion there had been steady demand in the interim but only marginal increases in values, and he referred to four sales in Palm Beach which took place in November and
December 1996. These included three sales of residences of three or four bedrooms, all old and two of them renovated, at $635,000, $660,000 and $1,075,000, and one sale of a block of three old beach houses, which were probably redevelopment prospects, at a figure which yields $1,233,333 each.
None of these could be called a sale of comparable property, and in my understanding, in Mr McNeilly's evidence the sales do no more than indicate in a general way a level of values for residential property in Palm Beach. I would think that there is a need for severe discounting when proceeding from property values in Palm Beach to the valuation of the subject property, because the balance of relative advantages and disadvantages which go to form its unique character include severe disadvantages, most strikingly in respect of access and availability of services. Even allowing for severe discounting,
I do not think that there is any indication that Mr McNeilly's judgment and his conclusion that the value of the land was $300,000 are not reliable.

Mr McNeilly also gave views on rental value; in his opinion the rental value of the property at 31 January 1997 was $13,000 gross per annum which he split to allocate $7,500 to the land. In support of this he referred to several lettings on a permanent basis of properties in Barranjoey Road and Ebor Street at much the same level. His allocation of the rent to the land gives a slightly lower proportion to the land than would be suggested by his split between the values of the improvements and of the land itself.

The next stage in the plaintiff's valuation evidence was taken up by Mr Valuer
McCann, who took Mr McNeilly's valuation, considered the lease documents (which were not a factor in Mr McNeilly's reasoning) and expressed a view about ground rent in which Mr McNeilly's valuation of the land was a starting point. The substantial matter which Mr McCann addressed was the adoption of a percentage of the land value which was to yield the ground rent. Mr McCann surveyed information available to him about the percentages which are adopted in actual transactions. The Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation applies 9 per cent for ground rents of commercial and industrial properties. The
Department of Conservation and Land Management generally adopts 6 per cent for rural properties, formerly was required by statute to adopt 2.5 per cent for rural residential properties and now applies a market test. National Parks and
Wildlife Service adopts 6 per cent for lettings of residential properties in the ski fields. The Government of the Australian Capital Territory was required by statute to adopt 5 per cent for residential properties in its practices until 1970 but no longer uses that basis, and uses 3 per cent for rural residential properties. Mr McCann was also aware of charges made by the
Department of Conservation and Land Management for permissive occupancies at
Palm Beach and in the National Park nearby.

All these sources are in my opinion strikingly unlike the valuation exercise before me; they furnished very little or next to nothing of elements of comparability. The little use that they are is that they are an indication that the opinion which Mr McCann first expressed that 2.5 per cent was an appropriate percentage is conservative.

In his first report Mr McCann made a check valuation based on consideration of rental values and I did not find his check valuation impressive.

In his first report Mr McCann applied 2.5 per cent to Mr McNeilly's first land valuation of $280,000, producing $7,000, and deducted a yearly allowance for the cost of maintaining the access track of $500 to produce an effective ground rent of $6500 which in his opinion this process supported. The adjustment for maintaining the access track was not, in my opinion, appropriate having regard to the defendant's being relieved of that cost by the avoidance of cl.5.

Mr McCann was not aware of the effect of the RT Act in avoiding some clauses when he gave his first report. When that effect became known he reconsidered the figure of 2.5 per cent for reasons set out in his affidavit of 27 April
He said: "Since the landlord now has responsibility for repair and maintenance, I estimate that would involve an expenditure over a 10 year period of approximately $36,500 (including insurance obligations of $5,000) on today's costs. This additional expenditure should be compensated for by the addition of 1.2 per cent to the figure of 2.5 per cent set out in my report of September 1995 ..." (I have incorporated the correction which he made in oral evidence). In my opinion I should not act on this revised view and I should not adopt the revised figure of 3.7 per cent because it was wrong in principle to bring into consideration for the determination of ground rent the incidence of liability for repair and maintenance of improvements, which is not an affair of ground rent at all.

Mr Valuer Norris gave evidence which endorsed the adoption of the figure of .5 per cent and the use of the method which Mr McCann had followed.

The valuation issue before me is, even for a valuation exercise (and they are often quite difficult), unusually lacking in concrete bases, and I am very much in the hands of the valuers and their opinions. I have not been presented with any cogent valuation logic based on principle by which I am able to perform and to endorse myself all the steps in the reasoning; what I have before me is a choice of opinions. None of the valuation evidence before me was insincerely advanced or lacking in an appropriate degree of consideration, but I have not accepted Mr Dempsey's evidence because I do not regard it as based appropriately on the true construction of the Deed and on what is involved in ascertaining a ground rent. Although I cannot apply all the steps of the plaintiff's valuers' reasoning myself, it seems to me that they have expressed their conclusions, in a difficult exercise, with moderation and care and have not shown any signs of partisanship. I feel that I should accept the findings which in substance are indicated by their opinions.

Adopting Mr McNeilly's land value of $300,000 and applying Mr McCann's first percentage, endorsed by Mr Norris, of 2.5 per cent, I find that the ground rent which should be adopted as the varied rent for the three year period from February 1997 is $7,500 per annum.

The plaintiff sought a declaration establishing an interpretation of the lease to be applied in future reviews. There were two versions of the claim, claim 2 and claim 3, and as expressed in claim 2 there was to be an allowance for the cost of maintaining the access road, an allowance which does not reflect the workings of the Deed subject to the RT Act. In my view I should not attempt to expound the meaning of the lease in a declaratory order, because difficult though the task may be, construction of the lease itself is always the primary source for which a declaration made by the court cannot be substituted. The views which I have expressed in this judgment may be of some assistance in further reviews, and I do not think that I can go further.

In his judgment in Quirk versus The Commonwealth & Anor [1995] 6 BPR 13989 at Windeyer J, dealing with the Deed before it was amended said "... the basis for any new rent to be fixed is the reasonable ground rent for the premises at the review date." In my view this is still true notwithstanding the amendment, and it is not possible to give any fuller exposition.
Reasonableness is to be determined in relation to conditions existing at the review date, and it is to be determined objectively, the overwhelmingly important consideration being the state of the market at the review date.

Conclusion.

In my opinion the history of the parties' dealings before they entered into this arrangement, and the fact that it was the defendant who renovated the property and met the expense of doing so, do not have any continuing impact on determination of the ground rent.

There is no disguising the arbitrary element in adopting 2.5 per cent of the land value to determine the ground rent. The remaining part of the exercise, in which a rental element to be allocated to improvements would be determined, is superfluous in the present case.

In my opinion nothing in the RT Act avoids the rent review provisions, but they may not be given effect except in accordance with the procedure provided by the Act.

Orders:
Declare that the sum payable by the defendant to the plaintiff for rent for the period 1 February 1997 to 31 January 2000 pursuant to the three-yearly rent review stipulated by clause 2 as amended of the Deed Annexure B to Lease
T and in accordance with the terms of the Lease is $7500 per year: but the terms of the Lease have effect subject to the [Residential Tenancies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/).
Order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
