

Regina versus Gervaise (aka Preece); Regina versus Preece Matter Nos Cca 60644/96;
Cca 60645/96 [1997] NSWSC 559 (13 November 1997) 
Regina versus Hamilton Gervaise (aka Preece) /96 
Regina versus Susan Preece /96 November 1997 
Smart J, Grove J, Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against Conviction and Sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60644/96; 60645/96 
DELIVERED: Thursday 13 November 1997 
HEARING DATE: Monday 25 August 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Hamilton GERVAISE (@PREECE) 
REGINA versus Susan PREECE 
JUDGMENT OF: SMART J, GROVE J, STUDDERT J 
COUNSEL: * Applicant: S J Odgers (Gervaise @ Preece) 
G R James, Q.C. (Preece) * Respondent: R D Cogswell 
SOLICITORS: * Applicant: Grahame Howe & Co (Gervaise @ Preece) 
Murphy's Lawyers Inc (Preece) * Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: MATERIALITY OF FALSE PARTICULAR - GIFT NEEDS PERFECTION - SENTENCE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Appeals against conviction dismissed; Sentences reduced 
NO. OF PAGES: 19 
REGINA versus Hamilton GERVAISE (@ PREECE) 
REGINA versus Susan PREECE 
HEADNOTE 
P and G who were wife and husband were respectively convicted under S178BB of the Crimes Act 1912 of knowingly making and concurring in making a false statement to obtain a valuable thing, namely, the home of C, an elderly and lonely man.

G, with P's knowledge, prevailed upon C to convey the fee simple of his home to P with a conveyance of a life estate back to C, with P after the transfer to pay the home maintenance and rates. There was no valuable consideration. G arranged for the conveyances to be prepared.

G told the principal solicitor for G & P that C was P's uncle. The conveyance of the fee simple stated as consideration "the natural love and affection borne by ... C to his niece ... P and of the sum of $1.00." The conveyance of the life estate stated as consideration "the natural love and affection borne by ... P to her uncle ... C ... and of the sum of $1.00." C and P were unrelated.

The principal solicitor retained a solicitor experienced in Old System conveyancing to prepare the conveyances. He explained the conveyances to P and was present while she signed them. He signed as witness. She was aware of what she was doing. Thereafter G artfully procured C's signature to the conveyances.

G & P knew that for the gift to be effective formal deeds of conveyance had to be signed and delivered and that they required the assistance of solicitors.

At the trial the appellants conceded that all the elements of the offence had been established except the materiality of the false statements of the relationship.

HELD: 
The false statements were material. To perfect the gift the appellants required assistance from solicitors. They realised that any enquiries or suspicions by solicitors had to be avoided. Objectively, the statements of relationship may have been taken into account by the solicitors retained by G & P; 
The sentences were excessive. They took into account the general conduct of G & P rather than centring on the offences of which they were convicted.

ORDERS 
I propose the following orders:
Appeals by both appellants against conviction dismissed;
Leave to both appellants to appeal against sentence; both appeals against sentence allowed.
As to the appellant Hamilton Gervaise, in lieu of the sentences imposed, he is sentenced to penal servitude for 2 years comprising a minimum term of 15 months starting on 22 September 1996 and ending on 21 December 1997 and an additional term of 9 months commencing on 22 December 1997. Order that
Hamilton Gervaise be released on parole on 22 December 1997, the conditions of parole to include supervision by the Probation and Parole Service.
 (a) As to the appellant Susan Preece, remit to a single judge of this court pursuant to s.12 (2) of the Criminal Appeal Act to finalise the terms of the sentence consistent with these reasons. In the event of any difficulty arising as to the sentence the matter to be referred back to this court.

Direct that the matter be dealt with by a single judge on 25 November 1997 or at such other time as may be appointed by a single judge.
Compensation order made by the judge against each appellant affirmed.
 
REGINA versus Hamilton GERVAISE (@ PREECE) 
REGINA versus Susan PREECE 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Susan Preece and Hamilton Gervaise (aka Preece) who are married have appealed against their convictions, after a trial by judge alone, of respectively making and concurring in making a false statement to obtain a valuable thing. They also sought leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence each received, comprising a minimum term of 2 years and an additional term of 1 year. Hamilton Gervaise was usually known as Hamilton Preece during the events covered by this judgment. 
The Crown case centred upon the execution at Wollongong of a deed of conveyance on 16 October 1991 by Susan Preece by which she accepted the voluntary conveyance to her of the fee simple of a residential property at 62
Rusden Street, Armidale from William Clifford Cleghorn and a further deed by which she conveyed unto Mr Cleghorn for his use during his life that property.
The deed creating the life estate provided that Mr Cleghorn would pay all telephone, gas and electricity charges and that Mrs Preece would pay all rates, taxes and other charges relating to the land. The deeds were prepared by a solicitor acting on behalf of the appellants.

The conveyance of the fee simple contained these words: "Now This Deed Witnesseth that in consideration of the natural love and affection borne by the said William Clifford Cleghorn to his niece the said
Susan Preece and of the sum of $1.00..." 
The conveyance of the life estate contained these words: "Now This Deed Witnesseth that in consideration of the natural love and affection borne by the said Susan Preece to her uncle the said William
Clifford Cleghorn and of the sum of $1.00..." 
Susan Preece and William Clifford Cleghorn were unrelated. He was elderly and lonely and lived on his own at 62 Rusden Street. Hamilton Gervaise had secured
Mr Cleghorn's confidence. Susan Preece was introduced to Mr Cleghorn on but one occasion prior to signing the deeds and by her husband. Hamilton Gervaise was the prime mover in what occurred.

On 17 October 1991, being the day following the execution of the deeds by
Susan Preece, Gervaise procured the execution of the deeds by Mr Cleghorn.

Susan Preece was charged with two counts, one of on 16 October 1991 at
Wollongong with intent to obtain the residential property at 62 Rusden Street making a statement in a deed conveying that property from WC Cleghorn to herself which was false and misleading in a material particular, namely that she was his niece; and the other of on the same occasion with the same intent making a statement in a deed conveying the property from herself to him which was false and misleading in a material particular, namely that W C Cleghorn was her uncle. Gervaise was charged in each instance of concurring in the making of such false and misleading statements.

The charges were laid under <case> of the Crimes Act 1912 which relevantly provides: "Whosoever, with intent to obtain for himself or another person any money or valuable thing or any financial advantage of any kind whatsoever makes or publishes, or concurs in making or publishing, any statement (whether or not in writing) which he knows to be false or misleading in a material particular or which is false or misleading in a material particular and is made with reckless disregard as to whether it is true or is false or misleading in a material particular shall be liable to imprisonment for 5 years." 
The charges as recorded at p.1 of the trial transcript and in the Indictment did not allege that the accused knew that the statement was false and misleading in a material particular. Knowledge should have been pleaded.
However, this defect has been cured by verdict as a finding of knowledge was included in the verdict. See Heyman v. the Queen [(1873) LR 8 QB 102] per
Blackburn J at 105 - 106 and The Queen v. Goldsmith (1873) LR 2 CCR 74 per
Bramwell B at 79 and per Cleasby B at 80. At the trial, the Crown, the solicitor for the appellants in his written submissions and the judge all proceeded on the basis that the Crown had to prove knowledge of the falsity of the statements. The judge recognised that knowledge was an element of the offences which he found proved.

At the trial Preece made the following written admissions: "1. That at Wollongong on 16 October 1991 with intent to obtain for myself a valuable thing namely the house property at 62 Rusden Street, Armidale made a statement, namely the Deeds of 17 October 1991 registered number Book 3856 number 639 and registered number Book 3856 number 638;
That I was not the niece of William Clifford Cleghorn;
That William Clifford Cleghorn was not my uncle." 
Gervaise made written admissions to the same effect in respect of Susan Preece substituting that he concurred in the making of the statement in lieu of that he made a statement.

At the trial it was accepted that <case> required the Crown to prove that the accused: with intent to obtain for herself or himself; any valuable thing; made or concurred in making; any statement in writing (the deeds); which she or he knew to be false or misleading in a material particular.

The appellants, at the trial, accepted that elements 1 to 4 (just mentioned) had been established. The admissions alone led to this concession. The statements in the deeds as to the relationship between Preece and Cleghorn were false and known by Preece to be false. The issue at the trial was whether these statements constituted a "material particular". As it was put in the written submissions of the accused: "It is conceded on behalf of each of the accused that upon the admissions the
Crown had proved each of the elements of the offence in each of the counts save for the following element `material particular'." 
This submission was expanded: "... the materiality cannot be divorced from the falsity, ie, it is necessary that the false statement be material and that the appellants knew that the false statement is material. It is necessary that the statement be objectively false and capable of inducing persons to act otherwise than they would have by reason of its falsity. In that sense the phrase `false and misleading' should be understood." 
The evidence at the trial relied on by the Crown consisted of the statements of a number of witnesses and the depositions of some witnesses at the committal proceedings. By the time of the trial Mr Cleghorn had died. His evidence at the committal proceedings was admitted at the trial. The transcript of his evidence reveals that he was partially deaf and generally had difficulty in giving evidence. Neither of the appellants gave evidence at the trial but they did so on the sentence hearing. At the trial they relied on the evidence of Mr AW Oliver, a solicitor with extensive conveyancing experience.

It is necessary to refer to the evidence in a little more detail. About
October 1989 Gervaise was looking for work. He advised Mr Cleghorn that the roof of his house needed painting, Mr Cleghorn agreed and Gervaise carried out that work. About December 1989 Gervaise called on Mr Cleghorn and the earlier work was checked. Gervaise enquired if there was any more work which he could do around the house. Some cracks had to be and were filled but Mr Cleghorn did not recall who did the work. He thought that it was somebody other than
Gervaise. In December 1990 Mr Cleghorn agreed that Gervaise should put a second coat of paint on the roof of 62 Rusden Street. By this time, Mr
Cleghorn had become quite friendly with Gervaise, welcoming his company. Mr
Cleghorn told Gervaise of his circumstances.

Mr Cleghorn was born in 1925 and had no close family. His only relative was a cousin who was married. Mr Cleghorn thought that Gervaise and his wife were nice people.

About December 1990 Gervaise suggested to Mr Cleghorn that he should transfer his house to Gervaise and his wife on the basis that he live in the house for the rest of his life and pay the gas and electricity charges and that they pay the rates and taxes and for the maintenance of the house. Mr Cleghorn's evidence as to the subsequent events and other matters was confused. It seems that Mr Cleghorn said that he would think about the matter, that subsequently he said the he would agree to the proposal and that at a later stage he said that he was not interested. Eventually, he agreed. At one stage Gervaise gave
Mr Cleghorn about $255 to have some windows on the home fixed, being a maintenance payment. Mr Cleghorn stopped paying the rates.

Gervaise told Mr Cleghorn that he would have to sign some documents to sign the house over but did not tell him what the documents were. Gervaise said that the effect of the documents would be to transfer the property to his wife. Mr Cleghorn further agreed that he stated that he did not want to have anything to do with lawyers.

Mr Cleghorn agreed that he was also told by Gervaise that he would be arranging for a valuer to value the property. Mr Cleghorn replied that he would be there when the valuer came but that he did not wish to speak to the valuer.

Mr KV Lee, solicitor, who gave evidence before the magistrate said that he was consulted by Gervaise in late May 1991 and asked to act on the transfer of a property from his wife's uncle to his wife with a life tenancy back to the uncle. The uncle was William Clifford Cleghorn of 62 Rusden Street, Armidale.

Mr Lee prepared a form of authority and direction for Mr W C Cleghorn to sign.
On 3 July 1991 Messrs AW Simpson & Co who had acted for Mr Cleghorn and held the title deeds to 62 Rusden Street received the authority and direction appearing to be signed by Mr Cleghorn on 30 June 1991. On 3 July 1991 AW
Simpson & Co sent the title deeds to Mr Lee's firm of Attwood Marshall & Co, Coolangatta. As the property was held under Old System title Mr Lee retained Mr HM Bisley, aged 80, a solicitor with considerable experience in
Old System conveyancing, to prepare the documents to effect a conveyance. Mr
Lee instructed Mr Bisley to transfer the title from Mr Cleghorn to Mrs Preece as his niece and on her express instructions, not to search the title. On 14
August 1991 Mr Bisley forwarded a draft conveyance of the fee simple and a draft conveyance of the life estate to Mr Lee with each draft containing a reference to the purported relationship between Mr Cleghorn and Susan Preece, the words "niece" and "uncle" being used respectively. On 21 August 1991 Mr
Lee wrote to Mrs S Preece seeking the personal details of Mr Cleghorn and herself. These were supplied by Gervaise on the following day.

In his letter of 16 September Mr Lee instructed the valuer to make a valuation of 62 Rusden Street. Attached to the letter was a copy of rate assessment notice for 1991 for the property and a copy of the draft conveyance indicating that Mr Cleghorn was conveying the property to his niece Susan Preece. The letter contains this somewhat unusual paragraph: "Prior to carrying out your valuation, would you please contact the writer to arrange a suitable inspection time as Mr Cleghorn is an extremely sensitive and nervous person. We ask that you do not approach Mr Cleghorn or the property without first consulting us." 
This paragraph was written as a result of instructions received from Gervaise.
The valuer was contacted by or contacted Gervaise and an appointment was made to inspect the property. The valuer recalled that during the inspection
Gervaise directed him through the house, that Mr Cleghorn remained in the background and that all his conversations were with Gervaise. The valuer said that Gervaise managed the proceedings and that he did not follow his usual practice of explaining why the valuation was being done. Mr Cleghorn knew the valuer and spoke to him but probably not directly. The valuer's report of 25
September 1991 records that it had been prepared under instructions from
Attwood Marshall, solicitors for and on behalf of Mr Cleghorn. That firm did not act for Mr Cleghorn.

Mr Bisley caused two original conveyances and two statutory declarations to be prepared. These declarations were required by the Stamp Office for the stamping of the conveyances.

By prior arrangement the appellants attended upon Mr HM Bisley in his office at Wollongong about 9.10 am on 16 October 1991. In the presence of Gervaise,
Mr Bisley read the contents of the two conveyances to his wife, Mrs Preece eliciting and inserting her address and explaining the terms used as he went.
When he came to that part of the conveyance which referred to the love and affection borne by Mr Cleghorn to his niece he said to her "that is the manner in which a document of this nature is expressed." At the end of reading the conveyances he asked her "Is that what you want to do?" She replied "Yes". He made sure that she understood that the documents transferred title to her and a life estate to Mr Cleghorn. She signed both conveyances and Mr Bisley witnessed her signature. Referring to two statutory declarations Mr Bisley said to Mrs Preece "There are some other documents to be signed by Mr
Cleghorn. He did not recall whether he read them to Mrs Preece. He handed her the two original signed conveyances and two unsigned statutory declarations in the name of William Clifford Cleghorn to Mr & Mrs Preece for delivery to
Mr Lee.

The appellants travelled from Wollongong to Armidale and on the morning of 17
October 1991 Gervaise called on him and wanted him to go downtown. Gervaise, according to Mr Cleghorn did not mention that he had to sign some papers. Mr
Cleghorn went with Gervaise to the Public Trustee's office. Mr Cleghorn said that he did not know then that he was going into that office to sign documents relating to the house. He said that he was not going to sign any documents but the lady in the office told him that he had to. I interpolate that Mr Cleghorn said that he was a bit deaf. Mr Cleghorn felt that Gervaise was forcing him to sign the documents.

Mr A B Bennie was the manager of the Armidale office of the Public Trustee. He signed a declaration and the two deeds as witness to the signature on each of
Mr Cleghorn. He did not have any independent recollection of signing the documents. The documents were dated 17 October 1991. It was not his normal practice to read or explain the contents of deeds. He dated them and wrote his name and address under his signature. After the documents were signed they were delivered to Mr Lee who ensured that the conveyances were registered.

It was common ground that if the words "his niece" were omitted from the conveyance of the fee simple and the words "her uncle" were omitted from the conveyance of the life estate each conveyance would, upon registration and delivery of the title documents, be effective. The gifts would be perfected.

The appellants contended that the words "her niece" and "her uncle" were surplusage and of no consequence or materiality. They did not bear upon the conveyances in any way. They were not misleading in a material particular. It was pointed out that the appellants were not charged with defrauding Mr
Cleghorn or some similar offence.

As there was no valuable consideration for the conveyance of the house from Mr
Cleghorn to Mrs Preece the conveyance had to be perfected before it was effective. This required the assistance of solicitors. The appellants sought and obtained their assistance. A conveyance of the fee simple of the kind in question between apparent strangers would have caused a prudent solicitor who did not want to become an instrument of fraud, to ask questions, especially if he gathered that the stranger was a senior citizen and said to be an extremely sensitive and nervous person who could not be approached direct. It only needed one independent person to discuss what was happening with Mr Cleghorn for the scheme to be put at risk. Gervaise realised the purpose and importance of the false statement and his wife acquiesced in it. It helped to allay any suspicion and preclude any enquiries or other action and so enabled the so called gift to be perfected. She made the false statements in writing when she signed the deeds and Gervaise concurred in their making. The fact that
Gervaise also made the statements at an earlier point of time does not detract from what is stated in the deeds and its importance. The so called relationship helped to explain the transaction.

In Regina versus Masler and Shaw [(1995) 79 A Crim R 199] at -203, in the course of discussing the decision of the Full Federal Court in
Minister for Immigration, Local Government & Ethics Affairs v. Della
Cruz <case>; [(1992) 34 FCR 348], Hunt CJ at
CL accepted the view that a particular will be material if it was relevant to the purpose for which it was being made and that it will be relevant to that purpose if it may be taken into account by the person to whom the statement is made in making any decision upon the matter in respect of which the statement was made. It was unnecessary that the statement must or will be so taken into account. The question is not whether that particular played any part in the decision made. An objective assessment has to be made.

It is sufficient if the particular may be taken into account. Both appellants admitted that the statements were made to obtain the property for Susan
Preece. The statements were made to those whose business it was to read the deeds and that included Messrs Lee and Bisley. On an objective assessment the statement may be taken into account by Messrs Lee and Bisley in preparing the conveyance and the inquiries which they would make. The statements were made more than once and this tends to underline their importance.

My reasons for holding that the offences had been proved differ from those of the judge. We reach the same result by different routes. As I am relying on the admissions and his findings on the evidence, which was in large measure undisputed, this does not matter.

As to the appeal of Susan Preece, what I have written so far disposes of grounds 1, 2, 3, and 4, namely, that the judge erred in law and fact on the materiality of the alleged false and misleading statements, erred in law and fact on whether the alleged statements were misleading, erred in law and fact on whether Susan Preece made the statements alleged and erred in law and fact in failing to consider whether the recitals or any antecedent statement or the execution of the deeds (and by whom) constituted the statements alleged.

Grounds 5 and 8 relate to sentence. Ground 6 was abandoned.

Ground 7 alleges that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory. I have examined and assessed all the evidence both as to its sufficiency and quality.
This ground was linked with grounds 1, 2, 3 and 4. The charges focus upon what happened in the solicitor's office at Wollongong. Everything was admitted except that the statements were false and misleading in a material particular.
Materiality of the statements was the issue. I have earlier given my reasons for regarding the statements as being material. I take a broader view than that advanced by the appellants. In my opinion the verdicts were not unsafe or unsatisfactory.

Grounds 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6 of Gervaise's appeal correspond with the grounds numbered 1, 2, 3, 4 and 7 in Susan Preece's appeal. Ground 5 was abandoned and ground 7 relates to sentence. What I have written as to the grounds taken by
Susan Preece applies to the grounds taken by Gervaise.

The appeals against conviction should be dismissed.

Sentence 
On the sentence hearing Gervaise stated that he told Mr Lee that Mr Cleghorn was his wife's uncle to make the transaction easier to complete. Gervaise maintained that he handled all financial matters and that the scheme was his idea. When he told his wife she thought that it would be nice to have a place when they got old. He claimed that she had nothing to do with it. Gervaise said that he and his wife were late for their appointment to sign the deeds because she did not want to sign them and they had an argument about the matter. Eventually, she did go to Mr Bisley's office and signed the deeds.

The judge rejected the suggestion that Mrs Preece did not know what was going on and did not participate in the events. She claimed that she could not read or write. However she had a driving licence. She agreed that her husband was pretending that she was Mr Cleghorn's niece and that she pretended to be his niece.

During the sentence hearing Gervaise agreed that he had "conned" Mr Cleghorn who did not understand what Gervaise was suggesting. Those were frank answers.
A considerable part of the evidence on the sentence hearing was devoted to the fraudulent conduct which had occurred. A relatively small part of the evidence concerned the making of the false statement. In his remarks on sentence the judge observed that the appellants, by an elaborate hoax, practically stole an elderly man's home from him. That was correct but it was not the offence with which they were charged. The judge also noted that it was only by chance that it was discovered. The judge described Gervaise thus: "... he has wandered around this country deceiving people left right and centre." The judge rejected the proposition that Susan Preece was not as guilty as her husband.
The judge's remarks were very emotive. The judge held that there was no genuine remorse and no rehabilitation. Nor had any capacity for rehabilitation been shown. The judge was dismayed by the appellants filing a sworn defence to
Mr Cleghorn's claim to set aside the transaction and regain his property.
Gervaise offered to pay $18,138.92 being the amount by which the estate was out of pocket. The judge discounted this because Gervaise had not reimbursed
Mr Cleghorn's estate for any of the losses suffered. The equity proceedings had been settled resulting in the return of the house with each side bearing its own costs.

The appellants complained that they had been sentenced for their general conduct and not for the offences of which they had been convicted. Study of the judge's remarks upon sentence shows that proposition to be well founded.
The conduct of the appellants was shameful and excites indignation. However, it is necessary to ensure that the appellants are sentenced for the offences of which they were convicted and nothing more.

The false statements made were part of a wider scheme to defraud Mr Cleghorn.
The sentences imposed upon each of the appellants would have been apt if the charges had been defrauding Mr Cleghorn but they are excessive for the charges of knowingly make the particular false statement with intent to obtain a valuable thing.

It appeared that Gervaise had no previous criminal convictions. There was material that he used a number of aliases and operated in a number of fields.
His conduct was suspicious. However, he should have been treated as a person with no previous convictions and a person against whom nothing else of substance had been proved. His wife had no previous convictions. There was no suggestion that she had used aliases. Gervaise did not advance his plea for leniency by denying his identity and supplying false information to the police. His wife attended with her solicitor at a police station and surrendered herself when she heard that she was wanted.

The evidence reveals that while Mrs Preece was aware of what was happening and knowingly signed the deeds her husband was the prime mover. Gervaise first made the false statements to Mr Lee who indicated that Gervaise was running the couple's financial affairs. There was evidence that Gervaise applied considerable pressure on his wife. In the end she acquiesced in what he proposed.

As at the sentence hearing on 25 October 1996 the appellants had a child who was aged 6 and a baby aged 10 months.

The sentences of Gervaise and his wife were excessive. Gervaise should have received a sentence of two years comprising a minimum term of 15 months and an additional term of 9 months. There were special circumstances as this was his first time in gaol and he will need 9 months supervision on his release.
Gervaise was in custody from his arrest on 6 October 1994 to 9 November 1994 when he was released on bail. There was no reference to this pre-sentence custody in the sentence proceedings. The judge was not told of it and thus made no allowance for it. To allow for the pre-sentence custody the minimum term of 15 months should commence on 22 September 1996 and end on 21 December .

Mrs Preece spent the period from 25 October 1996 to 15 November 1996 in custody, a period of 21 days. That amounts to 10 1/2 weekends. Taking this into account the appropriate sentence is one of 18 months periodic detention in addition to the time served. The question of the imposition and implementation of the sentence should be remitted to a single judge.

It was not suggested that the compensation order made by the judge should be disturbed.

I propose the following orders:
Appeals by both appellants against conviction dismissed;
Leave to both appellants to appeal against sentence; both appeals against sentence allowed.
As to the appellant Hamilton Gervaise, in lieu of the sentences imposed, he is sentenced to penal servitude for 2 years comprising a minimum term of 15 months starting on 22 September 1996 and ending on 21 December 1997 and an additional term of 9 months commencing on 22 December 1997. Order that
Hamilton Gervaise be released on parole on 22 December 1997, the conditions of parole to include supervision by the Probation and Parole Service.
 (a) As to the appellant Susan Preece, remit to a single judge of this court pursuant to s.12 (2) of the Criminal Appeal Act to finalise the terms of the sentence consistent with these reasons. In the event of any difficulty arising as to the sentence the matter to be referred back to this court.

Direct that the matter be dealt with by a single judge on 25 November 1997 or at such other time as may be appointed by a single judge.
Compensation order made by the judge against each appellant affirmed.

REGINA versus HAMILTON GERVAISE 
REGINA versus SUSAN PREECE 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I agree with Smart J. 
REGINA versus HAMILTON GERVAISE (@ PREECE) 
REGINA versus SUSAN PREECE 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: I have had the benefit of considering the judgment of Smart J in draft form. 
I agree that each appeal against conviction fails, and I agree with the reasons Smart J expressed in reaching that conclusion. There is nothing I wish to add.

I am also of the opinion that in each case leave to appeal against sentence should be granted and that the appeal should be upheld. I agree with Smart J that the sentences imposed should be quashed and I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J in their place.
 * * * 
