

Smith versus Acquire Asia Pacific Philippines Inc [2016] NSWSC 1084 (9 August )

Last Updated: 9 August 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: equitable set-off
In my view, the defendant has no right of equitable set-off in the circumstances with which I am concerned. The starting point must be that it has not proved that there is any Claim, in respect of which the Purchase Price is to be treated as reduced by the operation of cl 11.4. (I am not being critical; the validity of the defendant's demands was not one of the issues to be debated under the rubric of the separate question.) However, as I have said, the Purchase Price is only to be varied in respect of an "amount received or receivable ... in respect of [a] Claim". At present there is nothing that is shown to be "receivable" on the proper construction of that clause.
I accept, of course, that the defendant entered into the sale contract on the basis set out in cl 10.2, and that the plaintiffs acknowledged this. That might provide a basis (as Mr Pike submitted it did) for a conclusion of impeachment in some circumstances. However, as Mr Elliott submitted, the analysis must focus precisely on the nature of the right that is said to be impeached.
As I have noted, Mr Pike relied on the decision of Henry J in Drane. In that case, the parties entered into a contract for the sale of the plaintiff's shares in a company to the defendants. The purchase price was payable by instalments. The plaintiff sued for one of the instalments. It sought summary judgment. The defendants pleaded a defence by way of set-off, and a cross-claim relating to breaches of warranty and the like.
Henry J held that some of the pleaded breaches were capable of grounding a defence by way of set-off. As to one such matter, his Honour said at [57], the "claim bears upon the quantum of the overall purchase price and so impeaches the present claim for summary judgment, for that claim is a claim for part of the purchase price". As I read that paragraph in context, Henry J did not hold that the defendants had a right of set-off in equity. He held, rather, that their claim to have such a right was arguable, and hence that the plaintiff should not have summary judgment.
The facts of that case may be contrasted with the facts with which I am concerned. In that case, the defendants' obligation to pay the purchase price remained in part unsatisfied. There were further instalments to be paid. In this case, by operation of cl 5.1, the defendant's obligation to pay the Purchase Price has been fully satisfied, or "discharged" (to use the language of cl 5.1 itself).
In the case considered by Henry J, it was (with respect) easy to see why the defendants' claims were capable of impeaching the precise claim brought by the plaintiff. In the present case, the defendant has paid all that it is liable to pay (leaving aside the question of any adjustment under cl 12.4). The plaintiffs' demand is not for payment of any part of the Purchase Price. It is, rather, a demand to have the balance of the Completion Amount, already paid by the defendant but into the Escrow Account, paid out of that account to them.
In those circumstances, I do not think that the decision in Drane assists Mr Pike's submissions. Certainly it does not do so directly. And bearing in mind the significant distinction between the facts considered by Henry J and the facts with which I am concerned, I do not think that it offers Mr Pike any great assistance by way of analogy.
In my view, taking into account what I have said is the proper construction of the relevant provisions of the contract, it is not relevantly unconscionable for the plaintiffs to enforce their right under cl 5.2(b), to have the defendant give the requisite direction to the Escrow Agent, simply because the defendant has made Warranty Claims (which I accept have been made in good faith) that are yet to be resolved. There is no unconscionability because, reading the sale contract as a whole, the right that the plaintiffs seek to enforce is one that the parties agreed could be exercised in the circumstances that have arisen.
It follows, to my mind, that there is no sufficiently close connection between the demand that the plaintiffs make and the defence that the defendant asserts, to lead to the conclusion that the latter relevantly impeaches the former. On the contrary, the demand and the suggested defence operate in separate areas of legal obligation.
Further, I think that the sale contract, on its proper construction, necessarily excludes any right of equitable set-off in the circumstances with which I am concerned. I say that because: * (1) cl 5.2(b) provides for the payment out of the whole of the Escrow Amount in the circumstances that it describes; and * (2) it does so in circumstances where, as the parties must have known (because it is plain from the structure of their contract), there might well remain unresolved claims between them.
Put in different language, the result for which the defendant contends would be directly inconsistent with the clear and detailed contractual regime for which the parties bargained.

Conclusion and orders
It follows that the separate question, as reframed, should be answered "yes". On the face of things, the hearing of the separate question being a discrete "event" for the purposes of UCPR r 42.1, the plaintiffs should have their costs of the separate question. However, as I have said, I shall do no more than answer the question, reserve consideration of all other issues in the suit, and stand the matter over for a time for directions. I shall also give directions intended to ensure that everyone (including the Court) knows what is to happen when the matter comes back before me.
I make the following orders: * (1) direct that the separate question be answered as follows: 
Question: Whether, on the proper construction of the contract entitled "Share Sale and Purchase Agreement" entered into between the parties on or about 15 October 2014, and in circumstances where the defendant has made
Warranty Claims as defined in that contract, which Claims have not been finally agreed or adjudicated, the defendant is now obliged to direct the
Escrow Agent to release the Escrow Amount to the plaintiffs. 
Answer: Yes.

Direct the parties to provide to my Associate and exchange drafts of the orders that each seeks in consequence of that answer, and written submissions no more than five pages in length in support of those proposed orders, by 19
August 2016. 
Direct the parties to provide to my Associate and exchange written submissions in reply, no more than five pages long, by 26 August 2016. 
Reserve all questions of further relief, and as to costs, for further consideration. 
Stand the matter over for directions before me at 9:30am on 30 August .
 * * * 
