

Regina versus D H Matter No 60170/97 [1997] NSWSC 259 (14 July 1997) 
Regina versus D H /97 July 1997 
Newman J, James J, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus D H 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I will ask James J to deliver the first judgment in this matter. 
JAMES J: This is an appeal by the appellant, whom I shall refer to as DH, against his conviction on one of the five counts on which he was convicted, following a trial in the District Court before Judge Nash and a jury. The appellant also applies for leave to appeal generally against the sentences imposed on him by Judge Nash.

At the trial the appellant was found guilty by the jury on all five counts in an indictment charging that the appellant had committed sexual offences against the same victim, a female cousin of the appellant, whom I shall refer to as "the complainant" or "the victim".

The first two counts in the indictment were charges of indecently assaulting a female under the age of sixteen years at some time between 1 January 1979 and December 1980 (count 1) and at some time between 1 January 1980 and 31
December 1980 (count 2). These were charges under <case> of the Crimes Act as it then stood and carried a maximum penalty of penal servitude for a period of six years.

The third and fourth counts in the indictment were charges of carnal knowledge of a girl of or above the age of ten years and under the age of sixteen years at some time between 1 January 1984 and 31 December 1984 (count 3) and at some time between 1 January 1985 and 16 August 1985 (count 4). These were charges under <case> of the Crimes Act, as it then stood, and carried a maximum penalty of penal servitude for ten years.

The fifth count in the indictment was a charge of having sexual intercourse with a person between the ages of ten years and sixteen years, namely of the age of fifteen years, who was under the authority of the appellant. The offence was committed at some time between 16 August 1987 and 31 December
This was a charge under <case> of the Crimes Act, for which the maximum penalty is penal servitude for ten years.

On the first charge in the indictment Judge Nash imposed a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude of one year commencing on 26 March 1997, the date of sentencing. On the second charge his Honour imposed a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude of six months, also commencing on 26 March 1997. On the third charge his Honour imposed a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude of four years commencing on 26 March 1997. On the fourth charge his Honour imposed a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude of five years, also commencing on 26 March 1997. On the fifth charge his Honour imposed a sentence of penal servitude of eight years, consisting of a minimum term of six years commencing on 26 March 1997 and an additional term of two years.

His Honour made all of the sentences he imposed commence from 26 March 1997 and it is apparent that the principal sentence was the sentence on the fifth charge, the fixed terms of penal servitude imposed on the other charges being concurrent with part of the longer minimum term of the sentence on the fifth count.

Judge Nash expressly declined to find that there were special circumstances under [s 5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

As I have already stated, the appellant and the complainant were cousins, the appellant's mother being the complainant's father's sister. The appellant was born in 1962 and was about ten and a half years older than the complainant.
Both sets of parents had migrated to Australia from Greece. The appellant had been born in Greece but came to Australia as a young child with his parents.
The complainant was born in Australia.

After coming to Australia the two families maintained very close relations.
The appellant often came to the complainant's home. Pursuant to an arrangement with the complainant's parents, the appellant assisted the complainant from an early age with her school work. The appellant and the complainant worked together in the complainant's bedroom, with the door to the bedroom shut, and it is in those circumstances that a sexual relationship developed.

The objective facts of the offences of which the appellant was convicted can be briefly summarised as follows:- 
Count 1, when the victim was about seven or eight years old and the appellant and the victim were at the victim's home, the appellant inserted his finger and a paddle pop stick into the victim's vagina.

Count 2, when the victim was seven or eight years old and the appellant and the victim were at the victim's home, the appellant sucked one of the victim's nipples leaving a red mark.

Count 3, when the victim was about eleven or twelve years old and the appellant and the victim were at the victim's home, the appellant had penile vaginal sexual intercourse with the victim.

Count 4, when the victim was twelve years old the appellant had penile-vaginal sexual intercourse with the victim in a home unit to which she had been taken by the appellant.

Count 5, when the victim was fifteen years old the appellant had penile- vaginal sexual intercourse with the victim in the premises of a shop in a shopping arcade in the centre of Sydney.

According to evidence given by the complainant, which would clearly appear to have been accepted by the jury and which was accepted by Judge Nash when sentencing the appellant, the offences charged were not the only sexual offences committed by the appellant against the complainant. According to the complainant's evidence, the appellant had sexual intercourse with her many times over a number of years up until an occasion in 1989 when the complainant told the appellant, in her words, "No more, just get out." After this incident there was no further sexual intercourse between them.

The complainant first complained about the appellant's conduct in 1994, when she told another man, with whom she had a relationship, that she had been sexually interfered with as a child by a family friend, whom she later identified to the same man as being the appellant.

As I have already indicated, the appeal against conviction was limited to the conviction of the appellant on the fifth charge in the indictment and there was only one ground of appeal in relation to this conviction. This ground of appeal was that his Honour ought to have directed the jury to acquit the appellant on the ground that there was no evidence that (the complainant) was under the authority of the appellant.

Section 66C(2) of the Crimes Act, on which the fifth charge was based, provides as follows:- 
Any person who has sexual intercourse with another person who: is of or above the age of 10 years, and under the age of 16 years; and is (whether generally or at the time of the sexual intercourse only) under the authority of the person, shall be liable to penal servitude for 10 years.

At the time the offence was alleged to have been committed there was no definition in the Crimes Act of the expression "under the authority" of a person. There is now a definition in the Crimes Act of when, for the purposes of various sexual offences, a person is under the authority of another person but this definition was inserted in the Crimes Act only in 1989 (see <case> of the Crimes Act).

At the close of the Crown case at the trial counsel for the appellant applied for a directed verdict on the fifth charge in the indictment on the ground that there was no evidence on which the jury could find that the complainant was under the authority of the appellant when the sexual intercourse alleged in the fifth charge took place. The application had practical significance, because, apart from the heavier penalty under <case> as compared with s
C(1), the jury could not have returned an alternative verdict of guilty of an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act, (which contains the same elements, apart from the element of the victim being under the authority of the offender,) because under the Crimes Act as it then stood a prosecution of the appellant for an offence under <case> of the Crimes Act would have been statute-barred by virtue of <case> of the Crimes Act, at the time the prosecution of the appellant was instituted.

The trial judge refused the application for a directed verdict, giving his reasons in a considered judgment. His Honour held that there was evidence of a relationship of employer/employee between the appellant and the complainant and that on the basis of this evidence the jury could be satisfied that the complainant was under the authority of the appellant at the relevant time.

At the trial evidence about the employment of the complainant by the appellant during the period in which the conduct charged in the fifth charge occurred was given in the Crown case by the complainant herself. The complainant gave evidence that the appellant had opened a cake shop in an arcade in the centre of Sydney. For a period which the complainant said was between six months and a year the complainant worked in the shop with the appellant on Saturdays between about 9 o'clock or half past nine in the morning and about 4 o'clock in the afternoon. Her duties included serving customers and preparing food and drinks. The appellant paid her $50 for each Saturday's work. The complainant gave evidence that the sexual intercourse alleged in the fifth count occurred on Saturday afternoon in the kitchen area of the shop premises after the shop had closed for customers but while both the appellant and the complainant were still in the shop premises.

In his evidence, given subsequently in the defence case, the appellant did not challenge in any substantial way the evidence the complainant had given about her employment by the appellant. The appellant, of course, denied that the sexual intercourse charged had occurred.

In addition to evidence of the employer/employee relationship between the appellant and the complainant, there was also evidence before the jury of the close family relationship between the appellant and the complainant, of the age difference between the appellant and the complainant and of the practice of the appellant tutoring the complainant in her school work.

I have already referred to the judgment the trial judge gave in refusing the application for a directed verdict on the fifth charge in the indictment. In his judgment his Honour noted that at the relevant time there was no definition in the Crimes Act of the expression "under the authority of" but that a definition had later been inserted in the Act by <case>. The definition in <case> provides: "...a person is under the authority of another person if the person is in the care or under the supervision or the authority of that other person." 
Although his Honour thought that this definition, although not directly applicable, provided some guidance as to the meaning he should give to the expression, his Honour considered that he should endeavour to ascertain and apply the ordinary meaning of the word "authority" and for this purpose had recourse to the Oxford English Dictionary and the Macquarie Dictionary. His
Honour preferred definitions in the Macquarie Dictionary of the word "authority" as including "the right to control or command." His Honour concluded the relationship of employer/employee existed between the appellant and the complainant and that this relationship of itself meant that the complainant was under the authority of the appellant at the place of work, the appellant having the right to control or command his employee at the place of work.

On the hearing of this appeal we have been informed by counsel for the appellant, who also appeared for the appellant at the trial, that the first submission he made to the trial judge in support of the application for a directed verdict was that an employer/employee relationship could not amount to a relationship of authority for the purposes of s 66C(2). The trial judge apparently rejected this submission.

A further, alternative, submission was put on behalf of the appellant, that even if the victim of a sexual offence was an employee of the offender at the time the offence was committed and even if that employer/employee relationship amounted to a relationship of authority, nevertheless the victim would not be "under the authority of" the offender, unless there was a causal connection between the existence of the authority and the commission of the sexual offence. It was further submitted, and his Honour would appear to have accepted, that in the present case there was no causal connection between the existence of any authority arising from the employer/employee relationship and the commission of the sexual offence. On the complainant's evidence the appellant had been sexually abusing the complainant for years, before the complainant first became an employee of the appellant. His Honour found that the relationship of employer/employee merely provided the opportunity and the place for the commission of the offence charged in the fifth count. However, his Honour concluded that <case> did not require that there be any causal connection between the existence of the authority held by the offender over the victim and the occurrence of the sexual intercourse. His Honour said: "There is nothing in the offence whereby that authority must be causally connected with the sexual intercourse that is alleged." 
His Honour accordingly refused to direct a verdict in favour of the appellant on the fifth charge.

On the hearing of this appeal counsel for the appellant who, as I have said, also appeared for the appellant at the trial, has submitted that the existence of an employer/employee relationship between the offender and the victim at the time of the sexual intercourse charged does not mean that the victim is under the authority of the offender for the purposes of <case>.
Alternatively, if the existence of an employer/employee relationship does mean that the victim is under the authority of the offender, nevertheless it is still necessary for the Crown to prove a causal connection between the existence of the authority and the occurrence of the sexual intercourse and, in the present case, there was no evidence of that causal connection.

It was submitted by counsel for the appellant that in his summing up the trial judge had restricted the evidence which could be considered by the jury on the issue of whether the victim was under the authority of the appellant to the evidence relating to the employment of the victim by the appellant and that regard could not be had to other evidence in the case, such as evidence of the family relationship, the age difference and the school tutoring, which might, in conjunction with the evidence of the employment of the complainant, lead to a conclusion that at the time of the intercourse charged in the fifth count the victim was "under the authority of" the appellant.

In my opinion there was evidence upon which the jury could find that at the time of the sexual intercourse charged in the fifth count the complainant was "under the authority of" the appellant.

There was clearly evidence by the complainant that the complainant was employed by the appellant to work in his shop, that they worked together in his shop, that the appellant was in charge of the complainant while they were in the shop and that the appellant gave the complainant directions whilst they were in the shop.

In my opinion, the evidence relating to the employment of the complainant by the appellant was evidence on which the jury could have found that while at the shop the complainant was under the authority of the appellant within the definition of "authority" in the Macquarie Dictionary to which I have already referred. The appellant was clearly in a position where he had the right to control or command the complainant.

It is true that the sexual intercourse complained of took place after the shop had been closed for customers but it nevertheless occurred at the workplace, i.e. in a part of the shop premises, and there was evidence that various functions had to be performed as part of the carrying on of the business, even after the shop had closed for customers.

I am further of the opinion that a person can be "under the authority of" another person for the purposes of s 66C(2), without it being necessary for the Crown to prove any causal connection between an authority held by the latter person over the former and the act of sexual intercourse charged. The terms of the section do not require such a connection. The section provides that it is an offence punishable by a period of penal servitude for a person to have sexual intercourse with another person who satisfies two conditions, firstly of being within a certain age group and, secondly, of being under the authority of the first person. The terms of the section do not require that the sexual intercourse charged should have occurred as a consequence of the authority of the offender over the victim.

As is apparent from the report of the New South Wales Child Sexual Assault
Task Force in 1985 which led to the Crimes (Child Assault) Amendment Act No of 1985 by which <case> was inserted into the Crimes Act, and as indeed might be inferred from the terms of <case>, an important purpose of <case> is to provide a heavier sentence when the aggravating feature is present of a breach of a relationship of trust between the offender and the child with whom the offender has sexual intercourse. The aggravating feature of a breach of a relationship of trust is present when a person having authority over a child has sexual intercourse with the child, even though the sexual intercourse was not brought about by an exercise of that authority.

I turn to the final submission made by counsel for the appellant in support of the appeal. It is true that in the trial judge's summing-up his Honour directed the jury that the question for the jury to answer on the issue of authority was whether by virtue of the evidence of the employment of the complainant by the appellant the jury was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that at the relevant time he had control over her or he had the power to enforce obedience. In short, in the summing-up his Honour restricted the relevant evidence on this issue to evidence relating to the employment of the complainant.

It would seem to me that this direction was unduly generous to the appellant.
In my opinion, the jury would have been entitled to take into account, and the trial judge in determining the application for a directed verdict would have been entitled to take into account, at least as supplementing the evidence of the complainant about her employment by the appellant, the evidence given by the complainant and by other Crown witnesses that the appellant was the complainant's cousin, that he was a member of the complainant's extended family, that he was ten years older than the complainant, that he had regularly acted as a tutor and virtually as a teacher for the complainant, and that he had over a number of years established a relationship of ascendancy over the complainant, such that she accepted what the appellant told her. If this additional evidence could also be taken into account, as in my opinion it could, then it would strengthen the conclusion that there was evidence upon which the jury could find that at the time of the sexual intercourse charged in the fifth count the complainant was under the authority of the appellant.

I would propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed.

I turn now to the application for leave to appeal against sentence. In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge briefly summarised the objective facts of the offences his Honour regarded the offences as being extremely serious. His Honour noted that during the period within which the offences were committed the appellant was between about seventeen and twenty-five years of age and the complainant was between about seven and fifteen years of age.
The offences charged were not isolated offences. The appellant's conduct had caused the complainant very considerable distress, although she had succeeded in forming a sexual relationship with another man. His Honour said the commission of the offences was a grave breach of the trust placed in the appellant by the complainant's parents. His Honour said he would not treat the circumstance that the complainant was employed by the appellant at the time the sexual intercourse charged in the fifth count occurred, as a circumstance of aggravation warranting a heavier penalty, because, in his Honour's opinion, the employment "merely provided another place for continuing (the appellant's) activities." His Honour noted the appellant was not entitled to that leniency he would have received if he had pleaded guilty.

At the time of sentencing the appellant was thirty-four years of age, he had no relevant criminal history, he was well educated and had a university degree in engineering. He had a good employment history. In December 1996 he married a Vietnamese woman with whom he had been living for twelve months. The appellant's wife said in an affidavit that the charges were totally out of character with the man she knew as her husband.

In the proceedings on sentence there were favourable references from the appellant's school, from a priest of the Greek Orthodox Church, from engineers and relatives. However, as was correctly said by his Honour in his remarks on sentence "good character and general reputation do not generally avail a person to much of an extent in cases of this nature." The appellant suffers from diabetes.

It was not submitted by counsel for the appellant that the sentencing judge had made any specific error in sentencing. It was however submitted that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive.

I do not consider it should be held that the sentences imposed by his Honour exceeded the upper limit of the range of sentences within a proper exercise of his Honour's sentencing discretion. The objective facts were serious. They included three acts of sexual intercourse with a child under sixteen. The acts of which the appellant was convicted were not isolated acts. They were committed over a period of many years. They involved serious breaches of trust. The applicant pleaded not guilty and thus was not entitled to receive the credit he would have received if he had pleaded guilty. The sentencing judge was correct in saying that evidence of prior good character has less weight in cases of this sort.

I would propose that leave to appeal be granted but that the appeal against sentence be dismissed.
 
NEWMAN J: I agree.
 
HIDDEN J: I also agree for the reasons his Honour has stated.
 
NEWMAN J: The orders of the court will be as proposed by James J.
 * * * 
