

Environment Protection Authority versus District Court of New South Wales and
Helen Hamilton Matter No Ca 40593/98 [1998] NSWSC 378 (10 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY versus DISTRICT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES AND HELEN HAMILTON 
CA 40593/98 August 1998 
Meagher JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: In this matter Mrs Hamilton sought the production of certain documents from the Environment Protection Authority. That authority on various grounds all relating to the Freedom Of [Information Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia144/) declined to produce those documents, some not at all and some only in part. 
Mrs Hamilton was dissatisfied with the decision of the Environment Protection
Authority and sought to appeal against its rulings with an application under s of the Freedom Of [Information
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ia144/). The learned judge in the District Court, her Honour Judge Ainslie-Wallace commenced proceedings and at the invitation of both parties came to certain conclusions as to what principles of law she should apply in determining Mrs Hamilton's application, that is as far as that has gone.

The Environment Protection Authority sensing that a final conclusion by her
Honour may be contrary to law took out a summons in which it claims (1) an order in the nature of prohibition against any further proceedings by her Honour and (2) an order in the nature of certiorari.

In addition there is a Notice of Motion before me taken out by the Environment
Protection Authority asking for proceedings to be stayed.

In my view none of the relief sought by the Environment Protection Authority should be granted. As far as prohibition is concerned I cannot see how an order in the nature of prohibition can be made in respect of a part heard matter in which nothing has been decided. As far as certiorari is concerned I cannot see how an order in the nature of certiorari can be made in the absence of a record. As far as an order for a stay is concerned I cannot see any basis for it, bearing in mind that the practical result of any order granting a stay will mean that the litigation currently before her Honour will come to an abrupt halt and may not proceed for some very considerable time.

In my view Mrs Hamilton ought be permitted to continue her litigation in the
District Court without any further impediments and she can take whatever result her Honour is going to give her. I might further add only this, though
I hesitate to be dogmatic about it, that in my view the Court of Appeal ought to be very reluctant to interfere by the grant of prerogative writ or any order in the nature of a prerogative writ in part-heard litigation. It is far preferable to let the part-heard litigation take its course and then invoke the powers of this Court, if appropriate.

For those reasons I would dismiss the Notice of Motion and the summons in each case with costs.
 * * * 
