

Walton versus McBride No. Ca 40436/93 Inferior Courts and Tribunals - Medical
Practioners - Costs [1995] NSWSC 17 (30 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), POWELL(2) COLE(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 12 October 1994 #DATE :4:1995 #ADD 30:8:1995 
Counsel for the Cross-appellant:   J Basten QC 
Solicitor for the Cross-appellant:  Solicitor for the Complaints
Unit, NSW Health Department 
Counsel for the Cross-respondent:  P Le G
Brereton 
Solicitor for the Cross-respondent: Blake Dawson Waldron
ORDER
Order that the cross-appeal be allowed; 
Order that order 3 made by the Medical Tribunal as to costs be set aside;
In lieu thereof, order that, in the absence of agreement between the parties, the matter be remitted to the Medical Tribunal, as constituted for the inquiry, for the purpose of assessing the costs payable under order 1 made by the Medical Tribunal. Such costs: to be assessed upon such basis, including an indemnity basis, as the
Medical Tribunal thinks appropriate; and to include an allowance for the cross-respondent's attendances as a witness for the inquiry into the obstetrics complaints against him which were not proved, and such allowance to be in accordance with the allowance made and provided for expenses paid to expert medical witnesses in this Court; and 4.
Order that the cross-respondent pay the cross-appellant's costs of the cross-appeal but have, in respect thereof, a certificate under the [Suitors'
Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
JUDGE1
KIRBY P: The cross-appeal now before this Court is a continuation of a hearing which resulted from an appeal by Dr William
McBride against an order of the
Medical Tribunal of New South Wales (the Tribunal) removing his name from the
Medical Register. This
Court, differently constituted, on 15 July 1994 delivered its decision in that appeal. By majority (Handley JA and Powell JA; myself dissenting) the Court dismissed the appeal. It ordered Dr McBride to pay Ms Walton's costs of the appeal. See McBride versus Walton, Court of Appeal , unreported, 15 July 1994; (1994) NSWJB 66. The High Court of Australia refused special leave to appeal from the
Court's orders.
 
Course of the proceedings
For convenience, the Court severed from its determination of the appeal, the resolution of a cross-appeal which had been filed by Ms Walton. For shortage of time, the Court adjourned the hearing of the argument on the questions raised by the cross-appeal to be dealt with after the substantive matters in the appeal had been disposed of The disposition of the appeal affected, in the view which I took, the cost order before the Tribunal.
However, as the view of the majority was that the appeal should be dismissed, that cost order remained unaffected by the appeal's outcome. The Tribunal ordered first that, in respect of what had been described as the "scientific fraud complaints" against Dr McBride, each party should pay its own costs.
By ground 6 of Ms Walton's cross-appeal to this Court that order was challenged.
However, on the return of the cross-appeal, the ground of challenge was abandoned. Secondly, the Tribunal made significant cost orders against Ms
Walton on the other complaints.
The purpose of the cross-appeal has been to challenge these orders.
When the cross-appeal was called on, Handley JA was engaged in other proceedings. The Court was therefore reconstituted as at present. No objection was raised by either party to the reconstitution of the Court. Nor did either party suggest that the cross-appeal must, or should, be heard by the Court which had disposed of the earlier proceedings. The issues in the cross-appeal are now severable from those raised in the principal appeal. Of necessity, they present only issues of law. See McBride versus Walton, above, my own judgment p 5ff, Kirumba versus Walton, Court of Appeal unreported, October 1990
NSWJB 132; [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/), [s 90(1)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s90.html) So much was agreed by the parties.
In the way that is more fully described in my reasons in McBride versus Walton , Dr McBride was subjected, in the proceedings before the Tribunal, to the most extensive and time consuming scrutiny of his practice as an obstetrician and gynaecologist that has ever occurred in professional disciplinary proceedings in this country. These were the so-called "obstetric complaints" and they arose out of the complaints other than those relating to "scientific fraud". Except in one particular, and that minor and deserving only of a reprimand, Dr McBride was wholly exonerated by the Tribunal in respect of the "obstetric complaints",
Ms Walton, as complainant, was ordered to pay Dr McBride's costs of and incidental to the inquiry into those complaints, save and except for his costs of and incidental to the inquiry into the one particular (particular (e) of complaint 6) in respect of which the Tribunal had found the complaint proved and dealt with it as stated.
If matters had rested there, there would have been no cross-appeal. But the Tribunal in its final orders went on to make the following order: "3. Costs under order 1 to be assessed on the basis of indemnity costs in accordance with Supreme Court Practice under the costs rules of that Court and should be paid by the Complainant when assessed and agreed and failing agreement when assessed by a taxing officer of the District
Court of New South Wales and upon the issue of a certificate of assessment by the Deputy Chairman of this Tribunal in accordance with [regulation 27](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s27.html) under the Medical
Practitioners Act. The assessment of costs is to include an allowance for the practitioner's attendances before the Inquiry of and incidental to the Inquiry into the particulars of the obstetric complaints which were found not proved The allowance should be in accordance with the allowance made and provided for expenses paid to expert medical witnesses in the Supreme Court. In assessing the costs the taxing officer may exercise the discretion of a taxing officer of the Supreme
Court of New South Wales in the allowance of costs referred to by the Supreme Court Rules or by any Act having application to the assessment or taxation of costs in the Supreme Court. If the practitioner has entered into a costs fees agreement with his solicitor affecting the retainer the agreement may be given effect to by the taxing officer if same is approved and certified by the Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal.
 ....
Liberty to apply to the Deputy Chairman under these costs orders."
Ms Walton has cross-appealed to this Court against order 3. She has contended that the order demonstrates errors in "Point of law".
 
Issues in the cross-appeal
By her cross-appeal, Ms Walton raised the following objections to the costs orders of the Tribunal: 
That the purported basis of the orders, viz Medical Practitioners
Regulation 1981, reg 27 was inapplicable to the power to be exercised which, following the repeal of the Medical Practitioners Act 1938 on 1 July 1993, was replaced by the [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). It was the 1992 Act, and not the previous Act and Regulation made under the previous Act, which governed the exercise of the power to award costs to Dr McBride at the time of the
Tribunal's orders, viz 30 July 1993. This argument, although adopted in oral argument during the hearing, was later abandoned by written submissions; 
That the power conferred upon the Tribunal by the Act to award "costs" did not extend to the making of an order requiring Ms Walton to pay Dr McBride's costs on an indemnity basis; 
That if there were power to award costs on an indemnity basis, legal error was demonstrated in the exercise of the discretion to do so in the present case; 
That there was no power to order that the costs in favour of Dr McBride included allowance for his attendance before the inquiry. It was eventually conceded that there was power to order that Ms Walton pay Dr McBride's costs should include the costs of his attendance at such times before the Tribunal as he was obliged to attend as a witness. But not otherwise; and .
That the Tribunal erred in ordering that the costs be assessed by a taxing officer of the District Court of New South Wales. Although the Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal was a Judge of the District Court, neither he, in his capacity of Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal, nor the Tribunal itself, had the power to impose upon the taxing officer of the District Court, a donee of powers under the [District Court Act 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/), duties having nothing to do with the District
Court but arising out of the performance by the Tribunal of its separate statutory functions.
It will be apparent to anyone who troubles to read my reasons in McBride v
Walton (above) that I have considerable sympathy for Dr McBride. I favoured allowing his appeal. I proposed an order providing the restoration of his name to the Medical
Register. By its orders for costs, and particularly for indemnity costs in respect of the "obstetric complaints", it is clear enough that the Tribunal formed a most adverse view of the decision of Ms Walton to prosecute, and then to continue the prosecution, of so many time consuming and meritless "obstetric complaints". That enterprise, amounting to such an abysmal and near total failure, inevitably casts doubt upon the judgment and even the motivation of those who determined that such complaints should be prosecuted upon bases so unconvincing - virtually totally so.
I therefore approach this cross-appeal with an understanding of the considerations which led to the Tribunal to make the costs orders which it did. If I could do so, conformably with my legal duty, I would happily uphold the Tribunal's costs orders challenged by the cross-appeal. However, save for the first and third challenges, I consider that each of the points of law raised by Ms Walton in the cross-appeal is correct. In due course, this will oblige me to propose that the cross-appeal be allowed. I must deal with each of the points argued in turn.
 
Basis of the power to order costs
Although the first objection was abandoned in later written submissions it is appropriate to deal with it. This is because it concerns the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and hence on the cross-appeal of this Court. By the terms of its order number 3, it is tolerably clear that the Tribunal thought that the source of its power to order costs was Regulation 27 of the
Regulations made under the Medical
Practitioners' Act 1938. It was not, perhaps, surprising that it should have so proceeded. For a very long time, the Tribunal had been conducting an extremely protracted proceeding under that
Act, with powers enhanced by those Regulations. However, the [Medical Practice
Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) commenced four weeks before the Tribunal published its reasons for its determinations and its orders.
Cole JA has set out in his reasons the way in which the 1992 Act repealed the 1938 Act and provided, by transitional provisions in Schedule 5, for the case of proceedings already on foot such as those affecting Ms Walton and Dr
McBride.
In my view, the repeal of the 1938 Act by the 1992 Act had the effect, prima facie, of terminating the legal operation of the Regulations made under the 1938 Act. If the source of the power which sustained the making and effectiveness of the Regulation was repealed, it is difficult to see how, in logic, the Regulations themselves could remain in force. Neither party could cite any authority to the Court directly on this point. But that is probably because it is one of logic and necessity. Once the Act, which was the foundation for the Regulations, went, so did the Regulations. See Martin v
Trigg <case>; [(1931) VLR 62 (VSC)], 65.
Thus, the source of the Tribunal's power to make its orders had to be found wholly within the [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). Schedule 5, cl 11 provides for transitional cases: "11(1) The provisions of the 1938 Act continue to apply to and in respect of a complaint made, or an inquiry or appeal commenced, under that Act and pending immediately before the repeal of that 
Act.

Any order, decision or determination resulting from an inquiry or appeal to which this clause applies is taken to have been made under the corresponding provisions of this Act and is to have effect accordingly. "
A question is presented by cl 11 (1). It is whether the reactivation of the "provisions of the 1938 Act" is sufficient, in terms, as well to reactivate the Regulations made under that Act. It is possible that the transitional nature of the clause, its apparent purpose and the wide phrase "in respect of" would be sufficient o have this effect. However, I will not delay over this point. Clause 11(2) deems an order resulting from an inquiry to be made under the corresponding provisions of the Act and "to have effect accordingly".
There is no doubt that the "corresponding" provision of the 1992 Act is that which deals with costs. As Cole JA has pointed out, the effect of the Act was to transfer into the 1992 statute, via <case> and Schedule 2, the costs provisions which, by the time the instant inquiry had commenced, were found in the combined force of the Medical Practitioners Act 1938, <case> and
Reg 25A of the Medical Practitioners Regulation 1981 (as amended).
In the present case, because the power imported into the Act is precisely the same as the power which formerly existed under the 1938 Act and
Regulations, there is no ultimate obligation in the present case to differentiate the applicable source of the power. Whilst it is true that transitional provisions need to be applied with care according to their terms,
I have no difficulty in giving effect to the proposition that, in the present case, the purpose of the governing provisions in the 1992 Act was to ensure that the Tribunal's power to order (relevantly) the complainant "to pay such costs to such persons as the Tribunal may determine" remained available. Cf R v Habib and Visvikis [(1986) 44 SASR 413 (FC)] and D Pearce and R S Geddes
Statutory Interpretation in Australia, 3rd ed, Butterworths, Sydney, 1988, .
Even if, by its order, the Tribunal referred to the incorrect source of power (as I am inclined to think) it matters not. That reference is redundant to the effective part of the order. The source of power is the same. The new
Act continued to sustain the making of an order for costs in this transitional case. Out of fairness to Ms Walton and her counsel, I should say, that no objection to jurisdiction on this basis was originally raised. The matter was only adverted to in response to questions from the Court concerned to establish the basis of the Tribunal's jurisdiction. When counsel had had the opportunity to examine the point, he properly and promptly abandoned it, pointing out that, in any case, [s 30(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s30.html) of the [Interpretation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) would be adequate to preserve both the legal proceeding and the costs power incidental to it.
 
Power to award indemnity costs .
In EMI Records Limited versus Ian Cameron Wallace Limited and Anor [(1983) Ch ] at 63, Sir Robert Megarry VC described the main bases of taxation of costs known to our legal system. He catalogued them in five classes, viz "party and party"; "common fund"; "trustee"; "solicitor and own client"; and "indemnity" in that ascending order. The willingness of superior courts to make special orders as to costs, beyond the ordinary order for costs which has been taken to mean "party and party" costs, has arisen more frequently in recent years because of what Rogers J described in Qantas Airways Limited v Dillingham
Corporation and Ors, Supreme Court , 14 May 1987, unreported, at 4 as: "A yawning gap between costs recovered by a successful party from the other party on a party and party taxation of costs and the costs payable by the successful party to its own solicitors."
On the basis of this "gap", Rogers J, writing of the Commercial Division of the Supreme Court, observed (at 8-9): "I suggest that, in the current context of litigation, there is a great deal to be said for the proposition that the successful party should always be fully indemnified for costs. How, injustice, can it be justified that a successful party should walk away from court bearing a costs burden which is of measurable if not crushing impact to any but the most wealthy?"
In part, the provision of the power in a Court such as this to award a special measure of costs has been found in the Rules of Court. Thus [Pt 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/index.html#p52) r 23
SCR in this Court provides that costs are to be taxed on a party and party basis unless the costs are to be taxed on an indemnity basis pursuant to r
A, the common fund basis pursuant to r 30 or on a trustee basis pursuant to r 31. There are similar provisions in the Rules of other State Supreme Courts.
See eg Rules of the Supreme Court of Victoria O 63 r 28. Yet even where express provision is not made to empower a superior court to make an order for indemnity costs, such a power may be found in the inherent jurisdiction of courts which have developed out of the Royal prerogative. In the case of the
Supreme Court, Samuels AP in Premier Woodworking
Co Pty Limited versus Siganisucu
Court of Appeal , unreported, 30 November 1989; (1989) NSWJB 215 expressed the opinion that an order for indemnity costs in that case rested on "only a very frail footing in the cost rules". Nevertheless, the Court ultimately made an order for costs on a solicitor and own client basis where an appellant belatedly withdrew an unmeritorious appeal.
Such a power may also be found to be encompassed (as it was in the case of the Federal Court of Australia) within the constitution of the court as a superior court of law and equity and from its specific empowerment to make orders of such kinds as it thinks appropriate.
See eg Colgate Palmolive Co and
Anor versus Cussons Pty Limited <case>; [(1993) 118 ALR 248 (FFC)] insofar as (at 32ff) it referred to costs was a rather special case. It rested upon particular provisions in the Admiralty Rules.
In any case, the costs order made was on a solicitor and client and not an indemnity basis.
In the case of courts which are created by statute, at least where they are not superior courts of general jurisdiction in law and equity, the source of the court's power to order costs of any kind, must be found in the enabling statute. This is because costs are not, as such, a right or privilege created by the common law. The power to award costs in common law countries is ancient. But, as the High Court pointed out in Cachia v Hanes (above, 410) it is usually traced back to the Statute of Gloucester, 1278 (6 Edw I c 1).
Where a subordinate court of limited jurisdiction is created, it must find its powers in the express language of the statute which gives it existence, in the implications which derive from that language and are necessarily involved in it or such powers as may be inferred from the very fact that the legislature has created a court, with jurisdiction to perform and therefore with the necessary means of carrying out that jurisdiction and giving it effect. Cf John Fairfax and Sons Limited versus Police Tribunal of New
South Wales [(1986) 5 NSWLR 465 (CA).], 476. The distinction between inherent and implied statutory powers is, in my view, an important one. See Logwon Pty
Ltd versus Warringah
Shire Council [(1993) 33 NSWLR 13 (CA)], 16f. But it is not necessary to revisit the question here because the body whose powers are questioned in these proceedings is undoubtedly a creature of statute and is in no view a superior court of general jurisdiction.
For at least a century courts in England, which partook of the Royal
Prerogative, considered that they had the power to make special orders as to costs. But this was not so in the common law courts. They took the view that their only power was to award costs on a party and party basis. See Mordue v
Palmer [(1870) LR 6 Ch App 22],
More significant than the assertion of the Court of Chancery's power to award costs was the longstanding acknowledgment of the common law courts that their only power in respect of costs extended to costs as between party and party. Whether by the "fusion" of common law and equitable jurisdiction, by the passage of special enabling legislation or a developing view of the inherent jurisdiction, it is important to see the cost powers of superior courts of record as distinguishable from the powers of inferior courts and tribunals.
The former have traditionally had large (and often inherent) powers. The latter must always source their power to the statute which establishes them.
Many statutes which create courts and tribunals of limited and particular jurisdiction provide, in differing ways, for the making of costs orders. When this is done, it is necessary, in each case, to consider whether the court or tribunal in question has power to make the order which is challenged. The decision-maker will then look to the terms by which the power is conferred, consider the implications of the grant of the facility for ordering costs and reflect upon the nature and purposes of the body afforded that power. Just because a power to award "costs" is conferred in general terms, does not mean that the power is entirely open-ended. It cannot authorise the making of an order which is entirely at large. Nor will it sustain idiosyncratic orders or orders beyond the provision of what can truly be described as "costs". If
Cachia versus Hanes and Anor <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 403] in the High Court of Australia establishes nothing else, it makes the foregoing plain, for in that case both the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and the Rules of Court spoke of "costs" in perfectly general terms. A fortiori, a judge, magistrate or tribunal member of a limited and inferior statutory body given the power to award "costs" may have, thereby, a large discretion. But it is one to be exercised judicially, for the purpose of achieving the objects of the legislature which has conferred the power, not for the attainment of some personal view about justice in the particular case. Cf Donald Campbell and Co Limited and Ors v
Pollak [(1927) AC 732 (HL)], 11;
Trade Practices Commission versus Nicholas Enterprises Pty Limited and Ors [(1979) ALR 201 (FC)]; [(1986) 71 ALR (FC)], 152.
The range of expressions used in statutes conferring power to award costs in this State is quite wide. Thus, the [Anti-Discrimination Act 1977](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/), [s 114(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s114.html) provides that ordinarily each party to an inquiry before the Equal Opportunity
Tribunal should pay his or her own costs. But the section goes on: "114(2) Where the Tribunal is of the opinion in a particular case that there are circumstances to justify it doing so, it may make such order as to costs and security for costs ... as it thinks fit."
The Residential Tenancies
Tribunal is empowered by <case> of the [Residential Tenancies Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/rta1987207/) to "allow costs to or against any party to proceedings before the Tribunal" only in two specified circumstances. The word "costs" is undefined. Equally, it is undefined by <case> of the Community
Services (Complaints, Appeals and Monitoring) Act 1993 and the Nurses
Act , <case>. In the case of the Commercial Tribunal, the [Commercial Tribunal
Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cta1984192/), [s 32](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cta1984192/s32.html) is a little more specific: "[s 32.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cta1984192/s32.html) The Tribunal may award costs against a party to proceedings before it and may determine the amount of costs to be so awarded."
Normally, all that Parliament does is what it has done in the [Medical
Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/), [s 161](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s161.html) and Schedule 2 cl 13. It empowers the body in question to order the payment of "costs". These are left undefined. In default of some statutory assistance, content must then be given to the word, by utilising the measuring ordinarily ascribed to costs in a contest of the kind with which the tribunal in question deals.
In two previous cases questions have arisen as to whether inferior courts of this State, provided with statutory power to award "costs" attain thereby jurisdiction to award indemnity costs. In Hurstville
Municipal Council v
Connor and Anor [(1991) 24 NSWLR 724 (SC)], 735, Loveday J assumed that a Local
Court Magistrate had power to order indemnity costs. However, his Honour decided that the Magistrate ought not to have done so in the facts of that case. It was therefore not strictly necessary for his Honour to determine whether, under the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/), ss 37 and 38, the
Local Court was empowered to order indemnity costs.
In Milosevic versus Government Insurance Office of New South
Wales [(1993) 31
NSWLR 323 (CA)] this Court held that <case> of the [District Court Act 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) did not empower a Judge of the District Court to award indemnity costs. To the extent that [Part 19A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/index.html#p19a) Rule 9 of the [District Court Rules 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/dcr1973236/) purported to confer such a power, the Rule was invalid as going beyond the power conferred by the Act. The case turned upon the express reference in <case> of the [District Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) to "costs payable between party and party". The conclusion, however, drew strength from the general nature, history and purpose of the
District Court as a court established to provide for litigation at costs more economical than in the Supreme Court.Since Milosevic,
Parliament has amended the [District Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) to make it plain that that Court is to be taken retrospectively to have been authorised to make an order for the payment of costs of a party on an indemnity basis. See Courts Legislation Amendment Act , Schedule 2. See also Castlereagh Stud Pty Limited v
Hooper, Court of
Appeal , unreported, 22 September 1994; (1994) NSWJB 94. The power to order costs on an indemnity basis is now expressly conferred.
It is against this background that I turn to the question whether the general grant of power to award "costs" afforded this Tribunal the jurisdiction to award costs on an indemnity basis. No authority of the High
Court or of this Court specifically determines the point. No express terms in the statute, either of 1938 or of 1992 resolves the controversy. The word "costs" is, as Cole JA has pointed out, unqualified in the legislation. Cases will certainly exist where, as here, a cost order beyond party and party costs would be warranted on the merits of the contest. The facility for costs is a beneficial one added by Parliament to the statute. It should not be given a narrow construction. Indemnity costs are becoming more common in the courts of the State because of the "yawning gap" between actual costs and ordinary (party and party) cost orders referred to above. There is no express limitation in this legislation (as there was in the [District Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/)) referring to "party and party costs". It can therefore be left to the Tribunal to show discernment in ordering indemnity costs.
The misuse of disciplinary power can do lasting damage to a practitioner. Against such oppression the facility of occasionally ordering indemnity costs will be a healthy corrective. Cf Malfanti versus Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal, Court of
Appeal , unreported, August 1993; (1993) NSWJB 102, per Meagher JA, 3.
So went the arguments for Dr McBride.
The reasons why I cannot accept these arguments are as follows: 
The fact that "costs" are left undefined in this, as in the statues empowering other tribunals of this State to award costs, far from suggesting the large power to provide indemnity costs suggests to my mind the contrary, ie that no such power is intended. The word "costs" must be read in the context of the legislation here in question (as of legislation empowering other tribunals), it must be read against the backdrop of the provisions authorising orders for the payment of costs by the courts. As Cachia versus Hanes in the High Court, and in this Court demonstrates, that power is severely limited. From its earliest days in the Statute of Gloucester it was "never intended to be a comprehensive compensation for any loss suffered by a litigant".
See Cachia (above), 410. Where Parliament intends a larger provision, it will say so expressly, at least in the case of inferior courts and tribunals. See eg now [District Court Act 1973](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/), <case>; cf Litigants in
Person (Costs and Expenses) Act 1975 (UK), cited Cachia (HC), 416; 
Nothing was said by the Minister or by anyone else when the Medical
Tribunal was empowered by Parliament to award costs which even hinted at a power to award other than "costs" in the ordinary sense of that word. That ordinary sense is the sense long accepted by the courts of common law, ie party and party costs. Cf Fountain Selected Meats (Sales) Pty Ltd v
International Produce Merchants Pty Ltd and Ors <case>; [(1988) 81 ALR 397 (FC)], 400.
On the contrary, the Minister made it plain that what was concerning him was empowerment of the Tribunal to award costs against a medical practitioner. To the extent that the Second Reading Speech or other material may be looked at they lend no support to the notion that "costs" was intended to extend to indemnity costs; 
Given that the Minister referred expressly to cost orders against a medical practitioner (and that they are provided by the relevant legislation) it must be considered, in determining the scope of the power to award "costs" that if it applies to the orders against the complainant, it equally applies to orders in favour of the complainant and against a medical practitioner. Had such a potentially large burden been intended, it might have been expected that it would have been mentioned by the Minister if not expressly referred to in the statute. In visiting justice upon Dr McBride, it is important that this Court should keep in mind the consequences of possible injustice, or at least extremely heavy financial burdens, for other medical practitioners ordinarily ordered to pay the costs of the complainant before the Tribunal; 
Whilst it is true that the word "costs" is unconfined in the language of the statute, it is equally true that no express source of power is given to enlarge the ordinary meaning of the word, which would be party and party costs. Assuming such express power to be unnecessary to a superior court of record, such as the Supreme Court or the Federal Court of Australia, it is far from clear that it is unnecessary for a subordinate tribunal of limited jurisdiction. Yet if it is true of this Tribunal that it has such powers, it is presumably true of all the other Tribunals of the State which have a general power to award undefined "costs". That presents a very large question of policy indeed. If the relatively minor matter of policy affecting the
Supreme Court in Cachia versus Hanes required detailed consideration (as the High
Court majority assumed) the large question thus presented in relation to all statutory tribunals of the State with power to order costs is one upon which
Parliament should be allowed to speak. Such an enlargement of the powers of so many tribunals should not be provided in a stroke by this Court by embellishment of the meaning of the word "costs" where used, unembroidered, in the legislation;
It would be particularly odd if it had been the design of the legislation conferring jurisdiction on the Tribunal that it was intended to permit an indemnity costs order at the very time when the [District Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) (as this
Court held) did not extend to confer upon that Court a power to order indemnity costs. The Tribunal is, after all, a subordinate body of strictly limited jurisdiction. True, it deals with high earning medical practitioners.
But that would not provide a basis of acceptable principle for authorising a power to order indemnity costs which did not equally extend to the Equal
Opportunity Tribunal, the Residential Tenancies Tribunal, the Nurses'
Tribunal, the Commercial Tribunal and all the other tribunals of the State that have a power to award costs expressed in simple and unelaborated terms.
Parliament may certainly empower such tribunals to award indemnity costs. But, in my view, the Court should wait until Parliament has done so, expressly; and
Nothing is added to the arguments of either side by the reference to the word "such" in the source of power. This simply empowers the Court to order costs "such ...
as the Tribunal may determine". It is not an unlimited power.
It is not available for the "humour" or "whim" of the Tribunal. It is only available to the donee of the power afforded (directly or indirectly) by
Parliament to achieve the purposes of Parliament.
I am not convinced by the generality of the legislative language that those purposes extended to the making of orders for indemnity costs.
I would therefore uphold ground 1 of the cross-appeal.
 
No error of discretion
The foregoing conclusion relieves me of the obligation to determine whether, if there were a power, the Tribunal erred in exercising it in the circumstances of this case.
However, I wish to make it clear that I see no error in the exercise by the Tribunal of the purported jurisdiction claimed by it at least so far as the discretionary considerations were concerned. This Court, being limited in the cross-appeal to correction of an error of law, it would be obliged to accept as facts the findings made by the Tribunal relevant to the exercise of the costs discretion. Those findings included the following: that the prosecution of some of the complaints called into question the judgment of those responsible for the conduct of Ms
Walton's case; that the "statistics" case relied on by Ms Walton was "entirely inappropriate"; that, in effect, the complaints relating to Dr McBride's obstetrics practice ought not to have been brought; and that having regard to the length of the Inquiry an order which provided less than indemnity costs would be inadequate in terms of justice.
Where indemnity costs are available by law, it is usual to confine theirprovision to cases where the body so empowered to order costs ultimately comes to the conclusion that it must mark its disapproval for wrongful conduct by departing from the ordinary principle of costs and relieving the "innocent" party of the burden of costs inflicted by the wrongful action of the losing party. See Colgate Palmolive Co and Anor versus Cussons Pty Limited <case>; [(1993) 118 ALR (FC)], 254 citing Fountain Selected Meals (Sales) Pty Limited above at 400f
Indemnity costs may be ordered where a hearing is prolonged by deliberately false allegations of fact. Mere prolongation without more will not ordinarily justify an award of indemnity costs.
Cf Wentworth versus Rogers (No 5) [(1986) 6
NSWLR 534 (CA)]
Ms Walton attacked a number of the premises upon which the Tribunal acted in proceeding to make the order for indemnity costs in this case. These included the criticisms of the initial investigation, of the use of statistical material, of the length of the inquiry and of the judgment of those who had prosecuted this part of the complaints against Dr McBride. It suffices for me to say that, had I been of the view that the Tribunal enjoyed the power to award indemnity costs, I would not have been convinced by any of the arguments of Ms Walton that the discretion to award such costs miscarried in this case. Indeed, the case seems to have been an entirely appropriate one for the award of such costs, had only there been power to do so.
In view of my primary conclusion,
I see no point in exploring the other subordinate issue relevant to the award of indemnity costs, viz the order that they be assessed according to the Supreme Court Rules and scale. I am not convinced that the reference to such rules and scale amounted to an error.
They were simply an indication of the measurement which the Tribunal adopted in giving effect to its purported order for indemnity costs. No officer of the
Supreme Court was involved in this part of the Tribunal's order. The Tribunal merely referred to a convenient and readily ascertainable criterion for determining the quantum of the costs which it felt it was empowered to order.
Finally, it is perhaps worth commenting that the Tribunal had to go outside its own governing legislation to find a criterion for the calculation of indemnity costs in the Rules of the Supreme Court. No relevant rules or
Regulations existed in respect of the Tribunal's own jurisdiction.
This rather suggests that the Executive Government, like Parliament did not consider that the Tribunal had the power which it asserted in this case. However, in my view, nothing much turns upon this aspect of the order made.
 
Costs of attendance
It will be recalled that Ms Walton ultimately agreed that Dr McBride's costs of attending the Tribunal on those days where he was a witness, should be covered by the terms of the order made as part of his "costs". But she persisted in her objection, raised by the Cross-appeal that
Dr McBride's costs could not include the costs of sitting in the Tribunal during the long hearing and being available to hear and observe witnesses, give instructions to his counsel and listen to the accusations made against him.
Uninstructed by binding authority, I would accept the force of Dr
McBride's submission that his costs of attending the Tribunal throughout its long hearing in a matter so vitally touching his practice, pocket and reputation was within the expression "costs", or that it was at least open to the Tribunal to so decide.
There is some early authority which supported the view that a litigant may recover the reasonable and necessary costs of attendance at court throughout a hearing in which he is a party. See eg Australian Blue Metal
Limited versus Hughes and Ors [(1970) 2 NSWR 119 (SC)] 123; Kerridge versus Foley, Supreme
Court of New South Wales, unreported, (Street J), 19 August 1970; Petrunic and
Anor versus Barnes <case>; [(1989) VR 927 (SCV)], 292.
In Petrunic, Murphy J, responding to an objection such as Ms Walton has raised in this cross appeal, said, in relation to the Supreme Court of
Victoria: "To approach the matter with a pre-conception that a party is not entitled to claim expenses save for the time that he or she spends as a witness ready lo give and giving evidence is not correct.

More often than not, in my experience, it is both necessary and proper that a party be present throughout the hearing to instruct counsel or his legal representative as to, and to deal with, matters that inevitably crop up not only in his or her own case but also in the opponent's case, in the giving of evidence by the opponent and his witnesses."
However, in this Court, in
Cachia versus Isaacs and Ors, Court of Appeal , unreported, 23 March 1989; (1989) NSWJB 46, Samuels JA at p 21 of his reasons, made it clear that: "The current practice in New South Wales does not give effect to the views of Helsham J (in Australian Blue
Metal) and Street J (in
Kerridge)."
Samuels JA relied upon what he took to be a longstanding practice that a party may not recover costs for "attending merely to observe or instruct". Cf
Russo versus Russo <case>; [(1953) VLR 57], .
Although my own view about the breadth of the word "costs" where used in its generality have been expressed in Cachia v Hanes and Cachia versus Isaacs, those views were in dissent. They must now be taken to have been over-ruled by
Cachia versus Hanes in the
High Court. Kerridge, Petrunic and other cases are footnoted to the majority judgment in that last mentioned case (417). It is clear that the majority in the High Court disapproved of them. Their Honours observed: "Clearly, that is merely an indirect way of recompensing a litigant for time spent in the preparation or conduct of his case which, if it is not contemplated by the relevant legislation or rules, is not permissible. Of course, a litigant who qualifies as a witness is entitled to the ordinary witnesses fees."
It would be completely unacceptable to afford a litigant in person no costs (save as a witness) of attending at court whilst permitting a litigant to recover who could afford, or had, legal representation to do so. What applies to one must apply to the other unless some differing principle, grounded in the objection of professional lawyers to litigants in person, is to be expounded. It is clear in the passage just cited that the High Court has rejected the notion of litigants recovering costs of attending and instructing. Their costs are to be limited, by the principles in Cachia v
Hanes, solely to any witnesses fees to which they are otherwise entitled. This is a stem rule. It is not one apparently required by the breadth of the legislative language ("costs"). It is one imposed upon that language by judicial presumption upheld by this country's highest court. I am obliged to give effect to that opinion, whatever I may think of it. It completely negatives the order made by the Tribunal (in fairness before Cachia v Hanes was decided in the High Court) to the effect that Ms Walton was obliged to pay the costs of Dr McBride's attending during the hearing of the obstetrics complaint.
The cross-appeal must, to that extent, also be allowed.
 
Imposing duties on the
District Court Registrar
The final ground of the cross-appeal which was argued was that the order of the Tribunal requiring that, failing agreement, the costs were to be "assessed by a taxing officer of the District Court of New South Wales" was beyond power. The order in question further required that such taxing officer "may exercise the discretion of a taxing officer of the Supreme
Court of New
South Wales". It was suggested that this too was a purported conferral upon a donee of statutory powers of fuctions and discretions not afforded to him by
Parliament.
I agree. Neither the 1938 nor the 1992 Act nor the Regulations conferred any jurisdiction upon the Tribunal to impose upon a statutory office-holder under the [District Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) duties beyond those imposed by that Act or otherwise by statute or Regulation. In this respect the order differed from that part of the order which merely referred to criteria in the Supreme Court
Rules. It purported to impose positive duties upon a person whose duties are enumerated by statute and by express subordinate legislation. In my view such a purported imposition of obligations and conferral of powers to discharge those obligations was beyond the power of the Tribunal. Cf Woolf versus Snipe and
Ors, <case>; [(1933) 48 CLR, 677.]
In Woolf, a solicitor moved the High Court for an order directing the
Principal Registrar to tax his bill of costs against his clients in respect of business transacted in the High Court in a cause pending in that court. The
Principal Registrar gave an appointment for the taxation. However, an objection was taken by the clients that the Registrar had no authority to act as requested and that such authority could not be conferred by the mere application of the solicitor. The Registrar upheld the objection. He refused to proceed with the taxation. The solicitor then moved the Court to require the Registrar to do so. The motion was dismissed by Dixon
J. His Honour did not doubt that, if in the exercise of its general jurisdiction, the Court referred a solicitor's costs for taxation, the Rules of the High Court would enable the Court to order the solicitor to deliver a bill. But, at 681, he went on: "... (I)t is not expressed in such a way as to confer upon the
High Court the independent statutory jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court to order the delivery of a bill, much less the powers of that Court relating to the taxation of bills already delivered
Rules of Court ought not to be construed as enlarging or conferring jurisdiction or affecting substantive rights. Many difficulties would ensue if this general principle were neglected and the rule were read, not as operating only within the existing jurisdiction of the Court, but as conferring upon both solicitor and client a new right to taxation in this Court."
Although the Deputy
Chairman of the Tribunal who presided in Dr McBride's case (Wall DCJ) is a Judge of the District Court he was not discharging his fuctions as a Judge of that Court when acting as Chairman of the Medical
Tribunal. The other members of the Tribunal were indubitably not Judges of the
District Court. There was therefore no power in the Tribunal to impose duties, or to confer purported jurisdiction, upon the taxing officer of the District
Court. However sensible and well meaning such an order may be, it simply has no foundation in the express or implied powers of a taxing officer of the
District Court. The order must to that extent also, be set aside.
 .
The fact that this point was not taken before the Tribunal is not, in my view, significant. What is involved is purely a question of law which touches the jurisdiction to make the order impugned. No evidence before the Tribunal could have altered its powers.
This Court should ensure that the Tribunal's orders are made within jurisdiction. The redetermination of costs should be remitted to the Tribunal as a whole to perform: Cf Ohn versus Walton, Court of
Appeal , unreported, 28 February 1995; (1995) NSWJB 19.
 
Deriving an order of the Court
There is a divergence in the opinions of the Judges concerning the several points which have been argued in this cross-appeal:
Powell JA and I are of the view that the word "costs", in the relevant legislation, does not extend to costs for attending to observe or instruct legal representatives. Cole JA is of the view that "costs" is not to be so limited. There is, therefore, a majority for the view which Powell JA and I express; 
I am of the view that it was not open to the Tribunal to award, or to assess costs otherwise than on a party and party basis. However, Cole JA and Powell
JA are of the view that costs may be assessed on an indemnity basis or a basis akin to it. There is therefore a majority for dismissing the challenge to that part of the Tribunal's orders; and 
Both Powell JA and I are of the view that, insofar as order of the orders made by the Tribunal purports to delegate the task of assessment to a taxing officer of the District Court, it is incompetent. We are also of the view that there can be no delegation of the task of assessment even to the relevant Deputy
Chairman. The reassessment must be returned to the Tribunal. Cole
JA would not permit this question to be raised on the cross-appeal.
The result of the foregoing is that the following are the orders of the
Court: .
Order that the cross-appeal be allowed;
Order that order 3 made by the Medical Tribunal as to costs be set aside;
In lieu thereof, order that, in the absence of agreement between the parties, the matter be remitted to the Medical 
Tribunal, as constituted for the inquiry, for the purpose of assessing the costs payable under order I made by the Medical 
Tribunal. Such costs: to be assessed upon such basis, including an indemnity basis, as the Medical Tribunal thinks appropriate; and to include an allowance for the cross-respondent's attendances as a witness for the inquiry into the obstetrics complaints against him which were not proved, and such allowance to be in accordance with the allowance made and provided for expenses paid to expert medical witnesses in this Court; and
Order that the cross-respondent pay the cross-appellant's costs of the cross-appeal but have, in respect thereof, a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
JUDGE2
POWELL JA: As the facts which gave rise to the appeal by Dr McBride - which appeal was, by majority, dismissed by this Court, differently constituted, on th July 1994 - and the cross-appeal by Ms. Walton with which the Court is now concerned to deal, have been set out, in some detail, in the several
Judgments delivered by the then members of the Court on 15th July 1994, it does not seem necessary that they should again be dealt with in such detail.
That being so, I will content myself with a short - albeit, I hope, not inaccurate - summary of those facts.
The complaint which initiated the proceedings before the Medical Tribunal ("the
Tribunal"), the Orders in which proceedings were to give rise to the appeal by Dr. McBride and to the cross-appeal by Ms. Walton, was made, pursuant to the provisions of the Medical Practitioners Act 1938 ("the 1938
Act"), by Ms. Walton to the Medical Board in
July 1989. In the form which it ultimately took, the complaint comprised some sixteen complaints, those complaints being readily divided into two groups, they being:- what have been described as "the obstetric complaints" - complaints 1-7, 8A, 8B - which complaints - the inquiry into which involved the Tribunal conducting an extensive retrospective audit of Dr. McBride's practice over a period of some 10 years at three major reaching hospitals - were to the effect that Dr. McBride had been guilty of professional misconduct in the course of his practice as an obstetrician and gynaecologist; and what have been described as "the scientific fraud complaints" - complaints 9-15 - which complaints - the inquiry into which involved the
Tribunal considering experiments said to have been conducted by, or under the direction of, Dr. McBride in 1979 and ,
articles submitted to a scientific journal in 1982 and 1983 and evidence given by Dr. McBride, in the United States, on a number of occasions from and including 1980 to and including 1988 - were to the effect that Dr. McBride was not of good character in that he, in relation to medical research, made, published or caused to be published, statements which were false and misleading.
As this short statement of the nature of the complaints made against Dr.
McBride would suggest, the inquiry which the Tribunal was obliged to carry out was extensive and protracted. In the event:- the inquiry into the obstetric complaints engaged the attention of the Tribunal between November 1989 and February 1991; the nett result of that inquiry being that, except in relation to one case - out of the many which had been particularised - the complaints were revealed as being devoid of substance; the inquiry into the scientific fraud complaints engaged the attention of the Tribunal from February until
July 1991; the
Tribunal result of that inquiry being that, although, the Tribunal - upon the basis that "it (could not be) comfortably be satisfied that (a particular) experiment as described by Dr. McBride did not occur" - found three complaints not proved, and, as well, found some of the matters particularised in relation to other complaints not proved, each of the other complaints was found proved to the extent of some, at least, of the matters particularised in relation to it.
 .
Having, in February 1993, delivered its factual findings on both the obstetric complaints and the scientific fraud complaints, the
Tribunal - having, meantime, entertained, and refused, an application made upon behalf of
Ms. Walton further to "amend" the original complaint, and, as well, received evidence tendered on behalf of Dr. McBride on the question of "penalty" - at the end of May, and the be inning of June, 1993, heard the parties' submissions as to "whether or not the Complaints ... (had) been proved, and, if so, what would be the appropriate order of the Tribunal". Having done so, the Tribunal reserved its decision on those questions.
 .
Before the Tribunal came to deliver its "Reasons for Determinations and
Orders", the 1938 Act was repealed and the [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) ("the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/)") came into operation. At the time of the hearing of the appeal by
Dr. McBride, it was agreed between the parties that, by virtue of the operation of the transitional provisions (Schedule 5 cl, 11) contained in the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/), relating to proceedings which had been commenced under the 1938 Act, the Determinations and Orders of the Tribunal were to be taken to have been made pursuant to the provisions of the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/).
Those Determinations and Orders were in substance, as follows: 
In relation to the obstetric complaints -
The Tribunal determined that Complaints 1-5,7, 8A and 8B had not been proved.

The Tribunal determined that Complaint 6 as particularised in paragraph 6(e) had been proved.

The Tribunal ordered that (the Appellant) be reprimanded for the misconduct specified in Complaint 6(e).
In relation to the scientific fraud complaints -
The Tribunal determined Complaints 11-15 not proved.

The Tribunal determined Complaints 9,10 had been proved.

The Tribunal by majority ordered that (the Appellant's) name be removed from the Register of Medical Practitioners.
As to costs -
The Tribunal ordered - that (the Cross-Appellant) pay (the Cross-Respondent's) costs of and incidental to the inquiry into Complaints 1-8B inclusive save and except (the Cross
Respondent's) costs of and incidental to the inquiry of Particular (e) of Complaint 6.
 that each party pay its own costs of and incidental to the inquiry into Particular (e) of Complaint 6.
 that the costs under Order 1 be assessed on the basis of indemnity costs in accordance with Supreme Court Practice under the Costs Rules of (this) Court and should be paid by (the
Cross-Appellant) when assessed and agreed and failing agreement when assessed by a taxing officer of the District
Court and upon the issue of a Certificate of Assessment by the Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal in accordance with Regulation under the Medical
Practitioners Act. The assessment of costs was to include an allowance for (the Appellant's) attendances before the inquiry of and incidental to the inquiry into the particulars of the obstetric complaints which were found not proved. The allowance should be in accordance with the allowance made and provided for expenses paid to expert medical witnesses in (this) Court. In assessing the costs the taxing officer might exercise the discretion of a taxing officer of (this) court in the allowance of costs conferred by the Supreme Court Rules or by any Act having application to the assessment or taxation of costs in (this)
Court. If (the Appellant) had entered into a costs/fees agreement with his solicitor affecting the retainer the agreement might be given effect to by the taxing officer if the same be approved and certified by the Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal.
that each party pay her, or his, own costs of and incidental of the inquiry into Complaints 9-15 inclusive.
that there be liberty to apply to the Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal in respect of those cost orders.
From those Determinations and Orders, insofar as they were adverse to him,
Dr. McBride appealed, while Ms. Walton cross-appealed in respect of the
Tribunal's
Order for costs, the grounds of appeal taken by her being:- "1. Insofar as Order 3 required the Cross-Appellant to pay costs assessed on an indemnity basis, the Tribunal - erred in that it lacked power to make such an order; in the alternative to (a) if the Tribunal had such power, it erred in law in making such an order in the present case.
Insofar as Order required costs to be paid by the
Cross-Appellant to be assessed according to the Supreme Court
Rules and Scale, the Tribunal -
erred in that it had no power to make such an order; in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances of the present case.
Insofar as Order 3 required the Cross-Appellant to pay the costs of the Respondent's attendance during the hearing, the
Tribunal - erred in that it had no such power to make such an order; in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances or the present case.
Insofar as Order 3 requires that an assessment of costs be made by a taxing officer of the District Court, the Tribunal - erred in that it had no power to make such an order; in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances of the present case.
Insofar as Order (sic) provides authority for the
Cross-Respondent to recover costs under a cost/fee agreement with his solicitor over and above costs otherwise recoverable as on a party and party taxation in the District Court, the
Tribunal - erred in that it had no power to make such an order; in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances of the present case." and the Order sought by her in lieu being an Order that: - "The Complainant pay the costs of the Respondent in relation to complaints I-BB such costs to be agreed or assessed by a Deputy
Chairman of the Tribunal on a party and party basis in accordance with the District Court Special Scale."
As the form of the several grounds of appeal taken on behalf of Ms. Walton would indicate, there has been no dispute that, whether the Determinations and
Orders of the Tribunal are to be taken to have been made pursuant to the provisions of the 1938 Act (as to which see 1938 Act s.53(1)(c1);
Medical
Practitioners Regulations r.27(1) or pursuant to the provisions of the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) (1992 Act s.161; Schedule 2 c1-13), at least in general terms, the
Tribunal had power to order that Ms. Walton pay the whole, or some part, of
Dr.McBride's costs of the inquiry conducted by the Tribunal pursuant to the complaint which had been made to the Board by Ms. Walton in July 1989. The power to do so being - at least in general terms - accepted, the questions which arise for consideration - the appeal being limited to questions of law (1938 Act s.32U; 1972 Act s.90) in the present case seem to me to be as follows:- by whom was, and is, the power to be exercised? what form was, and is, any relevant Order required to take? .
by whom - i.e. by those who constituted the Tribunal or by some other person - and in what manner - i.e. by taxation, or in some other method - was, and is, the amount of any costs payable pursuant to any relevant Order to be quantified? what principles were, and are, to be applied in determining what are "costs" for the purpose of any relevant Order? . was, and is, it open to whomsoever is required to quantify the amount of any such "costs" to do so on other than "a party and party basis"?
However, before I turn to consider those questions, it is convenient that
I should first note a number of matters relating to the Tribunal, its constitution and membership, its staff, and its rules, and manner, of proceeding.
First, it is to be noted that, as far as I have been able to ascertain, at no time since the coming into force of the 1938 Act has the relevant "disciplinary tribunal" had any constant membership, and still less has it, at least under 1st June 1994 - and even since that date the position is doubtful - had any staff. Thus, when the 1938 Act came into force, it provided (1938
Act s.28) for a "disciplinary tribunal" to be constituted by a chairman - who was to be a District Court Judge, appointed for a term of 7 years - or, in the case of absence, a deputy chairman - similarly appointed and the members of the Medical Board, a quorum, at any sitting of the tribunal, being the chairman - or deputy chairman - and four members of the Medical Board. By , the 1938 Act provided (Part 3A Division ss. 32M, 32N) for there to be a Medical Tribunal, to be constituted, ad hoc, for the purpose of each complaint referred by the
Medical Board, by such of the Chairman or Deputy
Chairman - being such Judges of the District Court as had been appointed as such by the Governor for a term, in each case, not exceeding 7 years - as the
Chairman appointed, together with two medical practitioners appointed by the
Board, and one lay person appointed by the Board from a panel of such person from time to time nominated by the relevant Minister. The [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) contains similar provisions [(Part 11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s11.html) Division 1 [ss. 146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s146.html)-[148](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s148.html)) to those which had been introduced into the 1938 Act by the Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act .
So far as I have been able to ascertain, at no time while the 1938 Act was in operation did either the disciplinary tribunal, or, later, the
Tribunal, have any staff. When the 1938 Act first came into force it was the
Secretary of the Medical Board who convened meetings of the disciplinary tribunal and who was obliged to keep a record of its proceedings and decisions (1938 Act s.28(10); see also Medical Practitioners
Regulations 1981 r.22).
Following upon the coming into force of the 1987 amendments to the 1938 Act, it was the Chairman - or the
Deputy Chairman who was appointed to preside - who fixed, and who was required to give notice of, the time and place for the conduct of any inquiry (1938 Act s.320; as to the procedure oil and other matters related to, the conduct of the inquiry see 1938 Act Schedule ); the duty to keep records of proceedings and decisions of the Tribunal was imposed on the Registrar of the Medical Board.
 .
While the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) provides, as did the 1938 Act from 1987, that the
Chairman - or Deputy Chairman appointed to preside - is to fix, and give notice of, the time and place for the conduct of the inquiry (1992 Act s.160; as to the procedure on, and other matters related to the conduct of the inquiry see [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) Schedule 2) and for the Registrar of the Board to keep records of the proceedings and decisions of the Tribunal (1992 Act s.141), it also contains the following (inter alia) further provisions: - "
................
There is to be established in the Registry of the District
Court at Sydney a Registry for the Medical Tribunal to provide registry services for the Tribunal.
 ...........
 (1) A rule committee consisting of the Chairperson and
Deputy
Chairperson of the Tribunal may make rules, not inconsistent with this Act, governing the practice and procedure of the Tribunal.
 ............
 (1) The Governor may make regulations, not inconsistent with this
Act, for or with respect to any matter that by this Act is required or permitted to be prescribed or that is necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to this Act.

In particular, the Governor may make regulations of or with respect to the matters set out in Schedule 4.

Schedule 4 - Regulations
The procedure to be followed at and any matters incidental to the holding of an inquiry or appeal by a Committee or the Tribunal (including providing for the payment of costs in respect of the holding of an inquiry of the Tribunal). "
So far as I have been able to ascertain, since the coming into force of the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) no Regulation has been made pursuant to the provisions of that
Act, providing for the establishment, or for the staffing, of the
Registry for the Medical Tribunal referred to in [s.153](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s153.html) of the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). However, on 12th
May 1994, "the Rule Committee under [section 158](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s158.html) of (the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/))" made what are called the [Medical Tribunal Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/mtr199/) (see O'Grady: District Court Practice p.850) which Rules - to commence on 1st June 1994 - purport to provide (inter alia): - "4(1) There shall be a Registrar of the Tribunal.

The person for the time being holding, or acting in, the office of
Registrar of the District Court, Sydney, in its civil jurisdiction shall be the Registrar of the Tribunal.

The Registrar of the Tribunal shall, subject to and in accordance with any direction given by the Chairperson, control and administer the
Registry of the Tribunal. "
Given the limited nature of the rule making power conferred upon "(the) rule committee" by [s.158](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s158.html) of the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/), one may take leave to doubt the validity of r.4 of the [Medical Tribunal Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/mtr199/); but even if it be valid, the result is that the staff of the Tribunal is limited to one person whose primary responsibility is that of the Registrar of the District Court, at
Sydney, in its civil jurisdiction, and whose duties as Registrar of the
Tribunal are, in any event, limited to "the control and (administration) of the Registry of the Tribunal".
So far as I have been able to ascertain, at all times since 1938 (1938
Act s.28(9)(a); 1938 Act as amended in 1987 s.32T; [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) [s. 154(1))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s154.html), the decision of the Chairman - or Deputy Chairman - presiding on any inquiry as to any question of law or procedure arising has been, and is to be, the decision of the relevant "disciplinary tribunal" for the purposes of the inquiry.
However, the position as to other decisions has varied. Originally (1938
Act s.28(9)(b)), the decision of the majority, if there be one, on a question other than one of law or procedure, constituted the decision of the disciplinary tribunal; if the persons for the time being constituting the disciplinary tribunal were equally divided, the question was to be resolved "in favour of the person charged". Since 1987 (1938
Act as amended in 1987 s.32T; [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) s.,154) a decision, on a question other than one of law or procedure, supported by at least three members has constituted, or will constitute, the decision of the Medical Tribunal; if the vote is 2:2, the decision of the Chairman - or Deputy Chairman - presiding was, or will be, the decision of the Tribunal.
Prior to February 1984, the Tribunal had no power to make any Order for the payment by any person of the costs incurred by another person in relation to an inquiry conducted by the Tribunal. However, as from that time, and until
October 1987, the Tribunal had power pursuant to r.25A of the [Medical
Practitioners (Amendment) Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/mpa1983295/) - to order that a respondent to a complaint pay to the complainant such costs relating to the inquiry as the Tribunal might determine.
Before passing on, it is as well to pause to note two things as to the state of the law in 1983 - when the regulation making power was enlarged - as to "costs", they being:- for the most part, "costs" were limited to professional costs and out of pocket expenses in fact incurred by a litigant, together with an allowance - in the nature of a witness fee - in respect of the time involved in the litigant giving evidence in - but not in respect of the time involving in merely attending to observe or instruct at - the proceedings (see, for example, Cachis v. Isaacs (No. 2) ((1) Court of Appeal 23rd March 1989 unreported); Cachia v. Hanes ((2) <case>; [(1991) 23 NSWLR 304 (CA):] and cases there cited)); although, in cases in which costs were to be taxed pursuant to an Order of a Court, it was customary for those costs to be taxed "on a party and party basis", this was not universally so, and a number of other bases for taxation -
including "an indemnity basis" (see, for example, EMI Records Limited v. Ian
Cameron Wallace Limited ((3) [(1983) 1 Ch 59] - had come to be recognised. Although, at an earlier point in history, it seems to have been thought, first, that the common law courts had no power to award costs on other than a party and party basis, and, second, that the power of the old
Court of Chancery - which power was transferred to the High Court on the passing of the Judicature Acts - to award costs in equity matters on other than a party and party basis was an inherent power not dependent oil any statute (see, for example, Andrews v. Barnes ((4) [(1888) LR 39 ChD 133] and cases cited at 138)) more recent authority would suggest that the power to award costs oil other than a party and party basis is not to be limited to superior Courts of record of general jurisdiction, and that, in the absence of any limitation expressed, or to be implied, into the particular provision enabling the particular court or tribunal to award costs (as to which see
Milosevic v. Government Insurance Office of New South Wales ((5) [(1993) 31
NSWLR 323))] there is no reason in principle why all inferior court or a tribunal should not a power to award costs on other than a party and party basis. Thus, in Greenhouse v. Hetherington ((6)(1977) 122 SJ 47), which involved an appeal against an order of the county court for costs to be paid oil a solicitor and own client basis - the relevant rule being to the effect that subject to the provisions of any Act or rule "the costs of any proceedings in the county court shall be in the discretion of the court -
Roskill LJ (as he then was) - Browne and Megaw LJJ agreeing - said (inter alia):- "The position is absolutely plain. in the county court, all costs are in the discretion of the trial judge: it is for him to determine upon what basis, whether party and party, common fund, solicitor and own client, or whatever he may think best, the assessment will take place in accordance with the relevant rule applicable to that class of order."
However, to return to the question of the Tribunal's power to make Orders as to costs, contemporaneously with the coming into operation of the 1987 amendments to the 1938 Act, the Regulations were amended by the repeal of the former r.25A and by the promulgation of a new regulation in the following terms: - "27(1) The Tribunal may order the complainant, if any, the registered medical practitioner concerned, or any other person granted leave to appear at any inquiry or appeal pursuant to s.32P(2) of the Act, to pay such costs to such person as the
Tribunal may determine.

Where an order made under sub-clause (1) has taken effect, the
Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal shall, on application by the person in whose favour the costs are allowed, issue a certificate setting out the terms of the order and stating that the order has taken effect.

The person in whose favour costs are allowed may rile the certificate in the District Court together with an affidavit by the person as to the amount of the costs unpaid, and the registrar of the District Court shall enter judgment for the amount unpaid together with any fees paid for filing the certificate." .
Schedule 2 - Proceedings Before a Committee or the Tribunal of the [1992
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) provides (inter alia): - "13(1) The Tribunal may order the complainant, if any, the registered medical practitioner concerned, or any other person granted leave to appear at any inquiry or appeal before the
Tribunal to pay such costs to such person as the Tribunal may determine.

When an order for costs has taken effect, the Tribunal is, on application by the person to whom the costs have been awarded, to issue a certificate setting out the terms of the order and stating that the order has taken effect.

The person in whose favour costs are awarded may file the certificate in the District Court, together with an affidavit by the person has to the amount of the costs unpaid, and the registrar of the District Court is to enter judgment for the amount unpaid together with any fees paid for riling the certificate."
It is in the context provided by the various statutory, and other, provisions to which I have referred that what I have suggested are the questions which arise for consideration on the hearing of this appeal (see p.
 (above)) fall to be determined. 
By whom the inquiry, or by some other person - was - and is - the power to be exercised? 
What form was - and is - any relevant Order required to take) 
By whom - that is, by those who constituted the Tribunal for the purpose of the inquiry, or by some other person - and in what manner - that is, by taxation, or in some other method - was - and is - the amount of any costs payable pursuant to any relevant Order to be quantified?
The various provisions which I have set out above, in my view, make it clear that, whether the question is to be considered as involving r 27 of the
Regulations, or - as I think is the correct view - cl 13 of Schedule 2 of the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/), the question being one relating to a substantive Order rather than a mere question of procedure, the manner in which the power was - and is - to be exercised was - and is - to be determined by those who constituted the
Tribunal for the purposes of the inquiry - or the appropriate "majority" and not by the Deputy Chairman - Wall DCJ - who presided at the inquiry, and still less by anyone else.
The fact that r 27 of the Regulations provided, and that cl 13 of
Schedule 2 of the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) provides, as a means of enforcing any relevant
Order, that Judgment, in a money sum, representing the amount of costs unpaid, might be entered in the District Court, in my view, dictates that any Order for costs made by the Tribunal on an inquiry take the form of an Order for payment of an identified money sum.
The two matters to which I have just referred, in my view, dictate that it was, and is, the task of those who constituted the Tribunal for the purposes of the inquiry - or the appropriate "majority" of them - to determine what was, and is, the appropriate money sum to be included in any Order for costs. This view, as it seems to me, is reinforced when it is remembered, first, that, at the relevant time, the Tribunal had no staff of its own - indeed, as I have earlier (see p 12 (above)) indicated, it is my view that the
Tribunal still has no staff of its own - and, second, that there appears never to have been any provision any Regulation made pursuant to either the 1938 Act or the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) for the taxation of costs, a fact which is hardly surprising given the absence of any Tribunal staff - one adds that, having regard to the provisions of [Part 11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/index.html#p11) of the [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), which came into operation on 1st July 1994, it is improbable, in the extreme, that any
Regulation providing for the taxation of costs will be promulgated in the future.
Given that it was, and is, for those who constituted the Tribunal for the purposes of the inquiry themselves to determine what is the appropriate money sum to represent the costs to be paid to Dr. McBride, and given that there was no statutory, or other, provision dictating the manner in which they should do so, it was, and is, in my view, for them to determine the manner in they might do so. Tills they might have done, and might do, by having Dr. McBride's solicitors provide an itemised bill of costs - as seems as if it might be the practice in the Local Court (see, for example, Hurstville Municipal Council v.
Connor ((7) [(1991) 24 NSWLR 724.] 728) - or assessment of costs for consideration, and, use that bill, or assessment, as the basis for their determination. However, the task being that of those who constituted the
Tribunal for the purposes of the inquiry, it was, and is, not open to them to delegate that task to - and still less, to impose that task upon - anyone else.
If the views which I have recorded above be correct, it must follow that the Order as to costs which the Tribunal purported to make was not one made conformably with its power to make orders as to costs, it following that, if for no other reason, the cross-appeal should be upheld. 
What principles were, and are, to be applied in determining what are "costs" for the purposes of any relevant order? 
Was, and is, it open to whomsoever is required to quantify the amount of any such "costs" to do so on other than "a party and party basis".
Although the Tribunal was not, and is not, a court in the conventional sense, and although, in common with other like bodies, it was, and is, not obliged, when conducting an inquiry, to observe the rules of evidence, the facts, first, that the Tribunal is required to inquire into, and determine, complaints; second, that, for the purpose of conducting Such inquiries, the
Tribunal has vested in it powers to Summon witnesses and to require the production of documents, and to require those summoned as witnesses to give evidence on oath or affirmation; third, that the powers of the Tribunal, in the event of a complaint being found established, include powers to order deregistration of a practitioner or to impose a fine; and, fourth, that an appeal to this Court lies, in certain events, from decisions of the Tribunal, place the Tribunal in a position which is, to say the least, strongly analogous to that of a court - indeed, the decision of this
Court in
Australian Postal Commission v. Dao (No. 2) ((8) [(1986) 6 NSWLR 497)] would seem to dictate that the Tribunal is to be regarded as a "court" for the purposes of the [Suitors Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
This fact suggests to me that, when there was vested in the Tribunal a power to make orders as to costs, the subject of that power was intended to be "costs" in the sense in which that word was, and is, used when applied to the like power when vested in a court, that is, professional costs and out of pocket expenses in fact incurred by a party to the particular proceedings, together with an allowance - in the nature of a witness fee in respect of any time involved in the party giving evidence.
The basis upon which, and the manner by which, a court or tribunal is to proceed to quantify the amount to be allowed in respect of such costs is, so it seems to me, primarily to be determined by reference to the language by which the power to award costs is conferred upon the court and tribunal rather than by reference to the manner in which courts in the conventional sense have customarily exercised such a power. This is not to say that the manner in which such courts have customarily exercised such a power is irrelevant, for it seems to me that the principles applied by such courts in exercising such powers might properly be adopted as guides to the manner in which a discretionary power to award costs ought to be applied in particular cases.
The language of cl 27 of the Regulations was, and the language of cl 13 of Schedule 2 of the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) is, in my view, such as to justify one applying to the power to award costs vested in the Tribunal a description akin to that applied by Roskill LJ in Greenhouse v. Hetherington ((9) supra) to the like power in the County court: costs are in the discretion of the
Tribunal: it is for the Tribunal to determine upon what basis, whether one akin to "a party and party basis" or to "an indemnity basis", or any other basis which it thinks best, its assessment of costs will take effect.
If these views be correct, it follows that, while it would have been open to those who constituted the Tribunal for the purposes of the inquiry to proceed to assess "costs" on a basis akin to "an indemnity basis" if, as they clearly did, they thought that so much of the inquiry as was directed to the obstetric complaints was oppressive, it would not have been open to them to include within the amount to be allowed for "costs" an allowance in respect of
Dr. McBride's attendances at the inquiry otherwise than in respect of his time involved in giving evidence.
 
Orders
For these reasons, I would propose the following Orders: -
ORDER that the cross-appeal be upheld.
ORDER that Orders 1, 3 and 5 made by the Medical Tribunal be set aside.
ORDER that the matter be remitted to the Medical
Tribunal as constituted for the purposes of the inquiry to make such Order as to costs as it thinks fit conformably with these reasons.
ORDER that the Cross-Respondent pay the Cross-Appellant's costs of the cross-appeal.
ORDER that the Cross-Respondent have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
JUDGE3
COLE JA: Merrilyn Walton, the complainant before the Medical Tribunal of New
South Wales has cross-appealed against orders for costs made against her by the Medical Tribunal of New South Wales in favour of Dr William Griffith
McBride.
 
BACKGROUND [Section 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/haa1982221/s21.html) of the [Health Administration Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/haa1982221/) empowers the Minister for
Health or the Secretary of the Department of Health to delegate by instrument in writing powers imposed upon either. Any act done by the authorised delegate in the exercise of a function so delegated is, in effect, the act of the
Minister or the Secretary ((1) Section 21(5) [Health Administration Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/haa1982221/).)
Mrs Walton had delegated to her the power conferred upon the Secretary,
Department of Health, to make complaints regarding registered medical practitioners ((2.) [Section 28(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/haa1982221/s28.html) Medical Practitioners Act 1938.) Pursuant to that power Mrs Walton made complaints against Dr McBride. The Secretary (or his delegate) is obliged to refer a complaint to the Tribunal: "If the Secretary is of the opinion that the subject matter of a complaint (not being, in the Secretary's opinion, a frivolous or vexatious complaint), if substantiated, may provide grounds for the suspension or deregistration of a registered medical practitioner."
Mrs Walton, as delegate of the Secretary, referred the complaints to the
Tribunal in accordance with s.32(2) Medical Practitioners Act 1938.
There were 15 complaints, many having various particulars. Complaints 1 to
B, referred to by the Tribunal as the "obstetric complaints" were, with one minor exception, all found not proven. Complaint 6 comprised 5 particulars.
Particulars (a)-(d) were found not proven but particular (e) was found proved in part. Particular (e) was that: "In July 1987 the practitioner treated patient M and left the hospital without making proper arrangements for the further care of the patient (she then being in labour with augmentation)".
The Tribunal held: "In the background of the extensive retrospective audit of Dr
McBride's practice, spanning ten years at three hospitals, proof of the particular should be viewed as a minor and isolated lapse and out of character with his normal practice. Ordinarily a
complaint of this kind, if it were to be brought against a practitioner, would be referred to the Professional Standards
Committee for inquiry and determination and not to the Medical
Tribunal." ((3) Appeal Book, page 1.)
In respect of that particular the Tribunal ordered that Dr McBride be reprimanded for misconduct.
Complaints 9-15 were described by the Tribunal as "scientific fraud complaints". Each such complaint, except complaints 9 and 10, were found not proved.
Having made these findings upon the complaints, the Tribunal made the following orders for costs: "1. the Complainant is to pay the practitioner's costs of and incidental to the inquiry into Complaints 1-8B inclusive save and except the practitioner's costs of and incidental to the inquiry into Particular (e) of Complaint 6.
Each party to pay own costs of and incidental to the inquiry into
Particular (e) of Complaint 6.
Costs under Order 1 to be assessed on the basis of indemnity costs in accordance with
Supreme Court Practice under the costs rules of that Court and shall be paid by the Complainant when assessed and agreed and failing agreement when assessed by a taxing officer of the District Court of New South Wales and upon the issue of a certificate of assessment by the Deputy Chairman of this Tribunal in accordance with Regulation 27 under the Medical
Practitioners
Act. The assessment of costs is to include an allowance for the practitioner's attendances before the Inquiry of and incidental to the inquiry into the particulars of the obstetric complaints which were found not proved. The allowance should be in accordance with the allowance made and provided for expenses paid to expert medical witnesses in the Supreme Court. In assessing the costs the taxing officer may exercise the discretion of a taxing officer of the Supreme Court of New South Wales in the allowance of costs conferred by the Supreme Court Rules or by any
Act having application in the assessment or taxation of costs in the Supreme Court. If the practitioner has entered into a costs/fees agreement with his solicitor affecting the retainer the agreement may be given effect to by the taxing officer if same is approved and certified by the Deputy Chairman of the Tribunal.
Each party to pay own costs of and incidental of the inquiry into complaints 9-15 inclusive.
Liberty to apply to the Deputy Chairman under these costs orders." ((4) Appeal Book, Page 28-29.)
Mrs Walton, by a notice of cross-appeal, has raised five grounds of appeal, a sixth being abandoned. Those grounds of appeal are: "The Cross-Appellant appeals to the
Court from that part of the decision of the Medical Tribunal delivered on 30 July 1993 making orders as to costs and in particular
Orders number 3 and 4.

Ground
Insofar as order 3 required the Cross-Appellant to pay costs assessed on an indemnity basis, the Tribunal- erred in that it lacked power to make such an order; in the alternative to (a) if the Tribunal had such power, it erred in law in making such an order in the present case.
Insofar as Order 3 required costs to be paid by the
Cross-Appellant to be assessed according to the Supreme Court
Rules and Scale, the Tribunal- erred in that it had no power to make such an order; in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances of the present case.
Insofar as Order 3 required the Cross-Appeallant to pay the costs of the Respondent's attendance during the hearing, the
Tribunal- erred in that it had no such power to make such an order, in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances of the present case.
Insofar as Order 3 requires that an assessment of costs be made by a taxing officer of the District Court, the Tribunal- erred in that it had no power to make such an order, in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances of the present case.
 .
Insofar as Order provides authority for the Cross-Respondent to recover costs under a cost/fee agreement with his solicitor over and above costs otherwise recoverable as on a party and party taxation in the District Court, the Tribunal- erred in that it had no power to make such an order; in the alternative, erred in law in making such an order in the circumstances of the present case. ((5) Supplementary Appeal
Book, page)
The cross-appellant seeks an order that Order 3 be set aside and that in lieu there of there be an order: "The Complainant pay the costs of the Respondent in relation to complaints 1-8B, such costs to be agreed or assessed by a Deputy
Chairman of the Tribunal on a party and party basis in accordance with the
District Court Special Scale".
 
THE POWER TO ORDER COSTS
It is useful to have regard to the history of the Act and regulations in relation to the power to award costs.
Under the Medical Practitioners Act 1938 there was created a disciplinary
Tribunal ((6) Section 28.). A District Court judge was to be the Deputy
Chairman. In respect of any inquiry which the Tribunal was to make it was provided that: "The Disciplinary Tribunal shall, in making an inquiry, sit in open court, and the registered person concerned shall be afforded an opportunity of defence either in person or by his solicitor or counsel.

The person who referred the complaint or charge shall unless exempted from attendance by the disciplinary Tribunal be present and may be represented by his solicitor or counsel at the inquiry." ((7) Section 28(6))
There was no specific provision permitting the making of an order of costs. Nor did the regulation making power confer a specific power to make regulations in relation to the awarding of costs ((8) Section 53 Medical
Practitioners Act 1938.). For the purposes of conducting the inquiry the
Disciplinary Tribunal and its Chairman had conferred "the powers authorities protections and immunities conferred by the Royal Commissions Act 1923-1934 on a Commissioner and the Chairman of the Commission respectively ..." ((9)
Medical Practitioners Act 1938 s.28(8).). A Royal Commissioner under that Act did not have power to award costs except in respect of certain proceedings for an offence against the Royal Commission's
Act ((10) Royal Commissions Act -1934,s.24.).
In 1981 there was enacted the Medical Practitioners (Amendment)
Act".((11)
Number 55 of 1981) Pursuant to that Act, Medical Practitioners
Regulations 1981 were proclaimed. By cl.23 provision was made for payment of members attending and sitting as the Disciplinary Tribunal. By cl.24 it was provided: "(1) A person who appears as a witness at any inquiry by the Board or at any sitting of the Disciplinary Tribunal shall be paid expenses by the Board in accordance with a scale set out in Table to Schedule G to the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/).

Sub-clause (1) does not apply to a person who is an officer or temporary employee of the Public Service or any other service of the State of New South Wales or a Commissioner or servant of the
Commission."
No other provision was made in relation to costs.
In 1983, the [Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/mpa1983295/) ((12) Number 41 of .) inserted s.53(1)(c 1) in the regulation making powers to permit the making of regulations: "Providing for the payment of costs in respect of the holding of an inquiry by the Disciplinary Tribunal".
In the second reading speech the Minister for Health, Mr Brereton, stated: "The amendments will also enable the disciplinary Tribunal to award costs against a doctor where the Tribunal finds the complaint to be proved. Currently the disciplinary Tribunal cannot award costs." ((13) Hansard 22 Much 1983, page 4857.)
The explanatory memorandum to the amending bill provided in cl.20, which inserted the regulation making power in respect of costs, as follows: "Extends the regulation making power so as to enable rules to be made whereby the disciplinary Tribunal may order certain legal costs to be paid by a person against whom it finds the subject matter of a complaint to have been proved and whereby the recovery of such costs may be expedited." ((14) Hansard 22 March page .)(emphasis added)
Pursuant to the legislative power inserted by the 1983 amending Act, regulation 25 A was proclaimed operative from 10 February 1984. The regulation provided: "Costs
A.(1) Where pursuant to section 29(1) of the Act the disciplinary tribunal finds the subject-matter of a complaint made against a person to have been proved, the disciplinary tribunal may order that person to pay such costs to the person who made the complaint as the disciplinary tribunal may determine.

An order made under subclause (1) for a person to pay costs shall not take effect- subject to paragraph (b), until the expiration of a period of days after notification, in the manner prescribed by clause 25, by the disciplinary tribunal to the person of the making of the order; or if within that period the person gives due notice of appeal to the Supreme Court against the finding referred to in subclause , until the finding is confirmed by the Supreme
Court or the appeal is for any reason dismissed by the Supreme Court.

Where an order made under subclause (1) has taken effect, the deputy chairman of the disciplinary tribunal shall, upon application by the person in whose favour the costs are allowed, issue a certificate setting out the terms of the order and stating that the order has taken effect.
 
The person in whose favour costs are allowed may file the certificate referred to in subclause (3) in the District Court, together with an affidavit by the person as to the amount of the costs unpaid, and the registrar of the District Court shall enter judgment for the amount unpaid together with any fees unpaid for filing the certificates."
The regulation accorded with the intention of the Minister as expressed in the Second Reading Speech.
However, regulation 25A was repealed with effect from 1 October 1987 and replaced with a regulation conferring upon the Tribunal a much wider power in relation to costs. That was regulation 27 which provided: "27(1) The Tribunal may order the complainant, if any, the registered medical practitioner concerned, or any other person granted leave to appear at any inquiry or appeal pursuant to s.32P(2) of the Act, to pay such costs to such person as the
Tribunal may determine.

Where an order made under sub-clause (1) has taken effect, the 
Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal shall, on application by the person in whose favour the costs are allowed, issue a certificate setting out the terms of the order and stating that the order has taken effect.

The person in whose favour costs are allowed may file the certificate in the Distract Court together with an affidavit by the person as to the amount of the costs unpaid, and the registrar of the District Court shall enter judgment for the amount unpaid together with any fees paid for filing the certificate."
The Medical Practitioners (Amendment) Act 1938 was repealed by the [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). The [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) was assented to on 2
December 1992 and, except for s.6, was proclaimed to become operative from 1
July 1993 ((15) Government Gazette June 1993.). The regulations proclaimed under the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) do not touch upon the question of costs ((16) See [Medical
Practice Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) Regulations 1993 Government Gazette 25 June 1993; Medical
Practice Art Rules No. 173 of 1994 Government Gazette 20 may 1994.). The repeal of the Medical Practitioners Act 1938 thus occurred on 1 July 1993 ((17) [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/) [s.195.).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/s195.html) There were transitional provisions contained in Schedule 5 to the [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/). Clause 11 of
Schedule 5 provides: "(1) The provisions of the 1938 Act continue to apply to and in respect of a complaint made, or an inquiry or appeal commenced, under that Act and pending immediately before the repeal of that
Act.

Any order, decision or determination resulting from an inquiry or appeal to which this clause applies is taken to have been made under the corresponding provisions of this Act and is to have effect accordingly."
As the inquiry regarding the complaints had commenced under the 1938 Act, in consequence of cl.11(1) of Schedule 5 to the [1992 Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/), the 1938 Act, including the regulation making power and thus regulations made pursuant to itrelevantly regulation 27 - continued in force for the purpose of the inquiry.
By s.161 [Medical Practice Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/mpa1992128/), Schedule 2 applies to an inquiry conducted by the Tribunal under that act. Clause 13 of Schedule 2 provides: "13(1) the Tribunal may order the complainant, if any, the registered medical practitioner concerned, or any other person granted leave to appear at any inquiry or appeal before the
Tribunal to pay such costs to such person as the Tribunal may determine.

When an order for costs has taken effect, the Tribunal is, on application by the person to whom the costs have been awarded, to issue a certificate setting out the terms of the order and stating that the order has taken effect.

The person is whose favour costs are awarded may file the certificate in the District Court, together with an affidavit by the person has to the amount of the costs unpaid, and the registrar of the District Court is to enter judgment for the amount unpaid together with any fees paid for filing the certificate."
The legislature has thus enacted as part of the statute the cost making power previously conferred by regulation. No comment was made upon that provision in the second reading speech ((18) Hansard 24 September page .).
The power conferred by the regulation, and now the Act, is in plenary terms conferring upon the Tribunal power to make orders for costs against or in favour of not only the registered medical practitioner concerned, but also the complainant or other persons granted leave to appear. The nature of the costs which may be so awarded is not, at least in express terms, limited to legal costs.
 
INTERPRETATION OF THE COSTS POWER
The cross-appellant contended that the legislative power inserted as s.53(1)(c ) Medical Practitioners Act 1938 to make regulations "providing for the payment of costs in respect of the holding of an inquiry by the
Disciplinary Tribunal", and regulation 27 enacted pursuant to that power to make orders "to pay such costs to such person as the Tribunal may determine", was not a plenary power. Each power was said to be restricted in two ways.
First, "costs" or "such costs" was restricted to legal costs, or more precisely, such costs as might normally be permitted to be recovered pursuant to costs orders made by a court of law either in accordance with an inherent power, or more usually pursuant to a statutory or rule power.
Second, the power was further restricted to prohibit the awarding of indemnity costs.
It is apparent that neither restriction is found in the terms of s.53(1)(c 1) Medical Practitioners Act 1938, nor in regulation 27. Nor is there any indication found in either the Act or the regulations suggesting either restriction. One basis only for the argument restricting the costs power was advanced. It was that, absent any statutory definition of "costs", the term should be given its generally accepted meaning at the time of the enactment of that expression by the 1981 Amending Act and the 1987 regulations. It was argued that the term "costs" should be interpreted to refer only to "remuneration for the exercise of professional legal skill" ((19) Submissions, paragraph 2.2.). Support for this interpretation was said to be found in the decisions of Samuels JA in Cachia versus Isaacs ((20) (unreported Court of Appeal, March 1989).), of Handley JA in Cachia versus Hanes ((21) [(1993) 23 NSWLR 304] in particular the judgment of the majority at 379.).
Although I understood Mr Basten QC, Senior Counsel for the cross-appellant to accept that the Medical Tribunal was not a court ((23)
Transcript page 7-9.), nonetheless reliance was placed upon the judgment of
McHugh JA in Australian Postal Commission versus Doa (No.2) ((24) [(1986) 6 NSWLR ] at 515.).
The question of whether the Medical Tribunal is a court may be of some importance. If it is not, there is no apparent reason for restricting any costs power to legal costs as courts customarily do, and as the legislative and rule powers of courts customarily require. Further, if the Tribunal is not a court, the learning relating to the history of the manner in which courts have customarily interpreted powers in relation to costs becomes, if not entirely irrelevant, peripheral.
In Australian Postal
Commission, McHugh JA was concerned with whether the
Equal Opportunity Tribunal was a court "for the purpose of the [Suitor's Fund
Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/)" ((25) (1986) 6 NSWLR at 515A). As McHugh JA said: "The question has to be determined in the context and with regard to the purpose of the Act" ((26) (1986) 6 NSWLR at 515.)
His Honour regarded the [Suitor's Fund Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) as remedial legislation which should accordingly be given a beneficial construction, and thus: "The word "court" should be given a liberal and beneficial construction to accord with the purpose and policy of the Act. The correct approach is for the court to ask itself whether, bearing in mind the general purpose of the [Suitor's Fund Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/), Parliament must be taken to have intended that the Tribunal should qualify as a court? I think that the question should be answered in the affirmative.

Whether the Tribunal is a "court" for purposes other than the Act is beside the point.
What matters for the purpose of the [Suitor's
Fund Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) is that a body which determines rights and which is presided over by a judge of the District Court has made an error of law which has been corrected on appeal to the Supreme Court of
New South Wales. To grant a certificate, at the request of the respondents, is to promote the purpose of the Act. To hold that the Tribunal is a "court" for the purpose of the Act contradicts no express or implied provision of the Act. The Court should, therefore, declare that the respondents are entitled to a certificate under the Act."
Here there is no statutory use of the expression "court" which requires to be interpreted.
One comes to the question whether the Tribunal is a court in this instance only as a preliminary to considering whether, if it be so, that assists in determining whether the otherwise unrestricted expressions "cost" and "such costs" where used in the Act and regulation should be restricted to legal costs. Further, the approach of giving the expression "court" a wide interpretation where used in the [Suitor's Fund Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) because that would advance the object of that remedial legislation is here absent. Indeed contrary considerations apply. The cross-appellant seeks to give the expression "court" a wide interpretation, not for enhancing rights but rather for restricting the rights, and powers pursuant to which they are conferred, so as to disentitle the medical practitioner to recover costs incurred by him in rebutting, here successfully, complaints brought against him by the cross-appellant. If concepts of statutory interpretation have any materiality in considering whether the Tribunal is a court for such a purpose, and I do not think that they do, such concepts would lead to a restrictive rather than a wider interpretation of the expression "courts" where the purpose of interpreting the expression is to restrict rights of a person affected by such interpretation.
In Australian Postal Commission, Kirby P noted, correctly in my view, that: "It is important to confine the determination of whether the
Tribunal is a "court, to the question here in issue under the [Suitor's Fund Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) It is unnecessary, and it would be unfortunate, to determine in this costs application the large question of the whether the Tribunal is a court for the purposes of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and Federal legislation." ((27) [(1986) 6 NSWLR -513.)]
I do not think it is either necessary or desirable in these proceedings to express a concluded view whether the Medical Tribunal is a court. It is sufficient for the purposes of considering the complainant's submission that "costs" where used in the Act and regulations is restricted in the two manners indicated to recognise that some functions of the Tribunal, and some obligations upon the Tribunal as to the manner in which it must act, are analogous with or similar to those exercised by courts. However it must also be recognised that there are no rules of the Tribunal regulating the nature or quantum of costs which may be ordered to be paid as there are under rules of court.
The nature and functions of proceedings before the Medical Tribunal which render it similar to a court include the circumstance that it is presided over by a District Court judge whose rulings on law are the decision of the
Tribunal ((28) Section 32T(1).). The proceedings, in fact, are usually conducted as adversary proceedings. They normally follow the forms of procedure commonly adopted in courts. The proceedings before the Tribunal may result from a complaint by the secretary or his delegate and, in that sense, the complainant has the obligation of establishing the complaint. The Tribunal has significant powers of punishment including directing that a person's name be removed from the register ((29) Section 42R.). Rights of appeal to the
Supreme Court are given to either the complainant or the person about whom a complaint is made on a question of law, or upon the exercise of the power under s.32R.
On the other hand the Tribunal comprises, in addition to the District
Court judge, up to three medical practitioners ((30) Section 32M(3).). Those persons are not assessors assisting the Deputy Chairperson; they are full decision making members of the Tribunal. The Tribunal is not obliged to observe the rules of law governing the admission of evidence but may inform itself of any matter in such manner as it thinks fit ((31) Medical
Practitioners Act 1938 Schedule 4 cl.1.). The Tribunal may conduct the proceedings as it thinks fit ((32) Section 32O(3)(b).). Section 32O makes clear that the function of the Tribunal is to "conduct an inquiry into any complaint, matter or application": that is a function different from normal court functions. And most importantly, there are no Tribunal rules restricting costs which may be awarded either by reference to subject matter or quantum.
In my view such similarities as exist between the nature and functions of the Medical Tribunal and the courts ((33) For a consideration of the nature of courts and their functions see R versus Trade Practices Tribunal and Anor; Ex parte
Tasmanian Breweries
Pry Limited <case>; [(1970) 123 CLR 361] at 373-374 per Kitto J; Re:
Ludeke and Ors: Ex parte Australian Building Construction Employees and
Builders Labours Federation and
Anor (No.2) [(1985) 60 ALJR 98] at 105.) are insufficient to cause the unconfined expression "costs" where used in the Act and regulations to be restricted to legal costs. Such similarities do not, in my view, lead to the view that the intention of the legislature or executive in enacting and proclaiming s.53(1)(c 1) and regulation 27 intended that only "legal costs" were permitted to be ordered, or that such costs should be restricted to prohibit the awarding of indemnity costs.
The complainant placed strong reliance upon the judgment of the
High
Court in Cachia versus Hanes ((34) <case>; [(1994) 68 ALJR 374.).] That case was concerned with whether a non-legal successful litigant who appeared in person could recover monies for the loss of his time spent in preparation and conduct of his case and for out of pocket expenses, being travelling expenses associated with the preparation and conduct of his case. Those sums were sought in his bill of costs and disallowed. The claimant was a self employed consulting engineer. The claim was brought within Part 52 [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/) made in pursuance of s.76(1) [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). The High Court held that such "costs" were irrecoverable.
The majority judgment noted: "It is fundamental to the appellant's argument that the time he lost in preparing and conducting his case constitutes "costs" within the meaning of this rule.
He is, however, unable to sustain that proposition. The "costs" provided for in the Rules do not include time spent by a litigant who is not a lawyer in preparing and conducting his case. They are confined to money paid or liabilities incurred for professional legal services. It is only in that sense that the Rules speak of "costs" ((35) (1994) 69 ALJR at 375.).(emphasis added)
Later their Honours said: "To use the Rules to compensate a litigant in person for time lost would cut across their clear intent. Costs, within the meaning of the Rules, are reimbursement for work done or expenses incurred by a practitioner or practitioner's employee. Compensation for the loss of time for a litigant in person cannot be said to constitute costs within the meaning of the Rules." ((36) [(1994) 68 ALJR 376.)] (emphasis added)
The history of the awarding of costs by courts pursuant to statutes since the Statute of Gloucester in , and rules pursuant to such acts, were traced. The anomalous exception to the rule allowing a solicitor acting for himself in litigation to recover costs although he was a litigant in person was noted. The majority concluded as follows: "We should add that the English legislation and rules represent a straight forward approach to the problem, in contrast to the approach adopted in some cases where courts have treated the loss in earnings of a litigant incurred in the course of the presentation or conduct of his case as a disbursement. Clearly, that is merely an indirect way of recompensing a litigant for time spent in the preparation or conduct of his case which, if it is not contemplated by the relevant legislation or role, is not permissible.
Of course, a litigant who qualifies as a witness is entitled to the ordinary witnesses, fees." ((37) (199) 68 ALJR at .) (emphasis added)
Cachia versus Hanes, and all of the cases considered in that judgment, were concerned with the construction of the definition of "costs" in statutes or rules of court. The particular case was concerned with s.76(2) [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) which defined "costs" to include "costs of and incidental to proceedings in the court", although, as the High Court noted, "a definition of "costs" as including "fees, charges, disbursements, expenses and remuneration" is provided by [s.19(1)"](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s19.html) ((38) [(1994) [68](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s68.html) ALJR 375.).] Further, [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) [rule 23(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s23.html) there being considered provided that, save for immaterial exceptions, "costs shall be taxed on a party and party basis". [Rule 2(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s2.html) provides: "On a taxation on a party and party basis there shall be allowed all such costs as were necessary or proper for the attainment of justice or for enforcing or defending the rights of the party whose costs are being taxed."
In my view the expression "costs" where used in s.76 and [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) [Supreme
Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and Rules is restricted by the expressions which I have quoted.
There are no such restrictions in either the Medical Practitioners
Act or the regulations thereunder. Whilst Cachia versus Hanes is definitive of the law regarding recovery of "costs" as defined in statutes and rules similar to those of the Supreme Court, in my view it is not to be extended to determine the meaning attributable to "costs" where that expression is used by the legislature, or in regulations, which are not constrained by the restrictions imposed by the definition in s.76 [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), and [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/index.html#p52) of the Rules.
Particularly is that so where the regulations which I am considering impose a power to order the payment of "such costs to such person as the Tribunal may determine".
Senior Counsel for the cross-appellant was unable to point to any authority not involving a consideration of a statute or rule which contained restrictive provisions, such as those in the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) and rules, where the expression "costs" or "such costs" had been interpreted as being limited in the manner contended for in this case.
In my view the similarities between some of the functions and procedures performed by the Tribunal to those performed by courts are not sufficient to permit the distiling of a legislative intention that in using the word "costs" in the Medical Practitioners
Act 1938, and regulations thereunder, only such costs as would be recoverable were the Tribunal a court of law with attendant cost making powers restricted both by statute and rules, was conferred upon the Tribunal. Had that been the intention it would be expected that the legislature would have used an expression more restrictive than either "costs" or "such costs", and would have either referred to or created an appropriate rule structure so restricting the power. It did neither.
In my view "costs" is not to be restricted to "legal costs and disbursements". The second restriction sought to be imposed by the cross-appellant upon the meaning of costs was that, assuming costs is restricted to legal costs, it is further restricted so as to exclude indemnity costs, and the power to award them. I do not accept that submission. I see no reason to read "costs" or "such costs" as meaning "only those legal costs recoverable pursuant to rules of court and excluding indemnity costs". As I have said, there is no prescribed scale to which one can refer to determine which costs are included or excluded: accordingly there is no basis for saying that any such scale would exclude indemnity costs.
Five different categories of costs had long been recognised in the law and were summarised by Sir Robert Megarry VC in EMI Records Limited versus Ian
Cameron Wallace ((39) (1983) CH.59.). Those categories are party and party costs, common fund basis costs, trustee basis costs, solicitor and own client costs and indemnity costs. As Megarry VC made clear the awarding of indemnity costs dates back to at least 1915 ((40) (19831 1 Ch. at 65.). In a helpful summary of the law relating to indemnity costs Sheppard
J in Colgate Palmolive
Co. and Anor versus Cussons Pty limited ((41) <case>; [(1993) 118 ALR 248.)] has shown that, at least in chancery, the power to order greater than party and party costs has existed since 1635.
I see no basis for restricting "such costs" to party and party costs only.
Nor, in my view, is the decision is Guss versus Veenhuizen (No.2) ((42) <case>; [(1976) CLR 47.)] a barrier to interpreting "costs" in the regulation, and now the
Act, as encompassing more that legal costs. No question arises in complaints before the Tribunal of a medical practitioner seeking to recover, or being held to be entitled to recover, legal costs when in fact the person is a legal layman.
The costs which a medical practitioner suffers when charged by a complaint is both the cost of being unable to conduct a practice whilst the proceedings are being held because almost inevitably it is necessary for the medical practitioner to be present before the Tribunal to give instructions or evidence, and usually in addition, legal costs.
I see no reason in principle why an unsuccessful complainant should not be ordered to pay the costs incurred by a medical practitioner in successfully defending that claim. That view accords with the view of the majority in Latoudis versus Casey ((43) <case>; [(1990) CLR 534.)], at least in relation to legal costs in court proceedings. The great variability of such costs, and the difficulty of determining such costs in any individual case, mitigate against a view that the actual loss of earnings of a medical practitioner the subject of a complaint should be recoverable as part of his costs. Both convenience and reasonableness suggest that the cost of that medical practitioner's time should be awarded to him by reference to a recognised scale determined as reasonable. A court scale is one such measure available to the Tribunal in exercising its power to award "such costs ... as the Tribunal may determine".
Once it is appreciated that "such costs" is not restricted to legal costs, no question of the distinction between party and party costs and indemnity costs arises. The Tribunal has a discretion to be exercised judicially to determine what in its view are fair costs which the person charged may have suffered or incurred. I see no reason why the Tribunal should not nominate a person experienced in the determination of costs, such as a taxing officer, and nominate a scale by which an officer should determine those costs.
It follows, in my view, that the orders made were within jurisdiction.
Being within jurisdiction no error of law has been demonstrated.
As the cross-appellant is only permitted to appeal on a point of law, in my view the appeal must be dismissed". ((44) Section 32U(i).)
In my view cost order 3 which was obviously made with Petrunic and and
Anor versus Barnes ((45) [(1989) VR 929.)] in mind, is within power. The cross-appellant argued that it sought to confer powers upon the taxing officer of the District Court of New South Wales. That was not a matter raised in argument before the Tribunal and, in my view, leave should not be granted to raise it before this court. Otherwise the terms of order 3 are procedural being an indication of the manner in which "such costs" are to be calculated.
It seems to me obvious that in making an order for costs, unless the Tribunal was simply to order that all costs paid by the beneficiary of the order were to be repaid, some reference must be made to the basis of calculation of costs absent any tribunal rules specifying a scale of costs. Regulation 27(2) contemplates that once the quantum of costs has been determined, the beneficiary of the order may apply to Deputy Chairperson of the Tribunal for a certificate setting out the terms of the order, which obviously must be in a monetary sum, so that that certificate may be registered with the District
Court pursuant to regulation (3). Order 5 made by the Tribunal had that procedure in mind after quantification of costs in accordance with Order 3.
It was additionally argued that an error of law was demonstrated because, the orders for costs actually made awarding indemnity costs showed such a misassessment of primary facts said to ground the exercise of discretion to award such costs that it demonstrated legal error in accordance with concepts discussed in House versus The King ((46) <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499.).] In my view it is impermissible to challenge primary facts for the purpose of seeking to show that, had the facts been found differently, or understood differently, the exercise of discretion may have been different. That is so where the only appeal allowed is on a point of law. The cross-appellant is obliged to accept the findings and interpretations of fact and, upon that platform, argue that the exercise of discretion miscarried. I understood it to be accepted that, if the primary findings and interpretation of fact were not open to challenge, any challenge on the basis of wrong exercise of discretion must fail. Assuming findings made by the Tribunal,
I am of the view, in any event, that error of law is not demonstrated in accordance with House versus The King by the nature of the orders made.
I would propose that the cross-appeal be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/17.html  
