

Regina versus David Taufua [1996] NSWSC 538 (11 November 1996) 
REGINA versus David TAUFUA /96 November 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Priestley AP, James J, Barr J.

CATCHWORDS: Evidence - visual identification evidence - <case>, [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) - notwithstanding its reference to an identification that "was" made, the section refers to contemporary in-court identification.

RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY AP: I agree with Barr J.
 
JAMES J: I also agree with Barr J.
 
BARR J: The appellant was convicted by a District Court jury of armed robbery and was sentenced to a term of penal servitude. He appeals against his conviction and seeks leave to appeal against his sentence.

On 21 July 1994 two men walked into a supermarket at East Mayfield, Newcastle.
One of them had a knife and the other told an employee, Miss Barber, that he had a gun. The men robbed Miss Barber of a sum of money and cigarettes. One of the men was Dean Price and the Crown alleged that the other was the appellant.
Miss Barber described the second man as being of Tongan or Samoan appearance.
Mrs Aitken, another employee of the business who was in the shop at the time of the hold-up, said that he looked like an islander. It may be said that the appellant is of that general appearance. He took part in an identification parade but neither Miss Barber nor Mrs Aitken identified him as the second man in the hold-up.

There was evidence which tended to show that the appellant was the second man.
Michael John Little, a station assistant at Waratah railway station, saw two men there on the day of the robbery. One was Price, whom Mr Little knew. Mr
Little had also seen the other man a number of times before. Over objection he identified the appellant in court as the second man. That identification formed the basis of the first ground of appeal, and I shall make further reference to it as I deal with that ground.

Mr Todd Martin gave evidence that on the day of the robbery he gave two men a lift from Waratah railway station to East Mayfield. One was Price, whom Mr
Martin knew well. He gave evidence in chief that Price asked him whether he remembered the other man, "Dave", and that he, Martin, then recognised the appellant, a person he had known in high school. He said that he had dropped the two men off in the street in East Mayfield in which the supermarket was situated. However, in cross-examination Mr Martin changed his evidence as to the identity of the second man in circumstances suggesting that he was deliberately giving evidence unfavourable to the Crown. Over objection the
Crown obtained leave to cross-examine him. The cross-examination which followed forms the basis of the second and third grounds of appeal.

The next piece of evidence was from Ms Maria Lightfoot, a former girlfriend of the appellant, who gave evidence that the appellant had confessed to her that he was one of the robbers.

Against this evidence, the appellant called a man called Brien, who gave evidence that he was the second robber, and Price, who gave evidence to the same effect.

The first ground of appeal was that the trial judge erred in permitting Mr
Little to identify the appellant in Court. Mr Little's evidence was that the two men hung around Waratah railway station for some time and asked him to give them money. When he put them off the second man produced a long-bladed knife and threatened to use it on him if he telephoned for help. Price said, "Well, let's go and hold up a shop across the road". The two men then left the station and Mr Little saw them hail a car, which stopped and took them away.
Mr Little said that the second man was tall, thickset and had olive skin. He was of Tongan or Samoan descent, muscular and having short black hair. When the Crown applied for leave to have Mr Little identify the appellant in Court evidence was taken in the absence of the jury. It turned out that Mr Little had been asked to attend an identification parade but had arrived late, with the result that he had not previously formally identified anybody as being the second man.

Although Mr Little did not witness the robbery his evidence was very important because it placed the appellant in the presence of one acknowledged robber at a time and place close to the robbery. It also showed that the appellant was armed with a knife which could have been the one used in the robbery, that he, like Price, was short of money and thinking about doing a robbery, that he left the station in the company of Price and that he and the second robber were of the same general appearance. The evidence assumed even more importance when Mr Martin changed his evidence during cross-examination.

The appellant submitted on appeal that Mr Little's evidence was visual identification evidence to which [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) applied and that the trial judge had failed to consider the test prescribed by the section for the admission of such evidence. It was put in addition that even if his
Honour had applied the appropriate test he could not reasonably have allowed the evidence to be given. The Crown's response was two-fold, namely that the evidence was of events which had taken place before the commencement of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), so that the Act did not apply to it, and that even if the Act did apply, the evidence was admissible because it was evidence of recognition of somebody known to the witness rather than evidence of identification of a stranger.

Identification evidence is defined in the dictionary of the Act as follows: "identification evidence means evidence that is: an assertion by a person to the effect that a defendant was, or resembles (visually, aurally or otherwise) a person who was, present at or near a place where: the offence for which the defendant is being prosecuted was committed, or an act connected to that offence was done, at or about the time at which the offence was committed or the act was done, being an assertion that is based wholly or partly on what the person making the assertion saw or heard at that place and time, or a report (whether oral or in writing) of such an assertion." [S 114](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html) is as follows: "(1) In this section: `visual identification evidence' means identification evidence relating to an identification based wholly or partly on what a person saw but does not include picture identification evidence.

Visual identification evidence adduced by the prosecutor is not admissible unless: an identification parade that included the defendant was held before the identification was made, or it would not have been reasonable to have held such a parade, or the defendant refused to take part in such a parade, and the identification was made without the person who made it having been intentionally influenced to identify the defendant.

Without limiting the matters that may be taken into account by the court in determining whether it was reasonable to hold an identification parade, it is to take into account: the kind of offence, and the gravity of the offence, concerned, the importance of the evidence, and the practicality of holding an identification parade having regard, among other things: if the defendant failed to cooperate in the conduct of the parade - to the manner and extent of, and the reason (if any) for, the failure, and in any case - to whether the identification was made at or about the time of the commission of the offence, and the appropriateness of holding an identification parade having regard, among other things, to the relationship (if any) between the defendant and the person who made the identification.

It is presumed that it would not have been reasonable to have held an identification parade if it would have been unfair to the defendant for such a parade to have been held.

If: the defendant refused to take part in an identification parade unless a lawyer acting for the defendant, or another person chosen by the defendant, was present while it was being held, and there were, at the time when the parade was to have been conducted, reasonable grounds to believe that it was not reasonably practicable for such a lawyer or person to be present, it is presumed that it would not have been reasonable to have held an identification parade at that time.

In determining whether it was reasonable to have held an identification parade, the court is not to take into account the availability of pictures or photographs that could be used in making identifications." 
By para 9 of Schedule 2 of the [Evidence (Consequential and Other Provisions)
Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/eaopa1995445/), s 114 does not apply in relation to an identification made before the commencement of the section. It is therefore necessary to identify precisely what part or parts of Mr Little's evidence was or were identification evidence. If, as the Crown submitted, Mr Little's identification of the appellant took place at Waratah railway station on 21 July 1994, <case> would not apply. If the identification evidence were the in-court identification of the appellant, the section would apply.

In referring to an identification that "was" made, subs(2) seems at first sight to be intended to refer to past acts of identification but not to those made in court when the question of admissibility is being considered. Para (a) gives rise to no difficulty. What is there contemplated is an act of identification that took place in the past, following an identification parade. However, the portion of subs(2) which follows para (c) must, because of paras (b) and (c), refer to identification not only at an identification parade but in other circumstances as well. Although the use of only the perfect tense is curious, I think that the language of the subsection is wide enough to refer to evidence of in-court identification generally. There is a sense in which the admissibility of evidence cannot be considered until the court knows what it is, that is, until it has been given. And visual identification evidence to which it is intended to object will often relate to identification made for the first time in the Local Court or in the trial court in the absence of the jury. It would be strange if evidence of in-court identification made in either of those ways were admissible whereas evidence by which a witness identified an accused person for the first time in the presence of the jury were not.

Another reason why I think that <case> is concerned with in-court identification is that such evidence is nowhere else dealt with in the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).
[S 114](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html) deals with visual identification evidence more stringently than the common law. There is no general common law rule that such evidence is inadmissible without a prior identification parade: Alexander versus The Queen <case>; [(1980-1981) 145 CLR 395] per
Gibbs CJ at 401. Identification evidence is notorious for the risks it brings with it and on one view in-court identification is the least reliable of all:
Alexander versus The Queen per Mason J at 426, 427. It would be surprising if the
Act intended to leave the most problematical form of identification evidence to be dealt with by the weaker common law rules.

Paragraph 830 of report number 26 of the Australian Law Reform Commission states the primary proposal of the Commission as it was set forth in Research
Paper 12 (1983) - "... that no eyewitness identification evidence would be admissible for the prosecution - whether dock identification or evidence of an out of court identification - unless an identification parade had been held prior to the act of identification. Satisfaction of this condition was not required where it was not appropriate or not reasonably practicable. It was contemplated that where the accused refused to co-operate the latter exemption would apply ..." (Emphasis added.) 
Various criticisms of the proposal followed in the report and limitations as to the scope of the rule were discussed, but nowhere was it suggested that the proposed rule should not apply to in-court identification. The proposal of
ALRC 26 was in much the same terms (para 833). Clause 97 of the proposed bill was as follows: "Identification evidence . Identification evidence adduced by the prosecutor is not admissible unless - before the identification was made, an identification parade that included the defendant was held and the identification was made without the person who made it having been intentionally assisted or intentionally influenced to make it; or it would not have been reasonable to have held such a parade before the identification was made." 
Nothing set forth in the discussion and recommendation in ALRC 38 (paras -188) suggests any change of approach.

For these reasons I am of the view that evidence of in-court identification made before a jury at a trial is visual identification evidence for the purposes of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html)
But was Mr Little's in-court identification of the appellant the only visual identification evidence? Could it be said that all the in-court identification did was confirm an earlier identification, as it might confirm an identification of an accused at an identification parade? That was the Crown's submission. In my view that question must be answered in the negative. One may test the matter by asking whether before his in-court identification of the appellant Mr Little gave any visual identification evidence. The answer must be no. His evidence was of seeing a man in the circumstances I have mentioned whom he had seen a number of times before. The man's appearance was like the appellant's (if the jury should think that Mr Little's description corresponded with their own observations). That was evidence of circumstances consistent with the appellant's being the second man, but it did not identify him. Without the question and answer objected to there was nothing to link the evidence of what Mr Little saw at the railway station with the appellant as opposed to anybody else of that general description. That link was necessary before the evidence could be described as identification evidence - cf. the definition in the dictionary. For these reasons it seems to me that the visual identification evidence of Mr Little was not of an identification made before the commencement of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s114.html) It follows that the section applied to Mr Little's in-court identification.

It was common ground that neither of the circumstances in subs(2)(a) and (c) had occurred and it would follow that the court ought to have refused to allow the Crown to ask Mr Little to identify the appellant unless it would not have been reasonable to have held an identification parade (cf. para (b)). It is necessary for this Court to consider that question because the Court might dismiss the appeal in spite of the trial judge's error if it appeared that there had been no substantial miscarriage of justice. In order to answer this question it is necessary to consider the quality of Mr Little's evidence of identification.

Mr Little had been stationed at Waratah railway station for the whole of his service since 1979 apart from a period of six months spent elsewhere. He said that he recognised the man who was with Price, having got to know him over a period of time. Whenever he had seen the man, if he was not on his own he would be in the company of another friend or with Price. Mr Little would regularly see the man with Price. His most recent sighting of the man before July 1994 was about twelve months previously. He did not really know the man: just (well enough) to say "hello" to. He did not know his name. He had seen him "just in general travel". He said that on 21 July 1994 he "noticed sort of how much he sort of filled out ...". Asked again about that, he said that it was during the twelve months during which he had not seen the man that he had filled out. He said that the man he had seen in July 1994 and the man he had last seen twelve months earlier were the same person.

Despite a degree of familiarity Mr Little may be taken to have had with the man he had seen in the past and whom he thought was the man he saw in July , I do not think that if his Honour had considered subs(2)(b) he could reasonably have come to the view that it would not have been reasonable to have held an identification parade. In my view Mr Little's evidence did not describe a relationship of great familiarity. It was twelve months since he had seen the man he thought he recognised. The man's appearance had changed noticeably. I think that the police were correct in coming to the view that an identification parade was necessary. In my view the evidence of in-court identification was inadmissible.

I would uphold the first ground of appeal. Because of that and because the remaining grounds would if successful lead only to a new trial I can deal with them briefly. They relate to the cross-examination the Crown was permitted to direct to Mr Martin and of a question therein asked whether Mr Martin were afraid of the appellant. Under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s38.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) a party who calls a witness may, with the leave of the court, question that witness as though cross-examining about, inter alia, evidence given by the witness that is unfavourable to the party which called the witness. Mr Martin's evidence in chief was as I have related earlier in this judgment. In cross-examination his evidence changed markedly. He was asked whether the second man in the car might not in fact have been David Brien. His reply was, "I would not know."
Asked whether it were possible then that the man was Brien and not the appellant he replied that he did not know. When asked whether it were possible he said that he would not have a clue. When asked whether the fact was that he had no memory of the appellant actually being in the car he replied, "I would not know." Asked by his Honour what he meant when he said that he did not know, he said, "I don't know." Having said in chief that he recognised the man as someone he knew at school, he said in cross-examination that he did not recognise him.

It appears from the transcript of the proceedings that there was available to counsel and his Honour a copy of a statement which Mr Martin had made. In dealing with the Crown's application for leave to cross-examine, his Honour presumably had regard to the contents of that statement, but no copy of the statement has been put before this Court. A reading of the transcript of Mr
Martin's evidence in chief and in cross-examination suggests that whereas during the first part of his evidence Mr Martin gave evidence responsively, later on his attitude changed. Even in cross-examination by defence counsel, for example, he stated his date and year of birth but claimed to be unable to figure out what year he was in Year 12 at school. When it was suggested to him that it must have been 1987 he replied, "Wouldn't know". These and other questions and answers suggest that the substantial change in Mr Martin's attitude was deliberate. The trial judge would have been in a far better position to made a judgment about that, of course, because he could see and hear Mr Martin, an advantage this Court does not have. Nothing that I have read in the transcript suggests that his Honour was not entitled to come to the view that he did. I think that this ground of appeal should fail.

Just before the Crown prosecutor applied for leave to cross-examine Mr Martin he asked him: "Mr Martin, are you scared of Mr Taufua?" 
An objection was taken and in the debate which followed the Crown prosecutor was given leave to cross-examine. This evidence followed: "CROWN PROSECUTOR: Q. Mr Martin, I will put this question to you again. Are you scared of Mr Taufua? 
A. No.

Q. Once you are outside Newcastle are you scared of him? 
A. No.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Are you scared of anybody associated with Mr Taufua? 
A. I don't know any of his associates." 
The appellant first submitted that the questions must have been put without instructions or material on which the suggestion could properly be based. I do not agree. It seems to me that fear of the appellant might well have been the explanation for Mr Martin's change of front and I think that the Crown was justified in exploring the question. There might in addition have been something about the appearance of Mr Martin which put the Crown on enquiry.
Once again, the trial judge would have been the best judge of that. Finally, it was submitted that the very asking of the question allowed an insinuation to be put before the jury that the appellant had threatened Mr Martin. I do not agree. Mr Martin denied that he was afraid, so there was no evidence that he was afraid. Denied suggestions like the ones under consideration are routinely dealt with in the summings up of trial judges. No complaint is made about this summing up. This ground of appeal should fail as well, but for the reasons I have given the appeal should succeed.

I propose that the appeal be upheld, the conviction quashed and that a new trial be ordered.
 * * * 
