

Amec Australia P/L (Formerly known as Amec Construction P/L) versus Pacific
Power [1996] NSWSC 608 (10 December 1996) 
AMEC AUSTRALIA P/L(FORMERLY KNOWN AS AMEC CONSTRUCTION P/L) versus PACIFIC POWER /1996 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Did Arbitrator give adequate reasons or should matter be remitted back to him pursuant to [s.43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/s43.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/caa219/)? 
Held adequate reasons given.

Sufficiency of reasons: Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) NSWLR 247]; R.P. Robson Constructions Pty Limited versus D & L Williams BCL 289; Menna versus H.D. Building Pty Limited (unreported, Smart J, 1
December 1986).

Waiver: Presmist Pty Limited versus Turner Corporation Pty Limited [(1992) 30
NSWLR 478.] 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The issue presented for my decision in the submissions ultimately made, notwithstanding that other issues were raised in the Summons filed on 1
November 1996, is whether an Arbitrator, Mr T.I. McCreery, gave adequate reasons, in an Interim Award he published on 8 October 1996, for concluding that a preliminary question should be answered in the way he did. The submissions proceeded on the basis that if the Arbitrator did not give adequate reasons, it not being in issue that he was required to give reasons pursuant to [s.29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s29.html) of the [Commercial Arbitration Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/), ("the [Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/)"), the matter should be remitted pursuant to [s.43](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/caa1984219/s43.html) thereof with a request that he provide them.

The plaintiff, AMEC Australia Pty Limited, ("AMEC"), as Contractor, entered into a contract on 10 December 1993 with Pacific Power, as Principal, for the carrying out of certain work at the Wallerawang Power Station Handling Plant.
Disputes arose between the parties and were referred to the Arbitrator for determination. At a hearing in September 1996 the Arbitrator considered, at the request of Mr Donohoe of Queen's Counsel for AMEC, four matters as preliminary issues. They are set forth in the fifth recital of the Interim
Award and, as he answered the first adversely to AMEC, it was not necessary for him to consider the others.

The first question posed was:- "Assuming, without deciding, that after 8 May 1995 (being the date of AMEC's response to Pacific Power's notice dated 24 April 1995) Pacific Power became entitled to give a notice under Clause 44 of the Contract; did Pacific Power waive any entitlement to give a notice under Clause 44 before 3 October 1995 (being the date of Pacific Power's notice)?" 
In the concluding paragraph of his reasons the Arbitrator stated:- "In summary, my finding is that Pacific Power at no stage waived any entitlement to give a notice under Clause 44 of the Contract before 3 October 1995 (being the date of Pacific Power's notice to AMEC taking out of the hands of AMEC the whole of the work remaining to be completed)." 
The Hearing Before Me 
Before me Mr Donohoe appeared for AMEC and Mr Collins of Queen's Counsel, who had appeared for Pacific Power before the Arbitrator, appeared for it. The
Statement of Claim and Cross-Claim were tendered as Exhibit A, but no subsequent reference was made to them. Exhibit B, to which objection was taken by Mr Collins but upon which he subsequently relied to some extent, was admitted subject to objection. It comprises AMEC's written submissions in reply to the Arbitrator. Exhibit C, which was also admitted subject to objection, was the transcript of the proceedings before the Arbitrator part of which is annexed to the Summons and part of which was tendered separately.

In accordance with directions given previously the parties furnished written submissions although, as I have said, the issue was refined beyond the contentions advanced therein.

It was common ground that a Notice to Show Cause, which was given by Pacific
Power to AMEC, required cause to be shown within fourteen days; that the
Arbitrator had corrected his Award by deleting from the first line of the passage quoted on page 5 the word "not"; that Mr Wildman, who was appointed
General Manager of AMEC on or about 30 June 1995, was not called to give evidence; and that the content of certain "without prejudice" meetings, to which I shall refer, was not disclosed to the Arbitrator save to the extent that he was told that they occurred and were aimed at achieving a "commercial settlement".

I also note that Mr Donohoe conceded that if the matter was remitted to the
Arbitrator for reconsideration it may well be that he would, in providing further reasons, come to the same conclusion. It was thus conceded that as matters stood at an evidentiary level the Arbitrator could come to the same result.

A Consideration Of The Interim Award 
I propose, in the first instance, to consider the Interim Award on its own to determine whether the reasons are sufficient to indicate to the parties why the Arbitrator reached the conclusion he did: Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings)
Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247] at 273 and R.P. Robson Constructions Pty Limited versus D & L Williams (1990) 6
BCL 219 at 222. In doing so the parties agreed that the correct test for considering the reasons was stated by Smart J in Menna versus HD Building Pty
Limited (unreported, Smart J, 1 December 1986) and R.P. Robson
Constructions.

The Arbitrator recited the various matters leading to the four questions he was asked to decide and his finding on the first question. He held, and this was common ground, that in view of that finding it was unnecessary for him to consider the other questions and he attached his reasons. He set forth in his reasons the entry into the contract; the general nature of the work to be carried out; the division of that work into eight Separable Portions, which were required to be completed by "key dates specified in the contract"; that the work was of a complex nature and the contract price was for a substantial sum; and the general conditions of the contract, which were amended to meet
Pacific Power's requirements.

The Arbitrator set forth Clauses 44.2 to 44.4, which were relevant to the questions and provide that in the event of substantial breach of contract by the Contractor and if the Principal considers damages may not be an adequate remedy, the Principal may give written notice to the Contractor to show cause.
Certain substantial breaches are identified, although not exclusively. The
Contractor is required to show cause within the time specified and, as I have indicated, it was common ground this was a fourteen day notice. If, by the time specified in that notice, the Contractor fails to show reasonable cause, the Principal is empowered by notice in writing to the Contractor either to take the whole or part of the works remaining to be completed out of its hands or to terminate the contract.

The Arbitrator set forth the terms of a Notice to Show Cause given on 24 April , which alleged that the substantial breach was AMEC's failure to achieve the dates for practical completion for each of Separable Portions 1, 2 and 8, and he referred to the fact that on 5 May 1995 AMEC wrote to Pacific Power claiming extensions of time for the dates for practical completion of those
Separable Portions to October and November 1995. I pause to emphasise that if these extensions had been granted the substantial breach alleged in the notice would not have occurred. Accordingly, a consideration by Pacific Power as to whether the extensions of time should be granted, was of critical importance in deciding whether cause was shown.

The Arbitrator noted that on 8 May 1995 AMEC sent an eighteen page document responding to the Notice to Show Cause, which stated, inter alia, on page 17:- "We ask that should you decide that you do propose to exercise either of the options contained in Clause 44, we are given an opportunity to meet with you to discuss both the matter contained in the Notice and this response." 
I have quoted the passage with the deletion of the word "not" before the word "propose", which is the correction the Arbitrator subsequently made. Thus AMEC was seeking to meet with officers of Pacific Power in the event of Pacific Power not being satisfied with its response.

The Arbitrator set forth the following chronology:- 
In late May 1995 an officer of Pacific Power, Mr Dewar, began an assessment of AMEC's response to the Notice to show cause; 
On 2 June 1995 the Superintendent's representative determined that all of the claims for extension of time sought in the letter of 5 May 1995 should be rejected; 
By 7 June 1995 the assessment of AMEC's response to the Notice to show cause was completed, such assessment involving an acceptance of the correctness of the rejection of the claims for extension of time; 
Internal discussions within Pacific Power's management concerning the assessment of the sufficiency of the Notice to show cause took place; 
It was decided that Mr Dewar should make an independent review of the determination rejecting all of AMEC's claims for extension of time; 
On 30 June 1995 AMEC wrote to Pacific Power notifying changes in the senior management of AMEC including, I infer, the appointment of Mr Wildman as its general manager, and expressing a desire 'to have the opportunities of meeting the senior people in Pacific Power'; 
On 30 June 1995 Pacific Power wrote to AMEC noting its request for discussions and inviting it "to put in writing within fourteen days any further matters relied upon"; 
On 17 July 1995 AMEC replied; and 
On 17 July 1995 the review of the request for extensions of time was completed and it was stated "that the refusal of the Superintendent's representative to allow any extension of time is justified".

It will be necessary for me to refer to AMEC's letter of 17 July 1995 more fully. Before doing so I would observe that to this point the Arbitrator had set forth what I understand to be a series of essentially uncontroverted facts and no complaint is made about that recitation of the facts.

In the letter of 17 July 1995, according to the Arbitrator and this was not sought to be contradicted, AMEC stated:- "1. It considered that its letter, together with its letter dated 8 May 1995 (its response to Pacific Power's Notice to show cause of 24 April 1995) provided a comprehensive response to the Notice.
 . It was willing to sit down with representatives of Pacific Power in an endeavour to create a positive commercial approach to the project.
 . As a period of more than 8 weeks had elapsed since its response to the Notice to show cause, Pacific Power had lost the right to terminate or take over." 
Mr Donohoe relied strongly upon what was stated in paragraph 3 as showing that AMEC considered Pacific Power had lost its rights to terminate or take over. While that was AMEC's contention it stated the very issue for the Arbitrator's decision.

The Arbitrator recorded that in late July 1995 Pacific Power estimated the likely cost to it of terminating the contract to be $3.6m, and that in late
July 1995 Mr P.T. Graham, the General Manager of Pacific Power International, decided "as a last resort, to have discussions with AMEC's new senior management". The passage in quotation marks was a quotation from Mr Graham's statement, which the Arbitrator set forth in the Interim Award.

The Arbitrator found that in preparing for the meeting Mr Graham was briefed appropriately and he instructed an internal legal officer of Pacific Power "to prepare a draft letter of termination, ready for me to hand over to AMEC at our meeting should our discussions prove unsuccessful". Once again the words I have quoted were quoted by the Arbitrator from Mr Graham's statement.
Accordingly, whatever view AMEC took of the position as appearing in its letter of 17 July 1995, Pacific Power took the view that it was still entitled to exercise its rights. This merely pointed up the matter for decision by the
Arbitrator.

The Arbitrator nextly referred to a meeting, which was held between Mr Graham and Mr Wildman on 27 July 1995, at which Mr Graham showed Mr Wildman the letter to which I have just referred and stated that whether it remained unsigned depended "on how the meeting progressed". The Arbitrator continued, and it was common ground that this evidence was not challenged, that:- "Mr Graham in his statement records that he formed the impression that it was possible that a solution could be reached with AMEC without the necessity of having recourse to the Clause 44 procedure ...." 
The Arbitrator referred to four meetings having been held on specific dates "aimed at reaching some kind of commercial settlement" and that between 5 and 15 September 1995 there were a number of telephone conversations between Mr Graham and Mr Wildman "concerning a commercial settlement, but no agreement was reached". None of this evidence was controversial.

The Interim Award nextly records that on 3 October 1995 notice was given to
AMEC taking the whole of the work remaining to be completed out of its hands.

The Arbitrator said that in giving consideration to the question as to whether
Pacific Power waived any entitlement to give a notice under Clause 44 before 3
October 1995, he had been assisted by the decision of Cole J in Presmist Pty
Limited versus Turner Corporation Pty Limited [(1992) 30 NSWLR 478.] The
Arbitrator set out in five numbered paragraphs what he considered his Honour had held and it was not submitted that this understanding of the decision was erroneous or that the Arbitrator applied the wrong legal test either in his application of this interpretation of Presmist or because Presmist was decided incorrectly. This point is reinforced by Mr Donohoe's concession that if the matter is remitted to the Arbitrator he may well come to the same conclusion. The Arbitrator noted the requirements to act reasonably and for reasonable time to be afforded to a party considering the Notice to Show Cause to make its determination and, in particular, that this "will be a question of fact in each instance depending upon the circumstances". He observed that whilst consideration was being given to these matters the contract would be performed. I quote two of the paragraphs in which the Arbitrator set out the legal principles he applied:- "2. A party who requires another party to show cause as to why powers conferred under a contract should not be exercised must be given a reasonable opportunity to consider whether a notice purporting to show cause reasonably does so and whether the powers should be exercised if the notice does not effectively show cause.
 . In considering the factual question as to whether the acts of the party during the period of its consideration as to whether cause under the notice had been shown were sufficient to give rise to a waiver of its powers conferred by the terms of the contract, regard may be had to the history of the progress of the works both before and after the giving of the notice to show cause." (My emphasis.) 
The Arbitrator looked at the position as at 17 July 1995 and said that it was not until then that Mr Dewar completed his final assessment of AMEC's response to the Notice to Show Cause and:- "Having regard to the wide-ranging nature and complexity of the matters to be considered by Mr Dewar, I do not regard the time taken by him to complete that task as being unreasonable in the circumstances." 
Mr Donohoe made one submission in relation to this. It was that the Arbitrator had found that by 7 June 1995 Mr Dewar had completed his assessment of AMEC's response to the Notice and that that represented the first opportunity Pacific Power had to consider the adequacy of the response. He then referred to the fact that by 17 July 1995 the officer had completed his review of AMEC's extension of time claims and reported that their refusal was justified. He said this was a second opportunity Pacific Power had to consider the adequacy of AMEC's response.

The Arbitrator did not consider the matter by reference to these two steps, as
Mr Donohoe characterised them. In these circumstances he submitted that the
Arbitrator had erred by only looking to the decision on 17 July 1995. In my view that cannot be so. As the Arbitrator made clear the extensions of time related to the Separable Portions, which were the subject matter of the Notice to Show Cause, and until such time as there had been a resolution of those claims there could not be a final resolution of whether the response to the
Notice to Show Cause was justified. I should note that Mr Donohoe accepted the force of the Arbitrator's reasoning, but said that he did not wish to abandon the point. In my view the Arbitrator adequately exposed the reasoning process, which led him to the conclusion that up to 17 July 1995 the time taken by
Pacific Power was not "unreasonable".

The next paragraph of the Interim Award states:- "Pacific Power then decided, quite properly in my view, to explore whether or not it might be possible to reach a commercial solution to the situation. Meetings and discussions were held regularly between senior representatives of both parties, apparently on a without prejudice basis, from 27 July 1995 until 15 September 1995. The discussions were unsuccessful. However I do not regard the time taken by Pacific Power to decide whether or not to exercise its powers under Clause 44 of the Contract as being unreasonable in the circumstances." 
It was expressly conceded by Mr Donohoe that the Arbitrator posed the correct question for consideration, namely whether the time taken by Pacific Power was unreasonable. It was submitted on behalf of AMEC that this paragraph did not disclose the reasoning process by which the Arbitrator arrived at the conclusion in the final sentence I have just quoted. I reject this submission. In my view a reading of the totality of the Interim Award makes it clear that the Arbitrator found that after 17 July 1995 the power was not exercised because Pacific Power decided to explore with AMEC, as it had been requested by AMEC to do, the possibility of reaching a commercial solution. It was common ground that the meetings and telephone conversations took place with a view to reaching a commercial settlement, and it was common ground that submissions were put to the Arbitrator that the fact of "without prejudice" discussions may explain delay. The question was, accordingly, whether the time which elapsed between 27 July and 15 September 1995 was, in the circumstances, "unreasonable". The Arbitrator held it was not and in my view it is quite clear from the Interim Award that he came to that conclusion because he regarded it as proper for the parties to engage in those discussions and that, in those circumstances, any delay was explained by dint of those discussions and not because there had been any waiver by Pacific Power of such rights as it had. 
This is reinforced by the penultimate paragraph of the reasons in which the
Arbitrator referred to the tabling of the draft unsigned Notice of Termination at the meeting of 27 July 1995, which "also" demonstrated that it had "by no means divested itself of its rights under Clause 44 of the Contract". He added:- "In my opinion, at no stage did it do that." 
It is to be remembered that the second legal requirement the Arbitrator distilled from the judgment of Cole J was that the party, which was entitled to exercise the right:- ".. must be given a reasonable opportunity to consider whether a notice purporting to show cause reasonably does so and whether the power should be exercised if the notice does not effectively show cause." (My emphasis.) 
What the Arbitrator was stating, in my view in plain words, was that the reasonable opportunity involved, as a matter of fact, a consideration of what transpired between late July 1995 and 15 September 1995. In my opinion, without recourse to any of the evidence tendered, the Interim Award adequately states the reasons, which led the Arbitrator to the conclusion to which he came.

Submissions On Behalf Of AMEC 
The written submissions on behalf of AMEC travelled through the provisions of the Interim Award and suggested that the reasons given were inadequate in that the Arbitrator failed to explain how Pacific Power's unilateral decision to hold "without prejudice" settlement discussions "somehow, over the seven week period during which the meetings were held, preserved" its right to take the works out of AMEC's hands. I do not agree with this submission. Firstly, there was no "unilateral decision" taken. The initial suggestion for such discussions was made by AMEC in its letter of 8 May 1995 and repeated in its letter of 17 July 1995. It seems that Pacific Power was merely responding to these requests. Alternatively, if it was not, AMEC was obviously willing to enter into discussions with it. The question which then arose for the Arbitrator's consideration was whether the time which expired during the holding of those discussions was "unreasonable", which he held as a fact it was not. There was no need, in my view, for Pacific Power to otherwise "preserve" its rights. Rather the rights continued unless it did something to lose them or, as the Arbitrator said, "divest itself of" them. As Mr Collins submitted there was no complaint about the facts as found or not found by the Arbitrator. Nor, as I have said, was there any complaint that he did not apply the correct legal test. The Arbitrator held that the passing of time was explicable by a proper consideration by Pacific Power of the matter at various levels and that this was not an unreasonable approach by Pacific Power and did not, therefore, amount to a waiver.

Mr Donohoe's submissions then referred to his written submissions, which are
Exhibit B. In paragraphs 2, 5 and 7 of those written submissions he wrote:- "2. Simply agreeing to meet and meeting does not affect legal relations.
 . Evidence that there were communications between parties may explain delay. The fact that the parties decided to meet for a day or two may explain why one of them did not act on one of those days. They may say at the outset 'we are agreed that time will not run while we talk'. Even without express agreement it may be obvious that both parties must have meant that the rights of one of them would not be altered while they talked." . In other words the fact that there were meetings may or may not prove anything about what was to happen to other rights during that meeting or any other meeting. If there is evidence about whether other rights should be affected or not affected while they had a meeting that evidence must be assessed." (My emphasis.) 
In the present case, as I understand it, AMEC relied on the assertion that its letter of 17 July 1995 provided such evidence. However, this was part only of the evidence before the Arbitrator and the evaluation of it was a matter for him. He held, on essentially undisputed facts, that the meetings and telephone conversations proceeded from 8 August 1995 to 15 September 1995 and, in my view, the Arbitrator's finding that this was the explanation for Pacific Power's failure to exercise its rights during that period, but that in failing to do so in those circumstances Pacific Power was not acting unreasonably, was one which was clearly open to him and which he expressed in plain language.

The written submissions of Mr Donohoe to the Arbitrator referred to various pieces of evidence and to what may, in a hypothetical sense, have been said.
In paragraph 20 of the written submissions Mr Donohoe wrote:- "The impression formed by Mr Graham that it would not be necessary to exercise the Clause 44 power supports the inference that Mr Wildman would have formed the impression either at the meeting or soon after, that it would not be exercised." 
This was a reference to the meeting of 27 July 1995. However, Mr Wildman was not called and the Arbitrator was not referred to any evidence from which the inference could be drawn that Mr Wildman had formed such an impression.

The submission made by Mr Donohoe was that for the time "to be suspended, or rights to be preserved" there needed to be an agreement between the parties that the discussions would not affect their legal rights. It was then submitted that the Arbitrator failed to "expressly" address those submissions and, accordingly, that there is an injustice to AMEC because of stated obscurity in his reasoning process in relation to the treatment of the seven week period during which the "without prejudice" discussions were held, and whether his ultimate conclusion that Pacific Power acted reasonably in the circumstances is based on reasons, which included a proper consideration of the submission.

In my view there is no such obscurity. The question the Arbitrator posed was whether a reasonable opportunity had been given for Pacific Power to consider if it should exercise the powers once it was decided the notice did not effectively show cause. One of the matters for consideration by the Arbitrator was an evaluation of the evidence of the "without prejudice" discussions. It was put to the Arbitrator as an issue of fact and he held that in seeking to achieve a commercial resolution Pacific Power had not, as a matter of fact, acted unreasonably. As I have said it was not submitted that this was not the appropriate question to ask and, in the circumstances, I think the reasons given by the Arbitrator show clearly why he answered it as he did.

I was also referred to portion of the transcript of the hearing. Mr Collins drew my attention to the fact that in his submissions to the Arbitrator on 26
September 1996 Mr Donohoe had submitted that in each case "it is a question of fact for you and you have to look at the whole picture". I think, however, that it is necessary to read the whole of the submissions, although there is nothing to suggest that the question was other than a question of fact and that the Arbitrator had been invited to treat it in that way did so. In my view he explained his reasoning process adequately. No submission was made about the period from 15 September 1995 to 3 October 1995.

Conclusion 
In the result I have come to the view that the Arbitrator's Interim Award discloses sufficient reasons once it is accepted, as it was before me, that he posed the correct legal questions for determining the issue. I order that:- 
The Summons be dismissed.

The exhibits be returned.

The plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
