

Regina versus Church Matter No Cca 60463/98 [1998] NSWSC 554 (6 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 December 1998 
REGINA versus ROBERT ANTHONY CHURCH 
CCA 60463/98; CCA 60531/98 November 1998 
Abadee J, James J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown appeal against inadequacy of sentences and respondent's application for extension of time and leave to appeal against severity of sentences (Bellear DCJ).

FILE NOS: 60463 of 1998; 60531 of 1998 
DELIVERED: 6 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: 3 and 6 November 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Robert Anthony CHURCH 
JUDGMENT OF: Abadee J, James J, Barr J. 
COUNSEL: 
Crown: L M B Lamprati 
Respondent: P J D Hamill/S Corish (in the Crown appeal) 
Applicant: In Person (in the severity of sentence application) 
SOLICITORS: 
Crown: S E O'Connor 
Respondent: T A Murphy 
Applicant: In Person (in the severity of sentence application) 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - SENTENCING - CROWN APPEAL - SIEGE - RESPONDENT ARMED WITH BOW AND ARROW AND PISTOLS - CHILDREN DETAINED - SENTENCE INADEQUATE. 
NO. OF PAGES: 14 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Crown appeal allowed. Leave refused to applicant to appeal against sentences. 
REGINA versus Robert Anthony CHURCH 
JUDGMENT 
ABADEE J: In this matter the Court is in a position to give judgment and I will ask Barr J to deliver the first judgment. 
BARR J: This is a Crown appeal against sentences imposed on Robert Anthony Church by Judge Bellear in the District Court on the ground that they are inadequate. Mr Church filed a notice of application for an extension of time within which to apply for leave to appeal and an application for leave to appeal against the same sentences. I shall refer to Mr Church as the respondent. 
On 5 June 1998 his Honour sentenced the respondent to penal servitude for a period of four years, comprising a minimum term of one year and an additional term of three years, on each of the following charges. The sentences were ordered to be served concurrently.

Breaking and entering a dwelling house and committing a felony therein; two charges of using an offensive weapon with intent to hinder a member of the police force from investigating an act or circumstance reasonably calling for investigation; using a firearm, namely a pistol, without being authorised to do so by licence or permit; and two charges of detaining by force a child under the age of twelve years.

The respondent and his wife were estranged and she had the exclusive use of the former matrimonial home, a house at Engadine. The parties had been through a number of difficult hearings in the Family Court of Australia. As was her right, the respondent's wife had changed the house locks and installed a burglar alarm system. She had the control of the two children of the marriage, two boys aged respectively five and seven years, and the respondent had access.

On Sunday 13 October 1996 the respondent was exercising access pursuant to an arrangement made under a Family Court order and was due to return the children to his wife at the house at 6pm. Instead, he returned to the house a little after 3pm. His wife was absent, the house was locked and the burglar alarm was activated.

The respondent got into the house by removing a window at the back. He took the children with him and their entry set off the alarms. That brought a security officer to the house, but the respondent refused to let him in. The security officer saw that the respondent had damaged the burglar alarm and reported the matter to the police.

At about 4pm Constable Butterfield and Constable Anderson attended and walked up the driveway towards the front door. The respondent emerged from the house holding a bow and arrow. Constable Butterfield directed the respondent to put the weapon down, but he raised it and aimed it at the officers, saying that he would not lower it until they handed over their guns. A stand-off developed as the respondent and the police officers required each other to put down their weapons. All the while the respondent continued to hold the bow with the string and arrow pulled back ready for discharge and aimed at the police officers. In response to that danger the officers eventually removed their gun belts and placed them on the ground.

Still the respondent did not lower the bow and arrow but made other demands of the police officers, including that they stop using the police radio. The police officers walked away from the house. The respondent picked up the belts and weapons and took them into the house.

Police negotiators were called in and from then until the following morning the respondent and the children were in exclusive occupation of the house as the respondent repelled any attempt to enter. Police officers surrounded the house and tried to negotiate an end to the siege.

During the siege the respondent had with him in the house about a hundred arrows, some of which were used for target shooting and others for hunting. He discharged one of them, a hunting arrow with three pointed heads. The arrow became embedded in a structure in the rear yard of the house. It was not suggested the respondent had fired the arrow at any particular person. He also fired a round from one of the police revolvers. Fortunately, nobody was injured.

At 8am the respondent agreed to release the children. At about 9.30am he was disarmed and arrested.

Although the respondent pleaded guilty when arraigned before his Honour on 20
April 1998, there were substantial issues of fact between the Crown and the defence which had to be resolved by his Honour. His Honour made these findings in the face of the respondent's evidence.
The respondent did not, as he claimed, find the arrows in the garage. He took them to the house in the car.
Although he consumed a number of tablets prescribed for one of the boys, they had no significant effect upon his state of mind during the siege.
The respondent did not genuinely believe that he had the right to enter the house in view of his knowledge of the existence of an apprehended violence order preventing him from doing so, of the changing of the locks, and of the installation of the alarm system.
Neither of the police officers drew or attempted to draw a weapon from its holster before the respondent first aimed the arrow at Constable Butterfield.
The respondent's conduct had a serious impact upon the children, upon his wife, and upon the police officers.
The respondent took the bow to the house.

It is convenient first to itemise certain points raised by the respondent in his applications. I shall enumerate them and then deal with them as I deal with the Crown appeal. They may be summarised as follows.

The respondent was suffering from such a mental condition that he fell into the category of persons whom it is inappropriate to make a vehicle for sentences of general deterrence.

Secondly, this crime was a crime of passion, a reaction to his frustration resulting from his unsatisfactory relationship with his wife and consequent contact with the Family Court and with police officers.

Thirdly, the excessive length of the sentence was demonstrated by his Honour's considering that periodic detention might be a suitable sentence to impose and then reverting to his original intention to impose a sentence of full time custody after a submission from the representative of the Crown that not to do so would constitute appealable error.

Fourthly, the respondent drew attention to his strong subjective case, particularly letters and evidence from a minister of religion, work colleagues, and others in the community.

Fifthly, the respondent pointed to the finding that there was no likelihood of his reoffending.

Sixthly, in view of all these matters and the fact that the respondent had lost his children, his wife and his home, the sentences were too long.

In view of the respondent's deliberately taking the bow to the house, his detention of the children in all the circumstances, and his use of the bow and pistol, the objective criminality of the respondent was very high. He deliberately created a state of affairs that was fraught with danger for the children, the police officers, and anybody in the near vicinity.

There is considerable community concern about the use of dangerous weapons as an adjunct to the commission of crime. A longbow is a fearsome weapon when armed with an arrow designed to kill and in the hands of one practised in its use, as the respondent was. It will kill a human being as easily as a bullet and can be aimed more accurately than a pistol. The use of such a weapon calls for a heavy deterrent sentence.

Police officers are entitled to go about their lawful duty and not be exposed to the kinds of threats made by the respondent and the risk of death or injury which he presented. Such threats call for severe punishment, especially when they are made with intent to interfere with police investigation. See R v
Mitchell, unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 1 June 1994; R v
Crump, unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 7 February 1995; R v
Perez, unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 11 December 1991; R v
Hamilton, [(1993) 66 A Crim R 575.] 
Crimes against young children also call for severe punishment: R v
Ditford, unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal 17 March 1992.

In all the circumstances, his Honour was bound to impose substantial sentences to give effect to the objective seriousness of the offences, particularly to give a message to the community to deter others from committing such offences.

A strong subjective case was put before his Honour on behalf of the respondent. He was a person of good character with no criminal conviction to his name. He had a good employment record and was very well regarded by his friends, fellow employees and work supervisors. His Honour thought it unlikely that the respondent would ever seriously reoffend. There was evidence of considerable remorse on behalf of the respondent, though that had to be seen in the light of his Honour's finding of fact against the version put by the respondent, obviously in an attempt to play down the objective criminality of his actions.

The Crown did not attack the sentences of four years, submitting that they fell within his Honour's proper range of sentencing discretion. It is therefore unnecessary for this Court to consider the adequacy of the four year term. The attack was directed at the minimum term of one year which, it was submitted, was so low as to fail to give effect to the objective seriousness of the offences.

It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that, although the objective circumstances of the offences were serious, the respondent's behaviour was not typical of him and the circumstances giving rise to the offences were extraordinarily complex, stemming from the breakdown of the respondent's marriage, his love and separation from his children, and from the effects upon the respondent of a long series of court appearances after complaints his wife had made about him and failed to substantiate. At least one of them resulted in the respondent being held unnecessarily in custody for a considerable time.
As a result, the respondent became increasingly depressed and anxious.

Psychiatric evidence was put before his Honour to the effect that the respondent was, at one time at least, suffering from a major depressive disorder. Dr Westmore thought that he had an adjustment disorder with a depressed mood state. However, his Honour concluded that the respondent did not display any evidence of mental illness at the time of the siege and observed that there was no history of personal or family psychiatric illness.
His Honour observed that whilst the respondent's relationship with his wife may have been problematic, he appeared to have a good working history and to have been able to establish and maintain long-term personal friendships as well as good relationships with his family.

It was submitted for the respondent that in view of his state of mind at the time of the offences the respondent was an inappropriate vehicle through which to send a message to the community about the need generally to deter the commission of offences like these. Reference was made to R v
Scognamiglio [(1991) 56 A Crim R 81] and
R versus Champion [(1992) 64 A Crim R 244.] 
Counsel represented the respondent in defence of the Crown appeal but the respondent represented himself in his applications. In doing so, he drew the
Court's attention to other cases on this topic, namely R versus Engert [(1995) 84 A Crim R 67] and
R versus Wright [(1997) 93 A Crim R 48.] 
As these cases show, there are accused persons upon whom it is inappropriate to impose sentences giving effect to the ordinary principles of general deterrence. Putting aside the sentencing of children, such persons generally suffer from substantial mental illness or intellectual deficit.

Here, however, it is unnecessary to attempt to define the boundaries of the category because it is obvious from his Honour's findings that the respondent did not fall within them.

The principal submission made on behalf of the respondent was that a minimum term of one year was sufficient, making proper allowance for the subjective features, to reflect the objective seriousness of the offences. That was the real issue in the Crown appeal.

In dealing with [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) his
Honour said this: 
Having regard to all the material before this court I am satisfied that special circumstances do exist which among other things includes (sic) on release the need for continuing rehabilitation, counselling and supervision.

His Honour did not otherwise explain why he considered it necessary to devote three-quarters of the sentence he intended to impose for the purposes mentioned.

The purpose of the minimum term or non-parole period of a sentence was considered by the High Court of Australia in Bugmy versus The Queen <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 525.] In the joint judgment of the Chief Justice Sir Anthony Mason and McHugh J, their Honours said at 530-531: 
It has been said that "[t]he intention of the legislature is that a minimum term is a benefit to the prisoner": Iddon & Crocker v. The Queen [(1987) A. Crim R. 315], at 325-326; and so it is. The effect of fixing a minimum term is that the Parole Board may thereafter, in the exercise of its discretion, grant parole: [Corrections Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ca1986149/) (Vict.), [s.
(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ca1986149/s74.html);
Community Welfare Services Act 1970 (Vict.), s. 195(1), since repealed. But that does not mean that the sentencing judge, in fixing the minimum term, approaches the task on the footing that he or she is solely or primarily concerned with the prisoner's prospects of rehabilitation. Power v. The
Queen <case>; [(1974) 131 C.L.R. 623] put paid to that notion. Barwick C.J., Menzies, Stephen and Mason JJ. observed at 628: 
In a true sense the non-parole period is a minimum period of imprisonment to be served because the sentencing judge considers that the crime committed calls for such detention.

Submissions to sentencing Judges that a longer than usual period of supervision would be in the interests of the prisoner often seem to be based upon the assumption that if there were to be an increase in the additional term that would be at the expense of the minimum term. This assumption is not correct. See R versus GDR [(1994) 35 NSW LR 376] at -378; R versus Hampton, unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 25 June ; and R versus Bloomfield, unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 15 July .

Speaking about a prisoner's appeal against severity of sentence, Gleeson CJ said this in R versus GDR at 378: 
If, in a given case, the Court of Criminal Appeal considers that there has been an error in the exercise of sentencing discretion concerning the relationship between minimum and additional terms, it may, in the exercise of its own discretion, decide that the appropriate course is to leave the head sentence as it is, reduce the minimum term, and increase the additional term.
On the other hand, as was conceded in argument, there may be cases in which the Court will consider that no lesser minimum term could reasonably be imposed, and dismiss the appeal.

In my opinion, this principle applies no less to Crown appeals against inadequacy of sentences. In such appeals, whether or not the head sentence is attacked, the Court is entitled to come to the view that no lesser minimum term could reasonably be imposed than the term stated by the Court. In those circumstances it will be appropriate for this Court to increase the minimum term, and if the head sentence is not attacked, leave it undisturbed, with a resultant reduction in the additional term.

That is what I think should happen in the present case. In my opinion, his
Honour failed to impose a sentence the minimum term of which reflected the objective seriousness of the offences or gave effect to the need for general deterrence.

Counsel for the respondent submitted that even if the Court considered that the appeal had merit it ought to dismiss it in its discretion. He drew attention to the following matters.

The sentences were imposed on 5 June 1998 and, although the Director of Public
Prosecutions informed the respondent by a letter of 23 June 1998 that he was considering appealing against their inadequacy, the notice of appeal was not filed until 24 August 1998. Although the reason was the unavailability in the meantime of a transcript of his Honour's remarks on sentence, it was submitted that substantially the only attack that had been made on the sentence was the length of the minimum term, something the Crown knew about at the time of sentence. Reference was made to R versus Bardo, unreported, Court of Criminal
Appeal, 14 July 1992.

No doubt there will be cases where substantial delays in bringing an appeal will be taken into account by this Court in deciding to dismiss an otherwise meritorious appeal and, as was pointed out in R versus Bardo, the unavailability of transcript may not excuse delay. However, that is not an absolute rule and the seriousness of the offences in respect of which any appeal is brought and any prejudice flowing from the Crown's delay must also be brought into account. See R versus Hallocoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67.] 
In R versus Pham & Ly [(1991) 55 A Crim R 128]
Gleeson CJ said at 138: 
Where there has been any delay on the part of the Crown in instituting an appeal in a matter of this kind the question of delay is a relevant and sometimes a decisive discretionary consideration. However its weight and significance will ordinarily depend upon all the circumstances of the case.
One of those circumstances may be the view which the Court takes on the matter of the extent of the inadequacy of the sentence under appeal.

In the present appeal the offences were very serious indeed and the sentences imposed were well outside the proper range of sentencing discretion of the sentencing Judge. The delay has resulted in prejudice to the respondent. An affidavit sworn by David Phillip Barrow on 3 November 1998 was read on the hearing of the appeal and shows that decisions about the classification of the respondent have been deferred by the responsible officers of the Department of
Correctional Services pending the determination of the appeal. However, that fact does not weigh heavily in view of the seriousness of the offences and the inadequacy of the sentences imposed. The respondent knew when he received the letter that an appeal might well follow, and why. Throughout the period between the sentence and the appeal he has been serving the minimum term of his sentences.

In my opinion, the circumstances pointed to, while matters of concern, do not justify this Court's exercising its discretion so as to dismiss the appeal.

Other matters pointed to were the element of what is sometimes called double jeopardy, where any person sentenced faces a reconsideration of that sentence, and what was said to be the failure of the Crown to assist the sentencing
Judge.

On 2 June 1998 his Honour indicated that he proposed to sentence the respondent to a term of four years, comprising a minimum term of one year and an additional term of three years. His Honour adjourned the matter so as to consider whether home detention or periodic detention might be appropriate.
When the Court reconvened on 5 June 1998 the representative of the Crown told his Honour that if his Honour changed his mind and imposed a lesser term than the one foreshadowed, he would fall into appealable error.

However, it appears to have been nowhere stated, and is not implicit in what the representative of the Crown said, that the Crown was submitting that the proposed sentence was not outside the range of his Honour's discretion. I think there is no substance in this submission.

I propose the following orders:
Crown appeal allowed and the sentences quashed;
On each charge, sentence the respondent to penal servitude for four years commencing on 13 April 1998 and expiring on 12 April 2002, comprising a minimum term of two years commencing 13 April 1998 and expiring on 12 April , and an additional term of two years, commencing on 13 April 2000 and expiring on 12 April 2002. The special circumstances justifying an additional term exceeding one-third of the minimum term are the needs which the respondent will have on release from custody for continuing counselling and supervision in aid of his rehabilitation.
The respondent will be eligible for release on parole on 12 April 2000.

In view of what I have said about the success of the Crown appeal, it follows that the respondent's appeal against the severity of sentence must fail.

Although I would grant an extension of time within which to bring an application for leave to appeal against the sentences, I would refuse leave to appeal against the sentences.

ABADEE J: I agree with the reasons of Barr J and the orders proposed by his Honour. 
JAMES J: I also agree. 
ABADEE J: The orders of the Court are the orders as proposed by Barr J. * * * 
