

Reid Automation Pty Limited versus Schenker International (Australia) Pty
Limited and Ors Matter No 26/97 [1998] NSWSC 186 (5 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
REID AUTOMATION PTY LIMITED versus SCHENKER INTERNATIONAL (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED & ORS /1997 May 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Admiralty Division 
Name of Case: REID AUTOMATION PTY LIMITED versus SCHENKER INTERNATIONAL (AUSTRALIA) PTY LIMITED & ORS 
Proceedings: 26/1997 
Date of Hearing of Motion: 1 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 5 May 1998 
Solicitor for Plaintiff: Mr A C Green 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Phillips Fox 
Ex Parte 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Statement of Claim issued on 17 November 1997 Reid Automation Pty
Limited, ("the plaintiff"), sued six defendants including Schenker Hellas
Forwarding SA, ("the second defendant"). The plaintiff alleged that it is, and was at all material times, the owner of a prototype Reid Automation Smart
Cap/Spout Machine, ("the goods"), "and entitled to possession of same". It alleged that the second defendant is, and was at all material times, a company carrying on business as a freight forwarder and international carrier of goods. The plaintiff's claim was that pursuant to a contract of carriage between it and the first defendant, evidenced by a Fiata Multimodal Transport
Bill of Lading Number 0937 dated 3 February 1997, the first defendant agreed to carry the goods for reward from Greece to Sydney and that, pursuant to that
Bill of Lading, the goods were delivered for shipment to the first defendant, which engaged the second defendant to perform the contract of carriage.
Alternatively the plaintiff alleged it entered into a contract of carriage with the second defendant on the same terms and, pursuant to that contract, either the first or second defendant agreed to and did carry the goods from
Greece to Sydney.

Various provisions of the Bill of Lading and the Hague-Visby Rules were pleaded and, in paragraph 8, it was alleged that the first and/or second defendants entered into a contract of carriage with the third defendant, as sub-bailee for reward, whereby it took possession in Greece of goods for shipment. Another Bill of Lading was pleaded in relation to that and, thereafter, the Statement of Claim pleaded a case against the third to sixth defendants.

It was pleaded that on or about 18 February 1997 the goods were discharged at
Sydney in a damaged condition or, alternatively, on or about 3 March 1997, they were delivered to the plaintiff in a damaged condition contrary to the terms of the various contracts and in breach thereof. The plaintiff has particularised its claim for damages in the sum of $35,749.10.

The Present Notice Of Motion 
By a Notice of Motion filed on 17 April 1998 the plaintiff sought orders that pursuant to Part 10 rule 2 leave be granted to it to proceed against the second defendant and to apply "to the Registry for default judgment", and for ancillary orders. The plaintiff relied upon the affidavit of its solicitor, Mr
Andrew Charles Green, sworn 17 April 1998, and the affidavits of Evangelia
Vassilaki and Demetrios Jinieris sworn on 18 and 20 March 1998 respectively.
In his affidavit Mr Green deposed, on the basis of information and belief, to the nature of the dispute as pleaded, including the delivery of the cargo in
Sydney in a damaged state and its continued presence in New South Wales; the domicile of the first and sixth defendants in New South Wales; and that, in the alternative, the contract was entered into between the plaintiff and the first defendant in New South Wales whereafter the first defendant engaged the second defendant to perform it.

The affidavit deposed that the Statement of Claim was translated into the
Greek language and was given to Mr Vassilaki, who instructed a Greek Court
Bailiff, Mr Jinieris, to serve it in accordance with Greek Code of Civil
Procedure. Mr Green further deposed that the second defendant was served at its business address by Mr Jinieris on 12 March 1998 and that it has not, as at 17 April 1998, (nor, indeed, as at the present date), entered a Notice of
Appearance. Mr Vassilaki's affidavit disclosed that he is a member of the
Athens Bar and conversant with the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and the laws of the Republic of Greece. He referred to the Certificate of
Service dated 12 March 1998, which was issued by Mr Jinieris, and to service:- ".. in accordance with the provisions of the Greek Code of Civil Procedure, Chapter 16, Articles 122-143 and same is valid and effective under the Greek Law and is binding upon the defendant ..." 
The service report disclosed that on 12 March 1998 Mr Jinieris served the document. Mr Jinieris' affidavit confirmed this.

The copy Statement of Claim, which was served, had endorsed on it a notice pursuant to Part 10 rule 2A: see Form 13A. There is no provision in that Form for the time within which an appearance must be entered. Part 7 rule 5(c) provides that shall be done within twenty eight days after service, which period expired prior to the issue of the Notice of Motion.

In support of the application Mr Green, in his submissions, relied upon Part rule 1A(i), (k), (m), (c)(2) and (x).

Compliance With The Rules 
In my opinion the plaintiff is entitled to rely upon sub-rules (i) and (k). As to the first sub-rule the proceedings have been properly brought against a party served or to be served in this State and, as the matter is pleaded, the second defendant "is properly joined as a party to the proceedings". As to sub-rule (k) it is pleaded that the damaged goods are in New South Wales.
Accordingly, I am satisfied that the plaintiff was entitled to serve the second defendant outside the jurisdiction.

The second defendant was called and did not appear on 1 May 1998 and, in the circumstances, I consider that it is appropriate to make the first order sought in the Notice of Motion. I also propose to order that the plaintiff be granted leave to sign judgment against the second defendant on the issue of liability with damages to be assessed.

Orders 
I grant leave to the plaintiff pursuant to Part 10 rule 2 to proceed against the second defendant.

I order that the plaintiff have judgment against the second defendant with damages to be assessed.

I order the second defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the Notice of
Motion.
 * * * 
