

Stevens versus McNally Matter No 4652/95 [1997] NSWSC 537 (31 October 1997) 
Stevens versus McNally /95 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division /1995 - STEVENS V McNALLY 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a motion brought by the defendants (except the third defendant) to authorize an interim distribution of an assets realization to the members of a partnership that is being wound up by the Court. 
The partnership traded under the name of the Quail Island Company. Its purpose appears to be the operation of a grazing property on Quail Island, which is on the Queensland central coast. However, three of the partners also built themselves a house on the Island for their own private purposes.

The plaintiff commenced proceedings in respect of the partnership in 1995. The suit has still not been heard and, indeed, the plaintiff contemplates making further amendments to his statement of claim. However, by consent, on 21 March , Santow, J made a series of orders including an order that Mr Max
Donnelly be appointed receiver, that Mr Donnelly be empowered to sell the partnership assets and that the proceeds of sale be held by the receiver pending further order.

The receiver sold Quail Island by auction on 25 July 1997. The purchasers were the defendants other than the third and fourth defendants. The purchase price was $475,000 which was funded by a bill facility from the National Australia
Bank. The purchase price was paid to the receiver. There would not appear to be any outside creditors of the partnership and the receiver's fees from now on are estimated not to exceed $15,000. The receiver held $508,698.58 as at 12
September 1997. The receiver considers that this greatly exceeds what will be needed to repay creditors, repay the partners' loan accounts and pay administration costs to date.

The defendants ask that an order be made for an interim distribution of a surplus of $400,000.

Although the state of the accounts is not completely clear, it would seem that $491,000 is a surplus. The defendants say that if $15,000 of this sum is retained to meet the receiver's future fees and $76,000 retained to meet any potential claim by the plaintiff yet to be considered in the proceedings, there is no reason why the remaining $400,000 should not be distributed. On the other hand, the plaintiff says that his claims have been underestimated by the defendants. He says that there should be a distribution of the shares of the surplus to himself and the third defendant, but that the remainder should remain held in trust by the receiver until the suit has been heard and determined.

Mr J C Thompson, for the plaintiff, says that there are four claims made by the plaintiff which have a bearing on the ultimate distribution of the surplus. I have noted these as (a) through (d) below.
 is a claim that those partners who built houses on Quail Island should be repaid the cost of their houses before there is a surplus. Mr Sexton, for the opposing defendants, says that this claim is to be determined in the suit. He says that if the plaintiff succeeds on this claim, he would be entitled to an extra $ 69,000. This $69,000 has been taken into account in the allowance of $76,000 noted above.
 is a claim that there were many more cattle on the island than have been accounted for. Mr Sexton is prepared to allow $7,000 to be retained against this claim. Mr Thompson says that that is quite insufficient. He claims that there were 1000 head of cattle missing which, if it were shown to be the case, would mean that $120,000 would come back into the partnership accounts. If Mr
Thompson's allegation was made out at the trial, the plaintiff's share would be increased by $33,000 over the sum Mr Sexton is willing to retain under this head.
 is a claim for waste. Mr Thompson alleges that the true value of Quail
Island, properly maintained, was $680,000: it was sold for $475,000. There is a loss of $205,000 brought about, he says, by the default of the first defendant. Mr Sexton says that there is no evidence to support this allegation. Mr Thompson says that if this is so it is because his client's expert has been denied access to the Island. The problem as to access has now been resolved by agreement and the expert's report might be available in a month or so. If this allegation is made good, the share of the plaintiff would increase by $68,333.
 is a claim that the whole of the costs of the receivership to date should be borne by the first and second defendants because of their defaults. Again
Mr Sexton says that there is no evidence to support this allegation. If it were established, the plaintiff would receive a further $17,334.

Thus, even if all four complaints by the plaintiff were made out, there need only be retained a further $118,667, say $120,000, to secure the plaintiff's position. There would thus not appear to be any commercial reason not to authorize the distribution of at least $280,000.

The point which caused me to reserve was that I could not readily find any authority to guide me as to the principles to be applied when the court is asked to authorize an interim distribution of surplus in a partnership suit.
Ordinarily, the Judge determines all the issues in the suit, the Master then takes accounts and the surplus ascertained on those accounts is distributed in accordance with the partnership agreement. In the present case, it would be extremely useful for the defendants to receive an interim distribution so that they could retire the bulk of the bill facility raised to purchase the Island.
Can such a distribution be made only by consent, or can it be made whenever it appears to the court commercially suitable for it to occur? [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/s44.html) of the [Partnership Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/) specifies that in settling accounts between partners following a dissolution, "the ultimate residue" shall be divided amongst the partners. Until there are final accounts, there can be no determination of the ultimate residue. Thus, it has been held that until final accounts, a partner's right "is merely to have the assets...collected applied in discharging the liabilities of the partnership firm and to receive his share of any surplus there may be when the liquidation has been completed...there can be no relationship of debtor and creditor between partners unless and until the accounts have been finally taken and a balance has been ascertained to be due from each one to the others" (per Eve,
J Public Trustee versus Elder [[1926] Ch 266], 272).

I have not found any case in the reports where the question of interim distribution pending final accounts has been considered. However, in Remen
Nominees Pty Ltd versus Scaffidi [(1980) 23 SASR 258], it was held that it was premature for an order to be made for contribution to a probable deficiency before final accounts were struck.

The rule about not being able to claim as a debt the unliquidated balance of a partnership account has been affected by legislation,. Under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s44.html) (c) of the [District Court Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/), a person may sue in the District Court to recover the unliquidated balance of a partnership account.

In the sphere of company liquidations, it is not at all infrequent for the court to authorize its officer, the liquidator, to make a distribution of surplus. A recent example is Re D S Millard & Son Pty Ltd [(1997) 24
ACSR 71.] Even when there was more emphasis on formality, it was envisaged that such an order might possibly be made; see eg Re Paragon
Holdings Ltd [[1961] Ch 346.] 
In probate matters, as a matter of practice, executors are encouraged to distribute surpluses that could not conceivably be required for administration purposes, sooner rather than later, and, if this is not done, the executor may find his or her commission reduced.

It seems to me that, whilst there is no direct power to order a receiver to make a commercially sensible distribution of obvious surplus, the situations I have just discussed in analagous cases (ie where there is no legal right to payment, but only a right to ensure due administration) indicate that the court may advise its officer that he or she would be justified in making a distribution.

Thus, I would be prepared to order that the receiver would be justified in making a distribution of any amount from the proceeds of sale of Quail Island that will clearly not be required to discharge present or future partnership obligations. The distribution should be made in accordance with the partnership agreement. The distribution should be on the basis that the receiver obtains an undertaking from each recipient that, should monies be required for partnership purposes, they will be repaid within seven days.

Mr Thompson said in submissions that there was no evidence that the defendants could repay any monies distributed to them if circumstances arose for their repayment. This is a valid point. However, it is for the receiver to satisfy himself, should he seek advice, that he has made appropriate enquiries as to the ability of the payees to honour any undertaking to repay.

As to the manner and amount of the distribution, I do not favour any scheme whereby there is a distribution to the plaintiff and the third defendant, but the other defendants' shares are held in a trust account. This would seem to me not to be holding the scales equally between the partners. As I have analysed the situation, on any view of the plaintiff's claims, there is $280,000 surplus. It would seem unarguably to be the commercial position that at least this sum should be distributed rather than be placed in a trustee investment whilst the proceedings are completed.

It seems to me that I should not make any order on the motion at present. I would think that the appropriate way to proceed is as follows:
The receiver should make his own prima facie assessment as to how much should be distributed;
The receiver should seek undertakings that the distribution would be wholly or partly refunded should additional monies be required for the partnership;
The receiver should make appropriate enquiries as to the ability of the payees to honour their undertakings;
The receiver should formulate a proposal for interim distribution;
The parties should be given an opportunity to comment on the proposal;
If everyone consents, the receiver would be justified in implementing the proposal without further reference to the court;
Objections to the proposal, if any, should be detailed and specific and forwarded to the receiver within say 14 days of the proposal being notified to a party;
The receiver may then, if he feels so inclined, apply to the court in these proceedings for advice that he would be justified in implementing the proposal.

I would contemplate that the costs of the motion of 10 October 1997 (document ) and the costs of any such motion filed by the receiver should be costs in the winding up as they are necessary to unwind the affairs of the partnership.

Thus, all I need do at this stage is to adjourn the motion to a nominal date, say Tuesday, 16 December 1997 at 9:45 am as another motion in these proceedings has been adjourned to the Registrar's list at 9:30 am that day.
However, should the receiver or any of the parties wish to file a further motion on the present point or relist this motion on some earlier day, they should telephone my Associate.
 * * * 
