

Regina versus Gregory Robert Beeforth No. 60233/95 Sentencing [1999] NSWSC 1402 (31 October 1999) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(2), ALLEN(1) AND SULLY(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE :11:1995 #ADD 1:4:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant    P M Skinner 
Solicitors for the Appellant  Legal Aid Commission 
Counsel for the Respondent   T L Buddin with C O'Donnell 
Solicitors for the Respondent  Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
ALLEN J This is an application for leave to appeal against the severity of sentences.
The applicant escaped from Cessnock Gaol on 17 July 1995 and was at large for 159 days before he was recognised by police at Liverpool and arrested. He was taken into custody. At the police station he was searched and seven $100
Australian bank notes, as they appeared to be, were located in his wallet.
Each bore the same serial number.
With the permission of the applicant the police took him to his hotel room and searched it. There they found, in various containers, bundles of what appeared to be $100 Australian bank notes, as well as one note which appeared to be an Australian bank note of $50, and yet a further one of face value of $10. All the notes were counterfeit. The whole series contained the same number. The total face value of counterfeit money was $101,560.
Also found at the hotel room were the paper and equipment necessary to produce this counterfeit currency, the technique involved being scanning by computer and printing with a bubble printer.
The applicant was frank to the police as to his involvement. He told them that he had produced the counterfeit currency for two men, known to him respectively as Frank and Rob, and that they had wanted him to produce currency to a face value in all of $3,000,000 for the purpose of purchasing drugs. He said he expected to be paid $10,000 for his part in the operation.
The equipment and supplies for the operation had been provided by these men.
The applicant also said that he already had uttered approximately seventy of the $100 counterfeit notes at a variety of places including Goulburn,
Sydney, Melbourne and Adelaide. He said he also uttered about twenty counterfeit $100 notes in Sydney over a three or four week period. He claimed that for each note he uttered he received about $70 or $80 which he used to support himself whilst he planned his next move.
He faced three charges and he pleaded guilty to each of them. The first charge was the counterfeiting of the money. The second charge was the uttering of the money to which I have referred. The third was the possession of the counterfeit money.
The applicant was 48 years of age at the time he came up for sentence before Armitage
DCJ (as he then was). He had a criminal record, which could only be described as appalling, for offences of dishonesty. I shall ignore earlier convictions and pick up his record in 1989. In that year he was convicted of obtaining property by false pretences, there being in all four counts, and he received an aggregate sentence of six months' imprisonment. In the same year, less than three months later, he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for a number of offences of receiving, obtaining things by deception, and fraudulent conversion as a bailee. In March 1994 he was sentenced for various offences to an effective minimum term of four years and six months' imprisonment with an additional term of eighteen months. Those offences again were offences in the category of obtaining things by deception by making false instruments, and using false instruments in an attempt to deceive. In the same month he was dealt with for larceny as a servant and for five offences of making a false instrument and five offences of using a false instrument. For those matters he was sentenced to a fixed term of two years.
Taken into account on that occasion were five additional offences of obtaining benefit by deception, one offence of false pretences, four further offences on a different occasion of obtaining benefit by deception, and three further offences of the same class, as well as one additional matter.
He had absolutely nothing to recommend him when he came before his Honour.
He started off with having been at large, after escaping from lawful custody, for 159 days before police picked him up.
What his Honour did was to sentence him in respect of escaping from lawful custody to a term of imprisonment of eighteen months commencing on 1
May 1998. The reason for the late commencement of the escaping offence is that he first had to complete the sentence he was serving when he escaped plus the days he was at large.
In respect of the counterfeiting of the money his Honour took as a starting point a term of nine years. He then stated that, having regard to various matters raised on the applicant's behalf, and in particular his plea of guilty and his co-operation with the police, the term should be reduced to seven years. The next step he took was that he noted that the sentence imposed would be served in a prison in this State, where remissions do not apply. He took that into account as required by section 16G of the Commonwealth [Crimes
Act, 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/), and reduced the seven years down to five and a half years. When he came to the non-parole period what he did was that he indicated that there was nothing which required any unusual approach to be taken and he fixed a non-parole period of three and a half years.
He fixed the commencing date of the sentence for the counterfeiting as 31
October 1999 (being the expiration of the sentence for the escape).
I may deal more briefly with the sentence for the uttering and the possession as they were, in effect, embraced within the sentence for the counterfeiting. As to the uttering, the sentence was fixed at four and a half years, also commencing on 31 October 1999, and as to the possession the sentence was fixed at three years commencing on the same day. In each case the approach taken by his Honour was that taken in respect of the counterfeiting offence.
A number of grounds of appeal have been relied upon. It is convenient to go directly to the one which the Crown concedes is made good. It is that the reduction from the figure of seven years' imprisonment, which his Honour arrived at in respect of the counterfeiting after taking into account the plea of guilty and co-operation, down to five and a half years involved a discount for the absence of remissions of only 21.42 per cent.
The argument is that it should have been one-third in accordance with what was stated by this Court in
DPP (Cth) versus El Karhani [(1990) 21 NSWLR 370.] In that case the Court in its joint judgment said (at 384, 385): "The High Court of Australia and this Court have emphasised, in the fixing of non-parole (and hence parole) periods, that arbitrary formulae are to be avoided. This is so both for reasons of general legal principle and for reasons specific to sentencing. The general principle is clear. A statutory discretion must be exercised individually by reference to the purposes for which Parliament has provided it and upon the basis of the facts of each individual case. Its exercise may not be harnessed to preconceived rules or fixed formulae, however convenient they may be to the busy decision-maker:
Norbis versus Norbis <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 513.] This is not to say that a pattern may not emerge from many cases over time. But the function of the decision-maker is not to be surrendered to formulae, especially if they are arbitrary and precise. If
Parliament wishes to permit the discretion to be exercised in such a way it may so provide: see also Bugmy versus The Queen <case>; [(1990) ALJR 309] and R versus Chee Ben Lian (at 13).
Therefore, it is necessary in each case to make an individual judgment of what should be done by way of the adjustment provided for by <case>.

It is inappropriate to take into account that throughout
Australia the reduction of custodial sentences for remissions and the like is about one third of the sentence. Again, this is not a fixed ratio. But given the individualised 'adjustment' called for by <case>, it is an appropriate starting point."
What was said in El Karhani does not warrant treating what is said to be "an appropriate starting point" as if it were a rule of law that it is to be the adjustment made in every case. To elevate what is very commonly done to the status of a rule of law would be to fly in the teeth of what was said in
El Karhani in words that were quite clearly and carefully framed.
Nevertheless, the Court accepts that commonly a deduction of one-third is allowed. Whilst departure, in an appropriate case, from such a deduction would be entirely proper it would be desirable, where the departure is substantial, for the sentencing judge to indicate the reason for the particular deduction which he is making.
In the present case there have been very good reasons why Armitage DCJ made a deduction which comes to less than 22 per cent but, in the absence of any elucidation by his Honour of his reasons for taking that course, I would infer that his Honour has fallen into error in that respect.
Were the one-third deduction to be applied in the present case the sentence in respect of the counterfeiting would be reduced from seven years, not to five and a half years but to four years and eight months.
That would be a significant difference.
A similar approach taken in respect of the uttering and the possession convictions would result in sentences of imprisonment of about four years and about three years respectively.
I turn briefly to the other grounds of appeal. There is no substance in any of them.
The first is that the sentence was manifestly excessive. In dealing with that I shall assume that the sentences to be considered would be those arrived at by a one-third deduction, namely four years and eight months' imprisonment for the counterfeiting offence, four years for the uttering offence, and three years for the possession offence. All those sentences are being served concurrently. So regarded the sentences are clearly well within the normal sentencing range.
The Court has been referred to a number of cases dealing with counterfeiting. A typical one, and perhaps the one most directly in point, is
Regina versus Rohde [(1985) 17 A Crim R 166.] But that offers no assistance to the appellant. It was a Crown appeal. True it is that the amount involved was substantial - almost $5,000,000 of counterfeit notes. But Rohde was a man who not only pleaded guilty but had no prior convictions. He had shown remorse.
The sentencing judge was satisfied that before he was apprehended he had decided to abandon the criminal enterprise. Nevertheless, on a Crown appeal the head sentence of five years' imprisonment with a minimum term of three years offers no comfort to the present applicant with his appalling criminal record. That is so even though the sentence, imposed in Victoria, would attract remissions.
Complaint is made that insufficient consideration was given by his Honour to the applicant's co-operation with the authorities and to his plea of guilty. All I can say is I think he was very lucky indeed to get two years for that. He was caught out and his plea of guilty was a recognition of it.
Moreover, his co-operation with the authorities was found by his Honour on the evidence which was before him, and properly so found, to have been of virtually no practical utility at all.
Finally, the applicant complains of what is said to be the failure by his
Honour to apply the principle of totality. The reference to "totality" is perhaps inappropriate.
In the course of argument it became apparent that what the real complaint was was that the commencing date of the sentences in respect of the currency sentences are so far in the future that the sentences are far more onerous than like sentences taking effect immediately would be.
The reality of that must be conceded immediately. It is obvious. However, there is no reason, in my view, to suppose that a sentencing judge as experienced as Armitage DCJ would not have taken that into account. It is not the law that a sentencing judge has to refer to every consideration no matter how obvious it might be lest he otherwise be considered to have fallen into appealable error because of his failure to do so.
I come now to the practical implications of what I have said. I am of the view that leave to appeal should be granted and the appeal allowed. The sentence in respect of the counterfeiting should be quashed and that in lieu thereof the appellant be sentenced to imprisonment for four years and eight months commencing on 31 October 1999. The sentence in respect of the uttering should be quashed and in lieu thereof the appellant be sentenced to imprisonment for four years commencing on 31 October 1999. The sentence in respect of the possession should be quashed and in lieu thereof the appellant be sentenced to imprisonment for three years commencing on 31 October 1999. It should be ordered that time served is to count. The forfeiture order should be confirmed.
That leaves one matter. The non-parole period fixed by his Honour was three and a half years. He fixed that in relation to all of the offences. In my judgment that was the absolute minimum time which this appellant should serve in custody for those very grave offences, notwithstanding the remote date in the future when the service of the sentences will commence.
Accordingly
I propose that the non-parole period be for three and a half years commencing on 31 October 1999.
JUDGE2
GLEESON CJ I agree.
 .
The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Allen J. The order for forfeiture is confirmed.
JUDGE3
SULLY J I am in general agreement with what has been proposed by Allen J but
I wish to add one or two brief observations of my own. Reasonable consistency in sentencing is always a desirable sentencing objective. It is one thing to propose a reasonable consistency now entails that an allowance in the order of thirty-three and a third per cent is appropriate as a starting point for the purposes of section 16G of the Commonwealth [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/). But it is an entirely different proposition that any sentence is vulnerable which can be analysed mathematically so as to suggest a section 16G adjustment of less than thirty-three and a third per cent. I do not assent to the latter proposition.
As to the proposition that a sentencing Judge should expose a detailed process of reasoning leading to an adjustment of less than thirty-three and a third per cent, I would not assent to any attempt to establish with the authority of this Court an inflexible rule of law or of practice to that effect. Past experience in this Court should surely have taught by now that mathematical artifice in connection with sentencing does not need that, or indeed any other, kind of encouragement by Courts of appellate jurisdiction.
As well, clear and firm support should be given, in my opinion, to the principles discussed in the decision of a different bench of this Court in
Regina versus Beavan.
Subject to those matters I agree with the orders proposed.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1999/1402.html  
