

Ashington Holdings Pty Ltd versus Wipema Services Pty Ltd Matter No 1339/98 [1998] NSWSC 143 (23 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 `

ASHINGTON HOLDINGS PTY LTD versus WIPEMA SERVICES PTY LTD` ` 1339/98` `23 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between landlord and tenant over commercial premises in O'Connell Street, Sydney. 
The tenant is a company, which is controlled by two solicitors who carry on their practice in the demised premises. The lease that they had up until
February 1998 was one for six years to that date over level 7 in the building, being part of the land in a particular certificate of title.

On 20 November 1997 strata plan 55932 was registered over that certificate of title. Before that happened, probably somewhere in the first week in November, the tenant provided the landlord's agent with a piece of paper which, omitting formal parts, read: "As tenant under lease No E957598 ... we hereby consent to the registration of the strata plan approved by the Sydney City Council ... " 
The parties were in negotiations in late October 1997 as to continued occupation of the tenant in the demised premises. It would seem that rental value of commercial properties in the area had fallen and the rent review clause in the previous lease had not been put into play. The rental payable at the end of the lease was calculated at the rate of $395 per square metre.

During October a rental of $330 per square metre was being spoken about by the negotiators for the various parties.

A notice dated 27 October, omitting formal parts, said that the tenant: "Hereby gives notice of its desire to take a further lease of the demised premises for a further term of three years ... and exercises its option for renewal accordingly." 
The notice was sent to the landlord on 30 October with a covering letter. The covering letter said, amongst other things: "In view of the fact that the precise terms of the new Lease have not been finalised, and of the fact that the option for renewal of the present Lease expires on 31 October, (the tenant) is formally exercising the option for renewal in the present Lease, and a copy of the notice of exercise is enclosed, the original having been served on the landlord at its registered office. We emphasise that this step has been taken merely in order to protect the tenant's position and that if, as we expect, a new Lease is entered into, the parties would agree to treat the exercise of the option as being of no effect. We therefore look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible." 
The parties never did enter into a new lease. On 10 December the solicitors for the landlord sent to the tenant a form of variation of lease, which did not propose the grant of a new lease, but proceeded on the basis that the term of the original lease would be increased to eleven years and that there would be alterations to various other clauses.

The parties conferred for some time but, by the end of January, the tenant had indicated it was getting tired of talking and entered into a new lease with another landlord from February 1998, and quit the premises at the end of the original lease.

The landlord filed a summons on 10 February for a declaration that there was an enforceable agreement to lease between the parties and for a declaration that in obtaining registration of the strata plan there was no repudiation of that agreement to lease. Today the summons was amended by adding further matters of detail.

The defendant filed a cross-claim seeking virtually reverse declarations.
Paragraph 2 in the cross-claim dealing with estoppel was not pressed.

After the evidence was finished there was discussion between counsel and myself as to whether relief could be given on the summons and cross-claim as framed. The [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s63.html), requires the court to determine all matters in dispute between the parties in the one proceedings on a final basis. This ordinarily means that in a vendor and purchaser suit, or the equivalent, the court will not merely make declarations, but will insist that the moving party seek specific performance, or damages, or both. (Neeta (Epping) Pty Ltd versus Phillips <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 286).] 
However, even though this must happen, it is not necessarily so that all the decisions in the proceedings will be made at one and the same time, and it is appropriate in some cases to deal with some issues first and then postpone the others, if that is an efficient way of dealing with the case; see Winchcombe
Carson Trustee Co Ltd versus Ball-Rand Pty Ltd [[1974] 1 NSWLR 477.] 
Because of this, the parties then isolated two issues which could be dealt with today, with a view to other aspects of the case being dealt with at a later time, if necessary.

Essentially, the two issues are (1) whether the notice of exercise of option brought into existence a binding contract for the granting and taking of a new lease, and (2) whether the fact that the building had been strata-ed meant that it was impossible for the contract to be performed, or that it was void for uncertainty, or that it had been repudiated by the landlord.

There were two provisos. The first was that any question of impossibility, or the like, in respect of telephone wires, electrical cables, plumbing etc, brought about by the registration of the strata plan was outside the preliminary issues and, secondly, that there was a concession that only the lift, fire stations, utility ducts, and non lettable floor space was common property on level 7, and that otherwise the whole of the lettable floor space constituted lot 8 in the strata plan. Again, there was no abandonment of the point that the external boundaries of the two areas might be different.

The submission for the plaintiff was simple. There was a document which was a formal exercise of option and it meant what it said. It was conceded on both sides that there was no problem as to form or time of the exercise.

The argument on the other side was that the matter had to be considered in its factual matrix. This was that there were negotiations between the parties, which appeared to be getting close to conclusion, in which there would be a rental of $330 per square metre. It would be absurd for anyone to expect that the piece of paper uttered by the tenant one day before the option period expired was intended to amount to an acceptance of an offer that there be a lease at $395 per square metre per annum.

Commercially one can understand that submission, but the letter of 30 October, to which I have referred, shows that the reason for the document was because the tenant wanted to make quite sure that it had some right to continue occupation of the premises if the arrangement that it was negotiating at that time broke down. The point of "formally exercising the option" was "to protect the tenant's position". If there was, as Mr M Skinner said for the tenant, a conditional acceptance, that would be no exercise of the option at all and would not have in any sense protected the tenant's position. Again, that would be the position if the document was not intended to create legal relations.

A person who takes a solemn step, such as giving a formal exercise of option, usually cannot be heard to say that that solemn step was meaningless, see Re
Hallett's Estate [(1880) 13 Ch D 696], 727 and Franklyn versus Manufacturers Mutual Insurance Ltd <case>; [(1935) 36 SR 76], .

Furthermore, a person cannot take a step of a formal nature on a without prejudice basis. One cannot rescind the contract "without prejudice". Either one rescinds it or does not rescind it; see Haynes V Hirst <case>; [(1927) 27 SR 480], .

Having put those two possibilities out of the way, the only other realistic possibility is that the case is one of the fourth class, additional to the three mentioned in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353], that is: "One in which the parties were content to be bound immediately and exclusively by the terms which they had agreed upon whilst expecting to make a further contract in substitution for the first contract ... " (Sinclair-Scott &
Co versus Naughton <case>; [(1929) 43 CLR 310], 317; Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd versus G R
Securities Pty Ltd [(1986) 40 NSWLR 622], 628).

Had the negotiations continued on, and the parties agreed on a new lease, then by novation, rescission or otherwise the contract brought about by the exercise of the option would be for all practical purposes of no effect.
However, that condition did not occur. The tenant took the position that it needed to have a back-up of exercising a registered option and it seems to me that in the circumstances that is what happened.

Accordingly, there should be an answer to the first question that there is an agreement to lease the subject premises by the defendant from the plaintiff for three years from 28 February 1998.

The second matter I found far more difficult and I am glad to say in one sense that the decision I have reached on it is that it is premature. I will need to explain this.

The option clause in the lease is cl 20, which in the circumstances which have happened, requires the plaintiff to grant to the defendant a lease for three further years: "On the following conditions - the covenants conditions and restrictions of the lease with the said further term shall be the same as in this lease with the exception that this occupation option to renew shall be excluded: " 
Paragraphs (b) to (e) of cl 20 then set out special conditions with respect to the rent. Two particular matters are of significance here. The first is that not only are the covenants and conditions of the new lease to be the same, but so are the "restrictions of the lease". They also are to be "the same" as the original lease.

When the words "the same" are used in this sort of clause it may well have a more narrow meaning than the word "like". This is the reverse of the situation referred to by Fry, J in Re Smith [(1881) 45 LT 246] and by
Holland, J in Mark Mayne Pty Ltd versus Suburban Centres Pty Ltd [[1976] 2
NSWLR 67], particularly at page 71. The word "same" usually imports identical, not merely similarity, to use the words used by Gibbs J in another context in Avondale Motors (Parts) Pty Ltd versus Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1971) 124 CLR 97], 105. The word "same" can sometimes mean similar or substantially identical, see for instance Kingsbury versus Martin (1901) 1 SR (L) 272, but this is rare.

According to Stroud's Judicial Dictionary 5th ed Vol 5 p 2331, options for renewal in leases on the same terms have been used for hundreds of years, though the word does not appear to have been construed as to just what shade of meaning it has. Indeed, it is shown to be a common form of option in the leading books, such as Barnsley on Land Options (Oyez
London 1978) page 215 (where the learned author seems to equate the expressions "same" and "like") and Bradbrook & Croft Commercial Tenancy
Law in Australia 2nd ed (Butterworths Sydney 1997) at pp 265-6.

The distinction is clearly spelled out in Hollies Stores Ltd versus Timmis [[1921] 2 Ch 202.] There the renewed lease had to contain clauses "as far as possible identical" with the original lease including the guarantee clause.
One of the three original guarantors had died. It was held by F Russell, J that although guarantees of equal worth were being profferred, the landlord could not be compelled to grant a different lease. This decision was referred to with approval by the Court of Appeal in Verdi La Fontana Pty Ltd v
Mabrouk Pty Ltd [[1992] NSW Conv R 55-632] at p 59611, though this appears to be the only occasion where it has been cited in a reported case.

The change that occurs when property becomes subject to strata title legislation is more than merely nominal or cosmetic. The congerie of rights that are possessed by, at least, the owner of the common property and the landlord vary. The reversion is affected in that the landlord no longer has the whole of the fee simple from the sky above to hell beneath which can support the lease, but instead only has defined rights in a particular stratum. This can cause problems if there are pipes and services extending through the stratum. However, this particular matter has been postponed.

The question that faces me is whether the restrictions of the lease, when the lease is over a stratum, are the same as in the existing lease.

Mr Skinner took me through the various provisions of the lease and pointed out that there were quite a number of situations where the tenant just could not have the same rights as it had before the property was strata-ed because there were now statutory rights given to the proprietors of the body corporate which would mean that the tenant had less than it would have had, had the property not been the subject of strata-ing. He pointed out how the body corporate would have power to restrict the user of the common property that was to be used in conjunction with the demised property in a way that could restrict the tenant's lease.

On the other hand, Mr Ashhurst, for the landlord, put that if one looked closely at each of the rights given to the tenant, whilst there may be a slight academic change, the covenants, conditions and restrictions under the new lease would be "the same".

This is something I doubt very much because when one looks at the various documents one can see some of the alterations that need to be made and, as presently advised, I would have very great doubts as to whether the tenant was ending up with "the same" restrictions.

In my view the words "the same restrictions" mean that the restrictions in practice on the tenant under the new lease are to be identical with the restrictions under the old, matters that are de minimis excepted.

On this test, it seems to me that I should not, in a vacuum, determine whether the new lease does contain the same restrictions as the old lease, until I see the proposed new lease.

When and if a new lease is proffered of which the landlord seeks specific performance, then one can consider whether portions of the option have been frustrated or are impossible or whether the landlord has repudiated the contract in not being able to provide a lease containing the same restrictions so as to justify the termination by the tenant.

There is also the possibility that the contract is void for uncertainty. This point should be left in the ring, though it is usually very difficult to conclude that a transaction of this nature involves the parties in creating a meaningless nothing.

Probably I have said enough at this stage to deal with this aspect of the case. However, there are three areas that I might particularly mention that are of concern, apart from the matter of cables, et cetera. The first area is the extra restrictions on the tenant because of the rights that are now conferred on the proprietors of the body corporate. I have already dealt with this.

The second is cl 23 of the existing lease which compels the tenant to contribute to increases in the outgoings of the building. The landlord says that under the strata title regime the liability of the tenant has not changed and, indeed, the tenant should even be charged with strata title levies which the landlord has to pay the body corporate.

The tenant says that the whole basis of outgoings has now changed. Instead of there being one set of rates and land taxes, et cetera, being levied on the whole building and being equitably apportioned between the various tenants (the existing lease requiring the tenant to pay 8.09 per cent) there is now a regime whereby each floor is separately rated and separately the subject of land tax, and that even if the levies are to be taken into account, and other outgoings, the appropriate percentage would be the unit entitlement, which is .2 per cent rather than the 8.09 per cent which was adopted in the lease. The tenant also says that really strata title levies could not possibly come within the existing definition of outgoings or additional outgoings. I tend to think that this is right, but I will not decide that particular point on this occasion.

The third area is the rights that a tenant of a registered proprietor of a strata lot has over the common property. In Platt versus Ciriello, Queensland
Court of Appeal, 14 March 1997, unreported, the Queensland Court of Appeal dealt with the case where a tenant was using common property and resorted to the clear law that one tenant in common cannot restrict user by another tenant in common or its tenant. That, with respect, was plainly right. However under the former Queensland Act the common property was held by the owners as tenant in common.

Again, a lot owner's interest as tenant in common of the common property inures for the benefit of its lessee: Proprietors of Centre Building Plan No versus Bowne [[1984] 1 Qd R 613.] Under the present New South Wales legislation, it is not the proprietors who are tenants in common of the common property, but that property is held by a statutory corporation as agent for the lot holders. Are the rights of tenants of a proprietor the same as they were under the previous Queensland legislation? 
Although I can see strong points of distinguishing the previous Queensland case, it seems to me that the basic rights of the tenant remain the same.
There is no discernible legislative intention when interposing a corporate vehicle to hold the common property to change private substantive rights.
Thus, any right that the registered proprietor has to use the common property is a right which its tenant also has, subject, of course, to any particular restriction imposed by the Act or the by-laws.

Accordingly, the situation is that I have held that there is a contract for the plaintiff to give to the defendant a lease containing the same covenants, conditions and restrictions as the former lease, and there now must be an adjournment so that a lease purportedly complying with that obligation can be prepared and submitted.

I stand the matter over to 14 May 1998 at 9.30 for mention.
 * * * 
