

Michael Lollback versus Walter Skarchewski No. 60089/96 [1996] NSWSC 415 (6
September 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GROVE(1), McINERNEY (2) AND HULME(3) JJ
Appeal from District
Court (Judge Johnston QC)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 15 July 1996 #DATE 25:7:1996 #ADD 6:9:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant     P.J. Saidi 
Solicitor for the Appellant    I.V. Knight (Crown Solicitor) 
Counsel for the Respondent    S.J. Cook 
Solicitors for the Respondent   Peter N. Taradilis and Co
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
GROVE J This is an appeal on behalf of the prosecution by way of Case Stated by his Honour Judge Johnston QC sitting in Parramatta District Court.
The questions posed to this Court for determination arise out of the following facts. On 11 May 1994, after conducting some investigations into activities at Bill's
Book Exchange 303 Beamish Street, Campsie a police officer attended Burwood Local Court and made application for a search warrant pursuant to [s 11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/s11.html) of the [Search Warrants Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/) (SW Act). Such an application is made pursuant to [Pt 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/index.html#p3) of that Act and is required to be in a form prescribed by regulation. That form (Form 2) provides for statement of the section and
Act under which the warrant is sought. Section 39 of the Film and
Video Tape Classification Act 1984 (FVT Act - since renamed and then repealed, neither occurrence being relevant for present purposes) is an available provision specified in <case> of the SW Act.
A warrant was issued and executed on the premises on that day. On the following day (12 May) a police constable attended Burwood
Local Court and reported in these terms: "Warrant executed on 11 May 1994, 750 videos confiscated from the premises of 303
Beamish Street, Campsie and the upstairs unit. Offenders to be summoned."
The report was contained in what is prescribed as Form 7 by Regulation 8 of the Search Warrant Regulations. That prescribed form has a title in these terms: "REPORT TO AUTHORIZED
JUSTICE ON THE EXECUTION OF A SEARCH WARRANT (Search Warrants Act 1985)"
The seized tapes were refused classification on August 1994. This is arguably the 90th day after 11 May but his Honour found that the period of 90 days mentioned in <case> (1) of the FVT Act had been exceeded. Nothing now turns on this. On 26 September 1994 an information was laid against the respondent
Walter
Skarchewski alleging sale of unclassified film and on being summonsed he pleaded guilty before the Local Court although there is an appeal against the severity of penalty pending in the District Court. Again, nothing in the matter now before this Court turns on those circumstances.
On 19 October 1994 a summons to show cause why the seized video tape should not be forfeited to the
Crown was issued. That summons was endorsed with these particulars: "(1) That the things were seized pursuant to the issue of a
Search Warrant under Section 39 of the Film and Video Tape
Classification Act; . That within 90 days of the seizure of the things a member of the police force reported the seizure to a Justice, pursuant to Section 41 (1) of the said Act."
On 16 February 1995 the presiding magistrate at Burwood Local Court ordered forfeiture pursuant to <case> of the FVT Act.
Mr Skarchewski appealed to the District Court.
After evidence and argument Judge Johnston expressed his intention of upholding the appeal and quashing the forfeiture order whereupon application to state a case to this Court was made by the prosecution and that application was acceded to by his Honour.
The foreshadowed orders were dependent upon views as to the interaction (or absence of it) between the SW Act and the FVT Act and the requirement of reporting specified in the respective statutes. The provisions of each statute are in these terms: 
SW Act 
S21(1) The person to whom a search warrant is issued shall furnish a report in writing to the authorized justice who issued the warrant: stating whether or not the warrant was executed; if the warrant was executed - setting out briefly the result of the execution of the warrant (including a brief description of anything seized); if the warrant was not executed - setting out briefly the reasons why the warrant was not executed; stating whether or not an occupier's notice has been served in connection with the execution of the warrant; in the case of a telephone search warrant - containing a copy of the form of search warrant and the form of occupier's notice if those documents were not furnished to the person; and containing such other particulars as may be prescribed.
 
A report with respect to a search warrant shall be made within days after the execution of the warrant or the expiry of the warrant, whichever first occurs." 
FVT Act "S41(1)A thing which has been seized pursuant to a search warrant issued under section 39 shall be returned to the premises in or on which it was seized unless, not later than 90 days after the seizure: an information is laid against a person for a contravention of this Act or the regulations with respect to the thing; or a member of the police force reports the seizure to a justice.

On the reporting of the seizure of a thing under subsection to a justice, the justice shall issue a summons calling on the person who, at the time of the seizure of the thing, was occupying or using the premises entered by virtue of the search warrant issued under section to appear before a court of petty sessions to show cause why the thing and any other thing so seized should not be forfeited to the Crown.

A court may before which a summons issued under subsection (2) is returned may order that there be forfeited to the Crown: such of the things to which the summons relates as are not claimed by the person summoned, or by some other person; or where the person summoned, or some other person, claims any of the things, such of the things to which the summons relates as, in the opinion of the court, are connected with an offence against this Act or the regulations (as referred to in section \ (2) and which it is desirable should be so forfeited."
The learned judge held that he was only concerned (in respect of the appeal against the forfeiture order) about compliance with <case>(l)(b) of the
FVT Act to the exclusion of <case>(a).
He further held that the reporting (on May 1994) did not evidence a reporting under the FVT Act and was, by necessary inference in his reasons, exclusively made in compliance with the SW
Act. Ms critical findings were expressed thus: "9. I found that the procedures under the two Acts, i.e. the procedures laid down under the [Search Warrants Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/), [Section 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/s21.html), and under Section 41(1)(b) of the Film and Video Tape
Classification Act are intended to achieve two distinct and separate purposes, each requiring a separate compliance if the process is to be carried out. Where a warrant is executed, there is a process to be followed in reporting whether the warrant has been executed on that night.
I held that any reporting therefore under Section 21 of the
Search Warrant Act is not a reporting for the purposes of Section (1) of the Film and
Video Tape Classification Act and there was no evidence before me that any such reporting had been made under the Film and
Video Tape Classification Act."
Two questions have been posed by his Honour for determination: "(i) Did I err in law in holding that the report made by Constable
Carras on the 12th May, 1994 at the Burwood Local Court did not, and could not be capable of fulfilling the requirements of Section (2) of the Film and Video Tape Classification Act 1984.
 
Did I err in holding that any reporting made pursuant to the provisions of [Section 21](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/s21.html) of the [Search Warrants Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/) is not (and is not capable at law of being) a reporting for the purpose of
Section 41(1) of the Film and Video Tape Classification
Act."
Unlike the SW Act, there are no forms prescribed for reporting pursuant to the FVT Act and specifically no prescription in respect of a report of the kind contemplated by <case>(b). What is required to comply with the provision is unambiguously stated namely, a report to a Justice of the seizure of things pursuant to a warrant as contemplated by <case>. It is notable that <case> declares that R 3 of the SW Act applies to a warrant issued under <case> of the
FVT Act and this is repeated in the definition of a search warrant set out in s 10 of the SW Act which, inter alia, means a warrant issued under the FVT
Act.
The cross referencing in the terms of the statutes suggests congruity of purpose rather than division. There is no reason why a single document may not comply with the requirements of both Acts provided that document contains all the requisite information. The conclusion that the statutes require separate ritual compliance in reporting to a Justice assumes a lack of harmony which is indicated in the terms of neither Act. Submissions to the Court were directed to the contemplation of statutory purpose, the purpose of the reporting constable (referring, as I understood it, to which statute the constable had in mind when reporting) and the "signalling" of purpose to the
Justice but the issue for determination is quite straightforward. It is whether the report as made was capable of and did fulfil the requirement of s41(1)(b) and therefore s41(2) of the FVT Act. There is no information required by that statute that it did not provide and it manifestly did fulfil the statutory requirements.
Counsel for the respondent had to concede that the wording in the report was sufficient but contended that the reporting constable had to intend to submit it pursuant to the FVT Act (as distinguished from the SW Act) and to communicate that intention to the Justice. Those requirements do not appear in nor derive from the statutory provision.
The second question posed in the Case Stated is in terms of general application rather than in relation to the instant matter.
I propose the following answers in response to the questions in the Case
Stated: 
Yes; 
Unnecessary to answer.
The case should be returned to the District Court to be dealt with further according to law.
JUDGE2
McINERNEY J
I have read the draft Judgment of Grove J and agree that the Case
Stated should be answered (i) Yes and (ii) Unneccessary to answer and that the case should be returned to the District Court to be dealt with further according to law for the reasons advanced.
JUDGE3
HULME J I agree with the answers proposed by Grove J in response to the questions in the Case Stated and, subject to one matter, with His Honour's
Reasons.
Given the multiplicity of legislation in New South Wales no justice, or indeed authorised justice, can be reasonably expected to know it all or indeed all under which he may at some time have to act. Accordingly, I take the view that because of the obligation in sub-section 41(2) of the FVT Act that "On the reporting of the seizure of a thing under sub-section to a justice, the justice shall issue a summons..." the report of the seizure must be in terms or in circumstances calculated to direct the justice's mind to either the duty cast upon him or, at the least, the statutory regime which imposes that duty.
 .
In the ordinary course the obligation to include in the application for a search warrant a statement of the section and Act under which the warrant was sought and the fact that the report subsequent to the execution of the warrant is required to be furnished to the same justice to whom that application was submitted will ensure that this occurs. Whether it did in the instant case is not, of course, a question which arises for the consideration of this Court.
It may be acknowledged that the consequence of the conclusions which have been arrived at is that, providing any seizure is reported as required by the
SW Act, paragraph (a) of sub-section of 41(4) of the FVT Act will have no practical operation. However this does not affect those conclusions and would seem to be just the unintended consequence of the terms of the SW Act which was passed later than the FVT Act.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/415.html  
