

Regina versus Chahal Matter No 71847/98 [1998] NSWSC 729 (13 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
REGINA versus EHAB CHAHAL /98 May 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: In the application of Ehab Chahal, evidence has been called from his father that the father is prepared to go surety, to have his son reside with him, to impose and insist on a curfew and to speak to his son to seek to avoid further offences. 
In addition, I have been provided with a statement by an employer which I am informed indicates that the employer is willing to re-employ Mr. Chahal should he be at liberty.

Nonetheless, the volume of matters charged, the simple number of offences much less coupled with the gravity of the robbery and aggravated robbery and affray offences and the seriousness of the conduct in relation to the victims, bearing in mind their precarious circumstances, are such that I must view these matters seriously. Particularly is this so because there is no presumption in favour of bail on the aggravated robbery offence. Although there had been grants of bail in particular in relation to the robbery offences and subsequently in relation to the affray offences including a term requiring the applicant to attend the Legal Aid Office in accordance with pre- arranged visits, the offence alleged against the applicant of affray is alleged to have been committed whilst on that bail and the offences of affray, stalking and intimidation were said to have been committed whilst the applicant was on bail for all three of the charges to which I have previously referred.

These offences, on a reading of the statement of facts, are alleged to all be of a piece. That is, to involve in the company of others intimidatory conduct in addition to the culpability giving rise to the precise offence.

In the circumstances, and bearing in mind the number of occasions on which it is alleged the applicant has conducted himself in that way, and bearing in mind the number of occasions on which it is alleged that the applicant has breached bail by committing further offences whilst on bail, I am unable to see that it would be proper to grant bail unless there were some regimen that could guard against it. Nothing has been put forward in this application sufficient to persuade me that the prima facie effect of these allegations coupled with the potential breaches of bail, should be displaced.

In those circumstances, bail is refused.
 * * * 
