

Beca Developments Pty Limited (In Liquidation) versus [1997] NSWSC 133 (15
April 1997) `BECA DEVELOPMENTS PTY LIMITED (IN LIQUIDATION) versus ` ``CENTURIAN CONSTRUCTIONS PTY LIMITED /96 
TUESDAY, 15 APRIL 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the liquidator of Beca Developments Pty Ltd seeks to wind up Centurian Constructions Pty Ltd on the ground of insolvency. The liquidator primarily relies on the ledger of the plaintiff company which shows that on accounts between them the defendant owes the plaintiff $534,945. Before liquidation, both the plaintiff and the defendant companies were under the control of Mr Pselletes.

I am also part heard in a dispute between the liquidator and Mr and Mrs
Pselletes where the ledger of Beca Developments Pty Ltd shows that Mr and Mrs
Pselletes owe the Beca company substantial moneys. In those proceedings the
Pselletes allege that there are offsetting claims which more than extinguish
Beca's claim against them. The substantial defence in the present proceeding is that Centurian has claims which offset Beca's claim.

The liquidator issued a statutory demand and Centurian moved to set it aside, but was out of time. Because of the peculiar circumstances of the case the
Chief Judge ordered, on 26 August 1996, that Centurian have leave under <case> of the Corporations Law to oppose the winding up proceedings on any ground that the defendant could have relied on in an application under <case> to set aside the statutory demand.

It would appear that this order was interpreted in different ways by the legal advisers for the respective parties. On the one side it was thought that all that would be dealt with on the winding up proceedings is whether the statutory demand should have been set aside, a situation where there would be no cross-examination but where the Court would consider whether there was a genuine offsetting claim (see Classic Ceramic Importers Pty Limited v
Ceramica Antiga SA [(1994) 13 ACSR 263], 268). On the other side it was thought that there would be a "full blown" hearing. I do not wish to deal with whether either of those views could properly have been held because that will be relevant to the question of costs I will have to decide in due course.

Before the law was complicated by ss 459G and 459S of the Corporations Law, the situation was that if it was alleged on the hearing of a winding up petition on the ground of insolvency that the creditor's debt was disputed, one of a number of things could happen. First, if the real attack was that the petitioning creditor was not a creditor, then the Court never went to the question of solvency at all, but could dismiss the petition as an abuse of process. An illustration is Wilson Market Research Pty Limited versus The
Corporations Law [(1996) 39 NSWLR 311] (and see
Re A Company [[1984] 1 WLR 1090).] 
Secondly, if some money was owed to the petitioner though other debts were disputed then there was status to bring the petition and it could not be summarily dismissed (Re a company ex parte Trans Continental Insurance
Services Ltd [[1990] BCLC 697).] 
Thirdly, the Court might still dismiss the petition if it could see that the dispute as to the indebtedness was such that, together with evidence of the company's solvency, the matter should really be tried in the usual court that hears actions for debt (Tecma Pty Ltd versus Solah Blue Metal Pty Ltd [(1988) ACLR 358.] See also in general CVC Investments Pty Ltd versus P & T
Aviation Pty Ltd [(1989) 18 NSWLR 295).] 
Fourthly, where the company said that there was an offsetting claim, the matter was even more complicated. As the Statutes of Set-Off have been repealed in New South Wales, the mere existence of a set-off could not affect the status of the creditor to bring the proceedings. However, if the Court considered that, together with evidence of solvency, there was a genuine dispute which may mean that on the balance of accounts the company owed nothing, then the petition would be dismissed.

However, in more recent times the Court has not been as careful to distinguish between the Companies Court and the ordinary Courts as it did last century. In
Re QBS Pty Ltd [[1967] Qd R 218] at 255, Gibbs
J, when a Justice of the Supreme Court of Queensland, said that in every case it is necessary for the Court to exercise its discretion as to how far it will allow the question whether or not the dispute is bona fide to be explored.

In Re Horizon Pacific Ltd [(1977) 2 ACLR 495] Needham J in this Court said that one needs to consider whether the dispute between the parties is one which can conveniently be dealt with by the Companies Court and, if it can, then it may be dealt with in the Companies Court, otherwise there should be a dismissal or stay pending the outcome of proceedings to establish the debt.

In the present case the dispute is one which can be dealt with in this Court.
To remit the parties to their remedies at law would involve considerable delay and, accordingly, the appropriate course is to adjourn the proceedings so that the full evidence on which the defendant company relies can be put before the
Court and the existence or not of the debt can be finally determined.

When I indicated before the short adjournment that this was the course I would probably take, the parties worked out a timetable and this means that the matter will be adjourned, in accordance with that timetable, to 17 and 18 July before me. I reserve all questions of costs.
 * * * 
