

Nassar versus Nassar and Ors Matter No 14879/90 [1998] NSWSC 716 (30 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `HELEN NASSAR versus DEBEE NASSAR & 2 ORS` `14879/90` `30 July 1998` `Carruthers AJ` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 15 May 1998 Barr J in his capacity as the List Judge fixed this matter for hearing before Master Harrison, beginning on 6 July 1998 for an estimated two days. 
My immediate reaction to that is, that from what I have seen by reference to the file, and what I have heard from counsel for the parties today, that estimate of two days is erroneous, if I may respectfully say so. Five days would be much more realistic. That may not even be sufficient, bearing in mind that the plaintiff is obviously seriously disabled and is making a claim for hour a day, seven day a week care and the significant Griffiths and
Kirkemeyer claim that flows from that is no doubt one that is going to involve a fair amount of time.

One has to only consider the other complicated issues that arise in large brain damage claims, such as the instant case, to realise that two days is completely unrealistic. Five days is more realistic.

In any event, it is clear to me from what has been said this morning that the matter is not ready to proceed.

The late service of Professor Buchanan's two reports is one aspect of its inability to proceed next Monday, together with other outstanding investigations which have to be made on behalf of the plaintiff.

It would appear, from the plaintiff's point of view, that two matters remain outstanding. One is that next Wednesday the plaintiff will be assessed with regard to the possibility of obtaining benefit from computer-based material, and that could well give rise to a significant claim, when the matter ultimately comes to trial.

Secondly, further consideration may be required in relation to the question of modifications to a house to accommodate the plaintiff's disability.

In any event, I am assured by Mr Jones that the plaintiff will have completed whatever is necessary to be completed along these lines within three weeks of today.

Accordingly, I direct that the plaintiff is to serve any additional material upon the solicitors for the defendants by 24 July 1998.

Due to the late service of reports and the complexity of this case and for other reasons, there is a fair amount of investigation and assessment still to be carried out by the defendants.

Ms Bergin believes that that could be done by 18 September 1998.

Accordingly, I direct that the defendants are to serve upon the solicitors for the plaintiff all reports upon which they seek to rely at the trial. Nothing can be done by me at this stage so far as progressing a trial date is concerned.

Bearing in mind that the accident was some 20 years ago and the proceedings were commenced some eight years ago, it is abundantly clear that the matter should be resolved without any further delay.

Accordingly, having made those directions, I will vacate the hearing date before Master Harrison for 6 and 7 July 1998.

I confirm the directions as to the future progress of the matter and it will be transferred to the holding list.

That information will be communicated to Master Harrison and we will see what the future holds for this case.

By consent, I order that each party pay their own costs of today and the costs thrown away by reason of the vacation of the hearing date of 6 and 7 July .

I return Mr Buchanan's reports.
 * * * 
