

Regina versus K Austin [1998] NSWSC 1021 (2 May 1998) 
REGINA versus Karen AUSTIN /96; DC 96/21/2066 
Thursday 25 July 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, GROVE J, IRELAND J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL ON SEVERITY OF SENTENCE - CORRECTION OF ERRORS - LACK OF FURTHER CRIMINAL CONDUCT WHILST ON BAIL - VOLUNTARY RETURN TO FACE TRIAL - EFFECT OF PREGNANCY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
CRIMINAL LAW - appeal on severity of sentence - correction of errors - lack of further criminal conduct whilst on bail - voluntary return to face trial - effect of pregnancy.

The appellant pleaded guilty to a charge of breaking, entering and stealing contrary to [s 112](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s112.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which carried a maximum sentence of 14 years penal servitude. The offence occurred over the 1992/3 Christmas/New Year holidays, property worth $10,000 being taken which was not recovered. The applicant knew that the householders were away and had not revealed the identity of her confederates. The applicant had a non-custodial criminal history, had not re-offended since, and whilst she absconded on bail had voluntarily returned to face the charge. At the time of sentencing she was 61/2 months pregnant. The sentencing judge imposed an 8 month minimum term and an additional term of 16 months. It was contended that the applicant's pregnancy was not properly taken into account especially with respect to the delivery time of the child.

HELD, (1) The trial judge had not misdirected himself as to the need for a custodial sentence; (2) There was nothing to indicate that the trial judge had failed to take into account the subjective and objective features of the case; (3) Pregnancy cannot be given overriding and unconditional weight in sentencing.

JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an application by Karen Susan Austin for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by Robison DCJ in the District Court on 30 May this year.

The applicant pleaded guilty to one charge of breaking, entering and stealing contrary to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s112.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which carried a maximum sentence of 14 years penal servitude.

The offence was a serious one committed in company. The applicant was aware that the householders would be away and property worth $10,000 or more was stolen and has not been recovered.

The applicant did not reveal the identity of her confederates who have not been brought to justice. She was identified because her fingerprints were found at the scene of the crime.

The offence was committed over the Christmas/New Year holiday in December /January 1993.

One matter in the applicant's favour is that she has not committed any criminal offence since, although she has on more than one occasion absconded whilst on bail.

The sentencing judge imposed a sentence comprising an 8 month minimum term to date from 13 May 1996 and an additional term of 16 months to date from 13
January 1997. In view of the objective seriousness of the offence and the applicant's past criminal history, although this did not involve a custodial sentence, an appeal in this case would have been hopeless but for her condition. At the time she was sentenced she was some 61/2 months pregnant.

Also in favour of the applicant's challenge to the sentence is the fact that she returned voluntarily from Queensland to face this charge. If she had not done so she may not have received a custodial sentence for some time, although of course her continued liberty in Queensland was always precarious.

Also in favour of the applicant is her lack of any further criminal conduct other than her failure to answer to her bail on two occasions. Both of these matters are important but there is no reason to think that his Honour did not properly take them into account.

The function of this Court in a case such as this is to correct error. Mr Game has, in my opinion, identified two clear errors on the part of the learned sentencing judge. His Honour was informed that the applicant had been brought before the court on 13 May, on the same day that she was arrested. This was a mistake, because she had been arrested on 11 May. On any view the applicant is entitled to credit for that time.

The learned sentencing judge in his remarks on sentence said that the applicant had remained at Lyndon House for only five days in December 1994 before leaving without a forwarding address. His Honour was again mistaken because the applicant remained for 18 days. This mistake is established and the applicant is entitled to have her sentence adjusted to reflect an appropriate credit for the whole of this 18 day period, which did involve a significant deprivation of her liberty.

Mr Game, for the applicant, submitted that the sentencing judge made other errors which would entitle this Court to intervene. He submitted that the judge failed to have adequate regard to the applicant's pregnancy, that he fell into error in directing himself that a full-time custodial sentence was inevitable, and that he failed to have proper regard to the recommendation of the probation officer, Mr Aitken, that the applicant should be given a sentence by way of periodic detention.

It is difficult to think that his Honour could have failed to have proper regard to the pregnancy of the applicant, which must have been very obvious and was referred to at some length in the letter that she wrote, which became exhibit 1 in the sentencing proceedings.

In substance it seems to me that Mr Game's submission must amount to this, that it was an error in sentencing for the judge to impose a full-time custodial sentence which would continue beyond the expected delivery of the child.

While no one is particularly comfortable at the thought that an expectant mother is in gaol and will have her baby while in custody, although she will be in hospital at that stage, it is impossible for this Court to lay down any rule of law or sentencing practice to that effect.

This is a most important matter to be taken into consideration by the sentencing judge, but it seems to me that the sentence looked at objectively involving an 8 months minimum term was a lenient sentence for this crime which, as I have said, attracted a maximum sentence of 14 years penal servitude. This was the applicant's first offence of this nature but it was of such gravity that it would naturally attract a full-time custodial sentence. I have not been persuaded that the objective features of the sentence establish that the sentencing judge failed to have adequate regard to the applicant's pregnancy.

The next matter Mr Game relied upon, was that the sentencing judge had failed to have regard to the recommendation by the probation officer in favour of periodic detention. In my view this submission should not be accepted. The sentencing judge at p 4 of his remarks referred to this recommendation and he clearly took it into account, although he did not ultimately give effect to it.

The final submission based on the original material before the sentencing judge was that he had misdirected himself when he concluded that a full-time custodial sentence was inevitable. Again, I am unable to accept this submission.

At p 6 of his remarks on sentence the judge said: "I have, when considering all of these things, also considered my obligation which requires me to reflect on suitability or otherwise of a non-custodial sentence and in my view a custodial sentence is both appropriate and inevitable having regard to the circumstances (of) this case".

It is clear that the sentencing judge did not misdirect himself in concluding that a custodial sentence was inevitable, but reasoned to that conclusion in the light of the various objective and subjective features of the crime and the applicant's circumstances. I would therefore reject that submission as well.

Mr Game filed in Court an affidavit by Clare Joanne Farnham, a solicitor of the Legal Aid Commission, sworn 24 July, who deposed to the existing arrangements within the prison system for women who are pregnant and who give birth while in custody.

It is apparent that a mother in this situation is released from prison to a hospital for the delivery and for the immediate post-delivery period but that thereafter the child will be separated from the mother unless arrangements can be made under <case> of the Prisons Act to enable the mother and the child to remain together in a low security situation.

Whether or not those arrangements can be made available to this applicant and her baby remains a matter of speculation. However one would hope that an applicant with this record, and with the favourable subjective circumstances to which the sentencing judge referred, which are detailed in the report of the probation officer, would have very good prospects of receiving the benefit of these special arrangements.

Nevertheless, unless this Court were to take the view that in every case a sentence ought to be structured to permit an expectant mother to be released from custody unconditionally at or about the time of the birth of her child it is inevitable that arrangements of the kind referred to must be left to the executive.

I am unable, with respect to Mr Game's argument, to conclude that pregnancy and an expected delivery can be recognised in the sentencing process in the unconditional way that he seemed at times to be inviting the Court to accept.

As I said, it is a most important factor but in the end it is a factor which cannot be given overriding and unconditional weight.

It is an aspect of hardship, not only for the mother but also for the baby, that they should be separated so soon after birth but hardship to third persons is an inevitable aspect of any custodial sentence and it is more frequently inflicted upon innocent dependants, wives, children, members of the family and so on than on the prisoner.

As I have said, the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge was a modest one and if the applicant had not been pregnant the likelihood is that a much more severe sentence would have been imposed incorporating a longer minimum term.

However, the Court must give effect to the errors that Mr Game established.
The applicant is entitled to full credit for the 2 days between her arrest and when she was brought before the Court, and she is entitled to partial credit for the additional 14 days that she was at Lyndon House.

I would therefore propose that leave to appeal be granted, the appeal allowed, the sentence imposed by the sentencing judge quashed, and that the applicant be re-sentenced and given credit for the 2 days between her arrest and her first court appearance and for 7 days in respect of the additional time she spent in Lyndon House.

This will involve dating the minimum term from 11 May 1996 to expire on 3
January 1997. I would order that the applicant be released to parole on that day. I would not adjust the length of the additional term, which will date from 4 January 1997 and expire on 2 May 1998. They are the orders that I would propose.

GROVE J: Save the relatively minor adjustments referred to by the presiding judge, I am unable to detect any matter of significance undermining the critical conclusions of the sentencing judge. I concede that I am tempted to intervene and a Griffiths remand or periodic detention might achieve what is essentially being sought by the applicant.

However, there may observably be little more than an a misericordia basis for this and the case such as R versus Nager (1994) suggests that circumstances such as the present might provoke intervention.

As I understand this is a minority view, pursuit of it has no point. Orders should be made as proposed by Handley JA.

IRELAND J: I agree with Handley JA.

HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court therefore will be as I have announced.
 * * * 
