

Carpenter and Anor versus McGrath and Anor [1996] NSWSC 411 (6 September 1996) 
CARPENTER & ANOR versus McGRATH & ANOR /92; DC 70063/90 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE, SHELLER, COLE JJA 
CATCHWORDS: CONVEYANCING - notice to complete - interest under cl 24 (b) standard form conract - building certificate - s317B 
Local Government Act 1919 - offsetting deposit against damages 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
By operation of a contract in the form of the 1986 standard Agreement for Sale of Land, the appellants agreed to purchase property from the respondents. The property was described as "houses, stables, sheds and land." However, the respondents had failed to obtain building approval for the erection of a shed.
The appellants paid a 10 percent deposit, and agreed that the respondents could use this amount to put a deposit on land they were planning to purchase on the same day.

On 17 July 1989 the respondents' solicitors served a notice to complete on the appellants, fixing 3 August 1989 as the date of completion and making time of the essence. The appellants failed to complete on this date, and on 10 August the respondents' solicitors wrote that they were prepared to allow the appellants to the close of business on 16 August 1989 to complete. They also claimed interest on the balance of the purchase money from 11 July 1989 "to date" pursuant to cl 24(b) of the contract.

The appellants did not complete the sale, and the respondents purported to terminate the agreement and forfeit the deposit. The respondents then brought an action to recover damages for breach of contract. Judge Twigg QC awarded the respondents damages under a number of heads in the amount of $24,383.61, and set off the forfeited deposit against the total of all heads of damage.
The appellants argued that the respondents were unable to convey good title to the property because of the powers conferred on the council by s317B of the
Local Government Act 1919. They also appealed against the decision on liability and on the allowance of damages for interest pursuant to cl 24(b) of the contract, and for loss of income as a lecturer. The respondent cross appealed, claiming that if they were not entitled to recover interest on the purchase price they should be entitled to payments of mortgage interest on the property, and that the trial Judge erred in deducting the forfeited deposit from all the heads of damage.

HELD: . The absence of building approval did not constitute a defect in title. It was unlikely that the Council would ever have exercised its powers under s317B(1)(a) of the Local Government Act 1919. Even though there was a potentiality that the property may have been subject to a Council order, the passing of risk at the date of the contract also passed the risk of that potentiality to the purchaser.

Fletcher versus Manton <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 37] applied; Maxwell versus Pinheiro [(1979) 46 LGRA 310] and
Borthwick versus Walsh [(1980) 41 LGRA 144] not followed.
The rate of interest payable under cl 24 (b) was not void for uncertainty.
In this case, a claim for interest which did not exceed the maximum rate charged by the bank by more than 2 percent would conform with the contractual term.
There was no election not to terminate the contract. It was made plain that if completion was not effected by 16 August 1989, the respondents would terminate the contract. While the respondents' demand for interest was an exercise of a contractual right which only existed as long as the contract remained on foot, such conduct did not amount to an election by the respondents to proceed with the contract in any event.

Tropical Traders Limited versus Goonan <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 41.] (Per Clarke, Sheller JJA) Where a party sustains loss by reason of a breach of contract, the party is to be placed in the same situation, so far as money can do it, as if the contract had been performed; Robinson versus Harman <case>; [[1848] 1 Ex 850] at 855. However, the amount of interest claimed under cl 24(b) cannot be isolated and awarded as a separate head of damages. It was no more appropriate for the respondents to recover separately for interest on the balance of the purchase price up to the date fixed for completion than it was for the respondents to recover or retain the whole or any part of the purchase price.
 (Per Cole JA) The monies payable pursuant to cl 24 was a sum contractually payable if settlement was delayed, and constituted damages for breach of contract arising out of the appellants' failure to complete by 3 August 1989.
The loss of income as a lecturer was wrongly allowed. It could not fairly and reasonably be regarded as a loss flowing from the breach of contract, or something that might reasonably have been in the contemplation of the parties at the time the contract was made as a probable result of the breach.

Hadley versus Baxendale [[1854] 9 Ex 341.] (Per Clarke, Sheller JJA) If a deposit is forfeited it must be set off against the damages which flowed from the appellant's failure to complete the contract, such as expenses of resale, and not against damages separately recoverable under the contract: Ockenden versus Henly ( <case>; [120
ER 590]; Cratchley v Bloom [(1984) 3 BPR 97-206.] There is no reason why the doctrine only applies where the power of resale has actually been exercised. The loss of deposit on the other property, removal expenses and the legal costs and expenses of the sales were correctly set off against the forfeited deposit.
 (Per Cole JA) Offsetting of a deposit only occurs where there is a claim for damages for deficiency on resale, including expenses. In this case it was wrong to offset the forfeited deposit against any other general claims for damages. The only item that should have been offset against the deposit were the expenses.

ORDERS . Appeal allowed;
Judgment of Twigg DCJ set aside and in lieu thereof direct entry of judgment for the appellants;
Each party should pay and bear their own costs of the trial and the appeal.
 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: The facts are set out in the judgment of Cole JA and I will refer to them only insofar as is necessary for a clear understanding of the reasons which lead to my conclusions. 
Liability 
Both Sheller and Cole JJA have explained at length why the decisions in Maxwell versus Pinheiro [(1979) 46 LGRA 310] at 150 are wrong and should not be followed. I agree with their Honours and in these circumstances any further explanation of my reasons leading to that conclusion would be otiose. 
It is true that in Pisano & Anor versus Fairfield City Council [(1991) 73
LGRA 184] 
I agreed with Kirby P who expressed a qualified acceptance of the two decisions to which I have referred. That part of his Honour's judgment did not, however, form part of the essential reasoning towards the conclusion and, on my understanding, my agreement was limited to those essential parts of the judgment. If that not be thought acceptable let me simply say that, having to confront the problem directly in this case, I am satisfied that Pinheiro and
Borthwick cannot stand in the light of Fletcher versus Manton <case>; [(1940-41) 64 CLR 37] (see particularly Starke J at 45 and Dixon J at 49).

The appellant's second submission was that the claim in the notice to complete for interest calculated at 25 per cent was not authorised by the contract and the notice was, therefore, bad. Alternatively, it was said that cl 24(b) of the contract, which according to the respondents authorised the claim for interest, was in the circumstances void for uncertainty.

The two submissions are linked and, because the answer to the second almost certainly resolves the first, it is convenient to deal initially with the second. The relevant part of sub-clause 24(b) read: "The purchaser will ... on completion pay to the vendor interest on the balance of purchase moneys payable hereunder as and from the date fixed for completion at a rate calculated on daily rests and being $2.00 per centum per annum in excess of the rate charged from time to time by the National
Australia Bank on overdraft loans of an amount equivalent to such balance of purchase money hereunder." 
The sub-clause could not on its face be regarded as uncertain. Its meaning is clear. It is said, however, that evidence that the prime rate charged by the bank at the relevant date was 20.25 per cent but that the bank charged a margin of between .5 per cent and 3 per cent, depending on discretionary matters, over and above that prime rate, rendered the clause meaningless. In amplification counsel submitted that as it could not be said that the bank charged a specific rate the clause was rendered meaningless.

I do not accept the argument. The parties clearly intended that the clause should be operative and, provided it is capable of being understood as providing a mechanism for the calculation of interest, that intention should, if possible, be given effect to. In my opinion it is not a necessary condition of the sub-clause that the Bank have a specific rate for the defined loans on the date in question. The sensible meaning of the sub-clause is that the vendor is entitled to charge interest at 2 per cent more than the bank would charge for a comparable loan. If the bank says it charges between 20.75 per cent and 23.25 per cent then any claim for interest which added 2 per cent to a figure within the range would, in my view, conform with the sub-clause.

It is submitted that this approach fails to give due weight to the definite article which precedes the word `rate' in the sub-clause. Put another way, it is submitted that unless the evidence demonstrated the bank charged a specific rate for a loan of an amount equivalent to the balance of purchase money the sub-clause was void for uncertainty. The difficulty that I find with this argument is that, in point of fact, it is true to say that the evidence proved that the bank may well charge 23 per cent interest in respect of a comparable loan, albeit that it is also possible that the bank might have charged more or less than that figure, depending upon discretionary matters. In those circumstances the parties should be taken to have intended that a claim for interest which did not exceed by more than 2 per cent the rate charged by the bank, that is, a figure not more than 2 per cent greater than the figures within the established range, would conform with the contractual term. The fact that the bank did not charge a specific figure but worked within a range is no reason to deny force to the intention of the parties that the sub-clause be given effect to. For these reasons I am not persuaded that the sub-clause was uncertain or that the claim was made outside its terms.

The appellants' next submission was that after the date for completion had arrived the respondents elected not to rescind the contract. Although the respondents actually terminated the contract pursuant to cl 9 I will assume, for present purposes, that there would be no relevant difference between rescission for breach of an essential term and a termination under cl 9 and I will use the expression rescission to conform with counsel's submissions. The circumstances leading to that conclusion were as follows: On 17 July 1989 the respondents served a notice to complete upon the appellants calling for completion at 3 pm on 3 August 1989. Following receipt of this document the appellants, who had not retained solicitors to act on their behalf, consulted solicitors who spoke with the solicitor for the respondents. Following this conversation the solicitors for the appellants wrote to the solicitors for the respondents on 2 August advising, first, that the appellants challenged the validity of the notice to complete and, secondly, that they would be unable to complete the matter conformably with the notice and adding that no guarantees could be given when the matter would be completed. In the letter the appellants went on to request a period of 2 months in which to try and arrange completion.

On 4 August solicitors for the respondents replied to that letter asserting that the challenge to the validity of the notice to complete was misconceived.
On 10 August solicitors for the respondents wrote a further letter the critical parts of which read: "Our client requires, pursuant to Clause 24(b) of the Contract payment of interest on the balance of purchase money from the date fixed for completion, namely 11th July, 1989 to date at the rate of 23.5% being an amount of $6,084.25.

Completely without prejudice to their rights, the Vendors are prepared to allow the purchaser to the close of business on Wednesday, 16th August, 1989 to complete. If completion is not effected within that time they will terminate the contract and they have instructed us to indicate at this time that their intentions are to forfeit the deposit and to resell the property.
Of course they will, pursuant to the contract, claim loss and expense relating to the breach of contract and the resale from your client." 
The appellants' submission is that the first paragraph I have quoted constitutes an express recognition that the contract is still alive on 10
August 1989 and is quite inconsistent with the entitlement of the respondents to treat the contract as at an end. Counsel for the respondent accepted that the principle in Barclay versus Messenger [[1874] 43 LJ Ch 449], which was applied in Tropical Traders Limited versus Goonan <case>; [(1963-4) 111 CLR 41] at 55, was applicable so that the granting of an extension of time should be seen only as an indication of an intention to refrain from electing whether or not to rescind the contract until 16 August
Counsel, however, submitted that there was an unqualified requirement that the appellants pay interest pursuant to cl 24(b) of the contract and that, insofar as such as such a claim could only be based upon an existing contract, it constituted an election which disentitled the respondents from thereafter rescinding the contract.

The submission, in my opinion, overlooks the fact that the claim for interest must be understood in the context of the letter as a whole. It is clear to me that the solicitors for the respondents were saying two things. First, their clients would defer making the election until 16 August 1989; and, secondly, that if completion were to take place the amount payable included both the purchase money and the interest calculated in accordance with cl 24(b).
Consequently, while I think the appellants were right to submit that in demanding interest in those terms the respondents exercised a right under the contract that existed only as long as the contract remained on foot, that conduct did not constitute an election disqualifying the respondents from rescinding the contract because at the time the demand was made the contract was in fact on foot. Nor am I able to accept that the persistence in the claim for interest, calculated until the date of rescission (ie 17 August 1989), in the proceedings constituted an election. By the time the proceedings had commenced the respondents had elected to rescind in unequivocal terms in a letter dated 17 August 1989 and thereby they then rescinded the contract. The later claim for interest is either good or bad but it occurred after an unequivocal election to rescind had been made.

For these reasons I would reject the appellants' challenge to the finding on liability.

Damages 
Once the contract fell through the respondents forfeited the deposit and returned to their property and continued to live there. Accordingly, they did not make the usual claim in the case of a purchaser's default (that is, for the deficiency on resale) but sought consequential losses which his Honour identified and allowed as follows:
Loss of deposit on forfeiture on sale of `Tippaburgh' $25,300.00
Interest pursuant to Cl 24(b) by the sale of 
Mangrove Mountain $7,184.58
Legal costs and expenses on sale of 
Mangrove Mountain $1,740.50
Legal costs and expenses on sale of `Tippaburgh' $2,036.10
Loss of income as lecturer $15,000.00 $51,261.18 
His Honour then deducted the deposit of $35,000.00 from that figure resulting in damages of $16,261.18 to which his Honour added interest.

Both sides have challenged aspects of this award. The appellants claim that items (2) and (5) were not allowable and the respondents, for their part, claim that the sum of $4,500 removal expenses and interest paid to their mortgagee should have been allowed. They also submitted that his Honour erred in deducting the deposit.

The claim for $4,500 is admitted by the appellants. The claim for interest paid by the respondents to their mortgagee did not arise because of the breach of contract. The obligation to continue paying the interest followed the decision of the respondents not to sell the property. It is wrong in principle to regard an obligation which arises because a vendor makes a commercial decision to retain a property as flowing from the breach of contract by the purchaser.

The claim for loss of income as lecturer was, in my opinion, wrongly allowed.
I say this for three reasons. In the first place the appellants neither knew nor ought to have known that the male respondent was seeking a job as a lecturer in the Tamworth area and accordingly the damages could not fall within the second head of Hadley versus Baxendale [[1854] 9 Ex 341]; 156 ER
Secondly, there was no evidence that the respondents were financially worse off as a consequence of the male respondent's inability to take up a job as a lecturer. Whether or not they were worse off was a matter untouched by the evidence. Thirdly, the loss of earnings could not, in any event, be regarded as a loss flowing from the breach of contract.

That leaves only two questions, the deduction of the deposit and the allowance of the claim for interest under cl 24(b).

The general principle which applies to the awarding of damages for the breach by a purchaser of a contract of sale of real estate is that the injured party is to be placed in the same situation, so far as money can do, as if the contract had been performed (Robinson versus Harman <case>; [[1848] 1 Ex 850] at 855, per Parke B; <case>; [154
ER 363], at 365, cited with approval by Gibbs J in Wenham versus Eller <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 454], at 471). This general principle is, however, limited by the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale. That rule has been interpreted as containing two limbs and it is sufficient for my purposes to refer to Lord Upjohn's statement in Koufos versus C Czarnikow Limited [1969] 1 AC 350, at 421, where his Lordship said that - 
Damages should be such as may naturally and usually arise from the breach; or 
Damages should be such as in the special circumstances of the case known to both parties may be reasonably supposed to have been in the contemplation of the parties, as the result of a breach, assuming the parties to have applied their minds to the contingency of their being such a breach.

The overriding principle, however, is that which is expressed in Robinson.
For this reason it has long been accepted that if the deposit is forfeited it must be set off against any damages claimed. That rule does not simply apply to a deficiency on resale of the property but applies to all general damages allowed pursuant to the principle in Hadley versus Baxendale. (See The Standard
Contract for Sale of Land in New South Wales - Butt, p 529, 530; Ockenden v
Henly <case>; [(1858) 120 ER 590], at 593;
Howe versus Smith [(1884) 27 Ch D 89], at 100, -105; Shuttleworth versus Clews [[1910] 1 Ch 176]; Real Estate
Securities Limited versus Kew Golf Links Estate Pty Limited <case>; [[1935] VLR 114], at 124; Mallett versus Jones <case>; [[1959] VR 122], at 132; Cowan versus Stanhill Estates Pty Limited (No 2) <case>; [[1967] VR 641], at 649; NLS Pty Ltd versus Hughes <case>; [(1966) 120 CLR 583], at 589.) 
It is clear to me that a failure to deduct the forfeited deposit from the damages allowed under the Hadley versus Baxendale principle would lead to the over-compensation of the respondents who would thereby be better off than if the contract had been performed. In those circumstances his Honour was correct in deducting the deposit from items (1), (3), (4) and the removal expenses.

I would wish to make two further observations on this topic. First, Cl 9 of the contract distinguishes between the deposit, which the vendor is entitled to forfeit, and additional moneys paid, which the vendor is entitled to retain as security for damages. There is no doubt that there is a difference between a deposit and additional moneys paid. In the case of the former a vendor is entitled to forfeit it if the sale falls through. In the case of the latter the vendor does not enjoy that right but has a contractual right to retain the additional moneys as security. In the event that the damages do not exceed the deposit the vendor is not, as a general rule, bound to account to the purchaser for that deposit. The vendor is, however, bound to refund the additional moneys unless the damages exceed the deposit, and then it is entitled to retain only the sum which represents that excess.

Secondly, there is a decision, Essex versus Daniel (1875) LR 10 CP 538, which supports the respondents' submissions. That decision is, however, out of line with the great weight of authority and is regarded by text writers as questionable, if not wrong. (McGregor on Damages, 15th Ed, p 593; Vendor &
Purchaser - Stonham, p 710 and Williams on Vendor & Purchaser (4th Ed)
Vol II, 1016.) In my opinion Ockenden, which has been applied many times in this country, should be followed and the deposit must be brought to account.

The remaining and more difficult question is whether item (2) is allowable at all and, if so, whether it should be balanced against the deposit.

In principle the interest would not, in my opinion, be allowable. Once the contract had been rescinded the respondents could not have sued for the contract price. They were relegated to a claim in damages for loss of their bargain and consequential expenses. The interest payable under cl 24(b) operates to increase the amount payable on completion and, as the whole of the purchase money is not claimable, it is difficult to see upon what basis the interest payable on the purchase money could be claimable. The respondents rely on the decision of this court in Cratchley versus Bloom [(1984) CCH NSW Conv
R 55-203], at 57,415-57,416. It is submitted that Cratchley authorises the allowance of the interest and establishes that the amount awarded be allowed in addition to the forfeited deposit. Cratchley is a somewhat difficult case but, relevantly, it stands as authority, in my opinion, for the proposition that the deposit should not be deducted from amounts claimed under causes of action separate and distinct from the failure of the purchaser to complete. The items in question in that case, which were not balanced against the deposit, were an occupation fee in respect of a period after the contract had been terminated, repair costs in respect of damage caused during the purchaser's occupation of the property and the conversion by the purchaser of chairs.

This view is, it seems to me, consistent with Professor Butt's statement that: "... the vendor is not required to set off the deposit against amounts which he is entitled to recover from the purchaser under provisions of the contract which impose obligations upon the purchaser irrespective of the breach which justified termination by the vendor: the obligation to pay such amounts does not flow from the breach. Examples are: occupation fees payable pursuant to a special condition in the contract, and the costs of repairing damage to the premises pursuant to" [conditions in the contract].

The loss claimed in this case would, arguably, have been claimable only if the respondents had sought to recover a deficiency on resale. If that had occurred the respondents may have been entitled to treat the purchase price as constituted both by the amount shown in the contract and the interest payable under cl 24(b) for the purposes of determining the deficiency on resale. That only means that, for the purposes of calculating the purchase price payable under the contract, it is permissable to treat the interest as part of the price payable. This is a contentious question and it is unnecessary to decide whether it is correct. In the circumstances, as there was no resale and as the respondents are seeking to put forward a claim which could only be justified upon the basis of the continued existence of the contract, that claim should be rejected.

In the result the allowable damages are as follows:
Loss of deposit on forfeiture on sale of `Tippaburgh' $25,300.00
Legal costs and expenses on sale of 
Mangrove Mountain $1,740.50
Legal costs and expenses on sale of `Tippaburgh' $2,036.10
Removal expenses $4,500.00 $33,576.60 
The damages are, accordingly, less than the forfeited deposit. Consequently, the respondents failed to establish their entitlement in the action to any damages. In those circumstances, I agree with the orders proposed by Sheller
JA.
 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
By an agreement in the 1986 form approved by the Law Society and the Real Estate Institute and made on 11 April 1989, the appellants agreed to purchase from the respondents a little over six hectares of land described as Part Pt 18, Fairymede Street, Mangrove Mountain, for $350,000. Included in the description of the nature of improvements on the property were "stables, sheds". The appellants paid a deposit of 10 percent. The parties agreed that the respondents could use the deposit for the payment by them of a deposit of $25,300 on the purchase of a property called "Tippaburgh" which they had agreed to purchase on the same date from Vanguard Pastoral Holdings Pty Limited. 
The appellants did not complete the sale. On 17 August 1989 the respondents purported to terminate the agreement and forfeit the deposit. On 29 March 1990 they began these proceedings in the District Court to recover damages for breach of contract.

On 14 December 1992 his Honour Judge Twigg QC, who heard the proceedings, awarded the respondents damages of $24,383.61, assessed as follows:
Loss of deposit on forfeiture on sale of Tippaburgh $25,300.00
Interest pursuant to cl 24 (b) by the sale of Mangrove Mountain 7,184.58
Legal costs and expenses on sale of 
Mangrove Mountain 1,740.50
Legal costs and expenses on sale of 
Tippaburgh 2,036.10
Loss of income as lecturer 15,000.00 ,261.18 
Less deposit forfeited 35,000.00 ,261.18 
Interest at 15% for 3.3 years 8,122.43 $24,383.61 
His Honour, it will be observed, deducted the deposit forfeited from the total of all heads of damage.

The appellants appealed against Judge Twigg's decision on liability and on the allowance of damages under the second and fifth heads, interest pursuant to cl (b) and loss of income as a lecturer. The respondents filed a notice of contention and a notice of cross appeal to which I will return in due course.

TERMINATION OF AGREEMENT 
Clause 24 (a) of the agreement provided that completion would be effected on or before the expiration of ninety days from the date of the agreement, that is to say on or before 10 July 1989. By that date the appellants had failed to submit a transfer and, despite a request by the respondents' solicitors, Messrs David Roe Treatt & Watts, had neglected to make an appointment to complete. On 17 July 1989 the respondents' solicitors served a notice to complete, appointing 3 pm on 3 August 1989 as the time for completion, if completion was not effected by arrangement prior thereto, and making time the essence of the agreement in all respects. Notice was given that failure to comply would cause the respondents to terminate the agreement and forfeit the deposit. The balance due on settlement was shown as $320,181.08 which included a sum of $4,962.25 described as "Purchaser allows interest on balance purchase monies at 25% being $215.75 per day at 23 days." 
On 2 August 1989 Messrs Rooney & Heazlewood, solicitors, wrote to the respondents' solicitors confirming that they had just received instructions to act on behalf of the appellants. The letter continued: "Unfortunately it appears that effectively no searches or enquiries have been made on our client's behalf and of course it will be necessary to make such enquiries immediately.

Unfortunately we advise we are unable to complete the matter this week and can give no guarantees that the matter will be completed.

We ask that our clients be given an opportunity to have their purchase and advance properly prepared.

Our client requests that a period of 2 months be given, that is, until the end of September 1989.

Because we are unable to complete the matter this week and for that matter guarantee [we] will be completing at all it is pointless from our client's point of view to continue with the matters mentioned above unless your client is prepared to grant an extension of time to our clients to settle the matter.

That is not to be taken as an acknowledgment that your notice to complete has been issued validly." 
Various reasons were advanced for saying that the notice to complete was not valid or binding, none of which has been pursued.

The appellants failed to complete by 3 August 1989. The respondents' solicitors replied to Messrs Rooney & Heazlewood on 4 August and 10 August
In the second letter they wrote: "We refer to your letter of the 2nd August, 1989 and to our reply of the 4th instant. You first notified us of your involvement in the matter on the 31st
July, 1989, yet to date we have no indication from you that you have been able to arrange finance for the purchaser.

Our client requires, pursuant to Clause 24(b) of the Contract payment of interest on the balance of purchase money from the date fixed for completion, namely 11th July, 1989 to date at the rate of 23.5% being an amount of $6,084.25.

Completely without prejudice to their rights, the Vendors are prepared to allow the purchaser to the close of business on Wednesday, 16th August, 1989 to complete. If completion is not effected within that time they will terminate the contract and they have instructed us to indicate at this time that their intentions are to forfeit the deposit and to resell the property.
Of course they will, pursuant to the contract, claim loss and expense relating to the breach of contract and the resale from your client." 
The letter went on to identify heads of loss.

On 17 August 1989 the respondents' solicitors gave notice terminating the agreement and forfeiting the deposit "by reason of your failure to complete such agreement on or before 3 August 1989 which obligation had become an essential obligation of the agreement." 
GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
DEFECT IN TITLE 
On 1 December 1983 Gosford City Council advised the respondents that their development application for erection of a rural shed for the storage of rural machinery and horse stables on the subject property had been consented to pursuant to [s92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s92.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) subject to conditions, the first of which was that no building works, including demolitions or alterations, were to be carried out until a formal building application was lodged in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Act 1919 and approved by the Council. In 1984 a rural shed, covered by the description of improvements in the agreement, was built without any formal building application being lodged with or approved by the Council.

In their further amended notice of grounds of defence and counter claim filed in September 1992, the appellants said: "8A. Further or in the alternative, the Defendants plead as follows: 
A material and substantial part of the property the subject of the
Agreement was: a horse agistment business and stables and sheds used in connection with that business.

The stables and sheds were erected after the commencement of the Local
Government (Amendment) Act 1958, without approval of the relevant Council, namely, Gosford City Council' 
The Plaintiffs were consequently unable to convey good title to the property the subject of the Agreement, and the Defendants were entitled to rescind; 
The Defendants will rely on the Local Government Act 317B (1A)." .............
The Defendants have in fact accepted the repudiation and terminated the agreement and hereby further accept the repudiation and so terminate the agreement." 
The appellants cross claimed to recover their deposit.

This pleading was directed not to the effectiveness of the notice to complete but to the appellants' claimed right to rescind which had not previously been exercised. However counsel informed us that, as in this Court, the appellants' case in the District Court was that the notice to complete was ineffective because the presence on the land of an unapproved building, which the Council might by notice order the owner to demolish, constituted a defect in title and accordingly, when the notice was given, the respondents were unable to complete the contract. Judge Twigg noted the argument to be that the vendor in giving a notice to complete must be ready, willing and able to proceed to completion at the date specified in the notice for completion; Neeta (Epping)
Pty Limited versus Phillips <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 286.] His Honour rejected the submission that the presence on the subject land of a shed, which required not only a development application but also building approval, was sufficient to indicate that there was a defect in the respondents' title at the time specified for completion. His Honour said: "[The male respondent] convinces me that the Council through its employee when he tried to lodge a Building Application, told him that a formal Building
Application in respect of the shed was not necessary. The shed was clearly on the premises at the time of completion and may have been approved by Gosford
Council. Were it not approved in a formal sense, I am satisfied that a certificate under s317A of the Local Government Act would have issued. The plaintiffs did not mislead the defendants by the answers to requisitions nor in my view, is the absence of a formal building application or a certificate under s317A of the Local Government Act amount to a defect in the plaintiffs' title. (See Borthwick versus Walsh [(1980) 41 LGRA 144] and also
McNally versus Waltzer [(1981) 1 NSWLR 294] at -300)." 
The parties accept that there was no basis for a finding that the Gosford City
Council had approved or might have approved the building. Quite clearly the
Council had not. The question remained whether the male respondent's conversation with an employee behind the counter in the Health and Building
Department amounted to a waiver of the Council's right to insist upon a formal building application being lodged and approved if the building was to remain.

In 1989 the following sections of the Local Government Act 1919 were in force: "311. Approval of the council 
A building shall not be erected unless the approval of the council is obtained therefor beforehand.
 ........

B Repair or demolition of existing buildings 
If any building is erected or altered after the commencement of the Local Government (Amendment) Act 1958, without the approval of the council having been obtained therefor beforehand, the council may, by notice in writing specifying a reasonable time for compliance therewith, order the owner to demolish the building or the alteration, as the case may be, or, as an alternative, to carry out to the satisfaction of the council such work specified in the notice as is necessary to make the building or the building as altered, as the case may be, comply with the Act and ordinances.
 .......

AB Application for building certificate 
An application for a building certificate in relation to the whole or a part of a building may be made to the council by - the owner of the building or part or the owner's solicitor, architect or agent; the purchaser under a contract for the sale of property, which comprises or includes the building or part, or the purchaser's solicitor or agent; or any person, with the consent in writing of the owner of the building or part or the owner's solicitor or agent.
 ......

AD Inspection of building 
As soon as practicable after the application is received by it, the council shall undertake an inspection of the building or part, as the case requires.

AE Determination of application 
The council shall determine an application for a building certificate by issuing or by refusing to issue a building certificate the applicant.
 ......

AG Effect of building certificate 
If a building certificate has been issued in relation to a building or part, a council - by virtue of anything existing or occurring before the date of inspection stated in the certificate; or within 7 years after that date by virtue of the deterioration of the building or part solely by fair wear and tear, shall not - make an order under section 317B in relation to the building or part; take proceedings for an order or injunction requiring the demolition, alteration, addition or rebuilding of or to the building or part; or take proceedings in relation to any encroachment by the building or part onto land vested in or under the control of the council.

An order made or proceedings taken in contravention of this section shall be of no effect.
 ........." 
This legislative scheme empowered the Council by notice in writing to order "the owner" of the subject property, defined in s4 of the Act to include both owners in law and in equity, to demolish the shed which had been built without building approval. However, if the Council issued a building certificate under s317AE, its power to order demolition was lost. By cl 12 (b) of the agreement, the respondents warranted that the land was not affected "at the date of making of this agreement" by any notice pursuant to the provisions of s317B of the Local Government Act 1919 which had not been fully complied with.

In Fletcher versus Manton <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 37], each member of the majority of the Court (Starke, Dixon and
McTiernan JJ) referred to the well established rule of equity that when a valid contract for the sale of land is made and the vendor in the event makes good title, then, as from the date of the contract, the purchaser is to be considered the owner of the land and, by consequence, must suffer whatever loss or detriment may after that time fortuitously befall the property or be placed by the law upon the person filling the character of owner; 45, 48 and
In that case the contract to sell certain land together with a brick terrace erected thereon was dated 21 March 1940. On 8 March 1940 the Victorian
Housing Commission had declared pursuant to powers under slum reclamation legislation that the premises were unfit for human habitation and authorised the serving of notice in writing on the owner requiring him to demolish the houses. On 3 April 1940 the vendor received such a notice. On 8 May 1940 the purchasers were informed. The vendor complied with the notice and demolished the houses. On 21 June 1940 the purchasers refused to accept title, demanded rescission of the contract and required the return of the deposit.

At first instance Lowe J dismissed the purchasers' summons for declaratory relief. His Honour held that the burden of the declaration by the Housing
Commission and the direction for demolition fell on the purchasers as the equitable owners of the houses at the material time. In the High Court the majority agreed. Their Honours held that the direction to demolish the terrace did not become effective until its receipt by the vendor on 3 April, when the purchasers were the equitable owners of the land. Accordingly it afforded no reason for refusing to accept title, as the property was at the purchasers' risk at that date, and they should bear the loss occasioned by the demolition.
The case turned upon whether the ownership of the land was affected by the
Housing Commission's declaration on 8 March 1940, before the contract was made, or only by the sending out or receipt of the demolition notice. At 48-9
Dixon J said: "The real question appears to me to be whether the declaration of 8 March ought or ought not be considered as then presently affecting the ownership of the land or, in other words, subject to the owner's right of appeal, as being definitive of the owner's duty to demolish, service amounting to no more than a condition precedent to legal enforcement.

Upon consideration I have come to the conclusion that the making of the declaration ought not to be so regarded. The Housing Commission are an administrative body authorised to take a course adverse to the owner of land.
They are not pronouncing a judicial sentence or decree but giving a direction or addressing a command to a person occupying the character of owner. What the
Commission do before issuing the direction or command to the person concerned, that is, before service of the declaration, is inchoate and affects only themselves and their officers. They are authorised to deal with the owner and ownership, that is to say, the owner of land as such. The statute means that the blow shall fall on the owner for the time being, and it specifies the means or occasion by which it shall take effect. Whoever is the owner at that moment must suffer the consequence. It is at this point that the equitable rule is invoked. The rule determines that for such purposes `ownership' shall be regarded as passing from vendor to purchaser at the date of the contract.
It must be remembered that the parties were bargaining for the transfer from one to the other of slum property liable under a general Act of Parliament to be affected at any moment of time by services of a demolition order. Once it is seen that ownership with all its risks is in equity transferred from the moment of the contract, than no anomaly can be felt in imposing on the purchasers the burden arising from the promulgation afterwards of an order of the Housing Commission, though before the date of the contract proceedings within the commission had, without the knowledge of either party, advanced up to the final point before notification." 
In the present case Dixon J's reasoning points to a conclusion that the ownership of the subject land was unaffected until such time, if ever, as the
Council gave a notice under s317B (1A). The appellants sought to contrast the
Council's non-approval of the particular shed built without approval by emphasising Dixon J's reference to the slum property being "liable under a general Act of Parliament to be affected at any moment of time" by the service of a demolition order. In Royal Sydney Golf Club versus Federal Commissioner of
Taxation <case>; [(1955) 91 CLR 610] at 624 the High Court said that there is all the difference between a public law affecting the enjoyment of land and a restriction of title. But I do not think that the phrase quoted detracts from the conclusion that for the same reason that the ownership of the land was unaffected until the vendor received a notice in Fletcher versus Manton, the ownership of the subject land was unaffected until the Council gave a notice. It did not matter that until the Council gave a notice the subject property with a building erected on it without Council approval was, to adapt the words of Dixon J, liable under the Local Government Act to be affected at any moment of time by a notice in writing ordering demolition.

In New South Wales the Courts have held to the contrary. Maxwell versus Pinheiro [(1979) 46 LGRA 310], a decision of Powell J, concerned the sale of a two storey brick terraced house with a single storey addition and garage. Unknown to the purchasers, the addition, which included a kitchen alcove, had not been approved by the Council. The work had been done in about 1976. The purchasers, on becoming aware that the work had been done without Council approval required the vendors to supply a certificate of compliance under s317A on or before completion of the contract. The vendors' solicitor refused and the purchasers gave notice of rescission. At 318 his Honour said: "Quite untutored by authority I would have thought that the fact that, in consequence of work having been unlawfully carried out, a council might lawfully require the demolition or rectification of a building on land the subject of a contract for sale and might itself enter the subject land to carry out the work of demolition or rectification was, unless the purchaser knew of, or had reason to suspect, that fact at the time of entering into the contract, a latent defect in title, which defect the purchaser was entitled to have removed either by having the work rectified by the vendor at the vendor's expense or by having the vendor obtain a certificate under s317A of the Act." 
His Honour referred to Carlish versus Salt [[1906] 1 Ch 335], a case about the service of a party wall award on the vendor before the contract to sell was entered into, and Fletcher versus Manton as clearly demonstrating that this was so in a case in which a Council had proceeded to issue a notice under s317B (1A) and added: "For my own part, I see no logical reason why the position should not be the same even though no such notice has, in the relevant case, been served." His Honour referred also to Vukelic versus Sadil-
Quinlan & Associates [(1976) 3 ACTR 3] and declared the contract to be validly rescinded.

Borthwick versus Walsh [(1980) 41 LGRA 144], a decision of McLelland J, presented a different problem. Like the vendor in
Fletcher versus Manton, the vendors demolished the offending structure. The plaintiff had contracted to purchase a two storey house with swimming pool, cabana and carport. The carport had been erected without Council approval, a matter not known to the purchaser and not disclosed in answers to requisitions. The Council refused to issue a 317A certificate whilst the carport remained. The purchaser purported to rescind. A few days later the vendors dismantled the carport and shortly afterwards the Council issued a certificate of compliance. The purchaser refused to proceed with the purchase.
On the question whether the purchaser validly terminated the contract,
McLelland J said at 150: "The evidence establishes that the carport was erected by the vendors at sometime after they acquired the property in 1968 and that no approval of the
Council was obtained in respect thereof. It was therefore erected in breach of s311 of the Local Government Act, and the powers conferred on the Council by s317B of the Act were available in respect thereof. The evidence also establishes that as at 27th June 1979, there was no reasonable prospect that the Council would issue a certificate under s317A so long as the carport remained, and it is relevant to note that to the extent of more than 50 per cent of its area the carport stood between Currawong Avenue and a 20 feet building line which had been fixed by the Council on 31st August 1937, under s308 (1) of the Act.

In my opinion the existence as at the date of a contract for the sale of real property of a state of affairs which renders the powers conferred on a council by s317B available to be exercised in respect of that property constitutes a defect in the vendor's [sic] title. I respectfully agree with the decision of
Powell J to that effect in Maxwell versus Pinheiro. Any right exercisable against, or restriction affecting, the property or its owner to its or his detriment is a defect in title unless it arises solely by reason of the existence of a law of general application: see, eg Royal Sydney Golf Club v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1955) 91 CLR 610] at 623-4; Gollan versus Randwick Municipal Council [(1961) 6
LGRA 275] at 280-1; Ballard versus Way <case>; [(1834) M & W 520]; [150 ER 540]; and Larkin versus Lord Rosse [(1846) 10 Ir Eq R 70.] 
In the present case, while s317B of the Local Government Act is undoubtedly a law of general application, it is given a particular operation in the present case by reason of the special facts relating to the subject property (and in particular the carport), and the specific rights of the Council in relation to the subject property arose not solely by reason of the existence of s317B but by reason also of the existence of the special facts in question.
Those special facts are not matters of which the purchaser should be taken to have had notice at the time of the contract so as to qualify the vendors' obligations as to title in accordance with the principles stated in McGrory v
Alderdale Estate Co [[1918] AC 503] at 508." 
At 151-2 His Honour said: "In the present case the defect in title which I have held to exist in relation to the carport was in my opinion substantial in the relevant sense.
The carport was a significant feature of the property sold, providing as it did covered accommodation for two cars at the front of the property. It would have been impossible to provide equivalent car accommodation elsewhere on the property without a least demolishing, or substantially altering and adapting as a garage, the cabana, and thus being deprived of the use of the cabana for any other purpose. As I have said, there was on 27th June 1979, no reasonable prospect of the vendors being able to cure this defect in their title short of demolishing the carport. But demolition of the carport would have simply converted the legal detriment into the equivalent physical detriment. It is immaterial whether such demolition be regarded as a consequence of the defect in title existing as at the date of the contract, or as a voluntary act by the vendors after the date of the contract substantially altering the physical characteristics of the property contracted to be sold. Whatever be the true limits and rationale of the rule that a purchaser bears the risk of deterioration or destruction of property between contract and completion (see (Fletcher versus Manton; Davjoyda Estates versus National Insurance Co <case>; [(1967) 116 CLR 344)] it can have no application to voluntary destruction by a vendor of part of the property contracted to be sold: see, eg Duke of St
Albans versus Shore <case>; [(1789) 1 H Bl 270]; [126 ER 158.] For the reasons I have already expressed the carport was a significant and substantial feature of the property and in its absence the vendors would have been unable in a substantial respect to comply with their essential obligations." 
In McInnes versus Edwards <case>; [(1986) VR 161], Kaye J held that the contravention of building regulations prior to contract which empowered the Council to order rectification, demolition or removal of the offending works did not constitute a latent defect in the vendor's title. His Honour referred to Maxwell versus Pinheiro and
Borthwick versus Walsh and said that the ratio to be extracted from Fletcher v
Manton was not reflected in the decisions. At 168 Kaye J said that Powell J's view in Maxwell at 318 "expressed as a conclusion from authorities, .... was not accepted, if not rejected, by the High Court in Fletcher versus Manton." With due respect, I think this is correct. At 164 Kaye J quoted from the 5th edition of Megarry & Wade, The Law of Real Property, at 611 where the learned authors describe a good title as a title free from encumbrances including statutory liabilities "if they are not merely potential or imposed on all property generally" and continue: "But a statutory liability which first attaches to the property after the date of the contract must be borne by the purchaser (for the risk is on him) except to the extent that it is an outgoing which the vendor must meet as attributable to the period of his own occupancy, and except where it prevents the vendor from giving vacant possession on completion." 
In the present case it is not likely that the Council would ever have exercised its powers under s317B (1) (a) of the Local Government Act. Until it did the liability was at most potential.

In Delbridge versus Low [(1990) 2 QdR 317], Derrington
J held, following McInnes versus Edwards, that the mere existence of circumstances which created the possibility, probability or risk that a property would at a future date be subject to a statutory charge or burden did not constitute a latent defect in title. An inchoate or potential hazard at the date of the contract was not enough to constitute a defect in title. It could not be said that a risk of an order by the Council for the demolition of the roof sheeting to a carport constituted a defect in title within the meaning of the terms of the contract. His Honour reviewed the cases including
Summers versus Cocks <case>; [(1927) 40 CLR 321] and Tsekos versus Finance Corporation of Australia Limited [(1982) 2 NSWLR 347] at 356.

In Pisano versus Fairfield City Council [(1991) 73 LGRA 184], the appellants had sued the Council for having issued, allegedly with negligence, a certificate under s317A. In the course of his judgment, Kirby P, with whom
Samuels and Clarke JJA agreed, said, obiter, that he preferred the reasoning of Powell J in Maxwell and McLelland J in Borthwick to that of Kaye J in
McInnes versus Edwards. At 196 his Honour said: "To the extent that I be authorised to do so, conformably with the authority of the High Court in Summers versus Cocks and Fletcher, I would prefer the local decisions to the narrower approach of Kaye J in McInnes. At least where the defect is one which affects the viability of a dwelling house, the acquisition of which is the principal purpose of the purchase of the land and where a condition similar to cl 35 is included in the contract for sale, I believe that a purchaser would be entitled ultimately to rescind the contract where the vendor cannot supply the certificate under s317A as promised." 
In that case cl 35 of the contract provided that on or before completion the vendor should supply to the purchasers, at the cost of the purchasers, "the certificate of survey and s317A certificate". If the contract so provides and the vendor either cannot or does not furnish such a certificate, questions arise about the consequence of the vendor's breach of this obligation which are different from the question whether the vendor can make title to property with nominated improvements if those improvements required Council approval and were erected without it. In the present case the respondents were not obliged to furnish to the appellants a s317A certificate.

Of the authorities to which I have referred we are bound only by the decision of the High Court in Fletcher versus Manton. The reasoning in that case points to the conclusion that in the present case, at the date of the agreement for sale, the title to the property was good and that any subsequent action by the
Council affecting the ownership by a notice for demolition or alteration was the affair of "the owner" at the time, namely, the appellants. It should be observed that this conclusion is not affected by Div 7 of the Conveyancing
Act introduced by the Conveyancing (Passing of Risk) Amendment Act 1986.

DEMAND FOR INTEREST PAYMENT 
The appellants submitted that because the notice to complete demanded more than was due under the contract, it was invalid. In Neeta (Epping) Pty Limited versus Phillips the vendor's notice to complete made an untenable claim that on completion she should receive interest on the purchase money. She submitted that the notice to complete was good because completion was sought "in accordance with the terms of the agreement" and that therefore the claim to interest should have been ignored by the purchaser if it was not in accordance with such terms. At 301-2 Barwick CJ and Jacobs J said: "But this cannot be right. By the notice the vendor made the assertion that she was ready and willing to complete but at the same time by a second clause claimed the interest from the purchaser as a condition of completion. If that requirement was not met by the named time and day then, said the vendor, she would forfeit the deposit and sue for breach of contract etc. She plainly showed thereby that she was not willing to complete in accordance with the terms of the agreement." 
In the notice to complete sent on 17 July 1989 the respondents appointed a time and place to complete the agreement "on the terms therein contained and to pay the balance of purchase monies as follows: - ........

Purchaser allows interest on balance purchase monies of 25% being $215.75 per day at 23 days $4,962.25." 
This claim was based on cl 24 (b) of the agreement which provided that: "(b) The purchaser will either on prior demand by the vendor or on completion pay to the vendor interest on the balance of purchase moneys payable hereunder as and from the date fixed for completion at a rate calculated on daily rests and being $2 per centum per annum in excess of the rate charged from time to time by the National Australia Bank on overdraft loans of an amount equivalent to such balance of purchase money hereunder." 
The only evidence about rates charged by the National Australia Bank was contained in an affidavit of Mr Tony Imbruglia, a manager's assistant, apparently of that bank, who said that the National Australia Bank prime rate set on 3 July 1989 was 20.25 percent, which continued until after 17 August
The rate of interest for an overdraft facility throughout that period was calculated by adding to the prime rate a margin of between 0.5 percent to .0 percent, depending upon the quality of security offered and other discretionary matters. At the relevant time the National Australia Bank charged no one rate on overdraft loans but a range of rates. The maximum was .25 percent.

The appellants submitted that the demand for interest calculated at the rate of 25 percent was unsustainable. There was no evidence that in the given case the National Australia Bank overdraft rate would have been 25 percent. It might have been less or it might have been marginally more. There was no rate charged on overdraft loans. The bank charged a prime rate plus a margin. The clause was too uncertain to be enforceable.

In the Council of the Upper Hunter County District versus Australian Chilling and
Freezing Co Limited <case>; [(1967) 118 CLR 429] at 436-7, Barwick CJ pointed out that a contract of which there can be more than one possible meaning or which, when construed, can produce in its application more than one result is not therefore void for uncertainty.
 "As long as it is capable of a meaning, it will ultimately bear that meaning which the courts, or in an appropriate case, an arbitrator, decides as its proper construction: and the court or arbitrator will decide its application.
The question becomes one of construction, of ascertaining the intention of the parties, and of applying it. Lord Tomlin's words in this connection in Hillas & Co Limited versus Arcos Limited <case>; [(1932) 147
LT 503](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281932%29%20147%20LT%20503 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 512 ought to be kept in mind. So long as the language employed by the parties, to use Lord Wright's words in Scammell (G) & Nephew Limited v
Ouston [[1941] AC 251] is not `so obscure and so incapable of any definite or precise meaning that the court is unable to attribute to the parties any particular contractual intention', the contract cannot be held to be void or uncertain or meaningless. In the search for that intention, no narrow or pedantic approach is warranted, particularly in the case of commercial arrangements. Thus will certainty of meaning, as distinct from absence of meaning or of intention, be resolved." 
In my opinion the words here are capable of a definite and precise meaning.
Clause 24 (b) sets the rate chargeable as $2 per centum per annum "in excess of the rate charged by the National Australia Bank". If the National Australia
Bank were shown at the relevant time to charge but one rate on overdraft loans of the particular amount, the calculation would be straightforward. Where there is a range of rates, 2 percent per annum in excess of the rate must be 2 percent per annum in excess of the maximum rate charged from time to time by the bank on overdraft loans. If, at the relevant time, the range had been from to 25 percent, 22 percent would not be $2 per centum per annum in excess of the rate whereas 27 percent would be. Accordingly, in my opinion, the clause enabled the respondents to charge at the relevant time, 25.25 percent. They chose to charge less. By so doing they did not require the appellants to perform more than contractually they were bound to do.

ELECTION NOT TO RESCIND 
The appellants submitted that the respondents, by their letter of 10 August 1989, elected not to terminate the contract in accordance with the notice to complete. The appellants relied upon the second paragraph in which the solicitors stated that the respondents required, pursuant to cl 24 (b) of the agreement, payment of interest on the balance of purchase money from the date fixed for completion, namely, 11 July 1989 "to date at the rate of 23.5 percent being an amount of $6,084.25." The letter must be read as a whole. The substance of it was that "completely without prejudice to their rights" the respondents were prepared to allow the appellants to the close of business on 16 August 1989 to complete. It was made plain that, if completion was not effected within that time, they would terminate. In Tropical Traders Limited versus Goonan <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 41] at 456 in which Jessel MR, dealing with the effect of an extension of time under a contract making time of the essence, held that "a mere extension of time, and nothing more, is only a waiver to the extent of substituting the extended time for the original time, and not an utter destruction of the essential character of the time". Nevertheless the appellants submitted that the requirement pursuant to a clause of the contract that payment be made under it was inconsistent with the conclusion that the contract was at an end; compare Tropical Traders at 56. But, read in the context of the letter as a whole, the respondents were not requiring payment under the contract except as a condition upon which they were prepared to extend the time for completion. If the appellants had proffered the amount claimed and the respondents accepted it, the time would have been extended. Had the appellants then completed the agreement by the date mentioned, 16 August 1989, the right to terminate would have been lost. The letter made plain that if the appellants did not accept the respondents' proposal the contract would be terminated, as it was, on 17 August 1989. In my opinion the letter was not an election by the respondents to proceed with the contract in any event. 
QUANTIFICATION OF DAMAGES 
The general rule at common law is that where a party sustains a loss by reason of a breach of contract, the party is, so far as money can do it, to be placed in the same situation, with respect to damages, as if the contract had been performed; Robinson versus Harman <case>; [(1848) 1 Ex 850] at 80, 98, 116, 134, 148 and 161. In Amann Aviation at 98 Brennan J said: "Where a contract is rescinded for breach, the innocent party loses the benefit of performance of the contract so far as the contract remains unperformed. And there may be other losses resulting from the breach. The rule in Hadley versus Baxendale [(1854) 9 Ex 341] at 354; 156
ER 145 at 151 prescribes the condition on which damages can be awarded in respect of a loss sustained by reason of a breach of contract: `Where two parties have made a contract which one of them has broken, the damages which the other party ought to receive in respect of such breach of contract should be such as may fairly and reasonably be considered either arising naturally, ie, according to the usual course of things, from such breach of contract itself, or such as may reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties, at the time they made the contract, as the probable result of the breach of it.' 
Applying the rule in C Czarnikow Ltd versus Koufos [1969] 1 AC 350 at 385, Lord
Reid said that: `The crucial question is whether, on the information available to the defendant when the contract was made, he should, or the reasonable man in his position would, have realised that such loss was sufficiently likely to result from the breach of contract to make it proper to hold that the loss flowed naturally from the breach or that loss of that kind should have been within his contemplation.' 
I respectfully agree. A plaintiff (as I shall call the party not in breach) seeking damages from a defendant (as I shall call the party in breach) bears the onus of proving both the loss sustained by reason of the breach and the damages for the loss.

The measure of damages prescribed by Robinson versus Harman ensures that the parties to the contract are kept to the benefits and the burdens of the contract they have made: the plaintiff recovers no more than the net benefit he would have received under the contract; the defendant acquires no right to profit by his breach." 
The respondents were unable to extricate themselves from their obligations under the contract to purchase Tippaburgh. Vanguard Pastoral Holdings rejected any postponement of any settlement and gave notice that unless completion took place on 27 September 1989 it would cancel the contract and the deposit would be forfeited. This is what happened. In the result the appellants did not resist the respondents' claim to recover damages for the loss of the deposit, legal costs and expenses on the sale of Mangrove Mountain and legal costs and expenses on the sale of Tippaburgh, heads 1, 3 and 4 of the damages awarded.

The appellants appealed against the amount of damages described as interest pursuant to cl 24 (b). This represented interest under the contract up to the date fixed for completion and was allowed on this basis by his Honour. The appellants submitted that on rescission of the contract, the respondents were no longer entitled to the purchase price and thus could not be entitled to interest on the purchase price. In McGregor on Damages, 15th ed, at para 935, when speaking of the second remedy available to a vendor where the purchaser refuses to proceed with the contract in circumstances which amount to a repudiation, the learned author states the principle as follows: "Secondly, [the vendor] may treat the breach as discharging the contract, forfeit any deposit but restore any payments made on account of the purchase price, and proceed to deal with the property as he desires. Each particular contract must be construed to ascertain whether money already paid by the purchaser is a deposit in earnest or guarantee of performance and therefore to be forfeited, or a part payment of the price and therefore to be restored." 
If the vendor sues for damages to compensate for the loss of the bargain, the purchase price is taken into account in determining whether the vendor has suffered loss and, if so, the extent of it. Since damages in contract are usually assessed at the date of breach (Johnson versus Perez <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 351] at 355) the normal measure is the contract price less the market price at the contractual time fixed for completion. If the market price at the time fixed for completion exceeds the contract price the vendor has not suffered any damage by the loss of the bargain. In the present case the respondents made no claim on this basis. But as Pollock MR pointed out in
York Glass Co versus Jubb [(1926) 134 LT 36] at 40, the damages recoverable are not confined to the actual margin between the sum realised or realisable and the contract price. There may be incidental expenses which have necessarily flowed from the breach of contract.

If on proper analysis, as the author of McGregor suggests in para 940, the amount of damages the vendor is entitled to recover for the loss of the bargain is the full contract price less the net market value of the property left on the vendor's hands, that is to say the amount at which a re-sale has been or could be made deducting therefrom the costs of re-sale, any interest payable by the purchaser on the purchase price during the period up to that time becomes, for the purpose of the calculation, part of the full contract price at the date of breach when completion should have occurred. From the amount so calculated must be deducted the net market value at that date of the property which remains in the vendor's hands. Pursuant to cl 24 (b) interest was payable "on prior demand by the vendor or on completion ...... on the balance of purchase moneys payable." Interest was a component of the purchase price payable on completion and as such to be taken into account in assessing the damages to be awarded for the loss of the bargain. In consequence it was no more appropriate for the respondents to recover separately for interest on the balance of the purchase price up to the date fixed for completion than it was for the respondents to recover or retain the whole or any part of the purchase price. In my opinion, the amount of interest calculated under cl 24 cannot be isolated and awarded as a head of damage. On this part of the appeal the appellants succeed.

This brings me to the fifth head under which his Honour awarded damages, loss of income as lecturer. Judge Twigg found that the appellants knew that the respondents intended to purchase Tippaburgh, which consisted of 560 acres with a homestead and farm buildings at Nundle in northern New South Wales. The respondents wished to move from Mangrove Mountain. Mr McGrath had been conducting a veterinary practice in and around the Gosford area and had used
Mangrove Mountain not only to care for his clients' animals but also for the agistment of horses and some of his own animals. His Honour was satisfied that the appellants knew the plans of the respondents, not only to purchase another farming property in the Tamworth/Armidale area, but also to move there with the intention of either setting up a business or taking work in that area.
They knew that Mr McGrath was a veterinary surgeon who conducted an agistment business on Mangrove Mountain and proposed to continue in that kind of business in Tamworth. His Honour said it was a reasonable inference from these facts that he would continue to earn income as a veterinary surgeon "in some aspect of that profession".

The respondents made enquiries about the obtaining by Mr McGrath of a lecturing position at Tamworth TAFE. Mr McGrath planned to start in such a position in July 1989 by which time the respondents had begun their preparations for the move to Tamworth by moving stock, furniture and other tools of trade to Tippaburgh, having obtained a license from Vanguard Pastoral
Holdings to do so. At the end of July 1989 Mr McGrath took up his position as a lecturer. With the collapse of the arrangements to move Mr McGrath was compelled to give up this position.

The respondents claimed Mr McGrath's loss of income as an instructor and lecturer for one year based upon his plan to work for twelve months in that capacity at an annual income of $15,000. Judge Twigg said that for the respondents to succeed under this head the parties must have had such a loss in mind or it must have been reasonably contemplated as a consequence of the failure of the appellants to complete. His Honour was of opinion that the parties did reasonably contemplate this course and that the damages claimed were not too remote. He said: "It was known that the [respondents] were leaving the district and taking up another business and it was reasonably within the contemplation of the parties that the male [respondent] would have earned income of the same type as he was previously doing. To my mind if he was in business as a veterinary surgeon and continued that profession by lecturing in such related aspects of that profession, it is a proper extension of the second limb of the rule in Hadley v Baxendale that that income was in contemplation.." 
Accordingly his Honour awarded the respondents damages in the amount claimed.

There was no evidence to support a finding that the appellants at the time the contract was made knew that Mr McGrath intended to take up a lecturing position at Tamworth TAFE. The position was sought and obtained well after the contract was made in April 1989. In my opinion the loss of this opportunity could not fairly and reasonably be considered to arise naturally according to the usual course of things from the breach of contract itself or to be something that might reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of the parties at the time they made the contract as the probable result of the breach of it. Accordingly his Honour was wrong to award damages under this head. Quite apart from this, the amount awarded took no account of other employment opportunities available to Mr McGrath in place of the lost lecturing work. No reason was given for assuming that Mr McGrath's earnings were, as a result of the breach of contract, reduced by the loss of the amount of the lecturing fee for twelve months.

CROSS APPEAL 
The respondents cross appealed to recover for removal expenses which his Honour disallowed. The appellants accepted that an amount of $4,500 should have been allowed under this head.

The respondents further cross appealed on the basis that, if, as I think, correctly, the respondents were not entitled to recover interest on the purchase price pursuant to cl 24 (b), they should otherwise have been allowed interest on the lost purchase price. However, as I have said, I do not think that damages can be calculated in this isolated way. The purchase price and interest on it up to the date of breach must be brought into account to determine what damages, if any, the vendor can recover for the loss of the bargain, because the vendor is left with the property worth, at the relevant date, less than the purchase price. If the vendor discharges the contract on the purchaser's breach and forfeits the deposit, neither the purchase price nor interest on it is payable by the purchaser. In my opinion this ground of cross appeal fails.

Finally the respondents submitted that the trial Judge erred in deducting the forfeited deposit from all the damages. The allowable heads of damage that remain are the loss of deposit on forfeiture on sale of Tippaburgh, removal expenses, and the legal costs and expenses on the sale of Mangrove Mountain and on the sale of Tippaburgh totalling $33,576.60, an amount less than the deposit forfeited of $35,000. Condition 9 of the agreement for sale was headed "Purchaser's Default" and provided: "If the Purchaser defaults in the observance or performance of any obligation hereunder which is or the performance of which has become essential, the
Vendor shall be entitled by notice in writing served on the Purchaser to forfeit the deposit paid hereunder (except so much of it as exceeds ten per centum of the price) and terminate this agreement and thereafter either: to sue the Purchaser for breach of contract: or to resell the property as owner and the deficiency (if any) arising on such resale and all expenses of and incidental to such resale or attempted resale and the Purchaser's default shall be recoverable by the Vendor from the
Purchaser as liquidated damages provided that proceedings for the recovery thereof be commenced within 12 months of the termination of this agreement.

The Vendor may retain any money paid by the Purchaser on account of the purchase other than the deposit money forfeited pursuant to this clause as security for any deficiency arising on a resale or for any damage or compensation (including any allowance by way of occupation fee or for rents or profits from a Purchaser who has been in possession of the property or in receipt of the rents or profits thereof) awarded to the Vendor for the
Purchaser's default provided that proceedings for the recovery of such damages or compensation be commenced within 12 months of the termination of this agreement." 
In Ockenden versus Henly <case>; [(1858) EB & E 485]; [120 ER 590], a purchaser agreed to buy a property for [sterling]120 and pay a deposit of 20 percent in part payment of the purchase money. The purchaser failed to pay either the deposit or the purchase price and did not complete the contract. The vendor sued to recover the difference between the purchase price and the amount for which the property was resold, [sterling]15, the deposit, [sterling]24, and the charges attending the resale, [sterling]9.5s, a total of [sterling]48.5s. The jury awarded this amount. On a rule calling upon the plaintiff to show cause before the Court why the verdict should not be reduced by the sum of [sterling]24 on the ground that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover that sum as deposit, as well as all the damages, the purchaser succeeded on the basis that the amount of the deposit recoverable, [sterling]24, should be brought into account against the other damages recoverable totalling [sterling]24.5s with the result that [sterling]24.5s was the amount of damages recoverable. At 492 and 593 Lord
Campbell CJ, delivering the judgment of the Court, said: "But, the seller having obtained a right to the forfeited deposit, and making a further demand of damages sustained on the resale, it becomes necessary to consider what was the nature of the deposit. Now it is well settled that, by our law, following the rule of the civil law, a pecuniary deposit upon a purchase is to be considered as a payment in part of the purchase money, and not as a mere pledge; Sugd V & P ch 1 sect. III art 18 (13th ed).
Therefore in this case, had the deposit been paid, the balance only of the purchase money would have remained payable. What then, according to the seventh condition, is the deficiency arising upon the resale which the seller is entitled to recover? We think the difference between the balance of the purchase money on the first sale and the amount of the purchase money obtained on the second sale: or, in other words, the deposit, although forfeited so far as to prevent the purchaser from ever recovering it back, as, without a forfeiture, he might have done (Palmer versus Temple <case>; [(9 A & E 508))](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=9%20A%20%26%20E%20508 "View LawCiteRecord" ), still is to be brought by the seller into account if he seeks to recover as for a deficiency on the resale.

The rule to reduce the damages to [sterling]24.5s will therefore be absolute." 
The "seventh condition" appears to have been to the same effect as Condition 9 of the agreement for sale. In Cratchley versus Bloom (1984) 3 BPR 97206, Hutley and Samuels JJA held, I think correctly, that the decision was authority for the proposition that the expenses of resale should be set off against the deposit. Their Honours held however that amounts claimed by way of occupation fee and for repairs and restoration of the property and its contents, separately recoverable under the contract whether the purchaser completed or not, should not be set off against the deposit. At 9436-7 Samuels J said: "....... the deposit, as a part payment, is set against the deficiency produced by any difference in price less any expenses `which have necessarily flowed from the breach of contract' (York Glass versus Jubb) such as the costs of resale. But in the present case the occupation fee unpaid does not represent any expense of that kind, and its recovery does not involve any calculation to which the purchase price, or any part of it, is relevant. Clause 16 enables the vendor to retain `any money paid by the purchaser on account of the purchase other than the deposit money' as security for any damages, `including any allowance by way of occupation fee', awarded for the purchaser's default.
This suggests that the deposit was not to be held for that purpose. Hence the claim under this head stands undiminished.

I am of the same opinion concerning the claims for repairs and conversion, and for the same reason. In addition, cl 18 provides a remedy which appears to be independent of that conferred by cl 16." 
With respect I agree with what his Honour said.

In Essex versus Daniell [[1875] 10 LRCP 538], it was said that the doctrine in Ockenden versus Henly applied only where the power of resale had been exercised. There is no reason why this should be so. If the property is resold the deficiency may be measured by reference to the price on resale. If the property is not resold the deficiency is measured by the market value at the date of completion otherwise determined.

Essential to Lord Campbell's reasoning was the proposition that, but for the provision enabling the vendor to forfeit the deposit and prevent the purchaser from ever recovering it back, any part of the purchase price paid which the vendor had retained and which the purchaser was entitled to recover, had to be brought into account against damages recoverable by the vendor from the purchaser on the termination of the contract, being damages flowing from the purchaser's breach of contract in failing to complete. It follows that if a deposit has been paid by a purchaser and forfeited under the contract, and the damages flowing from such breach total less than the deposit, the vendor may retain the deposit, but if such damages exceed the deposit, the vendor may recover from the purchaser no more than the amount of the surplus. The Court was not concerned with amounts claimed by the vendor under the provisions of the contract imposing obligations upon the purchaser separate from the obligation to complete. Such were the occupation fee and cost of repairs held in Cratchley versus Bloom to be recoverable and not brought to account against the deposit. The distinction is explained by Professor Butt, Standard Contract for Sale of Land in New South Wales, 1985, at 530.

In the present case the heads of damage allowed, namely, for the loss of deposit on forfeiture on sale of Tippaburgh, removal expenses, and the legal costs and expenses on the sales, were damages which flowed from the appellants' failure to complete the contract and as such must be set off against the deposit forfeited. Accordingly his Honour was correct in his approach and this ground of cross appeal fails.

CONCLUSION 
I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed;
Judgment of Twigg DCJ set aside and in lieu thereof direct entry of judgment for the appellants;
Each party should pay and bear their own costs of the trial and the appeal.

COLE JA: Mr and Mrs McGrath were the registered proprietors of certain real property land at Mangrove Mountain which they sold by contract dated 11 April 1989 to Mr and Mrs Carpenter for a price of $350,000 with a deposit being paid of $35,000. The form of contract was the standard Agreement for Sale of Land - 1986 Edition, with special conditions. The property sold was described as "house, stables, sheds and land". Mr and Mrs McGrath had obtained development consent for erection of the shed in December 1983, and it was constructed in 1984. A condition of the development approval was that no building works were to be carried out until a formal building application was lodged and approved by council. No such building approval was obtained but, as Twigg DCJ found: "Mr Peter McGrath convinces me that the Council through its employee when he tried to lodge a Building Application, told him that a formal Building
Application in respect of this shed was not necessary. The shed was clearly on the premises at the time of completion and may have been approved by Gosford
Council. Were it not approved in a formal sense, I am satisfied that a
Certificate under Section 317A of the Local Government (Act) would have issued."[1] 
The contract required completion by 11 July 1989. Mr and Mrs Carpenter did not complete by that date. The vendors served a notice to complete dated 17 July which fixed 3 August 1989 for completion. Completion did not occur on that date. After intervening correspondence between the party's solicitors, on August 1989 the McGraths' solicitor sent a letter terminating the contract.

On 29 March 1990 the McGraths commenced proceedings claiming damages for breach of contract. The Carpenters cross-claimed seeking a return of the deposit. Twigg DCJ entered judgment for the McGraths in the sum of $24,383.61 made up as follows:
Loss of deposit on forfeiture on sale of Tippaburgh $25,300.00
Interest pursuant to clause 24(b) $ 7,184.58
Legal costs of expenses on sale of Mangrove Mountain $ 1,740.50
Legal costs and expenses on sale of Tippaburgh $ 2,036.10
Loss of income as lecturer $15,000.00 
Total: $51,261.18 
Less deposit forfeited $35,000.00 $16,261.18 
Interest at 15% for 3.3 years $ 8,122.43 
Total: $24,383.61 
The reference to Tippaburgh is a reference to a property which the McGraths contracted to purchase after exchange of the contract for sale for the sale of
Mangrove Mountain to the Carpenters. The Carpenters knew that the McGraths intended to purchase another property after the contract for sale of Mangrove
Mountain was entered into.

The Carpenters have appealed raising a number of points. First, they contended that as no building approval had been obtained for erection of the shed, that constituted a defect in title depriving the vendors of any entitlement to serve a notice to complete. Second, and alternatively, the notice to complete was invalid because it required payment of interest on the purchase price. The amount of interest required to be paid by the notice to complete was greater than the amount due. Third, and alternatively, the provision in the contract for payment of interest was void for uncertainty and thus the notice to complete was invalid because it required payment of interest. Fourth, if the notice to complete was valid, the vendors had elected not to terminate the contract by demanding interest under the contact on 10 August 1989, that is, after the date of 3 August 1989 fixed for completion by the notice to complete. Fifth, Twigg DCJ erred in allowing as damages interest on the purchase price before termination and Mr McGrath's loss of income as a teacher.

The McGraths have cross-appealed arguing that the trial judge erred in holding that there could be offset against the loss of deposit on termination of the contract for sale of Tippaburgh, the legal costs and expenses on the sale of
Tippaburgh and the loss of income as lecturer, the deposit of $35,000 forfeited on termination of the contract for sale of Mangrove Mountain. In addition, they argued that Twigg DCJ should have awarded as damages $4,500 agreed removal expenses. The appellant accepted that was so. Finally, they contended the trial judge erred in not awarding them interest paid by them on a mortgage over the Mangrove Mountain property after the due date for settlement.

I shall deal with each of these grounds in turn.

DEFECT IN TITLE 
The appellants contended that failure to obtain building approval for erection of the shed constituted a defect in title. This was because there existed the potential for the local council to exercise its powers under s.317B(1A) to order demolition in consequence of absence of building approval.

There is a conflict of authority regarding whether erection or alteration of a structure without building approval constitutes a defect in title. In New
South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory and New Zealand, the predominant view is that it does. In Victoria and Queensland the contrary view prevails.

In 1973 Helsham J expressed the view that "the law does not go so far as to say that defects relating to the construction of a building of the nature disclosed here amount to a defect in title. No doubt they go to the value of the work which is being carried out or was being carried out at the time of the contract on the property, but there is no case which has been cited to me, and none of which I am aware, which says that because a building is not being constructed in accordance with plans and specifications which have been approved this constitutes a defect in title".[2] His Honour restated that view in 1975.[3] 
However the contrary view was expressed by Connor J in the Supreme Court of the Australian Capital Territory in 1976.[4] 
His Honour said: "Moreover by the provisions of s.46 of the Ordinance, in the form in which it was at the time of these transactions, the building controller was empowered to direct the owner of the land to demolish a building which had been erected without a permit, as this garage was. These provisions imposed on the purchaser a liability of uncertain amount at some future time and constituted in my view a defect on the title to the premises -cf. Carlish versus Salt ."[5] 
Powell J in 1979 said: "Quite untutored by authority I would have thought that the fact that, in consequence of work having been unlawfully carried out, a council might lawfully require the demolition or rectification of a building on land the subject of a contract for sale and might itself enter the subject land to carry out the work of demolition or rectification was, unless the purchaser knew of, or had reason to suspect, that fact at the time of entering into the contract, a latent defect in title, which defect the purchaser was entitled to have removed either by having the work rectified by the vendor at the vendor's expense or by having the vendor obtain a certificate under s.317A of the Act." 
Reinforced by the view of Connor J, his Honour said: "In my view the susceptibility of the premises to action by the council pursuant to s.317B(1A) of the Act constituted, in the circumstances of this case, a latent defect in title which the plaintiffs were entitled to require to be removed, either by the rectification of the work or by the issue of a certificate under s.317A of the Act in default of which they were entitled to rescind the contract".[6] 
His Honour did not see Helsham J's decision in Long as a barrier to that view. McLelland J expressed the same opinion in 1980[7] stating: "In my opinion the existence as at the date of a contract for the sale of real property of a state of affairs which renders the powers conferred on a council by s.317B available to be exercised in respect of that property constitutes a defect in the vendor's title. I respectfully agree with the decision of Powell
J to that effect in Maxwell versus Pinheiro. Any right exercisable against, or restriction affecting, the property or its owner to its or his detriment is a defect in title unless it arises solely by reason of the existence of a law of general application." 
Similar views were expressed by Needham J in 1981[8] and 1983[9], by Cohen J in 1983[10], by Powell J in 1984[11], and by Kearney J in 1984[12]. This line of authority was followed in Watkin versus Wilson New Zealand in 1984[13]. In the New South Wales Court of Appeal in Carter versus Hanson considered whether a carport erected without consent constituted a defect in title. In the particular circumstances of that case Mahoney JA, with whom Reynolds and
Samuels JJA agreed held that: "I do not think, even if the carport involves a contravention of the Act or the ordinances, it should be inferred from that that there was a relevant defect in title." 
Being of the view that the carport did not form part of the dwelling which had been agreed to be sold, his Honour said: "The fact that, in respect of some structure which is upon the land, there has been a contravention of the legislation does not, in my opinion, mean that there is a relevant defect in title."[14] 
The report of the decision in Carter versus Hanson does not indicate that the court was referred to any authority on the topic.

In 1985 in McInnes versus Edwards in the Supreme Court of Victoria, Kaye J expressed the view that alterations to a building without consent do constitute a latent defect in the vendor's title. Having discussed the decisions in Maxwell, Borthwick, and Watkin, his Honour considered the decision of the High Court in Fletcher versus Manton[15] and Summers v
Cocks[16]. From those decisions his Honour concluded that: "... the material time for the purpose of conveyance for determination whether a defect in title exists in at the time when the parties entered into their contractual relationship. The existence then of an order made or direction given in the exercise of a statutory power imposing a burden or charge on land or the improvements thereon constitutes a latent defect in title. However, the mere existence of circumstances which create the possibility or probability or risk that the property will at a future date be subject to a statutory charge or burden does not constitute a latent defect in title."[17] 
That decision was followed in the Supreme Court of Queensland by Kelly SPJ in [18]. In that court in 1989 in Delbridge versus Low Derrington J, in a judgment I find persuasive, reviewed some of the authorities and expressed a view according with that of Kaye J. Having quoted the passage that I have quoted from the judgment of Kaye J his Honour said: "The line of reasoning behind this ratio is identical in principle with the analogous line of cases relating to the potential liability of land to a charge to secure the payment for work undertaken by a local authority, and exemplified in such cases as Re Allen & Driscolls Contract [[1904] 2 Ch.
];
Abbott versus Bull [(1988) 14 VLR 996]; and
Holland versus Goltranes Limited (1981) (Full Court 26 July 1984 unreported). The underlying principle is that an inchoate or potential hazard at the date of the contract is not enough: in Re Forsey Hollebones Contract [[1927] 2 Ch.
] , .

It is difficult to accept the proposition advanced for the plaintiffs that there is some relevant distinction in the case of a potential liability of the land to such a burden where on the one side it arises out of illegal conduct and on the other where it is simply the result of an action by an authority so empowered. There is a distinction certainly, but its relevance has never been acknowledged by the many authorities that have touched this and related topics."[19].

Most recently in New South Wales, the matter was considered by the Court of
Appeal in 1991 in Pisano & Anor versus Fairfield City Council[20]. The leading judgment was given by Kirby P with whom Samuels and Clarke JJA agreed.
Kirby P referred to the decisions in New South Wales of Maxwell and
Borthwick, of Watkin in New Zealand and of McInnes in Victoria. His
Honour did not have the advantage of the Queensland decisions. His Honour was alive to the decisions of the High Court in Fletcher versus Manton and Summers v
Cocks. Kirby P wrote: "For my own part I prefer the reasoning of Powell J in Maxwell and McLelland
J in Borthwick. To the extent that I would be authorised to do so, conformably with the authority of the High Court in Summers versus Cocks <case>; [(1927) 40 CLR 321] and Fletcher, I would prefer the local decisions to the narrower approach of Kaye J in McInnes. At least where the defect is one which affects the viability of the dwelling house, the acquisition of which is the principal purpose of the purchase of the land and where a condition similar to clause 35 is included in the contract for sale, I believe a purchaser would be entitled ultimately to rescind the contract where the vendor cannot supply the certificate under s.317A as promised."[21] 
It will be seen that Kirby P's expression of view was greatly qualified. The contract being considered contained a provision which required the vendor to supply the purchaser's on or before completion with a s.317A certificate.
Further, the view expressed was restricted to the circumstance where the affected structure was the "principal purpose of the purchase". Neither circumstance applies in the present instance for there is no clause requiring the vendor to provide to the purchaser a s.317A certificate, or its more modern equivalent, nor could it be said that a shed on a rural property of 6 hectares being sold with house, stables and sheds could be said to be the principal purpose of the purchase. Further, Kirby P's view was qualified by the overriding obligation to respect the principles to be derived from
Fletcher versus Manton and Summers versus Cocks in the High Court.

In my respectful opinion the principles to be so derived are those enunciated by Kaye J in McInnes and lead to the view that "the mere existence of circumstances which create the possibility or probability or risk that the property will at a future date be subject to a statutory charge or burden does not constitute a latent defect in title". I respectfully agree with the view expressed by Derrington J that there is no basis in principle for restricting that concept to circumstances arising otherwise than out of illegal conduct by the vendor, or for that matter, the vendor's predecessor in title. It follows in my view that the absence of building approval does not constitute a defect in title.

The decision in Fletcher, in particular, enunciates what Rich ACJ described as the "undisputed principle" that "when a valid contract for sale of land is made and a good title is shown", the purchaser becomes on exchange the inchoate equitable owner of the land. Thus he bears the risk or advantage thereafter of acts which affect the land or improvements. Dixon J stated the "well established rule of equity" in similar terms: "When a valid contract for the sale of land is made and the vendor in the event makes a good title, then, as from the date of the contract, the purchaser is to be considered the owner of the land and, by consequence, must suffer what loss or detriment may after that time fortuitously befall the property or be placed by the law upon the person filling the character of owner".[22] (emphasis added).

In a sense there is a circularity in using the passing of risk at the date of contract which is dependent upon the subsequent making of good title, to justify a view that the existence of the potentiality of adverse affectation between contract and completion negates the characterisation of that potentiality as a defect in title. Nonetheless it is the title which the vendor has contracted to convey which is established by the contract and thus it must be determined at the date of contract. At that time a property may have the potentiality to be subjected to orders or charges pursuant to a number of local government, rating and other statutes, which potentiality may or may not in the future be realised. The passing of risk at the date of contract passes the risk of that potentiality. Thus, as it seems to me, it is correct in concept to hold that mere potentiality of affectation does not constitute a defect in title.

That does not leave a purchaser without protection. A purchaser may, by an appropriate provision in the contract, require a s.317AE certificate to be provided by the vendor. Alternatively a purchaser may apply himself for such a certificate, protecting his rights if such a certificate is unsatisfactory or does not issue. Thus there seems to me to be no reason of principle which should lead to the contrary result.

It follows that the challenge to the notice to complete, and right to terminate the contract for non-compliance with it upon the basis of a defect in title, fails.

UNCERTAINTY 
Clause 24 provided: "(a) Completion will be effected on or before the expiration of ninety (90) days from the date hereof.

The purchaser will either on prior demand by the vendor or on completion pay to the vendor interest on the balance of purchaser monies payable hereunder as and from the date fixed for completion at a rate calculated on daily rests and being $2.00 per centum per annum in excess of the rate charged from time to time by the National Australia Bank on overdraft loans of an amount equivalent to such balance of purchase money hereunder.

Notwithstanding any other provisions contained herein the vendor's obligation to transfer title of the property to the purchaser will be dependent upon payment of such interest (if any)."[23] 
The evidence was that as at the last day provided by the contract for completion, namely 11 July 1989, the National Australia Bank prime rate was .25%, which rate remained until after 17 August 1989. However in addition to that prime rate the bank charged a margin of between 0.5% and 3%, depending upon the quality of the security offered and other discretionary matters.
Accordingly at the relevant time the bank rate charged by the National
Australia Bank might have been between 20.75% and 23.25%. To that was to be added 2% referred to clause 24(b).

The notice to complete required the purchaser: "To complete the agreement on the terms therein contained and to pay the balance of purchase monies as follows: ....

Purchaser allows interest on balance purchase monies at 25% being $215.75 per day at 23 days $4,962.25." 
As the range of interest rate possible under clause 24 was between 22.75% at the lowest and 25.25% at the highest, the clause was said to be uncertain and, further the notice to complete unenforceable because it required payment of a nominated amount calculated at 25% which may not have been the rate determined under clause 24 if a rate could be determined.

I do not think that clause 24 is void for uncertainty. The clause directs the parties to add 2% to the rate charged by the National Australia Bank on overdraft loans of an amount equivalent to the balance of purchase monies.
That rate is ascertainable, even if it be that , in varying circumstances, the rate may vary . The intention of the parties was clear that the rate to be charged was to be derived from applying a factor to that charged by the
National Australia Bank. On any view a minimum rate charged by the National
Australia Bank on overdraft loans of the specified quantum is known. It is .75%. The bank may, depending upon circumstances, charge more and may charge up to 23.25% at the relevant time. If the vendor wished to levy a charge greater than the minimum rate because of circumstances, and that above minimum rate was not agreed, a court could determine whether an additional sum above the minimum rate was intended by the contract. As Gibbs CJ said in Meehan v
Jones[24], after citing the well known passage from the judgment of Barwick
CJ in Upper Hunter County District Council versus Australian Chilling &
Freezing Co. Limited[25], "it is only if the court is unable to put any definite meaning on the contract that it can be said to be uncertain".

Here a definite meaning can be put upon the contract. The rate is at least .75%, and may, arguably, be more. However the court has not been asked to determine what the true rate contemplated by clause 24 is.

It is said, however, that by nominating a rate of 25%, and a figure calculated based on that rate which the notice to complete called upon the purchaser to pay, the notice is rendered invalid for the rate either is not or may not be %.

In my opinion there are at least two answers to that contention. First, the notice to complete is to be read as imposing upon the purchaser the obligation to complete the agreement "on the terms therein contained". That involved paying interest at the rate required by clause 24. The nomination of the rate of 25% by the vendor was the vendor's contention of what that clause required.
If it was in excess of that which the purchaser agreed was required by the terms of the contract the purchaser could firstly have said so, and secondly have properly complied with the notice to complete by paying the correct sum.
In fact, although the solicitors for the purchaser wrote nominating the alleged deficiencies in the notice to complete, no contention was advanced that the rate required by the clause was other than 25%, and no exception was taken to the amount claimed.

A second answer is that the difference between the rate claimed of 25% or $215.75 per day for 23 days and the minimum rate of 22.75% or $196.33 per day is de mininis. The overall difference is $19.41 per day, or a total of $466.60.

The position here is different to that in Neeta (Epping) Pty Limited v
Phillips[26]. In that case there was no right to interest at all yet it was claimed in the notice to complete. Here there is a right to interest under the contract and it has been claimed but, arguably, at a rate slightly above that which might be determined as the correct rate. That error, if it be one, does not indicate that the vendors "have plainly shown that they were not willing to complete in accordance with the terms of the agreement". As was made clear in Green versus Summerville[27], the adoption by a party of an erroneous construction of the contract does not necessarily negate the position that that party remains ready and willing to perform the contract according to its terms properly construed. That is the manner in which the notice to complete in this instance is to be considered.

It follows that the challenges to both the contract and the notice to complete based upon uncertainty and error in interest calculation fail.

ELECTION 
It was contended that the vendors, after the date for completion had arrived, elected not to terminate the contract. This contention was based upon a paragraph in the letter from the vendor's solicitors dated 10 August 1989 which read: "Our client requires, pursuant to clause 24(b) of the Contract the payment of interest on the balance of purchase money from the date fixed for completion, namely 11 July 1989 to date at the rate of 23,5% being an mount of $6,084.25." 
This was said to be a reliance upon, and affirmation of, the contract. Thus there had been an election not to terminate.

The submission is without substance because it neglects the context in which the paragraph was written. The vendors had given a notice to complete requiring completion on 3 August 1989. On 2 August 1989 the purchaser's solicitors wrote stating that the purchasers are "unable to complete the matter this week and can give no guarantees that the matter will be completed". They sought an extension of time of two months to enable their clients to endeavour to complete. On 4 August 1989 the vendor's solicitors rejected that proposal. However on 10 August 1989 they wrote, "completely without prejudice to the vendor's rights", that the vendors were prepared to allow the purchaser until 16 August 1989 to complete. Obviously if completion was to occur the vendors were entitled to interest pursuant to clause 24(b) from the initial contractual date for completion, namely 11 July 1989, up to August 1989. The passage which I have quoted upon which the purchaser relies was merely an indication of the calculation of interest under clause (b) up to the date of the letter, 10 August 1989. Not only was the letter written without prejudice to the vendor's rights, but it stated explicitly that "if completion is not effected within that time they will terminate the contract". In no way could it be said that the portion quoted constituted, in those circumstances, an election not to terminate.

DAMAGES 
The remaining matters argued by the appellant relate to damages. It was contended that Twigg DCJ erred in allowing $7,184.58 damages pursuant to clause 24(b). The argument was that that was a contractual right dependent upon completion. As completion did not occur, interest was not payable.

I would reject that contention. The purpose of clause 24(b) was to compensate the vendor for late completion. The contract contemplated that the giving of a notice to complete may be necessary, and the parties had agreed in clause 25 that fourteen days was a proper period of notice. Non-performance of the contract occurred and a notice determining the date for completion given.
Clause 9 of the contract provided: "Purchaser's Default 
If the Purchaser defaults in the observance or performance of any obligation hereunder which is or the performance of which has become essential, the
Vendor shall be entitled by notice in writing served on the Purchaser to forfeit the deposit hereunder (except so much of it as exceeds ten per centum of the price) and terminate this agreement and thereafter either: to sue the Purchaser for breach of contract; or to resell the property as owner and the deficiency (if any) arising on such resale and all expenses of and incidental to such resale or attempted resale and the Purchaser's default shall be recoverable by the Vendor from the
Purchaser as liquidated damages provided that the proceedings for the recovery thereof be commenced within 12 months of the termination of this agreement.

The vendor may retain any money paid by the purchaser on account of the purchase other than the deposit money forfeited pursuant to this clause as security for any deficiency arising on a resale or for any damage or compensation (including any allowance by way of occupation fee or for rents or profits from a Purchaser who has been in possession of the property or in receipt of the rents or profits thereof) awarded to the Vendor for the
Purchaser's default provided that proceedings for the recovery of such damages or compensation be commenced within 12 months of the termination of this agreement."[28] 
Part of the loss which the vendors suffered resulting from the purchasers not completing on 3 August 1989 was non-receipt of the monies payable pursuant to clause 24. The sum is not part of the purchase price but rather a sum contractually payable if settlement is delayed. The sum so payable is in my opinion damages suffered for breach of contract arising from the purchaser failing to complete by the fixed contractual date of 11 July , as extended by the notice to complete to 3 August 1989.

The remaining challenge was to the trial judge's award of $15,000 for loss of wages suffered by the male vendor who was unable to take up a position as a lecturer in the Tamworth district. In my opinion this challenge succeeds.
Whilst it was known that the vendors intended to move to a new area on completion of the sale, at the date of contract there was no knowledge in the purchasers of the male vendor's intended occupation as a lecturer. Indeed the position of lecturer was not obtained until after the contract date. The second limb of the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale[29], denies the vendors' entitlement.

CROSS-CLAIM 
The vendors are entitled to an additional $4,500 for agreed removal expenses, as was conceded. In addition they challenge the trial judge's rejection of a claim for interest which they paid to the Commonwealth Bank on a mortgage over the Mangrove Mountain property after the sale fell through. Although the claim made was only to the date of trial, in principle the vendor's claim appears to be a claim in perpetuity whilst ever they retain Mangrove Mountain. In my opinion this claim is unsustainable. The vendors had the property subject to the mortgage. Had they sold the property they would have discharged the mortgage. However, once the transaction fell through, they retained possession of the property and had the benefit of it. One could not claim as damages the monies payable under a mortgage on the property without bringing into account the advantages or benefits of occupation of and earnings from the property. No endeavour was made to establish that loss. Continued payments of mortgage interest on a property retained after termination of a contract for default cannot in usual circumstances be regarded as a loss flowing from breach. This claim fails.

There remains the question of whether the trial judge was correct to offset the forfeited deposit of $35,000 against the damages found.

The general rule is that damages should, so far so possible, put the innocent party in the same position as he would have been had the contract been performed.[30] This general principle is limited, as Gibbs CJ pointed out in
Wenham[31] by the rule in Hadley versus Baxendale that: "Where two parties have made a contract which one of them has broken, the damages which the other party ought to receive in respect of such breach of contract should be such as may fairly and reasonably be considered either arising naturally, i.e, according to the usual course of things, from such breach of contract itself, or such as may reasonably be supposed to have been in contemplation of both parties, at the time they made the contract, as the probable result of the breach of it." 
The vendors rights on the purchaser's default contemplated by the parties were those agreed by clause 9 of the contract set out above. To my mind clause 9 makes clear that the deposit is forfeited to the vendor. That is so even if the property could be resold immediately for a price equivalent to the original sale price plus expenses. In that event the vendor makes a profit from the breach. It also makes clear that the purchaser may sue for damages for breach of contract. It makes clear that if there is a sum by way of deposit in excess of 10%, that sum may be retained by the vendor "as security for .. any damages ... awarded to him for the purchaser's default". That makes clear that the 10% deposit forfeited is distinct from any additional sum which the vendor may recover as damages for breach of contract.

As I read Cratchley versus Bloom[32], which considered a clause 16 identical with clause 9, that decision establishes that damages recoverable pursuant to clause 9, other than any deficiency being the difference between the contract price and resale price, and costs associated with resale, are not to have offset against them the forfeited deposit.

As Hutley JA said: "The fact that the vendor is entitled to retain money received by him in addition to the deposit against damages or compensation (including any allowance by way of occupation fee ...) awarded to him for the purchaser's default, would suggest that the deposit was not to be treated as security against such default." 
Samuels JA drew a distinction between two categories of damages, namely, those related to deficiency upon resale including expenses, against which the forfeited deposit must be offset, and other heads of damage against which the forfeited deposit was not to be offset. Offsetting the forfeited deposit against the first category of damages is clearly consistent with authority[33]. As Samuels JA pointed out the reason why the deposit is forfeited where no action for damages for deficiency in purchase price is brought yet is offset in a claim for damages in the first category flows from the character of a deposit, it being both "an earnest to bind the contract (Howe versus Smith [[1884] 27 Ch.D 89] at 101) and part payment of the purchase price." As Fry LJ said in Howe versus Smith[34]: "Money paid as a deposit must, I conceive, be paid on some terms implied or expressed,. In this case no terms are expressed and we must therefore inquire what terms are to be implied. The terms most naturally to be implied appear to me in the case of money paid on the signing of a contract to be that in the event of the contract being performed it shall be brought into account, but if the contract is not performed by the payer it shall remain the property of the payee. It is not merely a part payment, but is then also an earnest to bind the bargain so entered into, and creates by the fear of its forfeiture a motive in the payer to perform the rest of contract.

The practice of giving something to signify the conclusion of the contract, sometimes a sum of money, sometimes a ring or other object, to be repaid or redelivered on the completion of the contract, appears to be one of great antiquity and very general prevalence.
 ...

Taking these early authorities into consideration, I think we may conclude that the deposit in the present case is the earnest or arrha of our earlier writers; that the expression used in the present contract that the money is paid "as a deposit and in part payment of the purchase-money", relates to the two alternatives, and declares that in the event of the purchaser making default the money is to be forfeited and that in the event of the purchase being completed the sum is to be taken in part payment."[35] 
It is forfeited because it is an earnest for a broken contract[36]. However, having the co-ordinate character of being a part payment of the purchase price it is offset against any deficiency on resale when damages in that respect are claimed because a vendor is not entitled to receive for the property by way of damages more than he would have received on sale.

However damages falling within the second category do not have that characteristic of being related to the purchase price. They are separate and distinct damages flowing from breach of contract and contemplated by the parties as being so by clause 9. As Samuels JA said: "Clause 16 enables the vendor to retain "any money paid by the purchaser on account of the purchase other than deposit money" as security for any damages, "including any allowance by way of occupation fee", awarded for the purchaser's default. This suggests that the deposit was not to be held for that purpose. Hence the claim under this head stands undiminished." 
Mahoney JA was correct, in my opinion, to say in Cratchley that the vendor's rights depend upon the construction of clause 16 (here clause 9).

Professor Butt[37] has written, regarding setting off the deposit: "Set-offs
Deposit 
In assessing the damages payable to the vendor for the purchaser's default, credit must be given for the amount of the forfeited deposit. If the amount of the damages exceeds the amount of the deposit, the vendor may recover only the difference; conversely, however, if the amount of the deposit exceeds the amount of the damages, the vendor may retain the whole of the deposit (subject, of course, to the purchaser's right to seek relief against loss of the deposit by way of equitable principles or statutory provision, discussed earlier in this commentary upon condition 9). However, the deposit is set off only against those damages which, in accordance with the general Hadley v
Baxendale principles (discussed above), may be said to flow from the purchaser's breach. It seems that the vendor is not required to set off the deposit against amounts which he is entitled to recover from the purchaser under provisions of the contract which impose obligations upon the purchaser irrespective of the breach which justifies the termination by the vendor: the obligation to pay such amounts does not flow from the breach. Examples are: occupation fees payable pursuant to a special condition in the contract, and the costs of repairing damage to the premises pursuant to paras (b) and (c) of condition 18." 
Cratchley versus Bloom is cited as authority supporting the last two sentences quoted.

With great respect I think that the first sentence is too widely stated.
Credit must be given for the amount of the deposit forfeited when claim is made for damages flowing from a deficiency on resale. That is because of the part characteristic of a deposit as part payment of the purchase price. Each of the authorities cited by Professor Butt in support of the first sentence are cases involving a claim for deficiency on resale, or where other relief is sought contain discussion of that topic. They do not address a claim for other heads of damage.[38] No authority is cited for the third last sentence quoted, which is of similar import to the first. The last two sentences suggest that
Cratchley versus Bloom holds that the deposit need not be offset against damages payable in respect of breach of contract not justifying termination because the obligation to pay such damages does not flow from the breach justifying termination. I can see nothing in Cratchley to support that basis for not offsetting the deposit. The reasoning of each of Hutley and Samuels JJA in
Cratchley is that offsetting of deposit occurs only where there is a claim for damages for deficiency on resale (including expenses), and because the deposit has the part characteristic of part payment of purchase price. It is not related to the characterisation of the breach as being one which enables termination. It flows as a consequence of the construction of clause 9.
Accordingly in my view it is not to be offset against other general claims for damages.

There is, upon this basis, only one item to be offset against the deposit, namely $1,740.50 being expenses of sale. That sum is thus irrecoverable as damages 
It follows, in my view, that Twigg DCJ was in error in offsetting the $35,000 forfeited deposit.

In my view damages to which the vendors were entitled were as follows:
Loss of deposit on forfeiture on sale of Tippaburgh $25,300.00
Interest pursuant to clause 24(b) $ 7,184.58
Legal costs and expenses on sale of Tippaburgh $ 2,036.10 Removal expenses $ 4,500.00 
Total: $40,761.18 
Interest @ 15% for 7 years (July 1989-July 1996) $42,799.24 
TOTAL: $81,819.92 
As the appellants have in substance failed they should pay the costs.

I would propose the following orders:
Appeal and cross-appeal upheld.
Order of Twigg DCJ dated 14 December 1992 be set aside.
In lieu thereof judgment be entered for the respondents in the sum of $81,819.92.
The appellants are to pay the respondents' costs of the appeal and of the proceedings in the court below.
 [1] Appeal Book, p.129T-130C.
 [2] Long versus Worona Pty Limited (1973) 1 BPR 9109 at 9112.
 [3] Macklouf versus Sakr 1 BPR 9133.
 [4] Vukelic versus Sadil-Quinlan & Associates Pty Limited & Anor [(1976) FLR 457.] [5] Vukelic versus Sadil-Quinlan & Associates Pty Limited & Anor [(1976) FLR 457] at 464.
 [6] [(1979) 46 LGRA 310] at 318-319.
 [7] Borthwick versus Walsh [(1980) 41 LGRA 144] at 150.
 [8] De Lellis versus Tinyow (1981) 2 BPR 9236.
 [9] Hanna versus McDiarmid (1983) 3 BPR 9143.
 [10] Maybury versus Constaniou (1983) 3 BPR 9125.
 [11] Lavery versus Nelson (1984) 3 BPR 9211.
 [12] Didsbury versus Griffin [(1984) 3 BLR 9284.] [13] Watkin versus Wilson [(1985) 1 NZLR 666.] [14] (1979) 1 BPR 92411 at 9245-6.
 <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1986) VR 161] at 168.
 [18] Barber & Anor versus Keech & Ors <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 37] at 48.
 [23] Appeal Book, p.47.
 <case>; <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 429] at 436-7.
 <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 286] at -302.
 <case>; [(1979) 54 ALJR 50] at 52.
 [28] Appeal Book, p.45.
 [29] [[1843-60] All ER Rep 461.] <case>; [[1848] 1 Ex 850] at 855 per Parke B; <case>; [154
ER 363] at 365;
Wenham versus Eller <case>; <case>; <case>; [[1858] 120 ER 590] at 593; Howe versus Smith [[1884] 27 Ch.D 89] at 100, -105; Shuttleworth versus Clews [[1910] 1 Ch 176]; Keck v
Faber (1916) 60 Sol. J 253; Real Estate Securities Limited versus Kew Golf Links
Estate Pty Limited <case>; [[1935] VLR 114] at 124; Mallett versus Jones <case>; [[1959] VR 122] at 132; Cowan versus Stanhill Estates Pty Limited (No.2) <case>; [[1967] VR 641] at 649; Abraham versus Mallon (1975) 1 BPR 9157; Taylor v
Raglan Developments Pty Limited [[1981] 2 NSWLR 117] at 135l
Little versus Piccin [(1983) CCH NSW Conv. R 55-152];
Coates versus Sarich [[1964] WAR 2.] [34] [[1884] 27 Ch.d 89] at 101.
 [35] [1884] 27 Ch/D 89 101-102.
 <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 378] at 386 per Barwick CJ, 392 per Gibbs J, 398 per Stephen J, per Jacobs J and 406 per Aickin J.
 [37] The Standard Contract for Sale of Land in New South Wales (1985) -530.
 <case>; [[1858] 120 ER 590] at 593; Howe versus Smith [[1884] 27 Ch.D 89] at 100, -105; Shuttleworth versus Clews [[1910] 1 Ch 176]; Keck v
Faber (1916) 60 Sol. J 253; Real Estate Securities Limited versus Kew Golf Links
Estate Pty Limited <case>; [[1935] VLR 114] at 124; Mallett versus Jones <case>; [[1959] VR 122] at 132; Cowan versus Stanhill Estates Pty Limited (No.2) <case>; [[1967] VR 641] at 649; Abraham versus Mallon (1975) 1 BPR 9157; Taylor v
Raglan Developments Pty Limited [[1981] 2 NSWLR 117] at 135l
Little versus Piccin [(1983) CCH NSW Conv. R 55-152];
Coates versus Sarich [[1964] WAR 2.] The damages claim of the vendor in Little is unclear;
I take it to be a claim for expenses of sale. * * * 
