

Mass International versus Sinclair Matter No 3185/95 [1997] NSWSC 260 (15 July )

MASS International Pty Limited versus Sinclair /95 July 1997 
Hodgson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
NO. 3185 OF 1995 
MASS INTERNATIONAL PTY LIMITED V SINCLAIR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 22nd April this year, Master Macready made orders setting aside a statutory demand served on the company, M.A.S.S. International Pty. Limited, by John Aston Sinclair, and also refused leave to Mr. Sinclair to bring proceedings to wind up M.A.S.S. on the ground of insolvency. 
Mr. Sinclair wishes to appeal from that decision. He set about commencing such an appeal by filing a summons under Pt.51A of the rules, that summons being filed within the 28 days allowed for the appeal. That was the wrong form for instituting an appeal, and it was subsequently rejected. The proper form for instituting an appeal, a Notice of Appeal under Pt.60, was filed on 27th May , that is, seven days out of time. Mr. Sinclair now applies to me for an extension of time for bringing that appeal.

That application is opposed by M.A.S.S. It is not suggested that the breach of the rules was a major breach or that any prejudice has been caused by it. The ground of the opposition is essentially that the appeal has no chance of success, and that the interests of justice do not require that leave be granted.

Mr. Turner for the respondent, M.A.S.S., referred me to the decision of
Gallow v. Dawson <case>; [(1990) 93 ALR 479], to the effect that the discretion to extend time is given for the sole purpose of enabling the court to do justice between the parties.
Mr. Turner submitted that because the appeal had no chance of success, the extension was not required to do justice between the parties. It seems to me that, having regard to the nature of the non-compliance with the rules, I should not enter too deeply into the merits of the appeal. I believe that I should uphold Mr. Turner's submissions only if I were satisfied on the
General Steel test that the appeal had no chance of success.

Master Macready set aside the statutory demand partly on the basis that it was given by a person who, at the highest, was an equitable part-owner of the debt, and partly on the basis that the Notice of Demand was not signed.

Section 459E(2)(f) of the Corporations Law requires that a demand be signed by or on behalf of a creditor. However, s.459J provides that the Court should not set aside a statutory demand merely because of a defect, unless substantial injustice would be caused if the demand is not set aside, or there is some other reason why the demand should be set aside. "Defect" is defined in s.9 to include "irregularity". In this case, it appears that, although the demand itself was not signed, it was served along with an affidavit verifying the debt, which was signed by Mr. Sinclair. In those circumstances, it seems to me to be arguable that the absence of a signature on the form of notice itself, when the accompanying affidavit was signed, was an irregularity, and thus would not justify setting aside the notice unless substantial injustice would otherwise be caused.

As regards the other ground, it seems to me to be arguable that a creditor in
Equity can serve a demand. It may be, on the facts of this case that if Mr.
Sinclair is a creditor in Equity, he could only be a creditor as to one half the amount actually claimed in the demand; but a misstatement as to amount is again included in the definition of "defect", so conceivably need no require the setting aside of the demand. The Master did not specifically address the question of whether a misstatement as to amount would, in this case, have justified setting aside the demand.

For those reasons, it seems to me that, as regards the order setting aside the statutory demand, it cannot be said that the appeal has no chance whatsoever of succeeding.

The other matter dealt with by the Master was whether leave should be granted under s.459P of the Corporations Law to Mr. Sinclair as a shareholder of the company to bring proceedings to wind up the company on the ground of insolvency.

The appeal against that part of the Master's decision is brought firstly on the ground that the Master found that, even if a prima facie case of insolvency was made out, the Court had a discretion as to whether or not to grant leave pursuant to s.459P(3); whereas Mr. Sinclair wishes to argue that there is no discretion, but that once a prima facie case of insolvency is made out, the Court must grant leave.

I believe that if that had been the only ground, I would have been prepared to decide that against the appellant. Mr. Cameron for the respondent submitted that the other view would mean that there was a discretion to be exercised at the stage of giving leave, and a similar discretion to be exercised again at the stage of deciding whether to wind up the company. In my opinion, there is no incongruity in that, and I see no reason why the word "may" in s.459P should not be read in its usual sense. However, although that is the opinion that I have, I do not express that as a decision in this case: because I think there is some possibility of success on other grounds, I think it would be inappropriate for me to make a final decision on that one.

The other ground of the appeal in relation to s.459P is that the Master erred in the exercise of the discretion, in that he found that any obligation of the company to pay the amount claimed by Mr. Sinclair was subject to a particular condition, either directly or by reason of estoppel.

Mr. Turner has taken me in some detail to the findings of the Master, and submitted that, having regard to the principles applied by appellate courts in interfering with findings of fact and exercise of discretion, an appeal brought on those grounds would have no chance of success. However, Mr. Cameron for the appellant has referred me to an agreement between people involved in the transaction dated September 1993, which is, to some extent, contrary to the decision reached by the Master, and which the Master has not explicitly dealt with in his judgment. It does seem to me that that agreement, and inferences drawn from it, could possibly support an appeal based on a factual error in the Master's findings, and a resulting error in the exercise of discretion.

For those reasons, it does seem to me that it cannot be said that the appeal is hopeless, and that the appellant should be granted the very minor indulgence sought in this application.

However, Mr. Turner has referred me to wider considerations involved in this matter. There have already been five days of hearing before the Master on issues which were issues merely preliminary to the bringing of winding up proceedings. If the appeal is successful, the only advantage to Mr. Sinclair would be that he could then commence winding up proceedings, which would presumably involve reconsideration of many of the same matters, and maybe many additional matters as well. If those winding up proceedings were unsuccessful, then it would still be open to Mr. Sinclair to litigate as against the company and as against other shareholders in the company what was truly the legal situation between Mr. Sinclair and the company concerning the debt claimed in the statutory demand.

Prima facie, it seems to me that a dispute of the nature suggested by the proceedings before the Master, the Master's decision, and the argument before me, is really inappropriate to be conducted in the context of winding up proceedings. As I have indicated, the continuance of this litigation along the lines I have discussed would not be calculated to avoid multiplicity of proceedings, but rather would promote it. For that reason, if the respondent company seeks it, I would be minded to stay the hearing of the appeal until the appellant has brought proceedings in the Equity Division seeking an authoritative determination by this Court as between himself and other relevant shareholders of the company of the true position concerning the $175,000.00 which was subject to the Notice. The appeal could then be pursued immediately after determination of those proceedings.
 [Matter stood down for instructions to be obtained] 
Mr. Turner has now indicated that if I am minded to grant leave, the respondent would ask for an order along the lines I foreshadowed, and Mr.
Cameron for the appellant indicates that such an order would not be opposed.

So far as the costs of this application are concerned, I think the appropriate order is that they be costs in the appeal. The appellant has been successful, but the appellant was seeking an indulgence; and furthermore, I think it is fair to say that the grounds of appeal as set out in the Notice of Appeal did not adequately disclose all the grounds on which the appellant wishes to pursue the appeal. In particular, there was no reference to the agreement of
September 1993.

For those reasons, I make these orders.

I make Order 1 in the Notice of Motion filed 17th June 1997.

I order that the appeal be stayed until such time as the appellant brings proceedings in the Equity Division seeking a declaration as between himself and M.A.S.S. International Pty. Limited and Lee Andrew Drurie and any other necessary party as to the legal rights of Mr. Sinclair in relation to $175,000.00 said to be owing by M.A.S.S. International Pty. Limited to Mr.
Sinclair and Mr. Drurie.

I order that the appeal be dealt with immediately after the hearing of such proceedings.

I order that the costs of this application be costs in the appeal.

I direct that the Equity proceedings to which I have referred be commenced within six weeks.

I give leave to the respondent to apply for dismissal of the appeal if that direction is not complied with.

The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
