

Manly Municipal Council and Anor versus Boylan Nos Ca 40737/93 and Cl 12175/91
Negligence - Local Government [1995] NSWSC 39 (18 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1) KIRBY P(2) MEAGHER JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 26 April 1995 #DATE :6:1995 #ADD 18:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellants:   J E Maconachie QC with
I F Butcher 
Solicitor for the Appellants:  Bull, Son and Schmidt 
Counsel for the Respondent:   D B Milne QC with D R Conti 
Solicitor for the Respondent:  McClellands
ORDER
Appeal dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ: I have had the advantage of reading, in draft form, the judgments of Kirby P and Meagher JA. I agree with the orders they propose.
On the primary facts found by Loveday
AJ, which have not been successfully challenged, the decision of the High Court in Nagle versus Rottnest Island
Authority <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 423] requires the conclusion that the appellants were in breach of their duty of care to the respondent and that such breach was a cause of his serious injuries.
The case is stronger for the plaintiff than Nagle. There is something of an ambiguity in saying that the respondent dived into water and hit his head on a rock. In truth, he waded out into the designated swimming area up to a reasonable depth, and then sprang forward, in a shallow dive, in the manner in which most able-bodied young people would commence a swim. He collided with a rock which was barely submerged. This is a much less obviously dangerous form of behaviour than that engaged in by the plaintiff in Nagle, who, in a rocky area, dived into the water in the full sense of the word.
Loveday AJ found that there were three respects in which the appellants were negligent. I am unable to accept the first of these. The second is less than compelling.
As to the third, however, Nagle is indistinguishable.
The first was failure to remove dangerous rocks from the swimming area in the Dam. For the reasons given by Kirby P this was an unrealistic requirement, and compliance with it would have created other, and perhaps more serious, dangers.
The second was failure to fence off the area where the respondent injured himself. It is not entirely clear what Loveday AJ meant by "fencing off" the rocks. He went on to refer to moving the marker buoys. One possibility is that his Honour contemplated a prohibition, or prevention, of swimming near the rocks; another is that he had in mind discouragement.
The risk of injury, minor or serious, from activities in a recreational reserve in a bushland setting is so widespread that it cannot be reasonable to expect elimination of danger. As Brennan J observed in Nagle, diving into shallow water with a sandy bottom can be dangerous even when no rocks are present. It is not reasonable to require the appellants to make the Manly Dam risk-free.
 .
The third was the failure to erect signs warning of the dangers of submerged rocks. The trial judge found that, if such signs had been erected, then that would probably have prevented the accident, assuming the signs were properly located. On this point, Nagle is fatal to the appellants.
For the reasons given by Kirby P and Meagher JA I agree that, although the respondent may have been somewhat fortunate in the trial judge's findings on contributory negligence, the appellants have not made out a case for disturbing those findings.
JUDGE2
KIRBY P: The basic facts are stated in the reasons of Meagher JA and in the judgment of Loveday AJ, at first instance.
I agree with Meagher JA that this Court is bound to apply the holding of the High Court of Australia in Nagle versus Rottnest
Island Authority <case>;  <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 179], it must go to the High Court. This Court cannot do so.
Nagle is not only later in time. It accords with other developments of the law of negligence. It would be productive of confusion, so soon after Nagle was handed down, for the law to revert to Aiken. But if it is to do so, the reversal must be by the High Court. It cannot occur here.
I also agree with Meagher JA that this Court is controlled by the findings of fact made by Loveday AJ concerning the way in which the respondent executed his dive and received his injuries. Because Loveday AJ accepted the evidence of the respondent, and because that evidence was not "glaringly improbable" or contradicted by objective facts proved at the trial, this Court is bound by his Honour's determination in that respect.

As to the findings by Loveday AJ concerning the breach of the appellants' duty, I see much force in the appellants' argument that failure to remove the rocks was an unrealistic breach with which to fix the appellants with liability. There had been no similar injuries in the long period that the site had been used for public swimming. The cost of removal of all of the submerged rocks would have been very substantial. The endeavour to remove the rocks would probably have exposed sharp, jagged edges, possibly actually increasing their danger to bathers when they were submerged. Yet however powerful these arguments are, they do not meet the other two findings upon which his Honour rested his conclusions, viz the failure of the appellants properly to warn bathers, such as the respondent, and the failure to move further south the line of markers which divided off the area for swimming, inferentially presented as safe for that purpose. Given the findings made by Loveday AJ, I see no error in his Honour's conclusion that breach on the part of the appellants was established.
With Meagher JA, I consider that finding of contributory negligence is the most disputable question in the appeal. My first inclination was to hold that the defence had been made out, at least to some degree. Loveday AJ himself acknowledged that "more difficult problems" arose in that connection. He adverted to the respondent's consumption of alcohol (which was certainly significant); to his awareness of the danger of diving into shallow water or water in which he could not see the bottom; and to the obvious presence of rocks near to the area set aside by the appellants for public swimming.
Loveday
AJ disposed of the defence of contributory negligence in these words: "The substance of the plaintiff's case is that he had waded out to a point where he regarded it as safe to launch himself into the deeper water. He did so by extending his arms and plunging forward directly towards the deeper water.
The dive he attempted to execute was a shallow dive.

I am not persuaded that that action demonstrated a lack of care for his own safety. In the result, therefore, I find for the plaintiff on the issue of contributory negligence...."
Before this Court, the appellants argued that Loveday AJ had incorrectly applied a subjective test. He had tested the issue of contributory negligence by what the respondent considered to be safe and not by the standard of a person of ordinary prudence. Certainly, the test to be applied cannot be controlled by the opinion of the particular claimant as to what was, or was not, safe. Ultimately, it is for the court to express its conclusion, judged by the standards of reasonable care, objectively determined. See McHale v
Watson <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 199], 203. The proper approach was described, in that case, by Kitto J at 213: "The standard of care being objective, it is no answer for (a child), any more than it is for an adult, to say that the harm he caused was due to his being abnormally slowwitted, quick-tempered, absent-minded or inexperienced But it does not follow that he cannot rely in his defence upon a limitation upon the capacity for foresight or prudence, not as being personal to himself, but as being characteristic of humanity at his stage of development and in that sense normal. By doing so he appeals to a standard of ordinariness, to an objective and not a subjective standard."
See also 219, 229.
I do not see legal error in the reference by Loveday AJ to his finding that the respondent regarded it as safe to launch himself into the deep water at the point he did. I read this passage in his Honour's reasons as nothing more than an explanation of how, on his findings, the injury was caused.
Having determined that it was by a "shallow dive" the question became whether, on an objective standard, this revealed a lack of care for the bather's own safety.
The appellants argued that the evidence of contributory negligence was as follows:
That the respondent dived where he did;
That he either did not see submerged rocks (in which event he should not have dived, on his own statement) or did see them (in which event he should not have dived anyway);
That he could have entered the area to the east, which he must have known was likely to be safer but, instead, entered the water in a rocky area where he must have walked alongside, or bumped into sufficient rocks to alert him to the dangers of diving, even in a shallow way, in the vicinity;
That he could have eased himself into the water and swum out avoiding all risk of injury but instead, possibly because of his consumption of alcohol, dived, necessarily at a downward angle, exposing himself to the kind of danger which occurred; and
That his lack of sleep and earlier consumption of alcohol had affected his judgment. Had it been unaffected, it is more likely that he would not have executed a dive at all or would have done so with greater attention to his own safety.
The dynamics of swimming in very cold water before dawn in August in
Sydney cannot be overlooked. I think the Court can take judicial notice of the fact that water in an area such as the Manly Dam at that time of the year would have been extremely cold.
It would not have had the balmy quality of the refreshing dip in the middle of summer. The water temperature at a point just before sunrise (which the evidence showed was at 06 23 hours) would have caused something of a shock to the body of any bather. A natural action, to fend off the astringent feelings of cold, would be an initial vigorous movement on the part of the swimmer. To that extent, the execution of a shallow dive, as found by his Honour, would not be an unreasonable or unforeseeable action on the part of a perfectly sober bather. Unless it can be determined that the respondent's lack of sleep and his alcohol consumption clouded his assessment of the presence of rocks in the area into which he dived, I do not believe his antecedent conduct could be regarded as relevant to the actual cause of the injuries which ensued. Upon Loveday AJ's findings, and on the basis of the evidence (including photographic evidence) of the visibility of the rocks when submerged by water, I do not consider that this
Court would be authorised to conclude that the respondent's lack of sleep and consumption of alcohol contributed to the mechanics of the way in which is injuries were actually received.
This being the case, the ultimate question to be asked is whether executing a shallow dive in an area set aside for swimming after the bather had reached a point where the water was at the middle of his thighs, demonstrated a want of care for his own safety, judged by an objective standard. I have some doubts about the proper answer to that question. But I cannot say with any conviction that Loveday AJ was wrong to answer it in the negative. The appellants bore the onus of establishing contributory negligence. Loveday AJ dismissed their defence. He had all of the advantages of being the trial judge. In this appeal, the appellants have not demonstrated error.
 
Orders
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal by two municipal authorities who between them control and manage a reservoir of water called the Manly Dam Reserve. Into this reservoir at about 6.10am on 25 August 1990 the plaintiff/respondent plunged and suffered a severe spinal injury resulting in quadriplegia.
In the proceedings appealed from, Loveday AJ awarded the plaintiff a verdict of $1.9m. It was agreed between the parties that if the plaintiff recovered a verdict it should be in that sum. The matters in dispute which his Honour had to decide were whether he was entitled to a verdict at all (i.e whether the appellants were negligent) and whether he was guilty of contributory negligence.
His Honour decided both matters favourably to the plaintiff.
The background facts are not in dispute. The Manly Dam Reserve covers 370 hectares of land, of which 30 comprise a dam, 50 comprise a lake, and the balance comprises sandstone and bush land through which about 12 or 14 kilometres of walking track meander. The Reserve is not fenced. It has about formal or semi-formal points of entry. The lake is not tidal, but the level of the water varies from time to time, depending on a number of factors (e.g the amount of water pumped into it). On the southern side of the dam is an embankment; and on the western side is an area which has for decades been used for swimming. The public are invited to swim there. The appellants have dumped imported sand there to give the appearance of a beach. There are signs there, the effect of which are to encourage people to use it for swimming. This swimming area is crescent shaped, and on the northern side of the crescent there are a number of rocks, all of which are visible when the water is low, but some or all of which are submerged when the level of the water is high.
The facts of the case which are not now in issue, and which were found by
His Honour, were: the plaintiff, accompanied by a friend (who was not called to give evidence) arrived at the reserve either late in the evening of 24th
August or early in the morning of 25th August, lit a fire, and drank a little beer and some spirits until about 3.00am, when he went to sleep. He awoke about 6.10am, went down to the water's edge with a view to choosing a point from which to swim across the dam to the opposite shore, returned to the sleeping place and undressed, and then went to the water's edge a second time.
Although it was disputed at trial, his Honour found (and the plaintiff's evidence clearly justified the finding) that the plaintiff entered the water, veered to the left around a rock, zig-zagged again, and, when the water was mid-thigh deep, executed a shallow dive. This dive caused him to collide full on with a submerged rock, and that was the cause of his injuries.
In coming to his conclusion that the appellants were negligent, his Honour applied the test enunciated by the majority of the
High Court in Nagle versus The
Rottnest Island Authority <case>; [(1993) 67 ALJR 426], a case whose facts bear a significant resemblance to the facts of the present case. The majority in that case held that public authorities in the position of the appellants were under a general duty of care at common law to take reasonable care to avoid foreseeable risks of injury to visitors using the facility which they manage and control. Mr Maconachie QC, learned senior counsel for the appellants, submitted that his Honour applied the wrong test; that he should have applied the rather different test enunciated by Dixon J (as he then was) in Aiken v
Kingborough Corporation <case>; [(1939) 62 CLR 179] at 210-3, viz "What then is the reasonable measure of precaution for the safety of the users of premises, such as a wharf, who come there as of common right? I think the public authority in control of such premises is under an obligation to take reasonable care to prevent injury to such a person through dangers arising from the state of condition of the premises which are not apparent and are not to be avoided by the exercise of ordinary care."; and that the test applied by the majority in Nagle's Case was only applied because of the manner in which counsel conducted that case at first instance.
There may be some force in these submissions; it may even be that as a legal academic exercise many people may think that the test enunciated in Aicken's
Case is superior to that applied by the majority in Nagle's Case; Brennan J obviously did in Nagle's Case itself, but his judgment is a dissenting one.
The stark fact remains that the test carefully enunciated by the High Court in
Nagle's Case is the one his Honour chose to apply, and we as an intermediate appellate court are hardly in a position to modify what the High Court said.
We need not venture on the irrelevant question as to what the result of this case would be if his Honour had applied the Aicken's Case test.
Mr Maconachie QC then proceeded to make detailed submissions designed to demonstrate that his Honour's factual findings were wrong. He said that the plaintiff could not have executed the kind of dive he swore he did; that he would have received a sharper wound to his head if he had dived straight into a rock; and other related submissions. The difficulty with all these submissions was that they overlooked his Honour's right to believe the plaintiff. The plaintiff swore that he came to grief in a particular way, and his Honour believed him. It would be different if all the experts testified that the plaintiff's version could not possibly be true; but far from it. Dr
Yeo, perhaps the most eminent expert in the field, said that the plaintiff's injuries were exactly what he would have expected from the plaintiff's story.
Then Mr Maconachie QC took issue with his Honour's findings as to breach.
They were: failure to warn properly; failure to remove the rocks, on one of which the plaintiff had his accident; and failure to move further south the line of markers which divided the swimming section of the reserve from the water-skiing section of the reserve.
I can see nothing wrong with any of his
Honour's conclusions, and any one of them would be sufficient. For example, his Honour believed the plaintiff's evidence that a sign forbidding him to dive in the area where he went into the water would have prevented him diving: that seems to me to conclude that issue. As to the second of these findings of breach, his Honour found that the evidence disclosed that the cost of removing the eight rocks in the offending area would have been about $2,000. It is not in dispute that that was the evidence. Mr Maconachie QC challenged his
Honour's findings in this regard because to remove all the rocks in the reserve dam would cost about $2m, remembering that the swimming area where the plaintiff entered the water was only one section of the dam, and that the managing committee had limited funds. These arguments are singularly unconvincing. The area where the plaintiff was (described as section 1 in some of the maps) was clearly the principal area of the dam designated for swimming. The rocks in that area could easily be removed, If it would be impractical to remove the rocks in other areas, diving could be absolutely prohibited in such areas.
If the managing committee was short of funds, the appellants were not.
Finally, Mr Maconachie QC challenged his Honour's finding that there was no contributory negligence. This contention has more substance. The plaintiff said he knew of the dangers of diving in shallow water. He knew it was dangerous to dive into murky water. He knew it was dangerous to dive into waters where there might be concealed rocks. He knew that there were rocks along the shoreline. Although reasonably familiar with the area he had never seen rocks except along the foreshore, even when the water level was low. All these matters his Honour took into account. Nonetheless, his Honour came to the conclusion - and on reflection I think he was right - that a reasonable person armed with this knowledge was entitled to think that, after wading out until the water reached to the middle of his thighs, it was safe to assume that there were no concealed rocks in his path.
I would dismiss the appeal with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/39.html  
