

Hawes versus The Governor of the Goulburn Correctional Centre and Anor Matter
No 11601/97 [1997] NSWSC 369 (3 September 1997) 
Peter HAWES versus The Governor of the Goulburn Correctional Centre & Anor /97 September 1997 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Peter HAWES versus THE GOVERNOR OF THE GOULBURN CORRECTIONAL CENTRE & ANOR.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Peter Hawes, is in custody at the Goulburn
Correctional Centre awaiting trial on a charge of murder. By summons directed to the Governor of that Correctional Centre, the first defendant, and the
Commissioner of Police, the second defendant, the plaintiff seeks an order that the defendants and their servants or agents be restrained from taking, or attempting to take, samples of the plaintiff's blood, saliva or hair, in purported exercise of the power conferred by <case> of the [Crimes Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) (as amended).

On 30 August 1995, the plaintiff was charged by police with the murder the previous evening of a man in a boarding house at Coogee. He has been in continuous custody since then. On 1 September 1995 two police officers and a medical practitioner visited him at the Remand Centre at Long Bay. He was requested to supply a sample of his blood, but refused to do so. In the circumstances the doctor declined to take a sample. On 6 October 1995, in the cell complex at Waverley Police Station, there was another attempt to obtain a blood sample from him with the same result. On 3 April 1996 the plaintiff was committed to this court for trial and his trial has been fixed for 15
September 1997.

On 27 May 1997 police visited the plaintiff at Goulburn Correctional Centre, accompanied by a doctor and a registered nurse. One of the police officers told him that they intended to obtain a blood sample, but again he refused saying, "I want a decision from the Supreme Court before I will give blood voluntarily." On the following day I granted an interim injunction in the terms of the order sought in the summons, and on 25 July 1997 I heard full argument on the matter.

The parts of <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) relevant to my decision are the following: "(1) Where a person is in lawful custody upon a charge of committing a crime or offence: any constable; or where the person in custody is female and no female constable is available to conduct the search - any female acting under and in accordance with the request of a constable, may search the person and take from the person anything found upon that search.
 ....

When a person is in lawful custody upon a charge of committing any crime or offence which is of such a nature and is alleged to have been committed under such circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of the crime or offence, any legally qualified medical practitioner acting at the request of any officer of police of or above the rank of sergeant, and any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, may make such an examination of the person so in custody as is reasonable in order to ascertain the facts which may afford such evidence.

When a person is in lawful custody for any offence punishable on indictment or summary conviction, the officer in charge of police at the station where he is so in custody may take or cause to be taken all such particulars as may be deemed necessary for the identification of such person, including, where the person is or above the age of 14 years, his photograph and finger-prints and palm-prints.

A person authorised by subsection (2) to make a medical examination of a person in lawful custody may take samples of the person's blood, saliva and hair.
 ....

A reference in this section to lawful custody is a reference to lawful custody of the police or any other authority. If a person is in lawful custody in a place other than a police station, the powers under this section of a constable or an officer of police may be exercised by the person in charge of the place or by another person who is normally supervised by that person.

The consent of the person in lawful custody is not required for the doing of any thing under this section.
 ...." 
Sub-section (3A), empowering a person undertaking a medical examination under sub-s (2) to take samples of a suspect's blood, saliva and hair without his or her consent, was inserted by Act No 23 of 1995, following the decision of the
Court of Appeal in Fernando versus Commissioner of Police [(1995) 78 A Crim R .] Sub-sections (3C) and (3D) were added at the same time.

The argument before me centred upon what is meant by the opening words of sub-s (2), "When a person is in lawful custody upon a charge of committing any crime or offence .... ". Mr Jeffreys, for the plaintiff, was prepared to accept (without conceding) that the formal requirements of the sub-section had otherwise been complied with. His only submission was that those opening words confine the operation of the sub-section to the period of police custody between the arrest and charge of a person and that person being placed before a court. For the plaintiff, of course, that period has long since passed.

Mr Jeffreys acknowledged that the expression "lawful custody", without more, is capable of embracing prison custody. He argued, however, that the expression "lawful custody upon a charge" is a reference to initial police custody after a person has been charged, and is to be distinguished from any period of custody thereafter resulting from the order of a court. He referred to the provisions in the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), enabling a justice dealing with a person charged with an indictable offence to commit that person to prison by warrant during any adjournment and upon committal for trial, tracing the history of those provisions from 1924, when s
A was inserted into the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), to the present day.

The legislative history of <case> itself is set out in the judgment of
Priestly JA in Fernando at pp 65-7. In its original form it comprised sub-ss , (2) and (3). Sub-section (2) remains unchanged. Sub-sections (1) and (3) have since been amended, but not in any way which is material for present purposes. Mr Jeffreys sought to support his argument that sub-s (2) is confined to the period of initial police custody by the fact that the other two sub-sections are similarly confined. Sub-section (3), which is concerned with obtaining particulars for the identification of a person who "is in lawful custody for any offence ... ", vests the power to obtain those particulars in "the officer in charge of police at the station where (the person) is so in custody": see Reg versus Carr [[1972] 1 NSWLR 608] at 610.
Sub-section (1) enables police to search a person who "is in lawful custody upon a charge of committing a crime or offence". Although not so expressed, that sub-section is obviously concerned with the initial period of police custody. Quite apart from considerations of security, there would be little point in conducting a search at any later time.

Sub-sections (4) to (7), dealing with the obtaining of particulars for the identification of persons found guilty of an offence, were added in 1992 (as was sub-s (8), conferring a regulation making power). None of these sub- sections has any bearing upon the matter which I have to decide.

An apparent obstacle to Mr Jeffreys' submission is sub-s (3C), dealing with persons who are "in lawful custody in a place other than a police station" and conferring "the powers under this section of a constable or an officer of police" upon the person in charge of that place (or another person under his or her supervision). Mr Jeffreys argued, however, that this sub-section is also confined to the initial period of police custody and is directed to situations where a person who has been arrested cannot, for one reason or another, be held at a police station: for example, a person requiring hospital treatment.

Generally, he pointed to some unfortunate consequences which could flow if the operation of sub-section (2) were extended beyond that initial period. A suspect in custody might be forced to submit to a medical examination on the eve of his or her trial, or even during the course of it. More importantly, the sub-section would operate in a discriminatory, indeed capricious, way.
Given that the power can be used only against a person in custody, the opportunity to exercise it would depend upon whether the suspect had been granted bail and had been able to enter it, regardless of the seriousness of the charge and the possible evidentiary significance of a medical examination.

Mr Jeffreys submitted that the provision is to be construed strictly, as indeed it must. The principle that legislation will not be interpreted as authorising an abrogation or curtailment of a fundamental right, freedom or immunity, unless that intention is clearly manifested, was affirmed by the
High Court in Coco versus The Queen <case>; [(1993-4) 179 CLR 427.] Indeed, the statement of the principle in the joint judgment of Mason CJ, Brennan, Gaudron and McHugh JJ at pp 437-8 of the report was cited by Priestley JA in Fernando at pp 69-70: see also Clarke JA at pp -2 and Powell JA at pp 87-9.

For the defendants, Ms Latham, the Crown Advocate, submitted that the expression "lawful custody" in sub-s (2) is not limited, either expressly or by necessary implication, to the initial period of police custody. Such an interpretation, she argued, follows not only from the unambiguous terms of the sub-section, but also from the insertion in 1995 of sub-s (3C). She acknowledged that the provision could operate in a discriminatory way, depending on whether a suspect was in custody or on bail, but submitted that this was no reason to modify the plain meaning of its terms. Nor was the fact that the examination might be conducted at or about the time of a suspect's trial. She submitted that any injustice which might flow from such a situation could be remedied by the adjournment of the trial, or the discretion of the trial judge to reject evidence in the interests of fairness to the accused.

To adopt the narrow construction advanced by Mr Jeffreys, Ms Latham argued, would be to frustrate the legitimate investigation of crime, as there may be cases in which it would not be apparent until after that initial period that a medical examination might afford evidence of the commission of the crime charged. She relied upon judicial pronouncements concerning the purposive approach to statutory construction, such as Kingston versus Keprose Pty Ltd [(1987) 11 NSWLR 404], per McHugh JA at 423-4, Regional Director of Education v
International Grammar School Sydney Limited [(1986) 7 NSWLR 302], per Kirby
P at 314F, and Bropho versus Western Australia <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 1] at 20.

It may well be that sub-s (2), when it was enacted in 1924, was concerned primarily, if not solely, with medical examinations conducted during the initial period of police custody. The decision in Fernando establishes that the sub-section empowered no more than the examination of a suspect by eye and touch, and did not extend to taking bodily samples. So confined, it is unlikely that any such examination would have any evidentiary value unless it were conducted soon after arrest (for example, to determine whether the suspect had signs of injury consistent with having been involved in some violent incident). To this extent, the power was akin to the power of search conferred by sub-s (1). On the other hand, the use of the unfettered expression "in lawful custody" might mean that, even in 1924, it was envisaged that there might be cases in which the power could be exercised usefully at a later stage of the proceedings. It must be said that an examination of the
Parliamentary debates at the time the section was introduced throws no light on this matter.

However that may be, sub-s (2) must be interpreted in its context within the section as it now stands and, in particular, in the light of the 1995 amendments. The second reading speech of the Attorney General makes it clear that those amendments were introduced as a result of the decision in
Fernando. The only reference to sub-s (3C) is the observation, "The place of `lawful custody' is not limited to a police station." (New South Wales
Parliamentary Debates (1995) at 541.) However, I cannot accept that the operation of that sub-section is limited, as Mr Jeffreys argued, to situations where a suspect is in police custody in a place other than a police station.
As Mr Jeffreys rightly observed, in those situations the person remains in police custody. For example, an injured suspect under police guard at a hospital is in the custody of police, not the hospital. Mr Jeffreys' submission overlooks the opening words of sub-s (3C): "A reference in this section to lawful custody is a reference to lawful custody of the police or any other authority." Inevitably, those last words extend the operation of sub-s (2) beyond the initial period of police custody and embrace custody in a prison.

As observed, Mr Jeffreys' argument centred upon the opening words of sub-s , "When a person is in lawful custody upon a charge of committing any crime or offence .... " Those words, however, must be understood in the context of the words which follow them: "... which is of such a nature and is alleged to have been committed under such circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of the crime or offence ... " The purpose of the section is to empower the medical examination of a suspect who is in lawful custody as a result of having been charged with a certain type of offence: that is, an offence the nature and circumstances of which are such that a medical examination of the suspect might have evidentiary significance. It matters not whether, at the time of the examination, the suspect is in the custody of police or in prison custody while court proceedings are in train. Such an interpretation is consistent with the legislative intention evinced by the amendments. The evidentiary value of obtaining and analysing samples of a suspect's blood, saliva or hair, is not lost with the passage of time.

I am mindful of the unfortunate consequences of the legislation to which Mr
Jeffreys referred, and which are matters of real concern. There is no doubt that it is discriminatory as the power may be exercised only against suspects held in custody. Equally, I am not confident that satisfactory steps could be taken in every case to avert injustice to an accused where an examination conducted at the eleventh hour produced evidence in support of the Crown case.
The delay occasioned by an adjournment of the trial may well be distressing to all concerned, including the accused. On the other hand, if the trial were to proceed, it is far from clear that the discretions to exclude evidence created by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s135.html) and s 137 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) would be adequate to permit the rejection of the evidence.

Such matters, however, cannot be determinative of the construction of the relevant provisions, the meaning of which is clear. As McHugh JA observed in
Kingston versus Keprose (supra) at p 421: "Where the text of the legislative provision ... is grammatically capable of only one meaning and neither the context, the purpose of the provision nor the general purpose of the Act throws any real doubt on that meaning, the grammatical meaning must be taken as representing Parliament's intention as to the meaning of the law. A court cannot depart from the grammatical meaning of a provision because that meaning produces anomalies or injustices where no real doubt as to the intention of Parliament arises ... " 
Accordingly, provided the other legislative preconditions are met, the plaintiff may still be subjected to a medical examination, including the taking of samples of his blood, saliva or hair, whilst he is in prison custody. The summons must be dismissed.
 ----- * * * 
