

Kruger versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales Matter No 203/87 [1998] NSWSC 667 (17 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
STEPHEN BARTON KRUGER versus GOVERNMENT INSURANCE OFFICE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /87 December 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT - 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff claims damages for personal injuries allegedly suffered by him in a motor vehicle accident at Kelso near Bathurst on 25 February 1987 when the vehicle which he was driving and which was stationary behind another vehicle at an intersection was struck in the rear by a third vehicle and forced onto the vehicle in front. Liability has been admitted and the matter has proceeded for assessment of damages only. Having regard to the date of the accident, such damages are to be assessed in accordance with the [Motor Vehicles (Third Party Insurance) Act, 1942](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/) as amended in 1984 [(ss 35A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s35a.html)-[35D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s35d.html)). 
The plaintiff, who appeared in person, was born in the United States on 18
February 1943, so he was about 44 at the time of the accident and is 55 now.
He gave a rambling discursive history, as was noted by some of the hospitals and doctors, and appears to be obsessed with his pains and disabilities, so that it was difficult to ascertain the relevant facts, but this was made easier by the tender of a large number of employment records and medical reports which, along with the plaintiff's evidence, enabled a clearer and more consistent history to emerge.

He was married in 1961 and of that marriage there are two adult sons, a daughter having died in infancy. He was a member of the United States Air
Force for 10 years during which time he served in Vietnam mainly in the fields of radio, electronics and computers, and he came to Australia with his family in 1974. Shortly afterwards he contracted viral encephalo-meningitis, for which he was treated at Ipswich Hospital, and it appears that following this illness he suffered some degree of headaches, although the frequency, nature and extent of them is not clear.

He then obtained work as a Senior Technical Officer in the Department of
Electrical Engineering at the University of Queensland, and whilst there he collaborated on a paper, "A Myofeedback Control System Transfer" dealing with electrically controlled prosthetic hands, which was published in the
Transactions of the Institution of Engineers Australia in October 1979, with cover photographs (Exhibit B).

He resigned from the University in 1977 and from either 1978 or 1979 until he was Chief Electronics Engineer with Mount Isa Mines Ltd at Mount Isa, and then from July 1981 to 24 September 1982 Chief Engineer with Mackay
Television Limited. From August 1993 until April 1985 he was employed as
Senior Technical Officer with the Northern Territory Department of Education and he then obtained a contract for employment as Senior Technical Officer in the Department of Applied Physics with the Papua New Guinea University of
Technology in Lae for the period from 1 May 1985 to 30 June 1988; but it appears he contracted cholera, dengue fever and/or malaria and so he resigned and the contract was mutually terminated in late 1986 and he returned to
Australia, firstly to Cairns, and then he sought other work and it was in the course of travelling for interviews that the relevant accident occurred.

There is some evidence, disputed by the plaintiff, that at this time he was addicted to pethidine and that he was having (or self-administering) intra venous injections of the drug. There is also evidence that he was suffering from migraine headaches, possibly as a result of the encephalo-meningitis.

Following the accident, which as already noted, was a not uncommon rear-end collision with his vehicle forced onto the stationary vehicle in front of him, the plaintiff was admitted to Bathurst District Hospital under the care of Dr
Jamieson, where he was diagnosed as suffering a soft tissue injury to the neck. The hospital notes reveal that on admission he was complaining of neck pain, headache and numbness in his arms and legs, and gave a past history of hypertension, meningo-encephalitis and migraine, and an anxious personality was noted. He was fitted with a cervical collar. Two days later on 27 February the hospital notes record that the plaintiff was demanding analgesics. The notes continue: "Is obsessed with pain relief - apparently gets admitted to hospital 2-3 times a year for "Intravenous pethidine" for his headaches. Says his headaches are due to meningo-encephalitis and nothing else apart from Narcotics and Valium helps." 
That same day he was complaining of numbness in his entire left leg which was intermittent and had a cut off point at the top of his leg which was noted to be not consistent with any neurological pattern. He was discharged on 28
February 1987.

He was seen again by Dr Jamieson's partner, Dr Sandra, in their surgery on 2
March 1987 when he gave Dr Sandra a past history of encepehalo-meningitis and therapy with pethidine for headache from his local medical officer in New
Guinea. At that stage examination confirmed restriction of all cervical movement, particularly rotation, to 60 degrees in both directions.

The plaintiff continued looking for work and moved to Canberra where he saw a
Dr Lang, who referred him to Dr Owen White, neurologist, who on 21 July 1987 (see report of 1 August) noted that since the accident he had frequent headaches which were not associated with his typical migraine and that he was on a number of medications for hypertension and migraine (including
Tryptanol). After having tests including a CT Scan done, Dr White concluded (8
August 1987) that the plaintiff had a soft tissue injury which would respond to conservative therapy.

He then obtained work with the Superannuation Funds Investment Trust in
Canberra as a computer programmer and planning officer (Exhibit F) and worked there from 7 September 1987 until 27 May 1988 when his contract expired.
During that time, he had no time off work due to any injuries related to the motor vehicle accident, and his salary ranged from $586.60 to $614.89 per week gross.

After this he worked as a Senior Research Assistant (initially part-time but later full-time) with the James Cook University at Townsville from 1 July 1988 to 3 August 1988, but he developed diverticulitis and spent one to one and a half weeks in hospital, and resigned for "personal and health" reasons (Exhibit G).

He next obtained a position with the Post and Telecommunication Corporation of
Papua New Guinea as Supervising Engineer (Telegraphs and Data), charged with planning extensions and modifications to the existing networks, assessing new technology for future use and training local engineers in that field. He commenced in August 1988 on a three year contract, but after two years became sick and had to resign and return to Australia (Exhibit M).

It is not entirely clear from the evidence what his illness was at this stage.
At pp.44-5 he said he had major headaches with vomiting, which in the absence of medication lasted two or three days, and at p.53 typhoid and malaria (see also p.67), but there is no medical report relating to this except Dr Boyce who says the plaintiff's contract was terminated due to his narcotic addiction, which the plaintiff denies (p.86). Although he claims he was getting very bad headaches at this time I am not satisfied that any such headaches were a consequence of the motor vehicle accident and the reason for termination of the contract appears to have been symptoms associated with various tropical diseases, migraine headaches dating back to the encephalo- meningitis and drug addiction, particularly to Pethidine.

He came under the care of Dr Geoffrey M Boyce, consultant neurologist, of
Cairns who reported (27 March 1991 - Exhibit K) that he first saw him in
September 1990 on referral from one of the physicians at Port Moresby General
Hospital with a history of headaches since his viral encephalitis in 1974 and that in October 1990 he was using 4 to 6 Pethidine tablets per day. The frequency and intensity of the headaches had increased and with severe migraine there was an intense confusional problem.

Over the next year or so he saw a number of doctors in Cairns including Dr
Rigano (psychiatrist) and Dr Archdeacon (anaesthetist) as well as Dr Boyce.
They all noted the migranous like headaches dating back to the encephalitis and considered that these headaches had been exacerbated by the whiplash injury to the neck in the motor vehicle accident and by his addiction to prescription drugs. Dr Rigano did not accept that any change in his personality was related to the motor vehicle accident.

In about 1992 the plaintiff and his family moved to Hervey Bay closer to
Brisbane and he came under the care of Dr Michael Hamilton and a number of specialists to whom he was referred by Dr Hamilton. A number of reports from these doctors are in evidence (Exhibits L, P, R, S and T). It appears that not only did the headaches continue, but he developed a number of other symptoms and illnesses including duodenal ulcer, distal osophagitis, nausea, photophobia and dermatitis and the reports include constant references to his addiction to medication particularly opiates and benzodiazepines.

Dr Ludbrook placed emphasis on his vascular (migraine) headache and tension headache with only passing reference to the whiplash; and although in a letter to Dr Sheehan dated 10 November 1994, Dr Hamilton noted demands for excessive opiate analgesia at time of the accident, in a letter to the plaintiff's then solicitors dated 28 June 1993, he said that it did seem that his current severe headaches stemmed from the accident and not from the encephalitis. By
December 1994, the plaintiff was registered as an opiate dependent person (Exhibit R). Meanwhile in April 1993 Dr Richard Boyle, Neurologist, in a letter to Dr Hamilton considered he was undoubtedly suffering from common migraine, and was a chronic pain patient with pain out of all proportion to his underlying problems. Although noting the motor vehicle accident and increased headaches as part of the history, Dr Boyle made no reference to it in his diagnosis or conclusion. The plaintiff was also examined in 1992 by Dr
R A Green on behalf of the defendant, and although I agree with some of the doctor's conclusions e.g. problems predating the accident and drug addiction,
I reject his opinion that the plaintiff is malingering.

The plaintiff said (p.56) that his neck, although not in good shape, is not presently the major problem, which is very bad headaches, and I can find no evidence of recent complaints of pain or restrictions in the neck.

The medical picture is confused, but on the whole of the evidence I am satisfied that the plaintiff has suffered migranous headaches since his encephalo-meningitis in 1994 and that as a result of that and possibly the other illnesses he suffered in Papua New Guinea in late 1986 the plaintiff was addicted to intravenous analgesics especially opiates and benzodiazepines prior to the accident. I am further satisfied that in the accident he suffered a musculo ligamentous injury (or whiplash) to the cervical spine and that associated with this were headaches which appear to have aggravated both as to frequency and intensity the pre-existing migraines. Because of this pre- existing condition, the effects of the accident, including the exacerbation of the headaches, lasted longer than would otherwise have been the case, but not longer than three to four years. I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's current condition is in any way due to the accident although he genuinely perceives that it is.

I assess the plaintiff's general damages at $32,000 and interest is not allowed on this sum or any part thereof: [s
D.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mvpia1942396/s35d.html) 
As regards out of pocket expenses, the defendant admits a liability of $1607.40 relating to taxis, accommodation, chemists and food associated with the plaintiff's initial hospitalisation etc (Exhibit 2) and concedes that interest should be allowed on this amount. The plaintiff also claims a further amount of approximately $24,000 as set out in a Notice from the Health
Insurance Commission dated 30 July 1996 (Exhibit W). The plaintiff is entitled to have included in the verdict so much of this claim as relates to what I have found to be attributable to injuries sustained in the accident and the
Health Insurance Commission will be entitled to be reimbursed the relevant benefit; but other medical expenses which I have not found to be attributable to the accident are not recoverable from the defendant, and the plaintiff is not liable to reimburse the Health Insurance Commission for such amounts out of the judgement. As the plaintiff has not actually been out of pocket by actually paying these amounts, he is not entitled to interest on them.

In dividing up the amounts in Exhibit W in this way, something of a broad brush approach is necessary. I allow the amounts paid to Dr Lang of [Charnwood, ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ca113/) ($302.00), Dr Beckett of Belconnen, ACT ($17.50) as these followed shortly after the accident and were probably related at least in part to the whiplash symptoms, but I disallow the fees paid to Dr R M Stock, Dr Croese, Dr
Blackstock and Dr McGowen in July/August 1988, as these appear to have been on account of the diverticulitis suffered by the plaintiff at about that time. I also disallow all the other expenses incurred after the plaintiffs return from
Papua New Guinea at the end of 1991. Accordingly for out of pocket expenses I allow $1927, and I allow interest on $1607 of this amount for eleven and a half years at 15% per annum, namely $2772.

In respect of loss of income, the plaintiff was unemployed at the time of the accident following his first return from Papua New Guinea but was looking for work, and I am confident he would have found some, as he ultimately did as from 7 September 1987. In these circumstances I am satisfied I should allow 6 months loss of income at the rate of his starting salary with Commonwealth
Superannuation Funds Investment Trust, namely $586 per week gross, approximately $400 per week net; i.e. $10,400. I also allow interest on this sum and as it is a closed period such interest is at the full rate (15% p.a.) from about mid May 1987 to date, eleven and a half years, namely $17,940.

It is difficult to see any basis for any further award for loss of income past or future after that time. The Canberra job came to an end because the contract expired, he went to James Cook University but resigned on account of the diverticulitis, and to take up the position with the Post and
Telecommunication Corporation in Papua New Guinea, and left that position because of various tropical diseases and their consequences, but not due to the motor vehicle accident. Since then he has been largely unemployed but as a result of his many other illnesses and problems, but not because of the effects of the motor vehicle accident, the effects of which ceased some years ago. He said he set up a computer consultancy business but lost a profit of $500,000 due to the fraudulent conduct of another person. This, if true, demonstrates that he was not incapacitated from working by the effects of the motor vehicle accident, and the defendant cannot be held liable for the loss.

In summary, I assess the various heads of the plaintiff's damages as follows: -

General damages $32,000 
Out of pocket expenses 1,927 
Interest thereon 2,772 
Loss of income to date 10,400 
Interest thereon 17,940 $65,039 
Accordingly I direct the entry for judgement for the plaintiff in the sum of $65,039, and order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings. Exhibit B may be returned to the plaintiff after a photocopy has been made for the Court file.
 * * * 
