

Carver versus The Clerk of the Court, Local Court at Blacktown and Ors Matter
No 30114/97 [1998] NSWSC 358 (13 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
PHILLIP KINGSTON CARVER versus THE CLERK OF THE COURT, LOCAL COURT AT BLACKTOWN & ORS /97 March 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By summons dated 14 November 1997, the plaintiff claims various declarations and orders, the material ones for the purpose of this judgment being an order that the search warrant 183 of 1992 issued by the first defendant on 10 June 1992 to the third defendant be quashed, a declaration that the said search warrant is invalid, and a declaration that the execution of the said search warrant by the second and third defendants was invalid. 
The evidence in the case consists of an affidavit on behalf of the plaintiff sworn on 14 November 1997 by Kathy Jane Crittenden, an affidavit sworn on 23 of January 1998 by Andrew Wroblewski on behalf of the second and third defendants and, for the sake of completeness, an admission made by counsel on behalf of the second and third defendants to the following effect: that out of computer floppy disks seized in execution of the warrant, one floppy disk contained information relating to the sale of the premises 102 Grosvenor Road,
Wahroonga.

A submitting appearance was entered on behalf of the first defendant.

The search warrant in question is Annexure C to the affidavit of Ms.
Crittenden.

The validity of the search warrant is attacked on three grounds by the plaintiff, only the first of which is material to this judgment. That ground is that the search warrant did not disclose any offence in relation to which the seizure was authorised and is therefore invalid.

It is agreed and clear from Annexure C that the search warrant does not disclose any offence on the face of it. The issue therefore is whether the law requires that it should and renders it invalid if it does not.

The plaintiff relied upon Australian Broadcasting Corporation & Masters v. Cloran & Ors [(1984) 4 FCR 151] at 153 where
Lockhart, J. says:- "The warrants are therefore bad because they fail to describe the particular offences in relation to which the seizure is authorised so as to enable the persons to whom they are addressed and the persons whose premises are to be searched to know the exact object of the search.", and ex parte Bradrose Pty. Limited v. Albezia Pty. Limited [(1989) 41 A.
Crim. R 274] as authority for the common law requirement that search warrants should disclose the offence in relation to which the seizure was authorised.

The validity of the above proposition at common law was not challenged by Mr.
Lakatos on behalf of the second and third defendants, however he sought to argue that the effect of the [Search Warrants Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/swa1985175/) (New
South Wales) was to override the common law requirements. He acknowledged that this argument had been put before Temby, AJ. in Warner v. Elder & Ors;
Ventura v. Elder & Anor; O'Connor v. Elder & Ors (unreported April 1997). That argument is dealt with by Temby, AJ. commencing at p.11 of his judgment and concluding at p.13 where he held that the common law had not been changed by the provisions of the 1985 Act and the forms forming part of the Regulations.

Temby, AJ.'s decision was challenged in the Court of Appeal under the title
MacGibbon & Anor v. Warner & Ors; MacGibbon & Anor v.
Ventura & Ors; MacGibbon & Anor v. O'Connor & Ors. The unreported judgment was delivered on 27 November 1997. The principal argument in the Court of Appeal related to the construction of various sections of the
Police Royal Commission Act. However, at p.6 of the judgment the following passage appears:- "This was the primary submission for the appellants in the appeal. They appear to have relied on other arguments before Temby, AJ. These were formally relied on again in the appeal, but virtually the whole argument in this court was devoted to what I have called the primary submission. It also appears to me to have been the strongest submission available to the appellants." 
And, the following passage at p.8 of the judgment:- "To the extent that further arguments were relied on, they were those put before Temby, AJ. who dealt with them in a way which, in my opinion, was correct. In view of the way the argument went in this court it is unnecessary to say anything further about those arguments." 
The above extracts are taken from the judgment of Priestley, JA. with whose judgment Handley and Powell, JJA. agreed without qualification or reservation.

It follows, in my judgment, that the decision of Temby, AJ. on this point has been expressly upheld by the Court of Appeal and is therefore binding upon me.

In those circumstances, I am bound to find that the warrant in this case was invalid for failure to disclose any offence in relation to which the seizure was authorised and that is an end of this matter and it is not necessary to consider the other two grounds upon which the validity of the warrant was attacked.

Two further matters need to be recorded. I am told that a trial is due to commence in the District Court in June 1998 which will involve some of the material obtained pursuant to the warrant in this matter. Secondly, Mr.
Lakatos on behalf of the second and third defendants indicated that he would return all disks in possession of the second and third defendants, save one the subject of the admission, and another one which has apparently been lost, to the plaintiff.

In the light of the above, I do not regard it appropriate to make the orders sought by the plaintiff numbered (4), (5) and (6) in the summons because in relation to order (4), I am not satisfied that such an order would achieve anything; in relation to (5) and (6), the use to be made of such material in the forthcoming trial is entirely a matter for the trial judge having regard to all the circumstances relating to admissibility and otherwise.

Accordingly, I make the following orders:-
That search warrant 183 of 1992 issued by the first defendant on 10 June be quashed.
A declaration that the said search warrant is invalid.
A declaration that the execution of the said search warrant by the second and third defendants was invalid.
That the second and third defendants pay the costs of the plaintiff herein.
 * * * 
