

R (Commonwealth) versus Mark William Standen [2011] NSWSC 1042 (3 May 2011) 
Last Updated: 9 September 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
R (Commonwealth) versus Mark William Standen  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): May 2011  
Decision Date: May 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Common Law - Criminal  
Before: 
James J  
Decision: 
I give leave for witness to revive her memory from her statement  
Catchwords: 
Legislation Cited: [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) - s  
Cases Cited: 
Texts Cited: 
Category: 
Interlocutory applications  
Parties: 
Regina, Mark William Standen  
Representation  - Counsel: 
T Game SC, H Dhanji SC, S Buchen (Crown) 
M Ierace SC, G Farmer (Accused)  - Solicitors: 
Commonwealth DPP (Crown) 
Gordon Elliot, Elliot Lawyers (Accused)  
File number(s): /8922  
Publication Restriction: 
Published  
Judgment (on leave to revive memory from statement; see page 1406 of transcript)  
HIS HONOUR: The question is whether I should grant leave to Amanda McCormick of the Australian Federal Police, proposed to be called as a witness by the Crown, to revive her memory from the statement made by her on 30 April 2008 about events occurring in a meeting at the accused's office at the New South Wales Crime Commission on the morning of 21 February 2008. 
Ms McCormick made contemporaneous notes during the meeting, and I had already granted leave to her to revive her recollection by referring to the notes. Some parts of the notes were added by her later on 21 February. Ms McCormick's statement of 30 April 2008 is largely based on the notes she made at the meeting but, in some respects, and particularly in paragraphs 9, 10, 11 and 12 of the statement, goes beyond what is recorded in her notes. 
Ms McCormick gave evidence that on the afternoon of 21 February 2008 she had meetings with Mr Venchiarutti and Mr Beveridge of the Australian Federal Police, then with Mr Watt of the Australian Federal Police, and then a separate meeting with Mr Beveridge. In the course of these meetings, or one or other of them, she was given information about an operation being conducted by the Australian Federal Police known as Operation Octans, one of the targets of which was the present accused and which led to the charges presently brought against the accused. 
Ms McCormick gave evidence, which I accept, that as a result of these meetings she appreciated the possible significance for Operation Octans of some of the events at the meeting and, in particular, any questions asked at the meeting by the accused. It would, I accept, be an unusual occurrence for a Federal Police Officer to be informed that the Federal Police were conducting an operation, one of whose targets was a very high ranking officer of the New South Wales Crime Commission. In the circumstances, I would be prepared to accept that Ms McCormick would have been likely to have retained a good recollection of what had been said at the meeting, in particular what had been said by the accused. 
On 21 February, Ms McCormick took the first steps towards preparing the statement, although I accept that on 21 February the preparation of the statement went no further than the first two formal paragraphs of the statement and what were described by Ms McCormick as a couple of bullet points. The statement is dated 30 April 2008 so that a period of more than two months elapsed between 21 February and the time of the making of the statement. I would, nevertheless, be prepared to find that the events recorded in the statement were fresh in her memory at the time at which she made the statement. 
I have taken into account the matters referred to in section 192 of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) . I do not consider that any of the matters in subsection (2) of section 192, which I am required to take into account, would preclude the giving of leave. 
The Crown has submitted, and I would accept, that the evidence could be important as possibly supporting the Crown's allegation that the accused sought to utilise his information and contacts so as to facilitate the implementation of the conspiracy alleged by the Crown. 
I give leave to revive memory from the statement. 
It seems convenient that I should decide this matter now rather than wait for when the witness is giving evidence before the jury. * * * 
