

A M Strelec versus D Nelson and 2 Ors [1997] NSWSC 101 (31 March 1997) `AMANDA MARIA STRELEC versus DAVID NELSON AND OTHERS` `12401/90` `TUESDAY 6 FEBRUARY 1996` ``THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT (Tender of Professor Bennett's reports) 
HIS HONOUR: Upon the conclusion of the cross examination of Professor Bennett, Head of School of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of New South Wales, Mr Morrison, counsel for the plaintiff, tendered the Professor's report of 21 September 1992 and two of his reports of 5 June 1995. The basis of the tender was that Mr Higgs, counsel for the defendant, had cross examined upon them to the effect that they contained statements inconsistent with the doctor's oral evidence.

The better view is that, in substance, Mr Higgs only cross examined on one of the reports of 5 June 1995, namely, that containing paragraphs numbered 2 to .

The first area of cross examination related to whether Dr Hruz should have appreciated on 7 February 1985 that there was a real risk of a breech delivery of the baby Duncan. Upon the assumption that the plaintiff was examined on that day by Dr Hruz and that he found the baby's heart beat was on the opposite side to that on which he normally picked it up, Professor Bennett thought it was likely that at that time the infant was already presenting as a potential breech delivery. Professor Bennett stated that if the child was in a position for a breech delivery on 7 February 1985, it should have been possible to pick that up on examination and that an experienced practitioner using reasonable care would have been likely to pick up such a presentation.

Earlier in his oral evidence at T 122, Professor Bennett said that he really did not know whether, on the assumptions mentioned, an experienced practitioner, practising in obstetrics for the previous twenty years, should have picked up that a breech delivery was a reasonable possibility. He added that every obstetrician at some point in time had missed a breech presentation late in pregnancy.

In re-examination (T 146) Professor Bennett said that assuming the baby was in a breech position on 12 February 1985 (as he was), it was probable that he was presenting in that position on 7 February 1985. It was less likely that the baby turned in the last few days of labour.

Professor Bennett agreed that he had written in his report of 21 September :
 "I would certainly not regard a general practitioner/obstetrician, nor indeed for that matter a specialist obstetrician, as negligent for failing to detect a breech presentation. As Dr Hinde points out, we have no evidence that there was a breech presentation at any of the antenatal visits in the latter weeks of pregnancy, and it is quite possible that the baby turned from its head down position on 7 February to lie with a breech presentation by the time labour commenced on 12 February." 
Professor Bennett confirmed that it was possible for the baby to turn around between 7 and 12 February 1985. Mr Higgs did not ask about the probabilities.

Mr Higgs elicited from Professor Bennett that there was no documentary evidence that on the balance of probabilities the baby was in a breech position on 7 February 1985. Mr Higgs did not refer to the baby's heart beat being located in a different position (on the opposite side), nor the inference to be drawn on the balance of probabilities of the baby being in the breech position on 7 February 1985.

Professor Bennett refuted Mr Higgs' suggestion that the baby was not in a breech position on 7 February 1985 but agreed that even if the baby were in a breech position at 7 February 1985 it would not be an example of a doctor having failed to exercise reasonable care and skill in the event of that breech not being detected.

It was not clear whether this took into account the change in the heart beat location. The cross examination, taken as a whole, was capable of suggesting that there was a prior inconsistent statement on the subject of the breech presentation.

The plaintiff urged that I should admit the whole of the report of 21
September 1982. The defendant submitted that he had put the relevant parts accurately and that there was no occasion to invoke the discretion in <case> of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and admit any portions of the written material. The remainder of the report deals with other matters. Some of the text is couched in strong, if not emotive, terms.

On this aspect I would only admit para 1 and the fourth and fifth sentences of para 2. It will assist the jury to have the text before them. It will then be easy to relate the oral evidence to that text.

The next area of cross examination dealt with the post natal bleeding and Dr
Hruz' attempts to stop it. Reference should be made to the following passages in the transcript: T 123 lines 32 to 58; T 124 lines 6 to 26; T 139 lines 50 to 57; T 140 lines 26 to 45; T 141 lines 9 to 13, 15 to 26; the last line of T ; T 142 lines 1 to 5; and T 144 lines 31 to 42. Reference should also be made to paragraph 5 of the Doctor's report of 21 September 1992.

The overall impression that the evidence leaves is that Professor Bennett would not go so far as to say that there was negligence but Dr Hruz could have done better. The jury would not be bound by the doctor's opinion as to negligence.

It could look at the details of the matter as they emerged in the evidence, and have regard to the observation "Dr Hruz could have done better".

The comment made by Professor Bennett that Dr Hruz would have failed an early medical student test has some bite. The material in the reports which was referred to, namely, that in para five of 21 September and para 14 of 5 June , could be regarded by the jury as amounting to statements inconsistent with some of the oral evidence given by Professor Bennett.

It would be of assistance to the jury to have the text of para 5 of the report of 21 September 1992 before it beginning with the words, "For a patient to lose", and concluding with the words, "absence of notice by the doctors concerned". As to the report of 5 June 1995 I would admit para 14.

The text of these two paragraphs will help the jury in understanding and appreciating the cross examination and the position that obtains on the evidence. While I admit those two paragraphs I do not admit the rest of the reports, except as earlier admitted on the first point. The reports should be suitably edited before they go to the jury.
 
AMANDA MARIA STRELEC V. DAVID NELSON & 2 ORS /90 February 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Mr Higgs for the defendant has re-tendered the birth notice relating to
Duncan which appeared in The Border Mail on 16 February 1996. Mrs Strelec was still in hospital. At that stage she and her husband were unaware of the critical condition of Duncan. They believed that he would recover. Dr Bishop was also optimistic as appears from his report.

Mr Morrison told me that his client was unable to recall whether she participated in the preparation of the notice and that she thought that her husband may have inserted it. At a later stage there was a suggestion that another member of the family may have composed and inserted the notice.

The notice may be explicable on the basis of the lack of knowledge.

In his opening Mr Morrison alleged that Dr Nelson was abrupt, uncommunicative and angry. He did not discuss the alternative courses which were open nor tell her that there was a serious problem. Evidence to this effect was led. Sister
Elliott said that she felt uncomfortable. Mr Morrison suggested that these features were unsatisfactory in themselves and were indicative of Dr Nelson's approach.

The defendants contended that the statement in the notice "Our grateful thanks to Dr Hruz, Nelson and Bishop," did not sit easily with what Mr and Mrs
Strelec said had occurred.

In my earlier ruling I was concerned that the matter had not been put to Mr and Mrs Strelec and the raising of it at such a late stage of the trial.

Mr Morrison relied on s.135 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and the creation of disproportionate prejudice. I do not think that the tender should be rejected on that ground at this stage.

The jury could take the view that the terms of the notice and the thanks conveyed to Dr Nelson were not easy to reconcile with the conduct alleged against Dr Nelson. It would be incorrect to refuse to allow the defendants to pursue and put that point.

The notice may be admissible in evidence. It should have been obtained earlier. Birth notices including thanks to the doctors and nurses are common.

Upon re-consideration I give the defendants leave to have Mr and Mrs Strelec recalled for further cross-examination upon the birth notice and not otherwise. I was told that Mr Strelec was in Albury and may not be available.
That will have to be resolved. The additional costs of recalling Mr Strelec should, in any event, be met by the defendants.

The admissibility of the notice will be determined after I have heard Mr and
Mrs Strelec cross-examined. The Border Mail no longer has the initial application or lodgment forms.

AMANDA MARIA STRELEC V. DAVID NELSON & 2 ORS /90 February 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Evidence to go to jury on Hospital's liability for Dr Hruz 
The hospital has submitted that it is not liable for the actions of Dr Hruz in treating the post-natal bleeding of the plaintiff. There is material from which a jury could conclude that Dr Hruz should have first attended to treating the uterus before repairing the cervical tear.

The delivery suite notes of Sister Elliott record Dr Hruz stitching the tear.
There is no record of him first attending to the uterus by applying external massage to the abdomen. Dr Hruz has given evidence to the effect that he would have done so. The evidence establishes that the plaintiff consulted Dr Hruz concerning the pregnancy and that he managed it from the initial stage until he called in Dr Nelson, a specialist obstetrician, upon discovering that there was a breech presentation and that a foot was visible. Dr Hruz was a private practitioner in Albury and I would infer that he had admitting rights to the
Mercy Hospital.

On the night of 12 February 1985 upon her waters breaking the plaintiff went to the Mercy hospital and was admitted. The in-patient election form contains these parts: `` `` `1. Private (Chargeable) Single Bed Room Hospital (Non-Chargeable)` `` `Please complete and sign the sections relating to your election.` `` `` `2. Private (Chargeable) Patient - in which case I will be:` `` ` treated by Dr ....Hruz.... or by the doctor on call (Dr .........) and by doctors whom they may call into consultation on my behalf. I may choose these doctors provided they hold appointments at this hospital.` `` `3. Single Room Accommodation (where available)` `` ` Note: Single rooms are allocated first to patients with specific medical need for this accommodation.` `` ` I hereby request to be accommodated in a single room if available. I acknowledge I shall be charge $130 per day for this accommodation by the hospital (private health insurance will cover all or a substantial part of this charge depending on the level of insurance cover).` `` `` ` ....Amanda Strelec.(SGD).... ....12.12.84....` ` (Signature) (Date)` `` `If your have elected treatment as a chargeable patient, the name of your private health insurance fund (if any) is: ....NSW Building Society - Medi
Plus....` `` 
The effect of the form as completed suggests that she is to be a private patient under the care of Dr Hruz occupying a single bedroom. This seems to be reinforced by the form her husband completed on the following day. It seems that the bleeding became a serious problem after Dr Nelson and Dr Hruz left the hospital. Sister Elliott contacted Dr Hruz and he returned to the hospital. Dr Hruz acknowledged that he had obligations to the hospital as well as to the plaintiff to make an adequate record of any treatment he rendered to the plaintiff while in the hospital.

It would be important for those dealing with her future management and care at the hospital to know what Dr Hruz had found and had done. The plaintiff submitted that in re-attending at the Hospital Dr Hruz was doing work on behalf of the hospital in the management of the plaintiff. Reliance was also placed on Dr Hruz telephoning Dr Nelson for advice and subsequently for further advice and to attend at the hospital. Dr Nelson was the on-call specialist. Counsel took me with care to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Ellis v. The Wallsend District Hospital [17 NSWLR 553.] The hospital contended that it was neither vicariously liable for Dr Hruz nor under a non-delegable duty in the respect of the work performed.

Both parties accepted that, based on Ellis at 591, the court's task is to look at the totality of the relationship between the parties although control remains a significant and therefore relevant indicium of an employer and employee relationship. I look at the totality of the relationship.

At 598 Samuels JA posed this question: In treating the plaintiff was the doctor acting as the employee of the hospital (that is to say, on the hospitals behalf) or on his own behalf? He reframed the question, to ask whether in treating the appellant was the doctor engaged in his own business or the hospital's? I remind myself that the question to be asked is one of fact and that the question must go to the jury if there is any evidence that the doctor was acting on the hospital's behalf or was engaged in the hospital's business.

The plaintiff was Dr Hruz' patient and he had treated her from the beginning of her pregnancy. On admission he was shown as her doctor. He had attended to her shortly after her admission and remained throughout the delivery. The hospital telephoned him to advise that a problem had arisen. What he did in re-attending at the hospital was part and parcel of follow up treatment which is a normal incidence of the work of a doctor for his patient. On the other hand Dr Nelson was primarily responsible for her at that stage. Once Dr Nelson and Dr Hruz left the hospital it became the hospital's duty to nurse the plaintiff, monitor her condition and note any problems, such as undue bleeding and take reasonable steps to have such bleeding stopped. That involved arranging medical treatment if necessary. It was the primary responsibility of the hospital to take steps to stop the bleeding. It decided whether to call Dr
Nelson, the rostered specialist, or Dr Hruz, the plaintiff's general practitioner or the resident doctor.

Dr Hruz was likely to be able to come more quickly than Dr Nelson and some experience was desirable given the problem and the complications. In any event the hospital chose Dr Hruz when it could have chosen others. I think that there is evidence capable of sustaining the conclusion that Dr Hruz was acting on behalf of the hospital and was engaged in its business and that the issue should be left to the jury. I express no opinion on how it should be resolved.

The next question is whether the hospital owed the plaintiff an independent non-delegable duty. It has to provide nursing care which must be undertaken with reasonable care and skill. More difficult questions arise as to medical treatment. In Ellis at 604 Samuels JA said: "...a hospital is bound to ensure that reasonable care issued in providing the treatment which it undertakes to carry out; but that duty does not extend to treatment which is performed by a doctor pursuant to a direct engagement with the patient, and not on behalf of the hospital.

In my opinion therefore while proof of the relationship of hospital and "patient" will generate a special duty of some kind, closer scrutiny of the facts (cf the analysis proposed by Mason J in Stevens versus Brodribb Sawmilling) is necessary in order to establish its scope. It is a question of what medical services the hospital has undertaken to supply." 
At 605 Samuels JA pointed out that a hospital owes an independent non- delegable duty to ensure that the treatment it undertakes to provide is performed with reasonable care. The question in every case is the nature of that undertaking.

I think that it would be open to a jury to take the view that if during the hospital's nursing care a problem arose and came (or ought to have come) to the notice of the hospital staff and required prompt treatment by a doctor, an appropriate doctor would be called to give that treatment. Bleeding is an example. In the present case the hospital selected the doctor to be called. It would be open for a jury to conclude that the hospital undertakes to use reasonable care to ensure that serious bleeding is stopped within a reasonable time in the prevailing circumstances. With some hesitation, I think that it is open to the jury to hold that the hospital owes an independent non-delegable duty to the plaintiff.

These reasons principally deal with the situation in relation to the postnatal bleeding. The question of the failure to administer an anaesthetic falls within the same principles and the same result should follow.

AMANDA MARIA STRELEC versus DAVID NELSON & ORS /90 
MONDAY 19 FEBRUARY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT re any evidence to go to jury of negligence on Dr Hruz's examination on 7 February 1985 
HIS HONOUR: Dr Hruz has submitted that the court should not leave to the jury the issue of whether he was negligent in his examination of the plaintiff on 7 February 1985 wherein a breech presentation was not detected. 
Dr Hruz submitted that: there was no evidence of negligence against him, even if there was a breech presentation, in fact, on 7 February 1985; and, even if there was a breach of his duty of care in not diagnosing a breech presentation on that day, there was no evidence of causation linking that breach to the damages suffered by her. There was a further submission that there was no evidence that there was a breech presentation on 7 February 1985; there was no evidence that even if a breech presentation was diagnosed a vaginal delivery was not appropriate; and even if advice had been given that the plaintiff should have a caesarean section, there was no evidence that on being given that advice the plaintiff would have elected to have a caesarean section.

In my opinion, if Dr Hruz was negligent in his examination at this last consultation prior to the delivery in not detecting the breech presentation, a jury could take the view that damage does flow. A jury could take the view that at that stage she would have retained a specialist to investigate and make full assessment. She lost that opportunity and the opportunity to discuss the position with the doctor, consider it and determine what course she would take after being fully informed of all the risks. Given her past background and the desire of her and her husband for a baby, she might well have chosen a caesarean section.

Dr Nelson indicated the course to be taken is often planned in advance. On the day of the birth the specialist would have been called in as soon as she went into labour. Adequate pre-planning and time enables problems to be surmounted.

The evidence indicates that, as a general rule, a baby turns into the breech position many days, if not weeks, prior to the birth but that is not universally true. If the general rule applied the baby was likely to be in the breech position on 7 February 1985. The doctors were agreed that it was possible that the baby moved into the breech position between 7 and 12
February 1985.

Normally a breech presentation should be detected. Both Professor Bennett and
Dr Hinde (the two independent expert obstetricians who were called) stated that every obstetrician has missed breech presentations. Dr Hinde explained why. As I understood these highly qualified experts this could happen without negligence. I was taken to the evidence of Professor Bennett and Dr Hinde in some detail. Dr Hruz gave evidence of the examination he conducted on 7
February 1995 and that did not reveal negligence.

Neither Professor Bennett nor Dr Hinde was able to say whether the baby was in fact in the breech position on 7 February and, even less, that Dr Hruz was negligent.

In my opinion, there is no evidence capable of supporting the finding that Dr
Hruz was negligent in his examination on 7 February 1985.

AMANDA MARIA STRELEC v. DAVID NELSON, JOSEPH HRUZ & SISTERS OF MERCY /90 
MONDAY 19 FEBRUARY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT (Sufficient evidence to go to jury on psychiatric and economic claims) 
HIS HONOUR: A great deal of the evidence went to, and the principal contest between the parties was, whether the plaintiff had suffered compensable nervous shock as a result of the injuries to, or the death of, Duncan, her baby.

The plaintiff was at pains to adduce evidence that she had suffered an identifiable psychiatric illness. The psychiatrist called by the defendants stated that she had suffered a major depressive illness. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that this was not a case where she had to prove that she had suffered a sudden sensory loss to recover damages for psychiatric disability.

Counsel submitted that she had suffered a physical injury as a result of the negligence of Dr Nelson and the hospital and that she was entitled to damages for her grief and psychiatric illness consequent upon the physical injury.
Counsel submitted that she did not have to surmount the barriers encountered in an independent action for nervous shock. The plaintiff submitted that once she suffered a physical injury, albeit relatively small, she was entitled to be compensated for all the foreseeable consequences and that no fine distinction should be drawn.

Counsel submitted that the injuries started when Dr Nelson first used excessive force. That force affected both the mother and the baby. The injury continued and enlarged, as more force was applied and ultimately included the mental anguish which she suffered on the death of Duncan. Counsel submitted that the acts of Dr Nelson, which caused injury to the plaintiff were the same acts as those which caused the ultimate death of the baby. It did not have to be the same physical injury to the mother which also caused the nervous shock.
It sufficed if the same act of negligence caused both the physical injury and the nervous shock.

There is evidence from the plaintiff that she was unable to push because she was exhausted and that Dr Nelson was "dragging and dragging the baby". She said (T12), "I was in too much pain. It was so quick." She said that Dr Nelson was sweating profusely and using his weight. She estimated that it took 10 to minutes to deliver the baby.

At another point (T71) she said that there was a lot of grunting, twisting and pulling and that it seemed that within five to ten minutes it was all over. It was "sort of like pulling on a rope". Mrs Strelec said that Dr Nelson was dragging very forcefully. Sr Elliott agreed that Mrs Strelec was frantic and distressed during the delivery process. She said that most women are distressed. Mrs Strelec had had enough. Sr Elliott remembered rotating and pulling after the baby was delivered to the shoulder blades. She thought that there may have been pulling prior to this too but that she had some doubt about this.

It was a difficult and hard birth. The plaintiff had been given a local anaesthetic. There is some difficulty, given her condition and the size of the baby, in attributing the pain she suffered to precise causes. However, if the jury took the view that excessive force was used in delivery, the jury could take the view that she probably suffered more than minimal pain from the application of excessive force. The jury could also take the view that while the pain was short lived, it would have taken some days to recover from its effect. Pain can amount to an injury. That perhaps appears most clearly from the judgment of Woolf J as he then was, in Kralj v. McGrath [[1986] 1 All ER .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1986%5d%201%20All%20ER%2054 "View LawCiteRecord" )

There were two post natal difficulties. These were repairing the cervical tear and stopping the post natal bleeding. The defendants submitted that even if the plaintiff's right to recover damages was widened because of some physical injury, nevertheless her claim for damages for nervous shock had to involve grief or anguish above normal grief. Secondly, regardless of the extent of damages available to a plaintiff because of aggravation of physical injury, there has to be a causal connection between the damage for the emotional hurt and the physical injury. The physical injury had well and truly cleared at the death of Duncan or any other relevant time.

The defendants did not accept that the plaintiff suffered injury at the time of the delivery. They submitted that there was no evidence of injury at that point. They submitted that there was no evidence that excessive force caused her any injury or that she suffered excessive trauma. Any pain was not attributable to the acts of the defendants.

As indicated, I do not accept the defendant's submissions that there was no evidence as to injury. The defendants contended that the only injury was the shock consequent upon the post natal bleeding. The evidence is that the physical effects of such shock would have been over by late on 13 February
The defendants submitted that there was no evidence that the plaintiff's emotional state was due to any injury she suffered. They submitted that there was no evidence of the duration of any injury. At most there was short lived increased friction.

It is appropriate to look at the history of the plaintiff's psychiatric illness. By reason of her background, prior to Duncan's birth, she was vulnerable if a major problem arose. The evidence is that she knew the baby was floppy and that Dr Bishop, the paediatrician, and the nursing staff were devoting much attention to the baby. She knew that ultimately the decision was made to transfer the baby to a specialist intensive care unit at the Royal
Children's Hospital, Melbourne. She had been advised to have the baby baptised during the early morning of 13 February 1985.

She and her husband were worried about the baby, but hopeful. They went to
Melbourne as soon as she possibly could after partially recovering from the effects of the birth. Mrs Strelec said (T19), that they thought they were going down there to bring him home. They did not know the seriousness or extent of his injuries. Upon arrival at the hospital, Dr Campbell told them of the gravity of Duncan's injuries, that he was unlikely to recover and that his prognosis for life was not good. The doctor suggested that they let him die.
They were stunned.

The doctors carried out further tests but could do nothing for Duncan. He was at that hospital for nearly four weeks. She said (T20) that Dr Hruz gave them some hope. It was only when she took him to Woodstock, the Centre for the
Developmentally Disabled, that she realised the full extent fo Duncan's injuries including the number of operations and the bags he would need.

On the early morning of 17 March 1985, Mrs Strelec discovered that Duncan was in a critical and life threatening state. Emergency resuscitation was required and undertaken. The baby was taken to hospital where Dr Bishop worked upon him. Dr Bishop advised the parents that Duncan had stopped breathing so many times that he probably had serious brain damage. Dr Bishop advised the parents to let the baby go peacefully and they agreed. Mrs Strelec said that this position was reached quickly, once they arrived at the hospital.

The effect of the evidence is that she and her husband were plunged into a deep grief and shock. She found the grief of her relatives harder to bear than her own. (T254) Mr Strelec said that his wife did not cope well with the news as to Duncan's condition received from Dr Campbell. She was upset constantly, and they kept building their hopes. There were some glimmers of hope but
Duncan's condition proved irreversible.

When they took the baby home his wife was constantly upset with the situation.
Mr Strelec said that the decision to accept Dr Bishop's advice and let Duncan go peacefully was a very difficult one.

The evidence shows four points of high stress, namely, early on 13 February , the meeting with Dr Campbell and his advice, the advice given at
Woodstock and the morning of 17 March 1985. After Dr Campbell's advice there were continuing periods of concern and distress as events unfolded. Upon the evidence, while there was anger and complaint about the manner of delivery, the only conclusion open to the jury is that her psychiatric illness was not related to or consequential upon any injury she received but due to the injury and condition, impending death and death of Duncan.

Counsel for the plaintiff relied on Swan v. Williams (Demolition) Pty Ltd [(1987) 9 NSWLR 172] at 197 to 199 per Priestley JA; Flemming 8th ed 159;
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury & Death (3rd ed) H Luntz,
Sydney, Butterworths, 1990, pages 133 et seq, and especially paragraphs 2.3 and 2.4; Jaensch v. Coffey <case>; [(1983-1984) 155 CLR 549], especially at 564, 608-609 and 613. Counsel for the defendants relied on "Issues in Tort, Liability for Nervous Shock" J Swanton [66 ALJ 495];
Woods v. Lowns [(1995) 36 NSWLR 344.] 
Since the argument on Friday afternoon, I have found the discussion in Rowe v. McCartney [[1976], 2 NSWLR 73], Kralj v.
McGrath [[1986] 1 All ER 54] and
MacPherson v. The Commissioner for Government Transport [(1959) 76 NSW WN ] of interest. In Campbelltown City Council v. Mackay [(1988-89) 15 NSWLR 501]
Kirby P at 503 to 504 lamented the consequences of the law's failure to redefine the cause of action for nervous shock and remarked that nervous shock is rarely, if ever, explicable as the result of an isolated shock.
Psychological injury is a much more complex process.

I have found the discussion of McHugh JA at 509 to 511 very helpful. At 509
McHugh JA observed: "In an action for nervous shock, it is not enough, as Brennan J pointed out in
Jaensch v. Coffey, that the psychiatric illness was the foreseeable result of the defendant's conduct. The illness must be the result of a shock by the perception of a phenomenon for which the defendant is responsible..." 
McHugh JA at 507 referred to the observation of Brennan J in Jaensch at 567 that a psychiatric illness induced by mere knowledge of a distressing fact is not compensable; perception by the plaintiff of a distressing phenomenon is essential.

At 511 McHugh JA said: "In an action for nervous shock the sustaining of a psychiatric illness by shock is fundamental to the cause of action. In an action for damages for physical injury, a plaintiff who has suffered physical injury is entitled to recover for consequential psychiatric illness. A plaintiff in such an action does not have to establish that the psychiatric illness is the result of a shock caused by the sudden perception of some phenomenon for which the defendant is responsible. It is enough that the psychiatric condition is the reasonably foreseeable result of the defendant's negligence." 
I accept that many of the cases deal with different factual situations. It is open to the jury to find that excessive force was applied and that that was negligent. If it is so found, it is open to the jury to find that that caused relatively minor injuries to the plaintiff in the form of increased pain and grave injury to the baby.

The problems in this case are a matter of considerable difficulty, and I would have preferred to have had considerably more time to research and reflect upon them. However, I think it is necessary to distinguish between psychiatric illness to the plaintiff, consequent upon injury to her, and that consequent upon injury to the baby.

The present case is an illustration of the latter. As earlier mentioned, that is the finding open to the jury. It would not be open to the jury to find that psychiatric illness was the reasonably foreseeable result of the negligence of
Dr Nelson towards the plaintiff. I do not regard this as a fine distinction especially when the evidence points to the psychiatric condition being the result of the injuries to, condition of, and impending death and death of
Duncan.

The case was fought primarily on the basis of the plaintiff having to make out an independent claim for nervous shock rather then one of psychiatric illness consequent upon a physical injury to her. While there is material which would support the view that the psychiatric illness was of gradual cause, there are two incidents which the jury could regard as amounting to a sudden sensory shock. The first is the communication of Dr Campbell of The Children's
Hospital at Melbourne that the child's condition was hopeless and to let him die, and the second was the death of the child in tragic and traumatic circumstances.

A jury could take the view that she suffered a sudden shock and consequent psychiatric illness, consequent upon the communication of Dr Campbell's advice, and that the shock was much compounded by further sudden shock from the child's death. The evidence suggests that the latter shock was the greater. The compounding effect of shock upon shock upon the mind is well recognised in literature and perhaps nowhere more clearly than by Shakespeare.

I propose to allow the claims for personal injury against Dr Nelson and Dr
Hruz and her claim for nervous shock, as an independent claim to go to the jury.

The plaintiff intimated that she wished to rely as a head of negligence upon the failure of Dr Nelson to advise and recommend a caesarean section. The defendants strongly submitted that there was no evidence to support this head of negligence. They submitted further that there was no evidence to go to the jury that it was negligent to proceed vaginally. They submitted that there was no evidence that Mrs Strelec would have accepted the advice or the recommendation of a caesarean section.

One of the difficulties in dealing with this matter is that the doctor made no records of what he did. When he came to give evidence he had no recollection between observing the foot presenting and the difficulty in delivering the arms and the shoulders.

Dr Hinde gave evidence that he would have advised a course of a trial vaginal delivery reserving the option to switch to a caesarean section if that should be the preferred course. Dr Hinde envisaged that the whole process would be carefully monitored and, of course, that advice was given on the basis that the breech presentation had been detected at an earlier stage than it was in this case.

It seemed to be reasonably common ground that once the baby was delivered to the shoulder blades, a caesarean section was no longer practicable. The baby was not suffering foetal distress. There is difficulty because of Dr Nelson's stated inability to recollect what happened in relation to the delivery of the trunk other than by reference to his usual practice and to some extent, by way of reconstruction. He reconstructed that he would have lifted the second foot out and that the mother was unable to make effective expulsive efforts. There is evidence of force being used at the stage of the delivery of the trunk. Dr
Nelson has reconstructed that it would have been gentle traction.

The evidence of Mrs Strelec and Mr Strelec is to a different effect, in other words, that there was quite some force. Phrases like "dragging out" and "sort of pulling on a rope" do not suggest gentle traction.

There is also the evidence of Sr Elliott, of which it might be said that her evidence seemed to fluctuate about the use of force prior to delivery of the shoulder blades.

There is also the evidence of Dr Hruz. The jury would be entitled to draw the inference that there was probably some difficulty in delivering the trunk, that inappropriate force was used and that force would not have been used unless there had been some reason. The jury are entitled to take the view that, at the stage immediately prior to the delivery of the trunk, there were warning signs and that the option of a caesarean should then have been considered and recommended. Given the value of the baby to the plaintiff and her husband, the jury would have been entitled to infer that in the circumstances she would have accepted such a recommendation. These are possible views that the jury could take, and I, of course, do not express any view other than that there are possible views open to the jury on the evidence. The issue of the failure to advise a caesarean section should be left to the jury as a head of negligence.

Mr Higgs did submit that it was not put to Dr Nelson that he pulled because the position was tight or there were difficulties. Mr Morrison's riposte is that he only needs to establish that inappropriate force or traction was used and that a doctor would not use force unless he thought it was required.

There were a number of other arguments put on Friday in relation to claims for gratuitous services and domestic assistance. The plaintiff has made claims for gratuitous services in relation to the efforts of her husband. In her evidence (at T31 and T32), this passage appears: "Q. After Duncan's death, did your husband work around the house? 
A: Yes.

Q: Had he done so before? 
A: Reluctantly, but yes.

Q: Reluctantly before or reluctantly after Duncan's death? 
A: Both.

Q: Was there any change in what he did after Duncan died? Did he do things he had not done before or was he doing the same things as he had done before? 
A: No, it was more after Adam's birth that he really had to increase the help.
He would hang clothes out for me; bring clothes in. Any of the heavy duties he would do.

Q: Had you done heavy duties yourself prior to Duncan's death? 
A: Yes.

Q: What was there after his death that stopped you doing those duties? 
OBJECTION.

Q: What was there that stopped you doing those duties that you had previously done? 
A: I was just so tired all the time and so just didn't have the strength that
I used to have and then when I had the arthritis, after Harry, I dropped Harry in the bath once when I was bathing him, because I just lost all sensation in my hand, and I think it was just sheer fatigue. I used to really push myself to try to overcome it but it was just the fatigue. I was always tired.

Q: How do you find your capacity to do housework now? 
A: It is limited. I try. I have got a housekeeper that comes in now." 
On the evidence, the husband's measure of assistance both before and after
Duncan's death and up to Adam's birth was probably of the same order but after
Adam's birth there is material from which the jury could conclude that the husband gave increased assistance. It will be a matter for the jury whether they take the view that that was as a result of the effect of her psychiatric illness or the birth of the children or both.

So far as the claim for domestic assistance was concerned, the defendants submitted that there was no evidence of her incapacity to do the domestic work because of her depression. There is evidence that fatigue was a major problem and it will be a matter for the jury to decide on the evidence whether the need for domestic assistance arose out of the fatigue consequent upon the psychiatric illness or her having, in a relatively short space of time, three young children to cope with or from other problems or from the burdens which she was generally carrying by way of family and studies.

The jury may take the view that there were contributing reasons and think, for example, that some partial allowance was appropriate or they may think that a full allowance should be made or that no allowance should be made. There is material for the jury to consider and reach a conclusion.

As to her claim for economic loss, she claims that she was tired and depressed all the time. The defendants say that she was tired from time to time. The defendants submitted that there was no evidence that tiredness or bouts of depression stopped her working. She had a part time job as mayor. The defendants also submitted that she did not intend to work until the youngest child was at school.

On the evidence there are a number of conclusions to which the jury could come. They could take the view that her capacity for work was impaired by tiredness and depression and by other factors. This is an issue which should be left to the jury.

AMANDA MARIA STRELEC v. DAVID NELSON & 2 ORS /90 March 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Application of Border Morning Mail Pty Ltd to Discharge Suppression Order 
The plaintiff has sued Drs Nelson and Hruz and the Mercy Hospital, Albury for damages for negligence arising out of severe injuries sustained by Duncan during his birth on 12 February 1985. He died on 17 March 1985.

There is a claim for limited physical injury and a substantial claim for damages for nervous shock. From her background prior to her tragic loss it is apparent that the birth of Duncan was of more than usual importance to her.
She claims that she suffered much more than ordinary grief, namely pathological grief. She detailed her depression and difficulties.

Most of the hearing has dealt with the issue of whether there was a failure to take reasonable care. However, there has been a significant amount of time spent on damages, and her history, condition and treatment.

On 2 February 1996 upon the plaintiff tendering the issues of 1 and 2 February of the Border Mail, and her counsel telling me of their alleged effect on her children and her I prohibited until further order the publication of: any details as to the child of the plaintiff who was adopted out and the relations between her and the plaintiff and the plaintiff and the father of that child; and details of the relationship between the plaintiff and her husband; and details of the depression and medical treatment of the plaintiff in depression.

On the previous day I had made an order in terms of paragraph (a).

Border Mail now seeks to vacate orders (b) and (c).

On 1 February 1996 the Australian (p.2) published a column summarising the plaintiff's claims against the defendants, her breaking down during her evidence, the baby's death and the allegation that the plaintiff had suffered from a pathological grief reaction resulting in severe depression since
Duncan's death and that her marriage had failed. There was a sizable photograph of the plaintiff and her counsel.

On p4 of the Sydney Morning Herald there was a photograph of the plaintiff accompanied by an article summarising her claims and the account which she had given of events. It concluded with her claim that she had suffered from a pathological grief reaction after the death and continued to suffer depression.

The Border Mail a daily newspaper circulating in the Albury/Wodonga area published detailed reports of the proceedings. These included her account of the delivery of the baby, her allegations of negligence, her obsessive behaviour and depression and her personal history. She had encountered serious problems. The Border Mail, in a headline, used the description "a troubled life". Good taste would normally have led to a newspaper not publishing the intimate details contained in the Border Mail. The Australian and The Sydney
Morning Herald did not publish such details. However, good taste is not the test.

The plaintiff has been the Mayor of Albury since late September 1995 and a
Councillor for a few years. Earlier issues of the Border Mail suggested that she has been forceful, keen to change what she believes requires reform, active and controversial.

Border Mail contended that all aspects of her health were matters of vital interest to Border Mail readers having regard to the office she held. That puts the matter too widely. It is hard to see how aspects of her health which do not bear upon the performance of her duties as Mayor or her capacity to perform such duties would be matters of public interest. Counsel did not suggest that the intimate details published revealed any physical, mental or moral unfitness to hold office or to discharge her duties.

The plaintiff was concerned about the effect of the publication of this material upon her children, aged 9, 8 and 6. One child was upset and crying and does not wish to attend his school anymore. Another child was being teased and laughed at.

Counsel for Border Mail attempted to dismiss this evidence and the effect upon the children. I do not accept this approach. There is appreciable potential for harm. Taunts or teasing, based upon the intimate details published, directed at the children could be hurtful and harmful. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the court should not wait for the harm to occur.

In relatively recent years there have been statutory provisions which make substantial inroads on the publication of court proceedings. Examples include family law proceedings, the victims of sexual assaults in criminal proceedings and extensive provisions relating to children.
 [Section 80](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s80.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) permits business to be conducted in the absence of the public in certain nominated instances. These include in paragraph (c) where the business concerns the guardianship, custody or maintenance of an infant. The Border Mail submitted that the legislature having addressed its mind to the position of children must be taken to have decided when in relation to them proceedings could be conducted in the absence of the public. The present case does not fall within paragraph (c).

Paragraph (d) suggests that jury actions are heard in open court. This was a jury action until I dispensed with the jury during the final address of the plaintiff's counsel.

One problem is that in common law damages claims for personal injury where the plaintiff claims to have suffered depression or some other psychiatric illness, matters may emerge which will harm the children if they are published in newspapers but not if they are only given in open court. That harm may occur simply through publication or through publication and others commenting to the children about such matters.

Over the last ten years the Court of Appeal, the Court of Criminal Appeal, judges and magistrates have been troubled in reconciling the public nature of court proceedings with justice being administered in public and the general desirability of the fair reporting of such proceedings and the harm which such reporting may cause to innocent people. It becomes of even greater concern where children may be harmed. That is the issue which has worried me. Counsel were unable to find any previous case where that issue has been specifically addressed.

The cardinal principle is that the courts must conduct their proceedings so that justice is done (Scott v. Scott [1913 AC 417] at 437 per Viscount
Haldane LC, 442 and 445).

The courts as between the parties administer justice in public. There are some well recognised exceptions, namely, suits affecting wards, lunacy proceedings and cases where secrecy is of the essence including secrecy of a process of manufacture or discovery or invention or trade secrets. In such cases the whole reason for the proceedings would be destroyed by publicity.

Other exceptions include blackmail, the identities of informers, national security and extortion. It is not suggested that the categories are closed.

Where a judge finds that a portion of a trial is rendered impracticable by the presence of the public, the judge may exclude them so far as to enable the trial to proceed (per Lord Loreburn at 446). The case of D v.D 1903 p144 was an example. Apparently the practices allegedly engaged in were so shocking as not to be capable of being investigated and canvassed in open court.

At 436 Viscount Haldane was prepared to accept that the hearing or part of it may be heard in camera if justice could not be done otherwise. This principle had to be applied with great care and should not be stretched to cases where there was not a strict necessity of invoking it. At 438 his Lordship stated "But unless it be strictly necessary for the attainment of justice there can be no power to hear in camera." 
The Earl of Halsbury was troubled that individual judges might apply the principles generally stated by the Lord Chancellor in unintended ways and hold hearings in camera.

At 446 Lord Loreburn said: "It would be impossible to enumerate or anticipate all possible contingencies, but in all cases where the public has been excluded with admitted propriety the admitted principle ... is that the administration of justice would be rendered impracticable by their presence, whether because the case could not be effectively tried, or the parties entitled to justice would be reasonably deterred from seeking it at the hands of the court." 
While Lord Loreburn puts the test in terms which are perhaps slightly less stringent than Viscount Haldane there is little between the two formulations.
Lord Loreburn referred to the inveterate rule that justice is administered in open court and the High Court not having an unqualified power in its discretion to hear civil proceedings with closed doors.

At 463 Lord Atkinson pointed out that a public hearing may be painful, humiliating and act as a deterrent to parties and witnesses. It may reveal highly indecent details. This is endured because in public trial is found the best security for the good administration of justice. Viscount Haldane and the
Earl of Halsbury took the same view.

At 476-477 Lord Shaw regarded publicity as the very soul of justice and the keenest spur to exertion and the surest of all guards against improbity. He thought it was an important constitutional security and one which does not depend on judicial discretion.

None of the law lords addressed the situation where children were affected other than in wardship situations. I accept that the children of felons may be adversely affected by publication of details of a parent's crime and the butt of cruel remarks.

The Scott principles have been applied for many years in Australia. They received further detailed consideration in three decisions of the NSW Court of
Appeal. Those decisions involved courts presided over by magistrates and the
Police Tribunal. Some of the observations were of general application, some applied to superior courts and others related to the express situation under consideration.

In John Fairfax & Sons Ltd v. Police Tribunal of NSW [(1986) 5 NSWLR ]
at 476-477 McHugh JA stated that "an order of a court prohibiting the publication of evidence is only valid if it is really necessary to secure the proper administration of justice." 
At 479 McHugh JA quoted with evident approval an earlier observation by
McPherson J that there was no power to prohibit publication of an accurate report of court proceedings if they are conducted in open court. At 486-481 he expressed the view that the Tribunal had no power to make an order designed to protect a person who was not a party or witness from the perceived effects of evidence given publicly in the Tribunal.

In A.G. for NSW versus Mayas (1988) 14 NSWLR McHugh JA stated: "...if a court allows evidence to be given in open court, then in the absence of statutory authority, it has no power to prevent the publication of that evidence." 
These observations of McHugh JA make it difficult to sustain an order prohibiting the publication of the evidence as to the details of the relationship between the plaintiff and her husband and her depression when that evidence was given in open court.

In John Fairfax Group versus Local Court of NSW [(1991) 26 NSWLR 131] the Court accepted the "where necessary" qualification in Scott and as earlier expounded by Mchugh JA.

Mahoney JA at 163-164 considered the problems of the control of judicial power and accountability and the avoidance of personal and public harm. He pointed out that "the expedient of granting to every judge (a discretion) to balance the principle of open courts against the harm in the individual case had not been accepted." 
Mahoney JA and Hope AJA took the view that the earlier decisions of the Court of Appeal meant that orders prohibiting publication of the whole or part of the proceedings could not be made if the names of the people involved were disclosed in the court proceedings and any person attending the hearing would know the allegations being made.

Their Honours thought that there was an important distinction between an order prohibiting the publication of any evidence given in open court and an order for the use of pseudonyms. The former was unsustainable but the latter was permissible.

In Mr C [(1993) 67 A Crim R 562]
Hunt CJ at CL, for the Court of Criminal Appeal, set out a series of statutory provisions in relation to specified sexual offences and children which enable courts to make orders prohibiting publication of materials. At 573 he observed that Courts including the Supreme Court did not have power to make non- publication orders in the absence of a statutory warrant.

As I read the judgments of Mahoney JA in Mayas and John Fairfax Group his
Honour regarded the making of a non-publication order as perhaps justified as an incident of an in camera order or because the circumstances would have justified the making of an in camera order. His Honour did not finally resolve that question (Mayas at 349) and commented that he would not infer from the fact that an in camera order could have been made that the power existed to make a non-publication order. I do not understand Mahoney JA to be taking the matter further in John Fairfax Group at 164.

As I understand the observations of McHugh JA in John Fairfax & Sons Ltd and Mayas a non-publication order duly limited along the lines he indicated may be made where the proceedings are ordered to be and are heard in camera.
However, in the absence of statutory authorisation a non-publication order standing alone may not be made.

In Mr C At 564 Hunt CJ at CL stated that absent statutory authorisation the case would need to be special and exceptional before it would be heard in camera. That is another way of expressing the principle that it must be necessary for the administration of justice. In that sentence appeal in respect of offences of armed robbery and assault it was ordered that the applicant be referred to by a pseudonym. This was because there was an unrelated and pending murder charge and he could have been seriously prejudiced at the forthcoming trial.

I was not asked to make an order for a hearing in camera of the whole or part of the evidence or to order the use of a pseudonym.

A non-publication order could not be said to be necessary for the administration of justice. However, a limited non-publication order was necessary to avoid potential harm to the children but that is not sufficient to ground an order. In any event the evidence has been given in open court.

I discharge orders (b) and (c) made on 2 February 1996 and referred to earlier.

The legislature has already provided substantial protection for children. This case illustrates that further statutory protection is needed for them. I am not suggesting that there should be blanket or wide ranging orders but it would be useful if the court could make limited non-publication orders in respect of intimate personal details of parents where their publication is likely to affect the children adversely and their publication serves no useful purpose.

AMANDA MARIA STRELEC v. DAVID NELSON, JOSEPH HRUZ & SISTERS OF MERCY /90 
Friday, 13 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
The birth of Duncan Strelec at the Mercy Hospital, Albury late in the evening of 12 February 1985 was one of some difficulty. Sadly, during delivery he suffered severe injuries including a traction injury to his cervical cord. He remained very flaccid with marked floppiness. There were respiratory problems.
The baby was very ill and despite intensive treatment he died on 17 March
Mrs Strelec, the baby's mother, was devastated and the effects of the tragedy have been long lasting.

Dr Nelson was a specialist obstetrician and gynaecologist who was called in after labour had commenced to take over the delivery of the child by Dr Hruz,
Mrs Strelec's general practitioner. He had been attending to Mrs Strelec from shortly after conception of the baby. The Sisters of Mercy, Goulburn and
Amalgamated Houses, Albury conducted the Mercy Hospital, Albury. Mrs Strelec has sued each of them for damages for professional negligence. The hospital's liability depends primarily on whether Dr Nelson was negligent and secondly on whether Dr Hruz was negligent. The case against Dr Hruz depends on different acts and different stages of treatment.

Mrs Strelec had been a patient of Dr Hruz since 1982. Dr Hruz had considerable obstetric experience. He had undergone some specialist obstetric training. On July 1984 he established that Mrs Strelec was pregnant. He saw her at regular intervals and monitored her condition and the progress of the baby. He caused an ultrasound examination to be held on 13 August 1984. That revealed a single pregnancy and that the position was normal. Dr Hruz made notes of what he found on his various examinations.

Mrs Strelec said that late in her pregnancy she started experiencing pains and that Dr Hruz prescribed some Valium. Dr Hruz has a note that on 24 January she complained of pains. His note reads "painful conts (?)" She asked Dr
Hruz whether she should be consulting a specialist as her mother in law was urging. Dr Hruz replied that he had had 20 years experience in obstetric work and that he was more than capable of handling her problems. That assertion was to prove erroneous. Mrs Strelec also told Dr Hruz that her mother in law felt that she should have another ultra-sound but Dr Hruz told her that that was not necessary. She said that she spoke to Dr Hruz about these matters twice.

She recalled that on one visit Dr Hruz could not, at first, find the baby's heart beat. It was not in the usual place but he found it on the opposite side. Dr Hruz's records show that on 24 January 1985 the location of the heart beat had shifted. Dr Hruz has noted that the head was high, that is, it had not descended below the pubic bone and was still mobile over the pelvic inlet.
On 7 February 1985 Dr Hruz noted the heart beat in the same position and that the head had stayed in the same position over the pelvis. The baby had shifted from the left vertex position to the right vertex position.

Dr Hruz thought that there was nothing as at 7 February 1985 to indicate a breech delivery or a difficult birth.

The Case Against Dr Nelson 
Most of the evidence dealt with the plaintiff's action against Dr Nelson.
About .30 p.m., on 12 February 1985 the plaintiff's waters broke. Her husband took her to the hospital. The Hospital Admission Form shows that she was admitted at 9 p.m. She was examined by Sister Elliott who called Dr Hruz. It is not entirely clear but it seems that Dr Hruz probably arrived about 9.20 to 9.30 p.m. He examined Mrs Strelec and felt the baby's foot in her vagina. In his records he made this note (probably on 13 February 1985): "12.2.85 - Spont. premat. rupture of membranes .30pm -&gt; Mercy 9pm labour w.

Footling breech (prolapsed foot) - patient seen in labour ward, examined 
Dr Nelson consulted to take over delivery management." 
Mrs Strelec said that after Dr Hruz had examined her he stated that there was a foot presenting and that he would have to call a specialist in to be on the safe side but that there was nothing to worry about.

There was some difference of recollection as to when Dr Nelson was called. He lived some 34 kms out of Albury. He said that he came as soon as he was called. The witnesses varied as to when Dr Nelson first saw the plaintiff from about 10.15 p.m. to 10.25 p.m. It was probably about 10.20 p.m. to 10.25 p.m.
Dr Nelson did not have a recollection of much of what he did that night. His recollection was very limited. He had a recollection of coming into the labour ward and seeing the foot protruding through the vulva. He was relieved that the mother had not delivered the baby half way down the trunk. He said that his next positive recollection was the difficulty he had in delivering the shoulders.

Although present before, during and after the delivery Dr Hruz was unable to recall what happened after Dr Nelson arrived, that is, what steps Dr Nelson took. Dr Hruz stated that his only recollection was being called to the hospital, examining the patient and feeling a foot in the vagina. Dr Hruz believed that he would have acted as an assisting doctor.

Mrs Strelec recalled that on Dr Nelson's arrival he asked Sister Elliott why she had not given Mrs Strelec an enema as she was "chock-a-block". Sister
Elliott replied that it was too dangerous. Dr Nelson checked with Mrs Strelec that she had had a baby before and ascertained that it was 10 years previously. Mrs Strelec described Dr Nelson as very angry and abrupt. He did not mention that there was a problem with the baby's delivery or the possibility of a caesarean section.

Because of her position on the delivery table her view was restricted. Her abdomen was draped and her legs were held up in stirrups. She recalled that they were telling her to push but she could not do so as she was exhausted.
She told them so. She was told that she was having contractions but could not remember them. She said that Dr Nelson was telling her to push "and dragging and dragging" the baby. She said that she was in much pain and that the delivery was very quick. She estimated that it was 10 to 15 minutes from the time Dr Nelson arrived until the baby was delivered but accepted that it could have been 20 minutes.

While she did not recall that Dr Nelson had administered a local anaesthetic she understood that he had done so. She also understood that he had made an incision at the base of her vaginal opening to widen the opening for the purpose of delivery.

She said that there was a lot of grunting twisting and pulling with Dr Nelson leaning back, using his weight and pulling backwards, "it was sort of like pulling on a rope." Dr Nelson was sweating profusely. The baby was delivered about 10.40 p.m.

Mr David Strelec was beside his wife from the time they arrived at the hospital until after the delivery. He recalled Dr Nelson's gruff remark about his wife being "chock-a-block" and the doctor's reprimand of Sister Elliott.
By the time Dr Nelson arrived the baby's toes had protruded a little past the opening of the vagina. A foot was not outside the vaginal opening. Mr Strelec remembered Dr Nelson performing an episiotomy but not draining his wife's bladder and administering an anaesthetic by making injections. Dr Nelson proceeded to deliver Duncan rather hurriedly. Mr Strelec estimated that it took between five to ten minutes from the time Dr Nelson took Duncan's feet until he was delivered. Mr Strelec did not agree that it took 20 minutes to effect the delivery of Duncan.

Mr Strelec said that Dr Nelson got both feet out and then proceeded to drag
Duncan from his wife's body with a lot of force. Dr Nelson was holding on to
Duncan's feet or ankles dragging him out. Mr Strelec did not agree that after the delivery of the legs Dr Nelson pulled gently on the body. Mr Strelec said that the whole delivery was characterised by dragging. Mr Strelec noticed that
Dr Nelson was sweating heavily and by his actions was dragging the baby very forcefully. Dr Nelson's arms were outstretched and pulling the child from the body of his wife.

Mr Strelec said that Dr Nelson hesitated at the shoulders. He reached into his wife's vagina and pulled the baby's arms down beside his torso.

Mr Strelec seemed to accept that after Dr Nelson had brought the arms down and delivered the baby to the point where the shoulders were outside, Dr Nelson held the baby by the thighs twisted him and delivered the head. By that time he had eased up on the force. Mr Strelec stated that there was no rotation of the baby's body until the arms were out. Mr Strelec remembered seeing forceps but he did not remember seeing them used.

Sister Elliott attended Mrs Strelec from the time she arrived at the hospital, during the baby's delivery and the subsequent complications. She was nervous and embarrassed but not untruthful. She was conscious of her duty to tell the truth when giving evidence. When various people spoke with her over the years she did not want to be involved. She wished that she had not seen what had happened. She was torn between the allegiance which she believed she owed as a nursing sister towards the medical profession and telling what had happened.
As she added, "you are torn to perhaps tell what you saw and to keep that in silence." 
She said that in one of her statements she had reduced the extent of the situation. During her lengthy cross examination she seemed to lose the thread on occasions. At other times her recollection seemed to go blank. The experience of giving evidence was very distasteful to her to say the least.
There were elements of distress but I thought that the best course was to complete what she found to be a trying ordeal. Adjournments or stopping would not have helped. She said that cross examining counsel had "got me that knotted up." There is substance in that remark in that she lost the thread of what had happened and what she had said. At other times she was accurate.
Taken gently and sequentially she knew what had happened. She could not cope with sustained, detailed and somewhat hostile questioning. I have considered her initial notes, her statements, her evidence, her demeanour and conduct and tried to assess what she saw and heard. Considerable care has to be exercised in taking any one answer.

On Mrs Strelec arriving at the hospital, Sister Elliott examined her and observed that she was in established labour, quite distressed and contracting.
She was 6/7 centimetres dilated. She was not yet ready to deliver the child.
Sister Elliott telephoned Dr Hruz who attended, examined Mrs Strelec and called Dr Nelson, the obstetrician/gynaecologist on call for the Hospital.

Sister Elliott thought that the delivery which occurred about 10.40 p.m. took about 20 minutes.

Sister Elliott said that there were no signs of foetal distress from Mrs
Strelec's admission to the delivery of the child. During the delivery Mrs
Strelec needed lots of support. She was distressed. By the end of the delivery
Mrs Strelec was frantic and had had enough. Sister Elliott added that most women are in great distress during delivery.

Sister Elliott said that when Dr Nelson arrived there was a foot protruding.
He went straight to the delivery. He did not discuss with Mrs Strelec what he proposed to do or any alternatives. There was no mention of what would happen at any stage nor of a problem with delivery. He did not mention a caesarean delivery. He said nothing about a nuchal arm.

Sister Elliott said that it was a hard delivery, Dr Nelson was pulling and leaning back. He was sweating and angry. He was abrupt. She said that she felt uncomfortable and later in her evidence she described him as cross. When some hours later it was necessary for him to be contacted she declined and Dr Hruz had to telephone Dr Nelson. Sister Elliott accepted that Dr Nelson was concerned.

She saw Dr Nelson pulling, rotating and on occasions doing both at the same time. It was her recollection that the delivery had not progressed very far when Dr Nelson started pulling. It was very hard work. He was pulling out and down and then up. As he leaned back his arms were extended and he appeared to be pulling very hard. She recalled his expression.

At one stage in cross examination she said that she thought that the first pulling she observed occurred when the shoulders were being delivered. She could not remember whether she saw any pulling prior to the delivery of the shoulder blades. Under persistent detailed questioning Sister Elliott said that she thought that the baby was difficult to deliver even prior to the shoulders. She said that she had a doubt in her mind. Later, she said that she could not recall where the shoulder was when she saw Dr Nelson pulling. She described the delivery as very tight all along.

Late in her cross examination she said that the pulling involving very hard work occurred before and after the delivery of the shoulder blades. This was after the luncheon adjournment and she said, and I think truthfully, that she recollected more than she did in the morning. At T197 she said:- 
Q: You do remember seeing in one point in time the shoulders being rotated, do you not? 
A: I don't know. I think I do and then I think I do not. I don't know. Could I ask you, are you trying to tangle me up? 
Q: No, I am not. That might be what is occurring but I am not. I am asking about that point in time that you told us about beforehand where you say the baby's shoulders were being rotated. I am suggesting to you at that point in time you did not see Dr Nelson, in addition to rotating, pulling on the trunk of the body, do you understand that? 
A: He did have to pull the baby to get to the shoulders.

Q: Well, I am suggesting that is something that you did not see? 
A: I am not going to say I did or I did not. I was there and I could see, but
I can't remember every single detail but I was there.

Q: You see I am suggesting the pulling that you have described is the pulling that you observed whilst the baby's head was being delivered with the use - whilst the baby's head was being delivered, that is possible is it not? 
A: No.

Counsel took Sister Elliott through statements which she had made emphasising her lack of references to Dr Nelson pulling.

Sister Elliott was a rather gentle lady who was far from robust. She was not suited to adversarial litigation. She did not wish to give evidence against Dr
Nelson. She was no match for counsel. After being in the witness box from .40 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. she went away at the luncheon adjournment. When she returned she had obviously thought further about matters especially the pulling about which she had been questioned in the morning. She had cleared her thoughts and I think that most of what she said in the afternoon probably represented what she truly believed. There was pulling and hard work before the baby was delivered to the shoulder blades.

Sister C O'Toole was not present at the initial examination by Sister Elliott.
Without referring to the Hospital notes all she could recall, and it was a vague recollection, was a difficult shoulder delivery and that she received the baby in the delivery suite. She had had recourse to the hospital's notes.
She agreed that she did not recall anything up until the delivery of the shoulders. She was totally dependant upon the notes for any suggestion that there was anything wrong with the child.

Sister O'Toole was managing the floor that night and popping in and out of the delivery suite. Sister Elliott had the primary responsibility for Mrs Strelec.
Sister O'Toole's role was a secondary one. She only saw bits and pieces of what was going on. She was in the delivery suite while Dr Nelson was there and she believed that she would have been standing at the foot of the delivery table near Dr Nelson waiting to receive the baby and to do any other tasks which were requested. She said it was the usual routine for the second sister to be in the delivery suite for the full time of the actual delivery. Sister
O'Toole thought that Dr Nelson had difficulty in freeing the shoulders and was rotating the baby to help with this. She did not recollect any undue force.
She said that Dr Nelson had to use the force necessary to deliver the baby in this difficult delivery. She could not recall Dr Nelson applying traction to the baby during the difficulty with the shoulders. She could not recall how Dr
Nelson conducted the delivery before or after the difficulties with the shoulders.

She did not recall but believed that she would have recalled if there had been anything untoward in the delivery of the baby, for example, leaning back and pulling or dragging the child from the mother's body with a lot of force. She believed that Dr Nelson did nothing out the ordinary.

She believed that Dr Nelson used a lot of manipulation but she could not recall him using a lot of rotating force. She did not recall anything in this delivery to justify a breech extraction. She agreed that the hospital notes recorded an extraction. While she suggested that a breech extraction was not performed she stated that she was not saying that the hospital note was wrong.

She agreed that with a breech extraction there would have had to have been considerable traction and considerable pulling. She believed that if there had been excessive traction she would have recalled that. She could not recall Dr
Nelson applying traction to the baby but she could not say that no traction was applied.

She agreed that the texts which described spinal cord injury occurring following a breech presentation did so virtually exclusively on the basis of traction not rotation. She agreed that if there were no traction the birth could not conceivably be described as a breech extraction.

In a form completed shortly after the birth Sister O'Toole wrote "(Undiagnosed) Footling Breech Delivery". By undiagnosed she meant that Mrs
Strelec was not diagnosed as a mother requiring a breech delivery until her initial internal medical examination on admission.

As Sister O'Toole gave her evidence she came across as a nursing sister who was favourably disposed towards Dr Nelson and loyal to him. She believed that he would always follow correct procedures and exercise sound judgment. She had confidence in his skill and in what he did. With her mental approach and her absence of any useful recollection her evidence is of less weight than those who did have a recollection of what had happened. She had no detailed notes to assist her. In my opinion she did not know what had happened.

Dr R Martin commenced in the Obstetric Unit of the Mercy Hospital in mid
January 1985. He was there for 6 months training in obstetrics; having had general and geriatric experience in other hospitals. He has subsequently had considerable experience as a general practitioner-obstetrician. It was his belief that he was not present at the delivery. He had no recollection of the delivery or in assisting Dr Bishop, the paediatrician, with the care of Duncan after he was born. Dr Martin had never seen a breech extraction. Dr Martin had no recollection of being informed that Duncan had been diagnosed as suffering from spastic quadriplegia.

Dr Martin stated that with assisted breech deliveries there should be minimal traction. Indeed, there should be virtually no traction. If there was a breech extraction there would be significant traction. The two could blur to a certain extent if there was some problem, for example, if the mother was unable to push. When asked what role gentle traction had in an assisted breech delivery Dr Martin replied that if the mother was pushing and the trunk was descending without the need for traction, then it was not necessary. If the trunk was not descending then traction became necessary. Dr Martin stated that the point was not to pull harder on a breech delivery.

Dr Martin agreed that it was part of the duty of the treating doctor to make an appropriate note of any procedure carried out or work done with a patient.
It would be quite unusual not to find such a record. Where something serious has occurred it would be surprising not to find a note or report of what had taken place from the treating doctor. Dr Martin remarked that every doctor occasionally omitted to write notes.

In 1985 Dr J.M. Bishop was a specialist paediatrician practising in Albury. He remembered being summoned to the hospital and the breech delivery being in progress and well advanced when he entered the delivery room. Dr Bishop busied himself preparing the equipment for receiving the baby. He remembered that there was some difficulty delivering the shoulders. He saw some of the delivery of the shoulders. Usually the arms will flop out quickly on rotation but his recollection on this occasion was that there were problems in delivering the arms. Dr Bishop explained that the trunk of the baby and his pelvis are rotated through 90 degrees from a horizontal to a vertical plane and one arm is brought down. The trunk and pelvis are rotated the other way and the other arm is delivered.

Dr Bishop said that while the usual delivery manoeuvres seemed to be used there seemed to be more rotations by Dr Nelson than usual. This led him to conclude that there was difficulty in delivering the arms. Dr Bishop could not remember anything else.

Dr Bishop remembered that Duncan was well grown and quite a big baby. He required assistance with breathing by the use of oxygen. After treating the baby for over an hour or two Dr Bishop thought that because of Duncan's paradoxical breathing pattern he was suffering from spinal cord depression. At that time Dr Bishop's impression was that the difficulty with the shoulders must have caused some damage to the spinal cord. He did not know this. It was one possible cause. He knew of the difficulty in getting the arms out and thought that trying to extricate the arm was one of the possible causes of the spinal cord damage.

Dr Bishop made some detailed notes between about midnight and 1.30 a.m. In part, they read: ...
 "Difficult breech - nuchal arm traction to trunk & neck." 
By "nuchal arm" he meant that the position of the arm was abnormal - it was twisted around the back of the neck. When asked what he meant by "traction to trunk and neck" he explained, "it is really difficult to recall back but my recollection of the delivery of the arms was such that there was a lot more rotation than normal and that is where I thought that the difficulty had arisen." A little later in his notes the doctor set out his provisional diagnosis of: "- Breech - prob. (probably) cervical cord injury" 
In a letter to Dr Hruz bearing date 19 February 1985 but said to have been dictated on 13 February 1985 Dr Bishop wrote, amongst other things: "...there was a difficult footling breech with a nuchal arm and forceps to aftercoming head. Baby was depressed at delivery...
 ...I felt that baby had suffered some traction injury to his cervical cord to explain his flaccidity and respiratory pattern.

There does not appear to be any record of either Dr Hruz or Dr Nelson correcting or commenting upon the statement that the baby had suffered some traction injury.

In cross examination it was put to Dr Bishop that the text books which described spinal cord injury did so virtually exclusively on the basis of traction and not rotation. He was unable to comment as he had not seen that literature. He accepted that he was not in a position to express an opinion on what might have caused the damage as it was not in his area of expertise.

Dr Bishop disagreed that the words "traction to trunk and neck" indicated traction for the delivery of the trunk to reach the stage of the shoulders. He said that the words indicated "more to the extent that traction during the rotation to deliver the arm."(sic) He disagreed with the suggestion that there was traction during the rotation. He added "it was just a difficult delivery of the shoulders and I thought that is where the injury had occurred." 
This passage follows in his cross examination at T457: "Q. And traction has a very different meaning from the word rotation, doesn't it? 
A. In the context of a paediatrician it has, I mean, I am writing it as a paediatrician, not as an obstetrician.

Q. Traction means pulling, doesn't it? 
A. I see it as a rotational traction is - it is a force that is used in rotation as well.

Q. Then why didn't you record "rotation to trunk and neck"? 
A. I should have at the time." and at T457-8: "Q. What I suggest to you is that when you wrote "traction to trunk and neck" you meant not that there had not been rotation but rather that there had been pulling to deliver the trunk and neck, that is what you meant? 
A. Well I can't-- 
OBJECTION ALLOWED 
Witness: I can't sort of make a real distinction in the context that at the time of the delivery I didn't see all the delivery and the thing that I did see was the rotation through, with the shoulders, that is where I thought everything had got stuck and that is why I wrote that because of the arm and the force that was required at the delivery of the arms, that that is where things had gone wrong." 
Dr Bishop's earlier answer that there was no traction during the rotation (T457 lines 19-21) and his later answer "I see it as a rotational traction - it is a force that is used in rotation as well" seem, at first sight, to require some reconciliation. The first answer may be specific to this case and the later answer may be dealing with a more general situation. Perhaps the questioner and Dr Bishop were at cross purposes.

Dr Bishop stated that he just saw the trunk and the shoulders being delivered and it seemed to be much harder than usual to deliver the arms. Dr Bishop said that he could not comment on the suggestion that Dr Nelson used a lot of rotatory force. Dr Bishop knew there were more rotations but he could not comment on the word force or how Dr Nelson used it.

Dr Bishop emphasised that it was difficult to recall what he meant by words written eleven years ago. He sought to explain what he had meant by the words so written by his present recollection of what had occurred. Dr Bishop was an accomplished and agile witness. He impressed as a man who would use language with some precision.

Dr Bishop did not feel able to comment on the amount of force used and the manner of its use by Dr Nelson. Dr Bishop in searching his recollection spoke of the force that was required at the delivery of the arms. He saw the rotation and thought that everything had got stuck.

Dr Bishop tried to reconstruct what he meant by the words which he used in
He would readily distinguish between traction and rotation. There may have been more rotations than usual. However, it was believed that the traction caused the injury to the spinal cord. In his notes at the hospital and in his letter to Dr Hruz the reference is to traction to trunk and neck and "some traction injury to his cervical cord." Taking the words used at the time I think that Dr Bishop was referring to pulling down the trunk, extending the spinal cord and affecting the neck. Dr Bishop saw but a part of what occurred.

I return to the evidence of Dr Nelson. After seeing the foot protruding through the vulva and feeling a sense of relief Dr Nelson had no recollection of what he did next. He detailed his usual practice and explained that it was invariably followed unless something else such as an emergency forced a change.

Dr Nelson said that his usual practice after having noted the foot would involve the following steps: an abdominal examination including palpitating the mother's abdomen; satisfying himself that there is not more than one baby and ascertaining the position and approximate size of the baby; scrubbing up and putting on a sterile gown and gloves; putting sterile drapes in place; a vaginal examination in which his fingers are inserted past the foot, ascertaining by feeling where the other foot and the breech are. He puts his fingers over the breech to see if he can feel any cervix left. The fingers are withdrawn and he decides how he will proceed.

Dr Nelson having regard to his usual practice and his reconstruction which appeared to be based at least in part on data in the hospital file believed that, in view of her history of coming into the hospital at 9 o'clock without feeling any contractions, being 6 to 7 centimetres dilated then, and being fully dilated with the breech low in the vaginal cavity, he decided that vaginal delivery was about to take place. In cross examination Dr Nelson stated that he remembered that the cervix was completely dilated and the breech was very low in the vagina. It was important that Dr Nelson have a recollection of this for his case. Relying on these he advanced the view that birth was imminent and there was no time to do other than deliver the baby. He believed that he decided that there was no other option for delivery but to proceed and let her have a vaginal delivery. Dr Nelson had no actual recollection of these processes.

Continuing with his usual practice Dr Nelson believed that he administered a local anaesthetic in the perineum and the left and right sides of the vulva opening. He administered local anaesthetic blocking the left and right pudendal nerve. While waiting for the anaesthetic to take effect he drained her bladder to obtain more space. He also checked whether the rectum was full.
He had no recollection about that condition. He carried out an episiotomy.

The doctor said he had a recollection of lifting the second foot over the perineum to the outside to join the other foot. Dr Nelson recalled that he was waiting for and expecting spontaneous delivery but that did not occur because of the size of the baby. He believed that the breech would have been perpendicular, that is, straight up the mouth of the vagina. Based on his usual practice Dr Nelson assumed that he placed a sterile towel around the baby's buttocks and pelvic girdle, grasping that girdle and rotating so that the baby's back was in the uppermost position. Dr Nelson said that this rotation did not involve any other force being applied. He then usually waited for the mother to push the baby out. He had no recollection of waiting for the mother to do so. It was his reconstruction that there was no effective expulsive effort from the mother based on his recollection that nothing was happening. Dr Nelson said it was an assumption on his part that he used traction. He said that he had no recollection of doing so nor of the strength of the traction which he used. I found that statement unconvincing.

Dr Nelson stated that if there was no progress after the rotation he would exert traction gently downwards towards the floor at an angle. Dr Nelson said that in a breech delivery there is usually no resistance to the delivery of the trunk. He demonstrated his position. His usual practice was that he leaned forward slightly with his arms slightly bent and at around waist level. He effected the gentle traction by using his hand and bending at the waist at the same time. He indicated that he was pulling down gently and steadily. He said that there were two stages. There is traction to the delivery of the umbilicus and further traction as the trunk is delivered from the umbilicus to the shoulder blades. Dr Nelson had no recollection of these matters.

The point of this evidence of usual practice was to demonstrate that it was unlikely that the baby suffered any traction injury up to the delivery of the shoulder blades. Dr Nelson asserted that from this point he had an actual recollection. He stated that once the shoulder blades were exposed there was a slight rotation of the baby to the left. Dr Nelson placed his right hand over the right shoulder to feel for the right arm and to pull it down and deliver it. The right arm was not in front of the chest. Dr Nelson rotated the baby with his hand on the pelvic girdle 90 degrees to bring the right shoulder around the pelvic arch at 12 o'clock. The rotation is performed steadily and slowly. As he rotated the baby he encountered resistance which he was not expecting. When he encountered that resistance he had to use more rotary force. It took longer to rotate the baby. Dr Nelson said that there was no other force and that he did not pull.

Dr Nelson said that on completing that rotation he placed his hand over the baby's right shoulder to move the humerus and to hook the elbow down. Dr
Nelson could feel the upper arm but could not dislodge it. He inserted his finger and attempted to drag the elbow down. If too much force is used the arm is damaged. The arm should come down by itself. Dr Nelson persisted in trying to deliver the arm but it was stuck. Dr Nelson decided that as he could not deliver the right arm at that point he would deliver the left arm first. He rotated the baby 180 degrees and brought the left shoulder into the top 12 o'clock position. Dr Nelson said that it was also very tight and needed a lot of rotatory force. He inserted his left finger past the shoulder and was able to hook the left elbow down and deliver the left arm. It came down without too much difficulty. He rotated the baby back through 180 degrees and returned the right shoulder to the top 12 o'clock position. He placed his right finger into the uterine cavity and was able to hook down the right arm. Dr Nelson said that before it was delivered the right arm went sideways and then downwards instead of straight down. This led him to believe that the arm had been stuck behind the baby's head. It was different from an extended arm.

Dr Nelson said that there was no pulling during any of the rotating movements.
He said that that gets nowhere and that you must deliver the arms before the head. He said that he had never pulled while rotating a baby. If he had pulled both arms would be jammed at the rim of the pelvis. Dr Nelson said that after both arms had been delivered the shoulders were delivered. The baby's feet were lifted and held and forceps were used gradually to pull the baby's head straight out. Dr Nelson was bent over leaning a little to one side and pulling with his arm.

After delivery the umbilical cord was divided and the baby was given to Dr
Bishop. Dr Nelson attended to the membrane and the placenta and performed the episiotomy repair.

Dr Nelson was surprised that he was described as rude. He was anxious. He denied that he was angry. He was sweating. He had a plastic apron over his clothes and a gown over that. He was under a very strong theatre light and applying some very hard rotational forces.

Throughout much of the plaintiff's case it was contended that the plaintiff was never given the option of a caesarean section, that there was sufficient time to perform that operation and that it was a strong possibility that if such an operation had been performed the baby would have been born uninjured.

Dr Nelson accepted that the theatre could have been prepared for a caesarean section and the staff brought in and readied in approximately half an hour from his request. As Dr Nelson assessed the position when he arrived at the hospital a caesarean section was not an option. With the leg out, Mrs Strelec fully dilated, and the breech low he doubted whether he had the option of taking Mrs Strelec around to the theatre. He thought delivery was absolutely imminent. Dr Nelson pointed out that Mrs Strelec had made a large amount of progress in delivery without effective contractions. He described the birth as proceeding very quickly and stated that he did not expect to have to exert any traction.

Dr Nelson said that the decision to perform a caesarean section would have had to be made a considerable time before he arrived. I disagree. Dr Nelson's view was probably formed on the basis of his assessment on arrival that the birth was imminent. That assessment was erroneous. Dr Nelson conceded (T357) that as events turned out there would have been time to do a caesarean section. Dr
Nelson added that he could not answer whether he would have done so.

Dr Nelson regarded the delivery of the shoulders and the considerable force he had to use to rotate the baby as critical. It is certainly important. It was also important whether earlier Dr Nelson used appreciably more than gentle traction to deliver the trunk.

Dr Nelson did not agree with the proposition advanced by Professor Bennett that spinal injury came from traction and not rotation. Dr Nelson insisted that spinal injury occurred when the head was hyperextended and the cervical cord was thereby stretched. Dr Nelson said that he was supported by medical texts but he had not brought any of them to court.

Dr Nelson was referred to the hospital records which showed him as the surgeon, the principal diagnosis as footling breech delivery and the principal operation or major procedure as extraction. Those entries were in Dr Hruz' writing. Dr Nelson said he disagreed with this description of what he did. Dr
Nelson said that he first saw these entries about 5 years ago when proceedings were started. He took no steps to correct that record.

It was common ground that a breech extraction was a risky and dangerous procedure. Dr Nelson agreed that a breech extraction is only performed when there are indications of foetal distress or of imminent threat to the life of the mother or child. Dr Nelson disagreed with Professor Bennett that a breech extraction had occurred.

Dr Nelson had a different understanding from Professor Bennett of what was involved in a breech extraction.

Dr Nelson disagreed with the suggestion that a breech delivery involving traction and rotation amounts to a breech extraction. He agreed that an assisted breech delivery involved little or no traction. Preferably it should play no part. However, he did not agree that as soon as a significant amount of traction was involved there was a breech extraction.

At T351 Dr Nelson said: "...a lot of experts will say...when the breech is born by maternal efforts and then traction is applied, that is a breech extraction... but in my working life, I have understood that breech extraction implies breech extraction from within the birth canal." 
Dr Hruz said (T462) that: "...the exact rigid definition of the `breech extraction' would be that the obstetrician has to actually physically put his hand inside the vagina and in some way get a grip of the baby's buttocks or groin and have to pull the baby out of the vagina, that would be the classical breech extraction. In this specific case it was not so because there was no need to put the hand into the vagina 
This is to be contrasted with his understanding of assisted breech delivery :
 "If the baby was delivered by waiting or inactivity or gentle traction of the body down, up to the level of the shoulders and head would be delivered spontaneously, I would describe it as `assisted delivery'." 
At T462 Dr Hruz said that gentle traction to the shoulder blades and the
Lovset Manoeuvre (rotation to either side) would by his terms be an "assisted breech delivery". He continued: "...but I would add to it that it is not a breech of the body but the head itself was delivered by not quite normal procedure in which there wouldn't be any rotation involved at that point of the delivery, just simply lifting the feet or legs and body up, the head would be delivered itself." (sic) 
Dr Hruz said that there was no place for hard traction in this delivery because it was not necessary (T469). He believed that he would have recalled if there had been hard traction. He could not recall whether Dr Nelson had applied any hard traction. Dr Hruz thought that Mrs Strelec was pushing but he could not recall.

Dr Hruz said (T484-5) that when he wrote "extraction" in February 1985 he meant to convey "any mode of delivery which wouldn't fit into the category of spontaneous breech delivery with no or minimal traction". That is an incorrect answer. Dr Hruz may have convinced himself of that in recent years but it struck me as special pleading.

Dr Hruz agreed that traction meant pulling not rotation and that "extraction" in relation to a breech delivery meant the act of pulling out the baby from the body of the mother during child birth.

Dr Hruz said that the "exact rigid definition", of a breech extraction which he had earlier given was not the only instance of a breech extraction. Dr Hruz explained that it did not need to be very strong traction. Dr Hruz said that the problem was not delivering the body of the baby but the head.

Dr Hruz said that while the present case was not an extreme rigid text book case of breech extraction it was still a breech extraction. Apart from the extreme case there were many other situations which would still come under the category of breech extraction. He would class moderate traction or traction stronger than gentle traction as a breech extraction. Dr Hruz agreed that a breech extraction of any kind is a very serious procedure and one fraught with great risk to the child.

In this case Dr Hruz agreed that it was possible that there was more than gentle traction and that when he wrote "extraction" there was some pulling. He thought that there was most likely some degree of traction applied to the trunk. Traction does not mean rotation. Dr Hruz could not now remember what happened in terms of extraction. When asked if he had a recollection of the baby being rotated he replied, "No, I can't remember that very much". Dr Hruz could not remember whether during the course of rotation considerable force was used or whether the rotation was very hard. It was very difficult to judge the force another person was using.

Dr Hruz agreed that most of the texts which described spinal cord injury following a breech presentation did so virtually exclusively on the basis of traction not rotation.

In his answer to Interrogatory 9 namely, "Did Dr Nelson perform a breech extraction?", Dr Hruz replied, "Dr Nelson performed a breech delivery involving traction and rotation. It is my understanding a breech presentation involving traction and rotation amounts to a breech extraction." 
At T517 this passage appears: "Q: You were then asked "what indications were there for a breech extraction and you replied "I am unable to answer this interrogatory save in so far as it relates to cases [indications?] at the time at which I examined the plaintiff prenatally and in the labour ward prior to Dr Nelson's arrival at those times.
So far as I was able to ascertain there were no indications for breech extractions". Do you remember giving that response? 
A: Yes, I cannot remember but it must be that. It must be it.

Q: If, even after Dr Nelson arrived there was no foetal distress then the situation would be, would it not that there remained no indications for breech extractions? 
A: Yes." 
Dr Hruz used the phrase, "Difficult extraction" in the notes which he made in his practice's records on the following day. He also wrote the word, "extraction" on a Health Summary form. In his letter of 9 September 1986 to the solicitors for Mrs Strelec Dr Hruz referred to his diagnosis on 12
February 1985 of a "Footling breech - prolapsed foot" and to "a difficult extraction of a footling breech." 
I am persuaded that when Dr Hruz in 1985 and 1986 used the word "extraction" he meant to convey that a significant amount of traction had been applied to deliver the baby's trunk from his mother's body. That was the fact. Dr Hruz seemed uncomfortable when he was trying to explain away the use of the word "extraction".

The absence of any foetal distress and there being sufficient time, a caesarean section was preferable to the application of a significant amount of force to deliver the trunk to the shoulder blades.

Dr Nelson gave evidence which suggested that the baby's right arm was caught behind the baby's neck, that is, a nuchal arm. In his notes made within less than 2 hours after the birth Dr Bishop referred to a nuchal arm. However, Dr
Hruz, in his surgery notes which were probably made on 13 February wrote "extended arms." He made a similar entry on the Health Summary Form.

Dr Hruz had no recollection of Dr Nelson ever telling him that there was a nuchal arm. If he had known that there was a nuchal arm he would probably have made a note of that fact as it is so unusual. In one of his answers to interrogatories he had said, "the delivery involved traction and rotation to,
I understand, free an extended arm." He said that he meant extended arms. In answer to some later interrogatories Dr Hruz said that the baby was in the breech position and that the baby had to be delivered by way of controlled pulling and rotation because one of its arms was extended. These statements were based on Dr Hruz' belief of what would have happened rather than his observations. He believed that there was pulling followed by rotation.

Dr Hruz said that he made a slip in his answer because both arms were extended. There was no reference to a nuchal arm. Given Dr Hruz' insistence that both arms were extended it may be that there was a misunderstanding or that the draftsman of the answers to the Interrogatories was overly concerned about consistency in the cases of the defendants.

Dr Nelson could understand how traction could produce extended arms but not how it could produce an arm which is caught behind the head.

Dr Hruz was standing close to Dr Nelson while the delivery was taking place.
He was in a good position to see what was happening but, as he pointed out, only Dr Nelson who felt inside the mother knew where the arms were located.
Nevertheless, Dr Hruz believed that there were extended arms rather than nuchal arms. I would be surprised if Dr Hruz made a guess or made assumptions.
Perhaps Dr Nelson gave Dr Hruz to understand that there were extended arms but
I cannot make a definite finding on this point.

Dr Nelson never discussed with Mrs Strelec what had gone wrong with the delivery. Dr Nelson believed that Mrs Strelec knew that she had been through a hard breech delivery. He could offer her no satisfactory explanation of what went wrong. He did not know why he had had such difficulty. This was the only case in his professional experience where he had dealt with a nuchal arm.

Dr Nelson agreed that something went very wrong in this delivery - the trouble with the delivery of the arm. He continued: "A: I have thought long and hard about the birth. It is an injury which, again, it is the only time that it has ever happened in my practice and I can only assume it is due to the extra rotational force that I had to use, which is the only abnormality which I can recall in the actual delivery." 
He rejected that he had made an error of judgment. He acknowledged that his failure to make any note of what he had done and what had happened was a serious departure from proper practice. It was his usual practice to record what happened at a delivery. He denied that he had failed to make notes because he did not know why the delivery had gone wrong or to prevent anyone from reviewing what he had done and discovering a mistake. Dr Nelson was acutely embarrassed by what had happened. He was hoping that the baby would recover. He had no satisfactory explanation for what had happened. He probably asked himself whether he should have pursued a different course, eg. a caesarean section, which would have avoided the damage to the baby and had an uneasy feeling in that regard. He was worried that he had made a mistake. It was a subject which he found disturbing. It was a combination of such reasons that led him not to make notes.

The Court was grateful for the helpful expert evidence of two highly qualified, experienced and eminent obstetricians. Professor MJ Bennett is the
Professor of Obstetrics and Gynaecology at the University of New South Wales and practises at the Royal Hospital for Women.

Professor Bennett said that where a baby presents by the breech the obstetrician decides whether a vaginal delivery is likely to be safely achieved. If he so decides, almost all of the delivery takes place as a result of contractions occurring in the uterus and the mother bearing down with "masterly inactivity" by the obstetrician. The assisted breech delivery involves assistance being given along the way. Assistance is often required with the legs. This is done by placing the index finger behind the knees, flexing them and easing or lifting out the legs. The next stage usually arises after the baby's body is born when the umbilical cord is felt to check the baby's heart beat. The baby is left to hang and use is made of gravity and maternal expulsive efforts until the shoulder blades are seen. Assistance may be required to deliver the baby's arms and then further attention is given to achieve a slow and easy delivery of the baby's head. Additional assistance may be needed to deliver one or other of the arms and rotation of the baby's trunk may be required.

A breech extraction is the antithesis of an assisted breech delivery. The baby is literally dragged or extracted from the mother's pelvis or uterus.
Considerable traction and force is usually required. The essence of a breech extraction is getting hold of a lower limb, preferably two, pulling on them and continuing to pull until such time as the baby is delivered. The baby would not have to be pulled from within the uterine cavity. It is a dangerous manoeuvre and is only used where the life of the baby or the mother is under serious threat. Professor Bennett stated that there was no evidence in the hospital notes that this situation existed or that there was a need for urgency in the delivery of the child.

Professor Bennett described the failure of either of the doctors to make accurate and contemporaneous notes at the hospital of what happened and what they did as reprehensible. It was a major departure from good practice.

Professor Bennett said that if a breech extraction was performed as indicated in the hospital notes such a course was, in the circumstances, inappropriate.
Professor Bennett stated that most of the texts describing spinal cord injury occurring following a breech presentation do so virtually exclusively on the basis of traction and not rotation. Rotation is rarely involved in damage to the spinal cord.

Professor Bennett (T118) thought that Dr Hruz' description in his answers to interrogatories of what Dr Nelson had done was rather woolly, that is, that there was a breech delivery involving traction and rotation to free an extended arm and this amounted to a breech extraction, the force applied not appearing to be excessive. Professor Bennett gathered, as an obstetrician, that this meant that significant traction was used. Thus it was a breech extraction. There is virtually no traction involved in an assisted breech delivery. The traction which appeared to have been used was not appropriate and led to the spinal injury.

Professor Bennett said that his reading of the texts indicated that where one of the foetal arms came to lie behind the head this almost invariably happens as a result of injudicious traction on the foetal legs or trunk. He added that it could possibly occur if the Lovset Manoeuvre was done incorrectly, ie, in the opposite direction to that which it should be done but he discounted that as he could not believe an obstetrician would make such a mistake. To achieve a nuchal arm inappropriate traction must have been applied.

He agreed that it was highly unlikely but possible that the arm was in a nuchal position prior to the delivery being effected. Professor Bennett concluded that Dr Nelson had performed a breech extraction which was wholly inappropriate. In expressing the view that Dr Nelson failed to exercise all reasonable care and skill Professor Bennett agreed that this was on the basis that on the balance of probabilities the arm came into the nuchal position (or became extended) because of the way in which Dr Nelson attempted to deliver the child.

Professor Bennett accepted that even with all care being taken spinal damage could occur in the event of the breech having a nuchal arm. Such an arm is a very rare occurrence. If the baby's arms are either extended or there is a nuchal arm and a vaginal delivery has been commenced there are only two safe ways to deliver the arms. One is to use the Lovset technique and the other is to put a hand in alongside the face and trunk and fetch the arms using fingers. The Lovset technique involved flexion of the spine with the shoulder coming to lie under the upper and lower margins of the pelvis so you can reach the arm and rotation, usually to 90 degrees.

Professor Bennett thought that prior to delivery the baby's arms would have been where they usually are in a breech presentation and that is below the head somewhere in front of the chest or abdomen. Pulling the body downwards tends to leave the arms behind and up in the uterine cavity alongside the head. In the absence of traction with simple pressure by the uterus and the mother bearing down, the body carries the arms with it down through the pelvis and they are not left behind in the uterus. They do not get caught on the pelvic rim. Professor Bennett did not normally expect traction of any sort on the legs.

Professor Bennett did not accept that there was a nuchal arm. One arm becoming stuck up alongside the head was easier to explain than a precise nuchal position. He pointed out that the arm was never described as a nuchal arm at the time by any of the doctors involved in the delivery (Drs Nelson &
Hruz). Professor Bennett stated that an extended arm and a nuchal arm would produce the same difficulties at delivery. Professor Bennett would not accept that the likelihood of spinal cord injury with a nuchal arm was far greater than it would be when the arm was extended alongside the baby's head.

Professor Bennett was asked to assume that the arm was in a nuchal position.
He agreed that traction without rotation would not have caused the arm to be in a nuchal position. Traction and rotation could explain a child's arm coming from the conventional position in front of the body to a nuchal position.
Traction alone would give the extension of the arm and rotation would give the arm the opportunity to either bend in front of or behind the head as the baby was rotated.

Professor Bennett disagreed that with an assisted breech delivery arms can move from the normal position in front of the body to a nuchal position. He was unaware of that being a possibility. He had not come across that in the literature.

Professor Bennett agreed that it was appropriate for Dr Nelson to gently ease the foot still inside the mother out over the lip of the vagina. This would be expected to lead to the spontaneous delivery of both legs. At that stage the breech or the bottom of the baby would be at the mouth of the vagina. It would then be expected that delivery from the breech to the shoulder blades would occur over one or two contractions. If some gentle traction were applied to the buttocks or the upper limbs after delivery of the legs to effect delivery of the trunk in combination with the mother's efforts within about 30 seconds that would not be classified as a breech extraction.

Professor Bennett reluctantly agreed that the procedure just mentioned would not constitute a failure to take reasonable care. His reluctance was based on his view that traction has no place in a breech delivery. It was the
Professor's view that traction will lead to the extension of the arms. It was not known where they were when the traction was commenced.

I interpolate that I think that significantly more than gentle traction was applied.

Professor Bennett stated that if gentle traction was applied in the absence of even a weak uterine contraction, at the same time, such traction would be more likely to produce extension of the arms (T139). With a tired mother who was not able to push although asked, gentle traction which almost spontaneously results in delivery to the shoulder blades in a very short period of time might be something that fell within the ambit of a procedure available to an obstetrician in 1985 exercising reasonable care and skill.

In re-examination Professor Bennett said that assuming a nuchal arm from the outset the very meagre literature indicates that in the majority of circumstances there will be minimal or no damage to the foetus but that the risk of damage is considerably higher than it would be without a nuchal arm.

As to a caesarean section Professor Bennett indicated that in the circumstances set out in Dr Nelson's answer to an interrogatory Dr Nelson was entitled to regard this course of delivery as not a real possibility.
Professor Bennett thought that given a prolapsed foot but an operating theatre a minute or two away, empty, ready for operation and fully staffed an obstetrician may choose a caesarean section. However, the combination of a foot prolapse out of the vagina, presumably half the baby in the vagina and a caesarean [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s30.html) or more minutes away would mitigate against consideration of the caesarean section.
Professor Bennett agreed that in 1985 there was a substantial body of obstetricians who would prefer a vaginal delivery and a substantial body of obstetricians who would prefer a caesarean section once they had diagnosed breech presentation.

Professor Bennett gave evidence before Dr Nelson. After Dr Nelson's evidence
Professor Bennett returned and said that if he assumed that the obstetrician encountered extra resistance on rotation, found he needed and used a lot of hard rotating force in rotating the baby, did not know why he had such difficulty, and was sweating, then it would have to be said that that amount of force in any direction, without having made a diagnosis as to why resistance had been met was wholly inappropriate and probably responsible for the damage to the spinal cord.

Professor Bennett had not anticipated when he first gave evidence that the rotation practised by Dr Nelson was accompanied by a lot of force, that resistance of some strength was encountered and that the rotation was very hard. Rotation with a lot of force appears to be asking for trouble. It is surprising that when Dr Nelson first encountered resistance when rotating to the right he did not stop and rotate to the left and see if that would result in the release of the left arm. Dr Nelson also claimed he had to use considerable force when rotating to the left. Ultimately, having used hard force when forcefully rotating against resistance to the right and achieving no result he rotated to the left and secured the release of the left arm.

Professor Bennett stated that spinal injuries in breech deliveries are very rare. He was of the opinion that backward rotation may dislodge a hand or arm from the nuchal position and result in it coming to lie in front of the face or beside the head and that rotation in the reverse direction could result in a hand or arm that was along the head or face becoming lodged in a nuchal position.

Professor Bennett thought that Dr Nelson had applied impermissible traction and had probably thereby caused an extended arm (or arms) or possibly a nuchal arm. He also thought, based on Dr Nelson's account, that he had used excessive force in rotating the baby. As a result of imprudent action by Dr Nelson which involved a failure to take reasonable care, the baby's spinal cord had been damaged. The damage proved to be irreparable.

The difficulty in being able to determine the facts with greater precision lies in the absence of contemporaneous notes by Dr Nelson and the claimed lack of memory of Drs Nelson and Hruz. The roughly contemporaneous notes of Dr Hruz do not assist Dr Nelson. I have been careful not to use the answers of Dr Hruz to interrogatories against Dr Nelson. Those answers have however been considered in assessing the evidence of Dr Hruz.

I come to the evidence of Dr FC Hinde. He had retired from clinical practice in December 1995 after a long and distinguished career as a specialist obstetrician/gynaecologist. He had a large practice in his own right and for many years supervised doctors who were training to become specialist obstetricians/gynaecologists. He held senior positions at King George V
Hospital. Between 1983 and 1986 he performed 22 assisted breech deliveries and breech extractions. During his career he had encountered a nuchal arm on 2 occasions which he could recall.

Dr Hinde accepted that traction of itself can cause a spinal injury. However, he disagreed that traction could be expected to cause an arm to be in a nuchal position. Dr Hinde was careful to distinguish between an extended arm where both the arm and the shoulder are extended and a nuchal arm where the shoulder is extended but the elbow is flexed with the forearm passing behind the nape of the neck. Dr Hinde thought that a nuchal arm was much harder to rectify than an extended arm. That view was based on his own personal experience and on authors whose eminence was due to their skill in obstetric manipulation. Dr
Hinde said that although a nuchal arm is rare, when it does occur it commonly does so spontaneously. The literature recorded that the baby can come head first and yet have a nuchal arm. Further, studies over the last ten years by ultrasound and radiology have shown that until the latter weeks of pregnancy and at the start of labour prior to the delivery actually taking place, a nuchal arm has been seen on radiography and on ultrasound under circumstances where traction of the baby has not occurred.

Dr Hinde agreed that the application of traction to the trunk is likely to lead to an increased chance of the arms being extended above the head.
However, Dr Hinde had not been able to find in recent literature any articles recording definitive research which has shown that traction can lead to nuchal arms. He accepted that there were expressions of opinion to that effect in a number of text books. Dr Hinde had difficulty in seeing how arms placed in front of the baby in the flexed position against the chest are carried up so that they move up and cross behind the baby's neck.

He had, of course, no difficulty in accepting that inappropriate traction can lead to extended arms. Professor Bennett also took this view. He too seemed to question whether traction without rotation would have produced a nuchal arm (T136-137). Dr Hinde did not believe that the Lovset technique produced a nuchal arm nor that the application of gentle traction not necessarily coinciding with any contraction by the mother because she is tired, etc would do so.

If the baby's descent is not progressing then with extended arms it would be reasonable to try the Lovset technique. The Lovset technique has been used successfully on many occasions where the arms are extended in a breech presentation. In other cases it is necessary to insert the hand in along the vagina next to the baby and reach for the forearm of the baby and sweep it across the baby's face in order to bring the arm down. Dr Hinde said that with a breech presentation and a nuchal arm the Lovset technique has a place but the obstetrician is likely to discover that it will not work.

Dr Hinde detailed the procedures available to be followed where there is a nuchal arm and the risks of injury to other parts of the baby as well as the spinal cord. The three techniques described by him as available and acceptable were the Lovset technique, secondly, the procedure described by Dr Donald (a world authority) of inserting the hand into the vaginal opening and retrieving the baby's arm and thirdly that of rotating the baby in the direction in which the hand of the nuchal arm is pointing. The Lovset technique is the first one used. The other techniques are used only when the Lovset technique fails.

Spinal cord injury of the type suffered by Duncan is a recognised complication in the delivery of a breech presentation and may occur even where the obstetrician has used reasonable care and skill. Dr Hinde pointed out that a nuchal arm may not easily free and may cause problems and that by this stage a caesarean section was no longer possible. The obstetrician has to do the best he can under the circumstances. None of the techniques available will with any certainty allow the delivery of the baby without injury. I accept that this is so.

Dr Hinde thought that probably the head would be better able to rotate or be rotated with an extended arm than with a nuchal arm. Usually with one or two turns during rotation the lower part of the shoulder blade becomes prominent.
The technique is tried, perhaps two or three ways. If the baby's shoulder is not appearing in the desired way the obstetrician has to insert a hand into the vagina and try to diagnose why the delivery is not proceeding satisfactorily at that stage. These are difficult manipulations with the hand inside the vagina pushing on the various structures in order to try and get the arm. None of the structures moves easily. These manipulations increase the possibility of damage to the cervical cord which is situated very close to where the obstetrician is manipulating to obtain the arm. There would be less movement in the head with a nuchal arm than with extended arms. With a Lovset manoeuvre it was a distinct possibility that there would be more rotary force being applied to the spinal cord with a nuchal arm than with extended arms.

Dr Hinde thought that the injury to the baby's neck occurred as a result of the manipulations in delivering the arm. Not only do the limbs and structures not move easily but the head may well be fixed in a position. When the obstetrician executes a rotational movement that could cause tearing of the blood vessels around the cord and the collection of blood would effectively interrupt the spinal pathways and bring about the complication which occurred in the present case.

A series of assumptions were put to Dr Hinde as to how Dr Nelson had proceeded. Those assumptions followed how Dr Nelson in his evidence in chief asserted or believed he had proceeded to deliver the arms and the shoulders.
Dr Hinde was of the opinion that Dr Nelson had not failed to take reasonable care in dealing with the problem of a nuchal arm.

Dr Hinde stated that if more than gentle traction had been used to deliver the child to the shoulder blades and that traction had not been synchronised with any contraction or any expulsive effort of the mother, such greater traction would not have contributed to spinal cord damage of the type found in this baby. Dr Hinde thought it was much more likely that the spinal injury occurred in delivering the shoulders.

Dr Hinde said that if there was a footling presentation to begin with, assistance with the delivery of the other foot was needed and given, the mother was exhausted and gentle traction was applied so as to effect delivery to the shoulder blades and such traction was unrelated to any contraction or expulsion by the mother, the applied traction increases the possibility of extended arms. Dr Hinde understood that a breech extraction involved the application of force (or traction if that term is preferred) to the trunk and legs of the baby down and out of the mother's body. Measured force is applied.
With a breech extraction the likelihood of the arm extending is increased.
Ultimately it depends on whether the arms are caught within the uterus as the trunk is drawn down. Much also may depend on the amount of traction used.

Dr Hinde disagreed with the proposition that, generally speaking, a baby with a nuchal arm in a breech presentation can be delivered with little or no damage.

As to extended arms, Dr Hinde thought that the possibility of such a condition existing prior to delivery starting was remote. That condition is an uncommon complication of assisted breech delivery. It is usually due to traction.

In cross examination Dr Hinde agreed that with the benefit of hindsight it was probable that if a caesarean section had been performed the baby would have been delivered without any spinal injury. Upon the assumption that the foot had not progressed further between 9 p.m. and 10.15 p.m. and there had been no progress internally there would be time for an obstetrician arriving at 10.15 p.m. to order a caesarean section. Dr Hinde pointed out that the mother had progressed from 6 to 7 cms dilated to fully dilated.

Dr Hinde agreed that the obstetrician must not engage in excessive interference or apply excessive traction. The obstetrician does not pull on the trunk. Traction to the trunk is not used if the birth is proceeding quickly. He also agreed that while there are forces involved in the Lovset manoeuvre they should be applied gently. Considerable force should not be used. Dr Hinde stated that Lovset's manoeuvre involves rotation but if resistance is encountered and the baby will not rotate, the doctor should stop and investigate to find out why. The rotational force can injure the baby. The doctor does not simply proceed and use considerable force without examining why the Lovset technique is not working. This usually involves inserting the hand (generally along the front of the baby's body) and feeling at the shoulder level to ascertain the position of the limbs. Dr Hinde thought that could have been difficult in the present case. Pudendal block anaesthesia provides generally satisfactory anaesthesia in the lower part of the vagina and vulva but it does not produce any relaxation of the deeper muscles or tissues. If everything was tight the examination could be difficult.

Dr Hinde said that while general anaesthesia might have provided the relaxation necessary to allow the procedure he envisaged to be accomplished, there was not time to administer it and allow it to take effect. The baby would have died of asphyxiation in the meantime that is within the 5 to 8 minutes available. In the situation thus envisaged there was no alternative but to try the manoeuvres which were permissible.

He doubted if it would be possible to do the examination by just inserting the finger. You would need to have the palm of your hand in the vagina to be able to reach up far enough to ascertain what was happening. However, if the finger was sufficiently far in to feel the baby's forearm it should be possible to feel where the forearm is. If you could feel the humerus and the elbow but not the forearm it should be possible to determine the direction of the forearm.
Dr Hinde thought that it would be difficult to feel up far enough with a finger to make a diagnosis of a nuchal arm.

Considerable force may ultimately be needed to rectify the difficult problem of the nuchal arm. Dr Hinde thought that the doctor would have to use rotation in dealing with the nuchal arm. Very hard rotational forces would not be used without making a diagnosis and trying other methods to free the arm. Dr Hinde pointed out that the doctor needed to apply some traction to hold the baby out and then turn it. If you are too gentle nothing happens. If there were traction to the trunk that could explain arms being extended but not the nuchal arm.

Excessive pulling can lead to spinal injury. If the doctor was leaning back so that his whole weight was on the baby that would be excessive traction. If he was pulling very hard in the delivery of the trunk that would be inappropriate management and could explain spinal injury. There would be no call for any steps to accelerate this labour. Assuming the mother was fully dilated and there was no foetal distress it would be reasonable to free one of the legs but it would not be reasonable to pull on the legs or on the pelvis and traction to the trunk would not be justified. The worst thing is to intervene too early.

Although he was much pressed with quotations from text books and by counsel for the plaintiff Dr Hinde rejected that it was probable that the nuchal arm would occur during delivery. Dr Hinde added: "...Over 40 years I have encountered a nuchal arm twice. It is not a problem that is going to be in the experience of anybody to any extent to say with confidence that it resulted from the delivery. It is not an area in which it is easy to do research because of its rarity in performance of a breech delivery." 
Dr Hinde emphasised that if the permissible procedures (or some of them) went well it was possible to obviate the risk of spinal injury. The trouble was that sometimes they did not work. The problem was difficult and it was not always possible to resolve it without injury. Dr Hinde did not agree that the hard pulling prior to reaching the shoulders was the explanation for the spinal injury. If the difficulty which occurred had essentially been in the delivery of the shoulders, the spinal injury was most likely to have been caused at that time.

Dr Hinde did not agree that those texts which described spinal cord injury did so virtually exclusively on the basis of traction and not rotation. Rotational forces as well as traction can cause problems. Professor Bennett appeared to acknowledge this, at least partly, in his evidence in reply when he focussed on what Dr Nelson had done rather than on statements of principle, some of which were rather general, in the texts. He was not able to do that until he had heard Dr Nelson's evidence. Dr Hinde emphasised the relevance of the recent studies to which he had referred as demonstrating that nuchal arms occur spontaneously and were not as some had previously thought to have been exclusively a phenomenon of the actual breech delivery.

Dr Hinde regarded the failure by Dr Nelson to make notes as serious as indeed it was. While no question of credit arises as to either Professor Bennett or
Dr Hinde they did have different approaches. Professor Bennett appeared to attach a lot of importance to the statements contained in various textbooks.
Dr Hinde queried the value of these as they were expressions of opinion which did not seem to result from definitive research. He pointed out that breech deliveries with nuchal arms were exceedingly rare. He had seen two in forty years. Dr Hinde relied on his 40 years of experience and attached much importance to the manipulation skills of the obstetrician in attending a difficult birth. Dr Hinde's experience was such that he was able to evaluate the statements in text books and what was well established and what was opinion. He was less willing to accept expressions of opinion by the authors than Professor Bennett.

Professor Bennett and Dr Hinde agreed that it was mostly desirable not to hurry a birth and let the mother and natural forces do as much as possible.
Intervention at too early a stage was to be avoided. Dr Hinde pointed out that there were difficult births where assistance had to be given and that even with the doctor taking reasonable care injury occurred as a result of the assistance. Both specialists agreed that application of gentle traction and more than gentle traction increased (and increased correspondingly) the risk of extended arms. That risk was not negligible. Both specialists agreed that traction of itself can cause spinal injury.

I share these views of Dr Hinde (and for the reasons he gave) that: it is hard to see how the application of traction alone would cause a nuchal arm, a nuchal arm is harder to deal with than extended arms, the likelihood of spinal cord injury with a nuchal arm is greater than with extended arms, and a nuchal arm although rare, when it occurs commonly does so spontaneously.

I have reached the following conclusions:
I accept Sister Elliott's assessment that at the time of Dr Nelson's arrival Mrs Strelec was distressed, frantic and had had enough. I also accept that upon Dr Nelson's arrival there was an atmosphere that a vaginal delivery was going to be done.
While Dr Nelson took into account the prolapsed foot and its protrusion, the breech being low in the vagina and the mother being fully dilated he did not in the haste which occurred fully assess the mother's condition and the true position. She was probably not capable of further expulsive effort. Given the condition of the mother as correctly assessed by Sister Elliott, the likely lack of further maternal expulsive effort, that the delivery of the baby was not progressing further and the tightness of the fit, it is my view that a specialist of ordinary competence exercising reasonable care would have realised that there was likely to be time available for a caesarean section and further considered that course. After speaking with Mr & Mrs Strelec he would then have taken such a course. When Dr Nelson found that he had to apply traction to deliver the trunk that should have caused him to rethink the course which he was going to take. It is a pity that Dr Nelson did not at least briefly consult and advise Mr and Mrs Strelec. I have not overlooked
Professor Bennett's evidence but I have fuller materials.
While Dr Nelson made an erroneous assessment in not carrying out a caesarean section it is unnecessary for me to decide this case on the basis that he failed to exercise reasonable care in not advising and not pursing that course. I am conscious of the danger of being wise after the event. I prefer to and do decide this case on the basis of other failures on the part of Dr Nelson to take reasonable care. If it had been necessary to resolve the issue of performing a caesarean section I would have held that his erroneous assessment resulted from a failure to take reasonable care contributed to in a large part by undue haste. A calm appraisal was required.
I reject the proposition that only gentle traction was used by Dr Nelson on the baby's pelvic girdle and legs to deliver the baby down to the shoulder blades. I think that a significant and an excessive amount of traction was used. There was too much pulling. Dr Nelson said that he could not remember whether he used traction nor the degree or strength of the traction which he used.
It is probable that there was either a nuchal arm or extended arms. Dr
Nelson did not mention to Dr Hruz or Sister Elliott that he had encountered a nuchal arm. Dr Nelson made no note. Dr Bishop referred to a nuchal arm in a note which he made later on 12 February or early on 13 February 1985.

Extended arms would be readily explicable having regard to the traction used to deliver to the shoulder blades. Dr Nelson claimed that he was unable to offer Mrs Strelec a satisfactory explanation of what went wrong. He did not know why he had had such difficulty. Dr Nelson could have explained, if it had been the fact, that he had encountered a nuchal arm or extended arms and why this had made it difficult to deliver the arms and the shoulders. I doubt whether Dr Nelson knew what had really happened and why he had used (or had had to use) so much force in delivering the baby. That is one reason why Dr
Nelson made no note.

Having regard to the traction which Dr Nelson exerted to effect delivery of the trunk to the shoulder blades the probabilities favour the view that there were probably extended arms rather than a nuchal arm but there can be no certainty on this point. In expressing my view I have not overlooked Dr
Nelson's evidence pointing to a nuchal arm. I am unable to accept it.
Considerable force was used in rotating the baby and the force used was excessive. The force used was not sufficiently restrained. There was insufficient carefully controlled and skilful manipulation and too much haste.
There was pulling associated with the rotation. I have not overlooked the evidence that pulling is counter productive.
It is hard to go past the description of Dr Hruz in the hospital notes and his notes in February 1995 that there was an extraction. By that he meant that there was a pulling out of the baby from the body of Mrs Strelec. I think that there was an extraction which involved seizing hold of the lower part of the body and pulling. That pulling was not gentle but firm and marked.
It is not possible to be certain of the precise point of time at which the spinal cord was injured. It is probable that it was injured to some extent during the inappropriate pulling on the upper legs but I am not able to say to what extent. It is also probable that the spinal cord was injured at the time when excessive force was used in the rotation of the baby and the delivery of the shoulders. It is probable that this is when the greater injury occurred.
As a result of the impermissible force that was used in the delivery of the baby the spinal cord was injured with ultimately fatal results.
Dr Nelson failed to exercise the reasonable care and skill to be expected of an ordinary competent specialist obstetrician in the delivery of Duncan
Strelec. The plaintiff has proved her case in negligence against Dr Nelson.
 
The Case Against Dr Hruz 
Examination on 7 February 1985 
On 19 February 1996 I gave reasons in support of my ruling that there was no evidence to go to the jury that Dr Hruz was negligent in failing to detect a breech presentation at his examination on 7 February 1985. I adhere to those reasons.

The plaintiff relied on the general rule that a baby turns into the breech position many days if not weeks prior to the birth. That rule or principle is not of universal application. The doctors were agreed that the movement of the baby into the breech position could occur at a very late stage. It was possible that it could have occurred between 7 and 12 February 1985.

Normally breech presentations should be detected but Professor Bennett and Dr
Hinde stated that every obstetrician had missed a breech presentation despite taking reasonable care.

Dr Hinde stated that if the foetal heart sounds recorded at the examinations of 24 January and 7 February 1985 were an accurate anatomic record of where they were heard it was very unlikely that there was a breech presentation at either of those examinations. There is no good reason to doubt the accuracy of the records on this aspect. Dr Hinde explained that at times when you feel the bottom end of the baby it can feel very hard, like a head. This had happened to him when he was proceeding in a normal and careful manner.

Dr Hruz' evidence of his examination on 7 February 1985 revealed no evidence of negligence. It was a careful examination of which a reasonable record was made.

Mrs Strelec has failed to establish that the baby was in the breech position on February 1985. She has also failed to establish any negligence on his part in respect of the examination on 7 February 1985 or any earlier examination.

Post Natal Bleeding 
It is probable that at the times Drs Nelson and Hruz respectively left the hospital there was no evidence that Mrs Strelec was bleeding unduly. When it became apparent that there was a slow trickle of blood coming from her including passing large clots of blood and that it was not responding to treatment or easing Sister Elliott telephoned Dr Hruz, told him of the problem and asked him to return to the hospital. He did so. Sister Elliott was not sure of the time but thought it was probably between midnight and 12.30 a.m.
Mrs Strelec thought it was around about midnight.

Mrs Strelec said that Dr Hruz told her that there was a tear in her cervix and that he would have to stitch it. She asked him to use an anaesthetic as she was in so much pain. He indicated that this should not be done and explained why. Dr Hruz went ahead and stitched the cervix. The procedure was painful.

Mrs Strelec did not mention that Dr Hruz first massaged her abdomen externally nor was she asked in cross examination. The details of what, if anything, happened prior to him stitching the cervix were sparse.

Sister Elliott recorded Dr Hruz stitching the tear at about 0045 hours. Sister
Elliott understood from Dr Hruz that the suturing was intended to stop the bleeding. She did not see Dr Hruz give Mrs Strelec any other treatment for the bleeding. At 0100 hours Mrs Strelec was given 500 mls of Ergometrine pursuant to Dr Hruz' direction. Sister Elliott did not record that Dr Hruz had massaged the uterus externally prior to stitching the cervix or at any time. She recorded at a later stage that fundal pressure had been applied by Dr Nelson.

Dr Hruz insisted that in accordance with his usual practice he would have first examined Mrs Strelec externally with his hands. This simple step is never missed. If the uterus is atonic or relaxed the uterus is massaged externally and medical stimulus (Ergometrine) is given to facilitate the contraction of the uterus. After that the uterus is held in a contracted position by pressing with the hand on the front part and forcing that hand backwards and upwards. This may have to be repeated many times. This is continued until the uterus stays contracted. There will be pauses while the doctor sees if the uterus is going to remain contracted with the external massage. If it does not remain contracted further massage occurs. Dr Hruz regarded this as standard procedure where there was abnormal post natal bleeding.

Dr Hruz stated that if on his examination he was not sure that an atonic uterus was the only cause of the bleeding he would look for other causes. If he found that a repair was needed he would carry it out. While he regarded the cervix as needing repair he did not regard it as contributing to the blood loss.

It is improbable that Dr Hruz would have left Mrs Strelec even for a short period if the bleeding had not seemed to ease. It is probable that there was a short easing in the bleeding and then it resumed. Dr Hruz telephoned Dr Nelson for advice about 0120 and was told to administer certain medicines. Mrs
Strelec recalled that Dr Hruz seemed to be responding to a series of questions from Dr Nelson as to what had been done. The bleeding did not abate and Dr
Nelson was again telephoned about .30 a.m. by Dr Hruz.

About 2.15 a.m. Dr Nelson returned to the hospital. After examining Mrs
Strelec he told her that he would have to knead the uterus and that this would be very painful. It was. Dr Nelson believed, based on his usual practice, that he would have inserted his hand into the vagina of Mrs Strelec and compressed the fundus (or top) of the uterus with that hand and emptied it. This was described as digitally removing a blood clot from the cervical os. The uterus is compressed between the hand in the vagina and the hand on the top of the abdomen. The vaginal hand is removed and the fundus of the uterus is guarded by the abdominal hand to make sure that the uterus remains contracted. Upward pressure is applied to hold the uterus up out of the pelvis. The abdominal hand is held in position for 20 minutes. Sister Elliott has noted that pressure was applied for 20 minutes. There were no further problems with bleeding.

Sister Elliott noted that at 0300 further clots passed but that the loss was settling at 0330 hours and at 0400 "IV Blood commenced". Mrs Strelec suffered shock and exhaustion but gradually recovered during 13 February 1995.

Dr Hruz had carried out the procedure described by Dr Nelson many years prior to 1985. Dr Hruz had done so under supervision while undergoing obstetric training in Czechoslovakia. He had never carried out that procedure since that time. He said that he "could not have confidently carried out that procedure."
He did not recall what Dr Nelson had actually done.

Dr Hinde (T563) was asked to assume the case of a general practitioner with broadly the experience and practice of Dr Hruz. Dr Hinde would not expect such a general practitioner to feel confident that he could carry out the procedure (as described by Dr Nelson) successfully. Dr Hinde pointed out that the prior administration of Ergometrine made the task more difficult. Dr Hinde was referred to the drugs administered to Mrs Strelec (T563-T564). Having regard to these and the condition of Mrs Strelec, Dr Hinde would not have expected a general practitioner with the experience and practice of Dr Hruz exercising reasonable care and skill to perform an internal evacuation of the uterus. Dr
Hinde would have expected such a general practitioner to undertake massage of the uterus per abdomen.

Heavier than normal bleeding from the vagina following delivery of a baby is well known. The cause is most likely to be a non-contracted uterus. This must be sought and treated or eliminated as a possible cause of bleeding. With such heavier than normal bleeding the first step is to massage the abdomen externally. This often stops the bleeding.

There was no mention in the delivery suite notes of Sister Elliott of abdominal massage prior to the repair of the cervix. Professor Bennett interpreted the delivery suite notes as meaning that the heavier than normal bleeding was controlled by the simple expedient of rubbing up a uterine contraction and making sure that the uterus remained contracted. He thought that the blood loss was due to a lax uterus and not trauma. Professor Bennett assumed that the cervix was first repaired followed by abdominal massage of the conventional kind. I am persuaded that what ultimately caused the bleeding to ease was the successful implementation of the procedures described by Dr
Nelson, that is insertion of one hand into the vagina and evacuating the clots and placing the other hand on the abdomen and pressing as he described.

Professor Bennett thought it was probable that there was no abnormal bleeding when Dr Nelson left. Otherwise he would have stayed. That is probably correct.

Dr Hinde could not believe that any doctor called back to attend to the bleeding problem of Mrs Strelec would not first have massaged the abdomen externally. He found it so strange that he felt compelled to ask the question whether the massage had not been recorded because it was so routine.

Dr Hinde said that inherent in the assumption that Dr Hruz had not first palpated the abdomen was the highly unlikely procedure of the doctor arriving at the hospital and without doing anything else instructing the staff to put the patient's legs up in stirrups. The doctor cannot undertake the repair of the cervix unless the patient is placed in a position so that it is anatomically possible to do it. Dr Hinde could not believe that any doctor would direct a patient to be put in that position without even the minimal laying on of hands. There is much force in what Dr Hinde has said. It seems that Dr Hruz was at the hospital for a period before he began repairing the cervix.

Despite the absence of any reference in the delivery suite notes to the abdomen first being massaged and the absence of any relevant notes from Dr
Hruz, it is probable, based on the evidence of Dr Hruz and Dr Hinde, that Dr
Hruz massaged the abdomen of Mrs Strelec prior to attending to the cervical repair.

Professor Bennett appears to have assumed that the massage undertaken by Dr
Nelson on his second attendance at the hospital was conventional external abdominal massage. The delivery suite notes do not make it clear that Dr
Nelson carried out a different procedure.

Professor Bennett, Dr Hinde and this court have been hampered by the absence of adequate notes made by Dr Hruz and Dr Nelson as to what each did. This was a serious departure from proper practice. I do not criticise Sister Elliott.
She can hardly be expected to have the understanding and knowledge possessed by the doctors.

Professor Bennett took the notes of Sister Elliott as a complete record of what was done. Dr Hinde was not prepared to do so because of the strange state of affairs which would result. I agree with Dr Hinde. I also have the evidence of Dr Nelson and Dr Hruz. That was not available to Professor Bennett. I cannot accept that Dr Hruz would not have carried out the basic and simple step of massaging the abdomen when there was abnormal bleeding. It is probable that when Dr Hruz first re-attended at the hospital he massaged Mrs Strelec's abdomen externally prior to making the cervical repair..

Even if Dr Hruz had not massaged Mrs Strelec's abdomen I would not assume that any such massage would have stopped the bleeding. Dr Nelson could not and did not rely on conventional abdominal massaging. He had to embark upon the procedures earlier described.

In my opinion the case against Dr Hruz in respect of the post natal bleeding fails. Dr Hinde thought that there had been a major post natal haemorrhage which led to the plaintiff experiencing shock at 5.30 a.m. Dr Hinde would have expected the effects from the haemorrhage and its impact on the blood circulation to have largely abated by later in the day (13 February 1985).
Once Mrs Strelec had recovered physically from the blood loss her attention was focussed on the baby and going to Melbourne to be with him. From the nursing notes I would assess the effects of the blood loss and shock as continuing for 2 to 3 days.

Failure to use Anaesthetic 
I have earlier referred to the request of Mrs Strelec to Dr Hruz to use anaesthetic while he stitched the tear in the cervix and him not doing so. Dr
Hruz agreed that he had sutured the cervix without administering any anaesthetic (T501) or drug (T503-504). Dr Hruz could not remember being asked to do so (T502). He denied that Mrs Strelec would have been in considerable pain while that suturing was taking place. He did not think that suturing without anaesthetic would have added to her pain.

Dr Hinde said that it was not the suturing of the cervix which causes the pain but obtaining access to expose the cervix for suturing. There had been an episiotomy and the local anaesthetic previously administered may not be working. The gaining of access could be very uncomfortable.

Dr Hruz did not correctly assess the situation. He did not appreciate that with the episiotomy and the local anaesthetic wearing off she would suffer appreciable pain in his gaining access to do the suturing. Dr Hinde stated that local anaesthetic could be given to ease her discomfort and that he could see no contra-indication for a local anaesthetic. There was no sufficient reason for Dr Hruz not to accede to Mrs Strelec's request.

I am of the opinion that Mrs Strelec has established negligence on Dr Hruz' part in his failure to administer a local anaesthetic prior to stitching the cervix.

The Case Against The Hospital 
The plaintiff contends that the hospital is liable for the acts and omissions of Drs Nelson and Hruz.

Dr Nelson was not engaged by Mrs Strelec. On 12 February 1985 Dr Nelson was the on-call specialist obstetrician made available as a result of arrangements made by the hospital to attend to patients needing specialist care. That hospital had a maternity wing. Dr Nelson was called once Dr Hruz saw that there was a footling breech presentation.

Dr Nelson was in private practice in the Albury/Wodonga District as a specialist obstetrician/gynaecologist with many years experience. He had an arrangement with the hospital to be on call to attend to patients needing specialist care on days when he was the on-call specialist. Consequent upon
Ellis v. Wallsend District Hospital [(1989) 17 NSWLR 553] at 601
D-E, 604 F-G and 605 A-G. I hold that the relationship between Mrs Strelec and the hospital generated a special independent or non- delegable obligation on the part of the hospital to ensure that the delivery of Duncan was performed with reasonable care. Dr Nelson could not be regarded as an employee of the hospital.

The position as to Dr Hruz is more difficult. He was a private general practitioner in Albury with lengthy experience and a practice in obstetrics. I would infer that he had admitting rights to the hospital. The plaintiff consulted Dr Hruz concerning her pregnancy and he managed it from the initial stages in his surgery and saw her regularly. He attended at the hospital to deliver her baby but on seeing the footling breech presentation decided that a specialist was required and arranged for Dr Nelson as the on-call specialist to take over the management of Mrs Strelec and deliver the baby. Dr Hruz remained at the hospital to look after Mrs Strelec and to assist Dr Nelson.

The in-patient election form of the hospital completed by Mrs Strelec on her admission to hospital contains these parts: "I elect to be (tick one) 
Private (Chargeable) Single Bed Room Hospital (Non-Chargeable) 
Please complete and sign the sections relating to your election.
 ...

Private (Chargeable) Patient - in which case I will be: treated by Dr ....Hruz.... or by the doctor on call (Dr .........) and by doctors whom they may call into consultation on my behalf. I may choose these doctors provided they hold appointments at this hospital.
 ...

Single Room Accommodation (where available) 
Note: Single rooms are allocated first to patients with specific medical need for this accommodation.

I hereby request to be accommodated in a single room if available. I acknowledge I shall be charge(sic) $130 per day for this accommodation by the hospital (private health insurance will cover all or a substantial part of this charge depending on the level of insurance cover).
 ....Amanda Strelec.(SGD).... ....12.12.84....
 (Date) 
If you have elected treatment as a chargeable patient, the name of your private health insurance fund (if any) is: ....NSW Building Society - Medi
Plus...." 
The effect of the form as completed suggests that she is to be a private patient under the case of Dr Hruz occupying a single room. This seems to be re-inforced by the form her husband completed on the following day. He ticked the "Private (chargeable)" box.

The bleeding of Mrs Strelec became a serious problem after Dr Nelson and Dr
Hruz left the hospital. Sr Elliott contacted Dr Hruz and he returned to the hospital. Dr Hruz acknowledged that he had obligations to the hospital as well as to Mrs Strelec to make an adequate record of any treatment he rendered to her while in the hospital.

It would be important for those dealing with her future management and care at the hospital to know what Dr Hruz had found and had done. The plaintiff submitted that in re-attending at the hospital Dr Hruz was doing work on behalf of the hospital in the management of the plaintiff. Reliance was also placed on Dr Hruz telephoning Dr Nelson for advice and subsequently for further advice and to attend at the hospital. The hospital contended that it was neither vicariously liable for Dr Hruz nor was it under a non-delegable duty in respect of work performed.

Both parties accepted that, based on Ellis at 591, the court's task is to look at the totality of the relationship between the parties although control remains a significant and therefore relevant indicium of an employer and employee relationship. I look at the totality of the relationship.

At 598 Samuels JA posed this question: In treating the plaintiff was the doctor acting as the employee of the hospital (that is to say, on the hospital's behalf) or on his own behalf? He reframed the question, to ask whether in treating the appellant was the doctor engaged in his own business or that of the hospital? 
The plaintiff was Dr Hruz' patient and he treated her from the beginning of her pregnancy. On admission he was shown as her doctor. He had attended to her shortly after her admission and remained throughout the delivery. The hospital telephoned him to advise that a problem had arisen. What he did in re- attending at the hospital was part and parcel of follow up treatment which is a normal part of the work of a doctor for his patient. On the other hand Dr
Nelson was primarily responsible for her at that stage. Once Dr Nelson and Dr
Hruz left the hospital it became the hospital's duty to nurse the plaintiff, monitor her condition, note any problems, such as undue bleeding and take reasonable steps to have such bleeding stopped. That involved arranging medical treatment if necessary. It was the primary responsibility of the hospital to take steps to stop the bleeding. It decided whether to call Dr
Nelson, the rostered specialist, or Dr Hruz, the plaintiff's general practitioner or the resident doctor. Dr Hruz was likely to be able to come more quickly than Dr Nelson and substantial experience was desirable given the problem and the complications. The hospital chose Dr Hruz when it could have chosen others.

I think that Dr Hruz was acting on his own behalf in looking after Mrs Strelec and also on behalf of the hospital. It seems artificial to describe Dr Hruz as the hospital's employee in the circumstances of the present case and I would not so describe him.

The next question is whether the hospital owed the plaintiff an independent non-delegable duty. It has to provide nursing care which must be undertaken with reasonable care and skill. More difficult questions arise as to medical treatment. In Ellis at 604 Samuels JA said: "...a hospital is bound to ensure that reasonable care issued in providing the treatment which it undertakes to carry out; but that duty does not extend to treatment which is performed by a doctor pursuant to a direct engagement with the patient, and not on behalf of the hospital.

In my opinion therefore while proof of the relationship of hospital and "patient" will generate a special duty of some kind, closer scrutiny of the facts (cf the analysis proposed by Mason J in Stevens v. Brodribb
Sawmilling) is necessary in order to establish its scope. It is a question of what medical services the hospital has undertaken to supply..." 
At 605 Samuels JA pointed out that a hospital owes an independent non- delegable duty to ensure that the treatment it undertakes to provide is performed with reasonable care. The question in every case is the nature of that undertaking.

During the hospital's nursing care a serious bleeding problem arose. The initial work of the hospital staff (of which no criticism can fairly be made) did not cause the problem to ease significantly. It became obvious that an experienced doctor was needed. The hospital staff called the plaintiff's general practitioner and that was not unreasonable given his involvement in the birth, that he lived close-by and could come quickly. Dr Nelson was effectively 45 minutes away. The need for a specialist to treat the complication which occurred would not have been apparent to Sister Elliott 
Part of the hospital's obligations was to call a suitable doctor if a problem arose which required such services. Heavier than normal bleeding is a good example. The hospital was under a duty as part of its general nursing care to take reasonable steps and exercise reasonable care to ensure that heavier than normal bleeding was eased or stopped within a reasonable time in the prevailing circumstances. Dr Hruz had to summon Dr Nelson, the hospital's on- call specialist to deal with and reduce the bleeding problem so that the bleeding ultimately stopped.

It was during his treatment of the bleeding problem that Dr Hruz came across the cervical tear. He felt that it should be excluded as a possible source of the bleeding and repaired anyway. Dr Hruz agreed that the cervical tear was found to have no bearing on the bleeding problem.

The matter is not free from doubt but the better view is that the hospital did owe Mrs Strelec a non-delegable duty of care as to easing and stopping heavier bleeding, that the cervical repair arose during the treatment of the bleeding problem and that the hospital is liable for Dr Hruz' negligent failure to administer a local anaesthetic.

Damages 
There was substantial contest as to the damages to which Mrs Strelec was entitled if there should be a verdict for her. In her Further Amended
Statement of Claim filed in court on 31 January 1996 she claimed that she suffered injury, loss and damage. The particulars of injury supplied were nervous shock, reactive depression and an unnecessary tear in her genital track.

The plaintiff adduced evidence that she had suffered an identifiable psychiatric illness. Dr Dent thought that she was suffering from pathological grief, a severe psychiatric illness. Dr Phillips, who was called for the defendants, did not go so far but he thought that she had had a painful period of grieving consistent with the very major loss which she suffered. Dr
Phillips thought that she had suffered a major depressive illness and could be affected by such an illness in the future. Dr Phillips thought that it did not have the chronicity to support a diagnosis of pathological grief.

There was no issue that Mrs Strelec had suffered more than ordinary grief.
There was a major issue whether there had been a sudden sensory loss.

The plaintiff submitted that this was not a case in which she had to prove that she had suffered a sudden sensory loss to recover damages for her psychiatric illness. She had suffered a physical injury as a result of the negligence of Dr Nelson and another physical injury as the result of the negligence of Dr Hruz' and that she was entitled to damages for her grief and psychiatric illness consequent upon her physical injury. She did not have to surmount the barriers encountered in an independent action for nervous shock and was entitled to be compensated for all the foreseeable consequences. No fine distinctions should be drawn. The plaintiff submitted that the injury did not start when the baby died but when too much force was used. The injury continued and enlarged as more force was used and later included the mental anguish which she suffered on the baby's death. The same acts of negligence of
Dr Nelson caused injury to Mrs Strelec and the baby and resulted in the baby's subsequent death. Thus it was artificial to separate the claim for physical injury to her and the claim for nervous shock.

Reliance was placed on the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Bilad Aboushadi v. CIC Insurance Ltd, unreported, 17 May 1996 delivered by Handley JA. His
Honour held that the distinction between ordinary physical injury and psychological or psychiatric injury was illusory, relying on what Lord Shaw said in Coyle v. John Watson Ltd <case>; [[1943] AC ] at 103.
It is established that psychological or psychiatric injury is personal injury and that mental shock is presumably in all cases the result of, or at least accompanied by some physical disturbance in the sufferer's system.

In the present case the physical injury to the plaintiff's system unrelated to nervous shock was minor. There was excessive force in the delivery of the child probably resulting in increased pain during the delivery. This probably lasted for no longer than 10-15 minutes and the effects of it possibly for a couple of days in the form of discomfort. There was also the increased pain from stitching the cervix without anaesthetising the access areas. This was of short duration although the effects may have lasted for one or two days. The pain from Dr Nelson kneading the uterus was far greater and the effects of that swamped the effects of the other acts.

Neither the cervical tear nor the post natal bleeding has been shown to be due to any negligent act or omission by the defendants.

The nervous shock or psychological or psychiatric injury suffered by Mrs
Strelec was not due to any injury suffered by Mrs Strelec. If the baby had lived and had become healthy and normal Mrs Strelec would not have suffered nervous shock or psychological or psychiatric injury. However, she would always look back on the period of the delivery of Duncan as an exhausting and bad period but that is different from suffering psychological injury.

Mrs Strelec's background prior to Duncan's birth contained much that was sad and made her vulnerable if a major problem arose. It would be unnecessarily hurtful to detail it. While the birth of any child is very special to the family it was exceedingly so in her case.

Within a short period after Duncan's birth she knew that he was a floppy baby and that much attention was being devoted by Dr Bishop and the nursing staff to the baby. She was advised to have the baby baptised during the early hours of 13 February 1985. She was consulted over the decision to transfer the baby to a specialist intensive care unit at the Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne.

In Dr Bishop's letter of 19 February 1995 (dictated about 13 February 1995) to
Dr Hruz, reference was made to the problems which had arisen and the transfer of the baby. Dr Bishop concluded, "I expect this baby will recover well, but long term follow up will be required." Dr Bishop probably expressed similar sentiments to Mrs Strelec.

Mrs Strelec and her husband were worried about the baby but hopeful. They were willing and expecting the baby to recover. They wanted more information about the baby and to be with him. They went to Melbourne as soon as she was able to travel after partially recovering from the effects of the birth. Mrs Strelec said, and I accept, that she and her husband thought that they were going to
Melbourne to bring Duncan home. They did not know the seriousness or extent of
Duncan's injuries.

After arriving at the Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Mr and Mrs Strelec saw Dr Campbell who told them of the gravity of Duncan's injuries, that he was unlikely to recover and that his prognosis for life was not good with so many disabilities and difficulties. Dr Campbell suggested that they let Duncan die.
They were stunned. I am persuaded that Mrs Strelec suffered a sudden sensory shock on receiving this news.

Mrs Strelec found this hard to accept. She was unprepared for such news. She wanted everything done for Duncan as any mother would. The doctors at the
Royal Children's' Hospital carried out further tests but could do nothing for
Duncan. He was at that hospital for nearly four weeks before being taken home by his parents. Mrs Strelec said, and I accept, that Dr Hruz gave them some hope. It was only when she took him to Woodstock, the Centre for the
Developmentally Disabled, that she realised the full extent of Duncan's injuries including the number of operations and bags he would need.

At home on the early morning of 17 March 1985 Mrs Strelec discovered that
Duncan was in a critical and life threatening state. Emergency resuscitation was required and undertaken. The baby was taken to hospital where Dr Bishop worked upon him. Dr Bishop advised Mr and Mrs Strelec that Duncan had stopped breathing so many times that he probably had serious brain damage. Dr Bishop advised the parents to let the baby go peacefully. A grim decision confronted them. They agreed.

I accept the evidence of Mr Strelec that his wife did not cope well with the news as to Duncan's condition received from Dr Campbell. She was upset constantly and kept building her hopes. There were some glimmers of hope. When they took the baby home his wife was constantly upset with the situation. I also accept Mr Strelec's evidence that the decision to let Duncan go peacefully was a very difficult one.

Mrs Strelec was plunged into a deep grief and shock. This arose from the sudden shock that despite all her efforts Duncan's life was finished.

I do not think that Mrs Strelec was prepared for Duncan's death. She is an intelligent and determined lady and although she was constantly upset she kept hoping that Duncan would pull through. She so wanted Duncan that she was not really able to accept that he would die. Her necessary participation in their decision and Duncan's death and her perception of those desolating events shocked and rocked the very essence of her being.

I have paid careful attention to the observations of Kirby P in Campbelltown
City Council v. Mackay [(1989-89) 15 NSWLR 501] at -504 that nervous shock is rarely if ever the result of an isolated shock.
I think that Mrs Strelec's subsequent psychiatric illness was the result primarily of the sudden shock of Duncan's sudden death on 17 March 1985 and to a lesser extent the sudden shock she received when Dr Campbell told her of
Duncan's bleak future. She received two sudden body blows. She may have been able to recover from the first. The second left her with a long term psychological illness. This is not surprising. From the findings which I have made it will be apparent that this is a very unusual case.

In Mackay, Kirby P lamented the consequences of the law's failure to redefine the cause of action for nervous shock and he marshalled some strong factors in support of his lament. However, I am constrained to deal with the matter, as Kirby P was, on the basis of existing principles. In Jaensch v.
Coffey <case>; [155 CLR 549] at Brennan J said: "A plaintiff may recover only if the psychiatric illness is the result of physical injury negligently inflicted on him by the defendant or if it is induced by `shock'. Psychiatric illness caused in other ways attracts no damages, though it is reasonably foreseeable that psychiatric illness might be a consequence of the defendant's carelessness. The spouse who has been worn down by caring for a tortiously injured husband or wife and who suffers psychiatric illness as a result goes without compensation; a parent made distraught by the wayward conduct of a brain-damaged child and who suffers psychiatric illness as a result has no claim against the tortfeasor liable to the child." 
In the present case I am satisfied that the psychiatric illness suffered by
Mrs Strelec was not the result of physical injury inflicted on her. It was induced by shock. Further, it was not the caring for Duncan or his behaviour or disabilities which caused Mrs Strelec's psychiatric illness. That lasted for about one month, probably less. The cause was the shock arising from
Duncan's death in distressing circumstances. That death was due to the injuries he received during his delivery. Both the shock and the psychiatric injury were reasonably foreseeable.

At 567 Brennan J explained what was meant by "shock" thus: "I understand `shock' in this context to mean the sudden sensory perception - that is, by seeing, hearing or touching - of a person, thing or event, which is so distressing that the perception of the phenomenon affronts or insults the plaintiff's mind and causes a recognizable psychiatric illness. A psychiatric illness induced by mere knowledge of a distressing fact is not compensable; perception by the plaintiff of the distressing phenomenon is essential. If mere knowledge of a distressing phenomenon sufficed, the bearers of say tidings, able to foresee the depressing effect of what they have to impart, might be held liable as tortfeasors." 
This is not a case of the psychiatric illness being induced by mere knowledge of a distressing fact. It was induced by hearing that Duncan ought to be allowed to die and seeing him dead. There had been the earlier shock when Dr
Campbell spoke to Mr & Mrs Strelec.

In Mackay at 509 McHugh JA observed: "In an action for nervous shock, it is not enough, as Brennan J pointed out in
Jaensch v. Coffey, that the psychiatric illness was the foreseeable result of the defendant's conduct. The illness must be the result of a shock caused by the perception of a phenomenon for which the defendant is responsible..." 
At 511 he continued: "In an action for nervous shock the sustaining of a psychiatric illness by shock is fundamental to the cause of action. In an action for damages for physical injury, a plaintiff who has suffered physical injury is entitled to recover for consequential psychiatric illness. A plaintiff in such an action does not have to establish that the psychiatric illness is the result of a shock caused by the sudden perception of some phenomenon for which the defendant is responsible. It is enough that the psychiatric condition is the reasonably foreseeable result of the defendant's negligence." 
At the risk of tedious repetition I hold that Mrs Strelec suffered a psychiatric illness as a result of a shock caused by a phenomenon for which Dr
Nelson and the hospital are responsible. The psychiatric illness suffered by
Mrs Strelec was not consequential upon her physical injury.

Life After Duncan's Death 
After Duncan's death Mrs Strelec could not bear to walk into the nursery or live in the house. It was sold. She felt that she was removed from herself and as though she was sleep walking. She wanted to talk about Duncan all the time but her husband could not bear it. Their relationship was stressful.

Bamix offered to re-employ Mrs Strelec in her previous position but she could not accept it as it held too many memories. She had worked there until she was eight months pregnant. She decided that she would buy a small business as she could employ staff and would be able to go home if she became too upset about
Duncan. Her husband objected as he felt she was not mentally stable enough to manage a business. She would not listen to him or discuss the matter rationally. She subsequently accepted that he was right. She purchased a small frock shop business in about May 1985. She said that she was in no condition to run that business which failed. She stated that she sold out about
September 1986 having lost a lot of money. Her husband was angry with her. Her husband did, however, support her once she went ahead with the frock shop and help her financially.

She said that she was very difficult to live with and pushed her husband into purchasing another property when he did not want to do so. There was a real risk of losing a lot of money on it.

Mrs Strelec's third child was born on 16 May 1986. She said that during the early stages of her pregnancy she suffered some skin difficulties. She was admitted to hospital from 23 to 25 April 1986 for bed rest to settle her down as she was terrified of the birth. She suffered from tiredness and stress.

Her fourth child was born on 25 June 1987 and her fifth child on 15 July 1989.
Her pregnancies were not easy and she was worried about each birth. During the pregnancy with the fourth child she developed a bad chest infection and was admitted to hospital suffering from bronchitis.

Mrs Strelec said that her husband reluctantly helped her around the house both before and after Duncan's death. Her husband increased his help after Adam's birth and attended to the heavy duties.

After the birth of the third child she was accepted as a mature age student at
Charles Sturt University and commenced her studies there for a Bachelor of
Arts degree in 1987. Initially, she was a full time student but found that this was too much for her. She became a part-time student and with her other commitments she took six years to complete her degree.

Mrs Strelec said that she suffered from fatigue and that her mother-in-law helped her with the housework. In the latter part of 1987 she had problems with her wrists. It emerged that she was suffering from carpal tunnel syndrome and she received treatment for this.

In March 1988 a specialist confirmed that she was suffering from Lupus and prescribed medication in the form of steroids. She developed an ulcer as a result of taking the steroids.

During her pregnancy with the last child she was diagnosed as suffering from diabetes. In August 1989 her husband had a vasectomy, contrary to her wishes.
This probably created some tension in the marriage.

She said that her relationship with her husband slowly deteriorated. She was obsessed about what had happened to Duncan and her husband was concerned about her obsession. She neglected her personal appearance, putting on a lot of weight and cutting her hair very short. She said that she wanted to make herself unattractive. She did not want to have intercourse with her husband anymore and felt that the more unattractive she made herself the less likelihood there was of that happening. She said that her marriage was in "very big trouble" after the birth of their last child. From about April-May onwards she told her doctor that she was not in love with her husband in a physical way. She was taking anti-depressants, notwithstanding her dislike of them. She felt desperate.

She suffered vaginal bleeding for a period and had a hysterectomy in September
By that time she felt that the marriage was over. It was she who wanted the marriage to end. Her husband said, and I accept, that the hysterectomy gave rise to some emotional problems on her part and magnified her other problems.

In October 1991 she may have had some problems with some vaginal cists. At the beginning of 1992 she underwent surgery to remove surplus stomach skin. From about August 1988 onwards she took anti-depressants from time to time as prescribed. It appears that she saw her general practitioner frequently and that she received treatment and support from him and counselling from others who were experienced in their fields.

As she neared completion of her Arts degree she became interested in and angry about a number of local political issues. She ran for Albury Council and was elected in 1991. She threw herself into the council's affairs. Her husband was very unhappy and complained that she was using the council to avoid him. In hindsight she accepted that this was so although she did not think so at the time.

She completed her Arts degree at the end of 1992, graduating in 1993. In
January 1993 she went on a holiday with her children and another lady. Her husband was not invited. In February 1993 she insisted that there be a separation, giving her husband what was tantamount to an ultimatum. She was very heavy handed. He left three days later. Later in 1993 a matter arose involving her first child which upset her greatly. She returned to anti- depressants for a period. That matter had nothing to do with the delivery of
Duncan and any after-effects.

In 1993 she was suffering from a hormone deficiency. She underwent hormone replacement therapy and that made a big improvement. She felt less tired and better able to cope with difficult situations. Her feelings of tiredness fluctuated. In September 1993 she consulted a doctor about breast enlargement.
In early 1994 she underwent an operation designed to achieve that result.

In September 1995 Mrs Strelec became Mayor of Albury. As Mayor she had been busy and under attack. Although it was a part-time position it had occupied at times, more than 40 hours per week. On average it occupied about 20-30 hours per week.

Her sleep has been erratic. She has often been and still is kept awake thinking about what had happened to Duncan and her relationship with Mr
Strelec. She claimed that consequent upon the injuries to and the death of
Duncan she had become intense, intolerant and tactless. Her personality had changed.

Mr Strelec said after Duncan's death his wife changed from an easy going and happy person to a lady who was constantly upset. She was crying and emotional.
She became obsessive. Initially, her obsession related to Duncan. It extended generally to anything which she decided to apply herself to, for example, the business venture. She approached her further studies in an obsessive vein and similarly her work on the council. All of this gradually and increasingly excluded him. This contributed very strongly to the breakdown of the marriage.

Mr Strelec said that his sexual relationship with his wife diminished considerably after Duncan's death. It was only good when they were trying to have children. It became virtually non-existent. He confirmed that for a period his wife let her appearance go and did not care how she looked. She also became overweight.

He said that since Duncan's death if he tried or tries to discuss matters with her she just became irate. He tried to point this out to her but she would not listen. He said that prior to Duncan's death they could discuss all matters freely. Her behaviour pattern changed after Duncan's death and her changed behaviour had continued until the present.

Mr Strelec agreed that he and his wife had undertaken a business venture together in 1989 involving the purchase of a block of units and converting the units to strata title. It was mainly his wife's idea. They discussed it and he also thought it was a good idea. They hoped to make a profit. He said that initially they appeared to be coming out on top but gradually they came out about even. They were very lucky.

Mr Strelec stated that the plaintiff's skills were in sales. He did not embrace the suggestion that she had skills in managing stores. Mr Strelec said that prior to Duncan's death his wife was concentrating on the short term goals of being a mother and looking after the children. She had no long term goals at that stage. She had mentioned rejoining the work force but there was no pressure on her to rejoin as he was happy to provide for her and the children. It was her choice.

Despite their difficulties Mr Strelec believed that their marriage was a good one when he agreed to have the children. Otherwise he would not have had them.
He said that there were problems in the marriage prior to the last child's birth and that he had to make a lot of allowances. It was soon after that birth that she firstly appeared to him to be unhappy in their marriage.

Mr Strelec agreed that his wife had formed a close and loving relationship with each of their three surviving children.

Mr Strelec has endured much at the hands of his wife. He had shown patience and understanding over many years. He loved her but she had made it impossible for him to live with her. She was demanding, aggressive and determined to pursue and get her own way. I do not think that all this can be attributed to the death of Duncan. She was always a woman of drive who wished to achieve the goals which she developed.

It is probably true that the three year period prior to the death of Duncan was a happy period in the lives of Mr and Mrs Strelec. How long that would have lasted given certain aspects of her character and personality is difficult to assess and contentious.

Pre 1985 
In cross examination the defendants explored Mrs Strelec's pre-1985 history in considerable detail. She had had much unhappiness and some bitter experiences. She had left school of her own volition on obtaining the School
Certificate. Her family background was troubled. Her father had left her mother in circumstances which made her angry. There were difficulties between
Mrs Strelec and her mother. Mrs Strelec described herself as a difficult teenager. She left home soon after her parents separated.

She was rejected by her family when she got into difficulties of a personal nature. She had successive unfortunate relationships with two men which occasioned her much grief. She agreed that there were times when she was "very down". The events which occurred and the experiences which she underwent were likely to and did cause her to suffer deep depression in the period prior to .

Gradually over the period from 1974 to late 1981 she obtained more responsible positions. Despite all her difficulties she was in regular employment and advanced herself. She overcame or at least managed to live with some disturbing experiences. She had energy, drive and resilience. She returned to
Albury in late 1981. For a period she had two positions and worked long hours.
Then she obtained the position with Bamix which she developed and, in doing so, enhanced her own skills.

She saw Dr Hruz from March 1982 onwards from time to time for a series of relatively minor complaints. He had a note of her statement that she had had a rash to her face on and off over a few years. In September 1982 she complained that she was "irritated, tired, cranky and not rested in the morning". He prescribed an anti-depressant tablet to be taken at night. There were no other times when he prescribed an anti-depressant.

A View of Mrs Strelec 
Mrs Strelec would not have been content, in the longer term, to remain at home as a wife and mother looking after her children. She has been and is a restless spirit. Without the tragedy of Duncan she would have gone to
University as a mature aged student and become involved in political or commercial activity. She would have had periods of being depressed when things went poorly but she would have rebounded.

The Psychiatric Evidence 
The plaintiff relied on the evidence of Dr MRH Dent, a psychiatrist who specialises in aspects of loss, death and dying. Dr Dent was seized in considerable detail of the history of the plaintiff and the events which had befallen her. It was his view that she was suffering from pathological grief.
This was greater than normal grief. If a patient has not come to terms with painful reality and accepted that reality within about 18 months of the event and the grief then starts to manifest itself in the onset of formal categories of mental disorder that is called pathological grief. Dr Dent thought that the grief in the present case so manifested itself to a moderate to severe degree.

Dr Dent saw Mrs Strelec in August 1990, September 1992 and July 1995. He thought that her pathological grief had persisted for many years and was still persisting. He saw her for medico-legal purposes for about an hour on each occasion. He has never treated her.

As at September 1992 and July 1995 there were elements of a major depression found in her. These included loss of the appetites of life including loss of libido, loss of life energy, loss of a wish for intimacy, a loss of self interest, loss of interest in her appearance, loss of appetite, loss of weight and terminal insomnia.

The psychiatrist also looked for suicidal pre-occupation and psychomotor retardation and a variety of other features (T208). Dr Dent thought that the death of Duncan contributed to a great degree to the breakdown of her marriage.

Dr Dent said that Mrs Strelec needed intensive and long term expert counselling. It was essential to deal with and treat the underlying major mental disorder as well as the painful areas. Anti-depressant medication has to be used where there is a major depression and Mrs Strelec required it.

Grief after the death of an infant in circumstances such as those which prevailed in the present case was accepted as the most powerful emotion anyone would have to sustain. She was angry and bitter with the doctors involved.

An important but not a decisive consideration in assessing the grief which has been suffered is whether a person has returned to a state of productivity and relative well being. The patient may be using work to shield herself against painful circumstances. Activity can help relieve obsession but not necessarily resolve it. When the activity goes the subject of the obsession may come back.
Her past mental history including any depression was also important but not decisive.

Dr Dent disagreed that conclusions could be safely drawn as to her recovery from her having more children after Duncan's death. He was wary that she might be replacing the deceased child with another child rather than allowing the deceased child to fall into his own place. The matter had to be carefully assessed. There was a similar caveat with her becoming involved in business or further studies. Each was good provided that it was not being used to push away the hurt of Duncan's death.

Dr Dent was cross examined in considerable detail about various events which had occurred in the life of Mrs Strelec from about the early 70's to the present. He accepted that the resolution of the proceedings would be beneficial. Dr Dent agreed that Mrs Strelec had been able to resolve very severe emotional problems prior to Duncan's death. Her past history served to explain why Duncan was so important to her. Dr Dent accepted that there had been other problems in her life since Duncan's death but he thought that the overwhelming cause of her condition of pathological grief and major depression arose from Duncan's death. He thought that she would not experience a full recovery and that her condition would be long lasting.

Dr Dent stated that if he were the treating doctor he would see Mrs Strelec each week for 2 to 3 months and then monthly for about the next 18 months. She should then see a therapist for the rest of her life about every three months.
Dr Dent anticipated that there would be periods when her condition would flare up and that for such period she would need more intense treatment. He also thought that she would need medication for the rest of her life.

Dr Dent said that the schedule fee was $145 for a consultation. The cost of medication ranged from $90 to $120 per fortnight depending on dosage.

The defendants relied on the evidence of Dr J Phillips, an experienced psychiatrist who came into the case at short notice on the illness of the psychiatrist previously retained by the defendants. He was under a severe disadvantage in that he only spoke to Mrs Strelec for half an hour. He had to rely on reading the evidence of Dr Dent, skim reading the evidence of Mr and
Mrs Strelec and a series of assumptions communicated to him by the legal advisers for the defendants. Allowing for these matters I still found his evidence to be valuable.

Dr Dent's approach seemed to be weighed down with the grief and losses with which he had to deal. He communicated a sense of gloom greater than that which was warranted. Dr Phillips regarded Mrs Strelec's psychiatric problems as serious but not as grave or intractable as Dr Dent regarded them.

Dr Phillips believed that she had had a major depressive illness, that it had recurred during the stressful trial of these proceedings and that it may recur on occasions in the future. Dr Phillips did not believe that her disorder had the chronicity to support a diagnosis of pathological grief.

Dr Phillips emphasised that pathological grief is reflected in a continuous state of mind. It is not an episodic phenomenon. There must be a constellation of symptoms which are enduring, unvarying and continuous. There could be a fluctuation in degree. Dr Phillips did not accept that Mrs Strelec had suffered chronic enduring major evasive depression over the complete period since Duncan's death.

Mrs Strelec was assessed by Dr Phillips as a person with a very strong constitution and high intelligence. She was capable and competent. Dr Phillips said that the scars of what happened will remain with her indefinitely.
Neither she nor anyone else in a similar position had the power to totally heal the scars. No therapists could effect such a healing.

Dr Phillips pointed out that Mrs Strelec had made considerable strides in life. She obviously had a plan or goals. She had had three children since
Duncan's death, pursued her academic career and more latterly had pursued a local government career with considerable success. She had pushed herself very hard. She had always wanted to have a substantial family and to undertake further studies. She had left school early.

Intrinsically, Mrs Strelec was a woman who liked to and was driven to achieve.
In her earlier years she had on occasions, two jobs (day and evening). When she married she had a supportive husband and a firm basis on which to build.
There were real strengths in her marriage. Even when she terminated the marriage he loved her and she loved his qualities. Her entry into local government and her standing for Parliament were natural progressions for her, given her inclination and passion. I accept that she attacked her studies and her political interests in a full blooded way. She was probably obsessive but even if the tragedy of Duncan had not occurred she would probably have embarked on these ventures enthusiastically and diligently and perhaps obsessively. Any difference in her activities and interests and her application to them before and after Duncan's death is one of degree and not one of kind.

I have heeded Dr Dent's warning that the activity may have been to avoid coming to grips or reflecting upon Duncan's death. I have thus been wary of frenetic activity. Mrs Strelec is too intelligent not to realise the value of useful endeavour and much activity in giving her other matters to reflect upon and occupy her. I would accept that there is an element of these in what she has done but she has primarily undertaken further studies and become involved in politics because of her own commitment to these areas and that would have happened even without Duncan's death.

I do not accept that Mrs Strelec is suffering from pathological grief. Her condition has not had the requisite chronicity continuity and endurance. I accept that she received a major psychological blow and that she has suffered a major depressive illness. She suffered a very major loss. It is probably the greatest loss she could suffer.

I accept that Duncan's death would in part have led to the break-up of the marriage but it was not the only factor. She had her own wishes and plans and she lost interest in her husband physically. It is not possible to say whether, for example, in 10 years time Mrs Strelec would have wished to continue with the marriage if Duncan had not died. I have not overlooked that at the time of that death both Mr & Mrs Strelec regarded their marriage as normal and happy.

Dr Phillips was impressed with the way in which Mrs Strelec had, in difficult circumstances, put her life together and progressed. He thought that she had psychological steel within her and that in the longer term she would do well.

Dr Phillips thought that the level of treatment suggested by Dr Dent was unwarranted. Dr Phillips thought that Mrs Strelec would need about five "de- briefing" consultations upon the conclusion of the litigation to alleviate the stress which she experienced. Dr Phillips said that allowance should be made for a minimum of three further episodes of major depression in her life because, despite her strengths, she remained vulnerable. Each episode would require five consultations. I do not think that I should proceed on the minimum basis of three episodes. In an area in which there is no certainty it would be reasonable to proceed on the basis of a further five episodes each requiring five consultations. I would also take a figure of $160 per consultation. I have taken the higher figure because some of the consultations could be quite lengthy.

While medication may need to be considered the plaintiff does not like it and
Dr Phillips thought it should be avoided if possible. It would be unwise to ignore the possibility of medication and I think that an allowance should be made for this contingency.

Dr Kruytbosch, the general practitioner who has treated Mrs Strelec for many years since 1985 was not called and the Court has been left with an incomplete picture. This is ironic because his records were the subject of a subpoena and both parties used them on occasions. Neither party was prepared to call him.

Mrs Strelec spent a long time in the witness box. During that period she exhibited a variety of moods and attitudes. I have observed her for much longer than either psychiatrist and I have relied upon my assessment of her, making due allowance for the stress which she was under. This was very marked when she ascertained that intimate personal details of her past and health had been published in an Albury newspaper.

I have in general preferred the views of Dr Phillips to those of Dr Dent as the former corresponded with my assessment. However, I regarded the evidence of Dr Dent as valuable. It made me think more deeply about the issues and he was right to point out the various possibilities. Generally, I did not regard those as probabilities. I felt that Dr Dent did not attach sufficient weight to the strengths and inner qualities of Mrs Strelec and her goals. The resolution of these proceedings will be uncommonly important to her and her future. She was determined that the doctors involved in the birth should be publicly called to account.

Cost of Future Psychiatric Care 
It is convenient to assess the cost of future psychiatric counselling and therapy. I proceed on the basis that it is probable that such therapy is likely to occur in the next 20 to 25 years. Accordingly, I would award the following: immediate debriefing consultations at $160 each $ 800.00 further episodes of major depression each requiring 5 consultations at $160 each ($800.00) every 4 years.

Delayed 4 years, 3% multiplier .888 $ 710.40 
Delayed 8 years, 3% multiplier .789 $ 631.20 
Delayed 12 years, 3% multiplier .701 $ 560.80 
Delayed 16 years, 3% multiplier .623 $ 498.40 
Delayed 20 years, 3% multiplier .554 $ 443.20 
Allow for contingency of medication being needed on occasions $2500.00 -------------- $6144.00 
Lupus 
The plaintiff claimed that as a result of Duncan's death she subsequently suffered from Lupus. It was not disputed that she suffered Lupus. The cause was disputed.

In late 1987, some months after the birth of her fourth child, Mrs Strelec suffered from the swelling of some of her joints and anti-inflammatory medication was prescribed. Dr Kruytbosch suspected that she had Lupus and referred her to a specialist who confirmed that she had Lupus and prescribed steroids. At May 1988 she complained of widespread aching. She developed an ulcer. She understood that resulted from the steroids. The joint pains subsided and did not flare up again after she became pregnant with the fifth child.

Lupus is a disease of the auto-immune system. Dr Dent said that depression may lead to Lupus. Dr Dent did not believe that in Mrs Strelec's case the condition of Lupus led to her depression. He said that there could be a relationship between Duncan's death, depression and the pregnancy. He could not elevate this to a probability.

Dr Phillips stated that Lupus is a rare disease whose origins are not well understood. In the present state of knowledge, an obvious and direct link between Duncan's death and the onset of Lupus could not be made. He thought that gap of about 21/2 years between the death and the onset of Lupus made it even more unlikely that there was a connection between them.

Dr Phillips said that Lupus can be exacerbated by stress and that there could be a connection between Lupus and pregnancy in that any stress is said to affect any auto immune disease. Pregnancy is a hormonal stress and could exacerbate pre-existing Lupus. Dr Phillips said that someone suffering moderate Lupus is likely to react with some depression at some stage. If the
Lupus manifested itself by a prominent rash on the face, joint pain and a carpal tunnel syndrome with change in sensation and movement of fingers most people in that situation would experience at least transient depression.

As the evidence stands I am not satisfied that there is a connection between the death of Duncan and the onset or exacerbation of Lupus in the present case. It is probable that the Lupus contributed to the depression suffered by
Mrs Strelec.

It follows that I am not prepared to allow any of the out of pocket expenses of $1171 relating to the treatment of Lupus.

Economic Loss 
Frock Business 
Mrs Strelec claimed the sum of $80,000.00 as the loss which she sustained on the purchase, operation and sale of the frock shop business. As earlier mentioned she had that business from May 1985 to September 1986. She rejected the suggestion that she would have lost not more than about $50,000 but agreed that she did not know the exact amount which she had lost.

She went ahead with the purchase of the business against the wishes of her husband and in a headstrong manner. She does not seem to have made due enquiries. She was unaware that much of the stock which she was purchasing was old stock. She found out later that the business was running at a loss. She said that this did not appear to be so on the books at the time of purchase.
She persuaded her mother to become a partner in the business. Her mother appears to have mortgaged her house to help the business. Mrs Strelec could not recall accurately how much she paid for the business, fittings and stock.
She mentioned figures of $20,000 and $13,000. The details provided were sparse. She said that she sold the business for $15,000. She said that she had to sell the old stock at clearance prices.

The partnership income tax returns reveal these losses: 
May/June 1985 $ 4,307.69 July 85 - 30 June 86 $13,717.87 July 86 - 30 Sep 86 $ 6,613.63 -------------- $24,639.19 
The returns reveal that in May & June 1985 plant, fittings and a counter were purchased for $5352.00. For the year ended 30 June 1986 there were stock purchases of $37,698 and for the three months ended 1 October 1986 stock purchases of $7445.74. These figures tend to support Mrs Strelec's assertion that she had to purchase appreciable quantities of new stock.

Mrs Strelec said that she employed a junior but the business could not afford to pay her (Mrs Strelec) anything by way of wages or salary. That is consistent with the tax returns. She said that she worked long hours in the business.

Upon the sale of the business her mother at Mrs Strelec's request transferred the mortgage from the mother's house to the house owned by Mrs Strelec and her husband. Mrs Strelec thus substantially bore the losses sustained.

I regard a frock shop as a relatively risky business venture. So much depends on selecting fashionable frocks that ladies will like during the season. They have to suit potential customers. Further, the frocks have to be displayed and sold in an inviting manner.

Mrs Strelec was in no fit condition to embark upon running a frock shop in May
The purchase was imprudent. Nor do I think that she had recovered sufficiently in the ensuing 6 to 9 months. Even if she had substantially recovered from her major depressive illness she may not have had the touch necessary to run a frock shop successfully. Broadly, I allow her a sum based on the losses suffered and the equivalent of a salary for her for about 12 months based on the Bamix figures. I have taken the period of 12 months because many people when starting a business have an initial period of some months when they do not draw a salary. I have not overlooked the plaintiff's contention that she would not have entered into this venture if she had been thinking clearly. On the other hand she much preferred to run her own business. If she had remained with Bamix, she would have received a gross salary of $20,800 per annum plus the use of a company vehicle. No value has been put on that. I estimate that to be worth an extra $2600.00 per year for private purposes. Her husband also had a vehicle. The tax payable on $23,400 for a single person was about $5870 according to the 1985/1986 tax scales, the tax rates being higher in those years. This leaves a figure of about $17,530 which when this is added to the loss of $24,639.19 amounts to $42,169. It would be too arithmetical to take that figure and not make some allowance for incidental losses. I propose to award her $45,000 in respect of this claim.

Past Economic Loss 
Mrs Strelec sought damages for the general diminution of her earning capacity in relation to her periods of depression in the past.

This is a matter of considerable difficulty. I have already dealt with the period to 30 September 1986. It is most unlikely that she would have done full time work from 9 am to 5 pm for an employer between 1 October 1986 and the start of her university studies in 1987. She had a young baby about whom she was protective and vigilant. She may have done some casual work and assisted her husband in his or joint business ventures. She found that she could not cope with full time university studies with her family commitments. She had three children within 3 years 4 months. It says much about her capacity, application and energy that she was able to care for them and study part time.
While she had an ability to work in the years 1987-1992 it was not an ability which she could use given her other commitments except on a very limited basis. She could perhaps have done some casual or intermittent work or participated in business ventures with her husband. Further, during 1991 she campaigned for election to Albury City Council and was elected. During 1992 she devoted significant time to her council duties. That continued during , 1994 and 1995. I have earlier mentioned the time which she devoted to her mayoral duties. She was more interested in political matters than commercial matters and put political matters first. Money was of secondary importance. Details were not supplied of the mayoral allowance or any allowance received as a councillor.

Mrs Strelec gave evidence of the sustained fatigue which she suffered. Given her level of activity and the burdens of caring for three young children fatigue is to be expected. She suffered from Lupus for a period.

Mrs Strelec worked as a sales representative for Uncle Tobys in about -1993 but she said that she had to give up this position after a couple of weeks as it was too onerous physically. The dates of that employment are not clear. Mrs Strelec was troubled by other matters from 1990 onwards including the hysterectomy, hormone deficiency and a personal matter unrelated to these proceedings.

I have already made an allowance for the period to 30 September 1986. For the period October 1986 - 31 December 1986 I assess that she would probably have made a modest amount from a small quantity of work if she was not suffering from a major depressive illness. I assess this as being a small quantity of casual or intermittent work. I assess this as being about the equivalent of two weeks full time work amounting to about $800 net. For the years 1987, , 1989, 1990, 1991 and 1992 during which she suffered episodes of major depressive illness some of which were probably due to Duncan's death and some to other causes I allow the equivalent of 4 weeks full time work and take an average of $500 per week net. Thus I would allow $2000 per year for 6 years.
As to 1993 I take into account that she worked for Uncle Tobys for a few weeks. She had completed her university studies but was actively engaged with the council affairs. It was a year in which she was treated for hormone replacement and the year included a period of depression for an unrelated matter. I allow $1000 net loss of income for this year. I allow the equivalent of 4 weeks full time work for 1994 and 3 weeks full time work to September at $550 per week net making a total of $3750 for the 21 month period to
September 1995. I allow nothing for the period September 1995 - September 1996 being Mrs Strelec's mayoral year for which she received an allowance. I propose to allow the equivalent of 2 weeks for the period September - December , namely $1200 net.

The amounts allowed total $18,750. I would round off past economic loss at $19,000.
 
Future Economic Loss 
The trial seriously affected Mrs Strelec and probably caused a return of the depressive illness arising from Duncan's death. I think that I should allow until 31 March 1997 for her to return to a normal state. In respect of that period I think that she would probably have done some work had it not been for the combined effects of the trial. It would not on any view be full time work.
I allow the equivalent of 6 weeks at $600 per week net, that is, $3600. As from 1 April 1997 there should be only occasional interruptions to her ability to work and some slight overall reduction in that ability arising from the depressive illness. An average of about $20 per week for 25 years would be appropriate as she is 40 years of age. On the 3% tables this amounts to $18,444. Future economic loss would amount to $22,044 which I would round off at $23,000. I apply the conventional discount of 15% for the vicissitudes of life, namely $3450. This results in a balance of $19,550.

Gratuitous Services 
Counsel for the plaintiff claimed damages for the gratuitous services rendered by her husband. The plaintiff said that her husband helped reluctantly around the house both before and after Duncan's death. She said "it was more after
Adam's birth that he really had to increase the help. He would hang clothes out for me; bring clothes in. Any of the heavy duties he would do". She said that she became very tired and did not have the strength which she had previously had. Things became worse with the onset of arthritis and on one occasion she dropped her fourth child in the bath.

Many husbands assist their wives with the washing and heavy duties when there is a baby. The wives and mothers are often tired yet they manage to carry on.
Both parents, and especially the mother, have their sleep interrupted and they miss out on sleep. The arthritis should not be attributed to or seen as flowing from Duncan's death either directly or indirectly.

In my opinion any household assistance rendered by the husband did not arise out of or flow from Duncan's death. Essentially, it was the assistance which husbands who are gentlemen give their wives when there are babies and very young children in the home and the wives are much burdened.

I am unable to accept any part of this claim.

Domestic Assistance 
The plaintiff claimed damages for domestic assistance. She stated that she had received help with the housework from her mother-in-law who helped as often as she could. Mrs Strelec said that she first employed a housekeeper after the birth of her fourth child when she had problems with her arthritis and the carpal tunnel syndrome and that she received housekeeping assistance for about years of 2 to 3 hours per week. She paid about $10 per hour. It was discontinued because she could no longer afford it. I would take an average of /2 hours per week for 104 weeks. The defendants contested this claim, submitting that on a true analysis her need for domestic assistance did not arise out of any depression or grief or tiredness but because of the unrelated condition of Lupus and the development of arthritis. It was also pointed out that she was studying as well as managing a young family. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that Mrs Strelec had been tired as a result of the effects of depression. Her energy and vitality had been sapped. While I do not under estimate the effects of the major depressive illness and that it did cause some fatigue and tiredness on her [part
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/index.html#p1) am not satisfied that this was the cause of or materially contributed to her needing and obtaining household assistance after the birth of her fourth child. The need for such assistance arose out of her arthritic and Lupus conditions and her studying and managing a family. She was overburdened.

This claim must be rejected.

The plaintiff also claimed damages for domestic assistance which she was receiving at the date of the hearing. Mrs Strelec insisted that her capacity to do the heavier housework had been limited for many years and was limited at the date of the hearing. She stated that she was receiving two hours domestic help and that this was all she could afford. A date was not given but I would infer that the help resumed from about the date she became Mayor when she received a mayoral allowance and so much of her time was consumed by mayoral duties.

The plaintiff also claimed for future domestic assistance. This appeared to be at least in part on the basis of continuing disabling depression resulting in fatigue or tiredness and lack of strength and inability to do the heavy housework. Reliance was also placed on the inroads made upon her by her past depression and the conditions to which it allegedly gave rise in whole or in part. On the findings I have earlier made I am far from satisfied that any inability to do the heavy housework arose out of Duncan's death or any illness or disability which she suffered as a result. Nor do I think that any future disability to carry out domestic work, if it occurs, will be related to
Duncan's death or any consequential illness or disability.

I reject the claims for recent and future domestic assistance.

General Damages 
The plaintiff's major depressive illness due to Duncan's death was most intense in the years immediately after his death. It has continued from time to time over the years. It is periodic and episodic and during such periods it has been intense. She suffered a great loss and sustained major psychological damage. She will always bear the scars of Duncan's death.

With the resolution of these proceedings and the de-briefing envisaged by Dr
Phillips the future will be better than the past. The scars will be there, grief will remain but major depressive illness will recur infrequently. The depressive illness consequent upon Duncan's death has played a part in the breakdown of her marriage. She has become more intense and more determined to achieve.

The appropriate award of general damages is $130,000 of which I would apportion $100,000 to past general damages.

Damages Against Dr Hruz 
As against Dr Hruz the plaintiff has succeeded in establishing that his failure to use anaesthetic to stitch the cervix was negligent. The damages for this breech are limited. She suffered increased pain and discomfort. The damages are limited to general damages which I assess at $500.

I would therefore award the plaintiff: 
As Against Dr Nelson 
Out of pocket expenses 
Past $ 2,454.10 
Future $ 6,144.00 
Interest (?) -------------- $

Past economic loss 
Frock business $ 45,000.00 
General $ 19,000.00 
Interest (?) ---------------- $

Future Economic Loss $ 19,550.00 
General Damages $130,000.00 
Interest on past general damages of $100,000 (?) ----------------- $

As Against Dr Hruz 
General Damages $ 500.00 
Interest (?) ----------------- $
 
As Against the Hospital 
There should be verdict against the Hospital for the combined amounts of the verdict against Doctors Nelson and Hruz, it being noted that the verdicts against Drs Nelson and Hruz and that against the Hospital are concurrent.

I was told that the defendants had come to an arrangement amongst themselves and that was why all defendants were able to be represented by the one counsel.

I have deliberately not dealt with any alleged entitlement to interest or its calculation. I will leave that to the parties to reach agreement. If this is not possible any disputed question of interest may be argued. I invite the parties to check my calculations.

I have not heard counsel on the question of costs. Their addresses depend upon the findings which I made.

The parties should arrange for the matter to be re-listed to resolve the outstanding matters.
 
A M STRELEC v. D NELSON, J HRUZ & SISTERS OF MERCY /90 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Consequent upon my judgment of 13 December 1996 an argument has taken place as to interest. Both the plaintiff and defendants have handed up draft sets of calculations which I will mark respectively MFI 1 and MFI 2 on the interest argument and place them with the papers.

There are a number of contests. As to the frock shop business the plaintiff has claimed interest on $45,000.00 from 1 October 1986 and that works out at $68,609.89. The defendants' calculations did not proceed on the basis of the overall figure of $45,000.00 but attached to the components mentioned in my judgment as to the frock shop. The defendants' calculations came to approximately $66,727.37 so there is not much difference in the two methods of calculation. The total figure should be taken and the plaintiff's method of calculation is to be preferred.

As to the interest on past economic loss, the parties drew my attention to an arithmetical error on page 98 of the judgment. "$3,750" in the 4th line from the bottom of the main paragraph on page 98 should read $3,650 and in the last line "$18,750" should read $18,650. The error makes no difference because I took the view that all the figures should be rounded off in any event and the rounded off figure of $19,000 would remain.

As to the salary losses, the plaintiff took the mid-point of each year, namely July, and the defendants took 1 January or the end of the year. The defendants' approach is preferable in the circumstances of this case.
Accordingly, I adopt the defendants' figure on interest on past economic loss of $12,494.56 rather than the plaintiff's figure of $13,734.01.

There is no dispute that the interest on general damages totals $23,773.00.

I turn to the table on pages 103 and 104 of the judgment. There is no question of interest on out of pocket expenses. The interest on past economic loss totals $81,104.45 being the amounts of $68,609.89 and $12,494.56. This was not in issue.

This results in an overall verdict of $326,752.55 as against Dr Nelson. As to
Dr Hruz the interest on general damages is agreed at $237.00 resulting in a verdict of $737.00 against him. Using the table on pp 103 and 104 of the judgment the details are: 
As Against Dr Nelson 
Out of pocket expenses 
Past $ 2,454.10 
Future $ 6,144.00 $ 8,598.10 
Past economic loss 
Frock business $ 45,000.00 
General $ 19,000.00 
Interest $ 81,104.45 $145,104.45 
Future Economic Loss $ 19,550.00 $ 19,550.00 
General Damages $130,000.00 
Interest on past general damages of $100,000 $ 23,500.00 $153,500.00 ---------------- $326,752.55 
As Against Dr Hruz 
General Damages $ 500.00 
Interest $ 237.00 $ 737.00 
An issue has arisen as to the costs in relation to the publication by the
Border Mail of intimate details of the plaintiff's life and the application for a suppression order. The Border Mail published details given in evidence which the major Sydney daily newspapers did not publish and which are not normally published by the media. Because of the tradition and standards of reporting of the main Sydney daily newspapers, nobody anticipated that the
Border Mail would publish the details which it did. The Border Mail published the details, so it said, because the plaintiff was a public figure, at that time being the Mayor of Albury, and it was in the public interest that the citizens of Albury should be aware of the background and stress under which the plaintiff had operated. If anyone had anticipated what the Border Mail was going to publish no doubt an application for a suppression order would have been made and the cross examination would have been more guarded, particularly in relation to the naming of the adopted child. In the reserved judgment I took the view that I could not restrain publication although interim orders were made while I considered the matter.

As to the Border Mail aspect of the case, it is my opinion that as between the plaintiff and the defendants I should make no order as to costs. The argument involving the Border Mail took place one afternoon and the defendants were not present, the contest being between the Border Mail and the plaintiff. I published a reserved judgment and again the defendants were not present. I did not regard the cross examination of Mr Higgs as improper. With hindsight it may have taken a slightly different form. The defendants attached particular importance to the depression and the difficulties which the plaintiff had prior to 1985. As to the remaining issues of costs I will deal with them when
I hand down the judgment on dispensing with the jury and the disqualification aspect.

I enter judgment as of today but direct that time for appeal should not run until 24 January 1997 because I anticipate that my reasons for judgment on the matters mentioned will be handed down during that week.

A M STRELEC v. D NELSON, J HRUZ & SISTERS OF MERCY /90 February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Dispensing With Jury 
Consequent upon my judgment on day 16 of the trial indicating that I proposed to discharge the jury because of the terms of the closing speech of counsel for the plaintiff, but before I had made any formal orders, the plaintiff applied pursuant to s.89 of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) for an order dispensing with the jury and for me to determine the matter myself. I was asked to follow the course suggested by Patton v. Buchanan Borehole Colleries
Pty Ltd <case>; [178 CLR 14.] That was opposed by the defendants. After hearing counsel I made an order that the jury be dispensed with. I now give my reasons for so ordering.

As I indicated during argument on day 16, my mind wavered as to whether to discharge the jury. In the end I formed the opinion by the narrowest margin (50.1 to 49.9%) that I should discharge the jury. While I adhere to that opinion, it was attended by doubt and others may take a different view.

In support of her application the plaintiff submitted: 
The costs fell unequally on the parties: Morgan v. John Fairfax &
Sons Ltd [1988 13 NSWLR 208.] The plaintiff was in modest financial circumstances and the trial was quite long. There were three substantial defendants, supported by insurance, to share the costs.

The costs were high and the stress on all had been significant; 
I could readily determine the matter.

The defendants submitted: 
They had a right to trial by jury, albeit that the plaintiff had requisitioned a jury; 
The defendants had no option but to apply for the discharge of the jury given the terms of her counsel's speech; 
It would be wrong for a party who has precipitated the discharge of a jury by erroneous conduct to be able to deprive an innocent party of the right to a trial by jury. While the expense and inconvenience were to be regretted they were the inevitable consequence of the actions of the plaintiff's counsel. The defendants should not lose their rights because the plaintiff's counsel overstepped the bounds.

There had been strong criticism of the doctors and it had been put to the jury that there had been dishonesty as opposed to mistakes.

I had observed during a judgment that there was material on which it was open to the plaintiff to be critical of the records kept.

The plaintiff's case was always put to the jury as one of professional negligence. Counsel for the plaintiff, as he was entitled to do, put to the jury the difficulties which a plaintiff experienced where proper notes were not kept. Professor Bennett spoke in strong terms about proper records not having been kept. The plaintiff contended that the various explanations proffered on behalf of the defendants were unsatisfactory and that some of the alleged losses of recollection were hard to accept. It was also put that some of the evidence was incorrect and some was untrue. I will not repeat what I said in my reasons to discharge the jury.

I am of the view that counsel for the plaintiff did not deliberately set out to infringe the rules in his closing speech. No doubt he was concerned that counsel for the defendant had overstated the plaintiff's case to the jury and to that extent had mis-stated it. This was capable of being demonstrated in the address of counsel for the plaintiff. In summing up I was going to point it out to the jury and explain that it is always easier to rebut an extreme position and that the jury should concentrate on the case which the plaintiff was actually making.

The trial was very stressful for Mrs Strelec and stressful for Drs Nelson and
Hruz. Some of the witnesses were seriously affected. High emotion emerged on occasions in the hard fought trial. The trial was widely reported by the media. There was material suggesting that some of Mrs Strelec's children had been embarrassed and possibly adversely affected by the trial publicity.

The trial had been expensive with the calling, apart from Drs Nelson and Hruz of six medical practitioners, most of whom were senior. Their evidence was (with one exception) quite lengthy. One was from Victoria and one was from
Albury. There were also witnesses from the country. There had been extensive and costly preparations.

I am mindful of the criteria in Pambula District Hospital v. Herriman [(1987) 14 NSWLR 387.] The defendants pointed out that in every case where a jury is discharged there will be a waste of expense and effort and a personal toll. I have kept the principles expounded in Pambula in the forefront of my mind. It is a weighty factor against dispensing with the jury that it was part of the speech of counsel for the plaintiff that led to my decision that trial by jury could not continue. Normally, that factor would result in a refusal to dispense with the jury. However, I regard this case as an exceptional one. I note that: the distress of Mrs Strelec far exceeded the usual levels associated with a difficult, stressful and emotional trial. The evidence of Dr Phillips, the psychiatrist called by the defendants, established that the trial was a particularly traumatic ordeal for Mrs Strelec. He described the trial as a considerable stress. The intense stress and the deterioration in her condition during the trial while giving evidence was plain. She gave evidence on the first, second, third and eleventh days of the trial and was present in the court for most of the hearing. I do not doubt that during the hearing she was undergoing an episode of major depressive illness. I have accepted Dr
Phillips' evidence that she will need de-briefing after the litigation has concluded. It is most undesirable that there be another trial because that will precipitate another episode of major depressive illness. That will adversely affect her health.

Sister Elliott was far from robust. She was seriously affected by her period in the witness box. I doubt if she could cope with that experience again. The value of her evidence may be lost.

While it was part of the final speech of counsel for the plaintiff which led to the discharge of the jury, the course of the trial was not helped by counsel for the defendant over stating the plaintiff's case and thereby stating it inaccurately.

I do not leave out of account the expense and inconvenience involved. Medical practices and patients will be disturbed. Professor Bennett has a heavy load of university and public duties. I had to sit extended hours so his evidence could be taken and his other commitments kept. The expense of a further trial would result in costs far exceeding any likely verdict. Such disproportion should be avoided.

I was of the opinion that in the circumstances the jury should be dispensed with.

Disqualification 
On 23 February 1996, the 17th day of the trial, the defendants asked me not to hear this case on the basis that comments I had made during the trial indicated that I had prejudged this case. Counsel for the defendants was correct in stating that there was a discussion as to the length of the addresses. During that brief discussion, in the absence of the jury, counsel, in estimating the length of his address, listed the topics which he intended to address. Counsel did not mention the notes made by Dr Hruz as to the procedure followed and his explanation. I drew counsel's attention to this and said that as they could be regarded as important he would probably need to deal with these. Counsel for the plaintiff was likely to do so and I would probably have to deal with them in the summing up.

I do not accept that I had formed a view at that stage or appeared to have done so. From time to time during the trial I drew the attention of counsel for each party to points which appeared to require attention.

Counsel for the defendants contended that I should take his submission as to my mention of Dr Hruz' notes and his explanation into account and re-consider whether to dispense with the jury. As there was nothing objectionable in the comment which I made I see no good reason to vary my earlier decision.

Costs 
I heard argument as to costs on 23 December 1996 from both parties. The plaintiff also handed up written submissions. On that day I determined that as between the plaintiff and the defendants I would make no order as to costs on the Border Mail aspect of the case for the reasons which I then gave.

It was common ground that there had been no relevant offers of compromise.

The defendants submitted that the plaintiff was not entitled to her costs as to: a) the issue of the baby turning into the breech position prior to Dr Hruz' examination on 7 February 1985 and Dr Hruz not detecting it; b) the lupus issue; c) the domestic assistance issue.

She had lost on these issues. None of these issues occupied a great deal of time during the hearing but I was told that there had been medical reports on the lupus issue.

The defendants submitted that because there had been a jury, which had been demanded by the plaintiff, the trial had taken longer than it would have before a judge alone. It was submitted that before a judge the evidence and the explanations could safely have been shorter and that the addresses would also have been shorter. It was contended that I should allow the plaintiff the costs of a lesser number of days than the trial took.

The plaintiff, on the other hand, submitted that dispensing with the jury had shortened the trial. The plaintiff contended that for costs purposes it was incorrect to split up the case into small segments especially when all the issues were intermingled and that this was not a case where there were substantial discrete issues. The case was fought on a broad front and the plaintiff enjoyed a substantial measure of success.

The plaintiff sought the whole of the costs of the action including a certificate for two counsel (senior and junior counsel). The question of the number and status of the counsel employed is a matter for the costs officers or assessors. However, the case was one of some complexity and difficulty requiring extended preparation. The cross examination of the defendants and the witnesses called in their case required a high level of skill.

Some time was lost and expense incurred during the hearing by reason of the defendants' initially retained psychiatrist becoming ill and the defendants retaining another psychiatrist. I have already determined that the defendants meet the cost of the adjournments and the time lost irrespective of the outcome of the case. These costs will include any additional consultation fees arising out of the need of the plaintiff and her advisers to consult her psychiatrist.

While a hearing by judge alone may have been shorter, that is speculative. I am not persuaded that I should make any special order on that account.

I estimate that the hearing time taken on the aspects on which the plaintiff was unsuccessful amounted to no more than one day.

I order that the defendants pay the costs of the plaintiff of the action including the hearing, less one day of the hearing time and less any preparation and reports relating to the three issues of the baby turning into the breech position, lupus and domestic assistance. The determination made consequent upon the retained psychiatrist becoming ill stands subject to there being no doubling up. I make an order to that effect.

Originally I anticipated that this judgment would be delivered by 24 January
Because of commitments in the vacation list this was not possible. The time for appeal is to run from today.

AMANDA MARIA STRELEC v. DAVID NELSON & 2 ORS /90 February 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT 
Application To Discharge The Jury 
The defendants have applied to discharge the jury as a result of remarks made by counsel for the plaintiff in his final address. In deciding that application I have to assess whether any serious illicit prejudice has occurred, the extent of it, its likely effect in the atmosphere of the trial and whether it can be sufficiently cured by any directions which I may give.
The principles are set out in Morgan v. John Fairfax & Sons Ltd [(1988) NSWLR 208] and the cases there cited. Much caution has to be exercised before discharging a jury where a trial has extended over some weeks and such a step should only be taken where real injustice cannot otherwise be avoided.
In Morgan at 239 Clarke JA observed that the consequences of discharging a jury towards the end of a lengthy trial are so serious that the course should only be adopted in rare cases. Kirby P at 213 thought that it was desirable for a judge to interrupt counsel in the course of addresses and correct immediately the effect of any misconduct or serious error.

I am acutely conscious of the expense, the delay, the costs which would be wasted and the heavy emotional drain on the plaintiff, Dr Nelson and Dr Hruz.
There is also strain in respect of other witnesses. Further, professional reputations are at stake.

The application for discharge was made by counsel for the defendants at the first opportunity.

The defendants complained that in his final speech counsel for the plaintiff in effect called Sister O'Toole, a witness for the defendants, a liar. The plaintiff's counsel made a sustained attack upon her in his final speech. He had attacked her evidence in cross examination. He had suggested that her evidence was inherently inconsistent on a number of points of importance. He put to her some of the statements Dr Nelson made as to the force he used. She did not recall seeing Dr Nelson use such force and did not believe he had used it. It would be open to a jury to regard her evidence as not internally inconsistent and as not inconsistent with that of Dr Nelson. It would also be open to a jury to take a different view of her evidence. Sister O'Toole enjoyed a good professional relationship with Dr Nelson. She said that she was there to support Dr Nelson. The plaintiff's counsel effectively put to her that she was biased in his favour and there was material to support that suggestion. She maintained that she was there to give evidence.

In his final speech on 20 February 1996 counsel for the plaintiff reminded the jury that she recollected very little. He stated: - she vaguely recalls a difficult shoulder; - she did not recall traction in rotation or otherwise; - she was not useful or accurate; - she was here to support Dr Nelson; - she did not recall Dr Nelson using force to the shoulder but then said that
Dr Nelson did not use force; - she was not a witness to be believed; - she was an untruthful witness; - there was an enormous discrepancy between her evidence and that of the doctors. Dr Nelson had said he had used a lot of force, considerable force in rotation.

Counsel referred to some of her evidence and some of the other evidence.
Counsel then referred to the degree of traction involved in a breech extraction.

In the context and with counsel's animated attack the impression he conveyed in his address was that she was deliberately untruthful.

Counsel, albeit briefly, returned to his attack on her on 21 February 1996. He submitted that she had said in chief that she did not recall traction and yet there obviously was traction. He drew the jury's attention to her evidence at
T426, lines 52-58 to line T427 line 1 and described the answers as revealing.

I do not think that any of the other criticisms of the plaintiff's counsel's address on her evidence warrant attention. The submissions were open.

The treatment by counsel for the plaintiff of Sister O'Toole's evidence was vigorous. In view of his assertion of untruthfulness in address that should have been put to her more directly in cross examination. Nevertheless counsel attacked her evidence in cross examination. It was attacked as internally inconsistent and inconsistent with other evidence and bias was suggested. It was plain that the plaintiff was suggesting that her evidence was of little or no use and unreliable.

I would not discharge the jury on this account but on this point I would be inclined to tell the jury that while counsel in his address claimed that her evidence was untruthful he did not put this to her directly. I would also propose to mention that a substantial attack was made on the accuracy and reliability of her evidence and that bias was suggested. In any event, I do not regard Sister O'Toole's evidence as central and it could not be so regarded.

In opening his final speech shortly after 2 pm on 20 February 1996 counsel for the plaintiff strongly emphasised that a plaintiff had great difficulties in bringing an action for negligence against doctors and a hospital. Plaintiffs only had a limited knowledge of what had happened. A plaintiff has to: a) depend upon the records made by the doctors and the hospital; b) rely on doctors coming along and telling the truth about what happened; and c) find a doctor who is prepared to criticise other doctors.

Counsel stressed how dependant a plaintiff was upon the records made, the duty of Dr Nelson to both the plaintiff and the hospital to make a sufficient record and the additional obligation to make complete notes in a case out of the ordinary and where a baby suffered grave injuries and had poor life prospects. Dr Hruz' obligations to make notes of the treatment he gave were also stressed. Counsel returned to the failure to make notes on a number of occasions during his speech and to Professor Bennett's description of that failure as reprehensible. It was one of the mainsprings of his address.
Counsel had, in effect, put to Dr Nelson that the reason for his failure to record what he had done was because to do so would reveal his mistake or error of judgment. That was the correct course to take. Dr Nelson gave his explanation. The question covered both negligent and improper conduct. Counsel for the plaintiff urged the jury to reject Dr Nelson's explanation. Counsel for the defendants had previously urged the jury to accept the explanation.

On 20 February 1996 the plaintiff's counsel put to the jury that Sister
Elliott was the classic reluctant witness. He referred to a statement she had made emphasising, "I will never forget that night and that delivery." He said that she did not tell all the story to the plaintiff's solicitors. Counsel referred to a subsequent statement she had made drawing attention to the words "harrowing experience" and the assertion that after Dr Nelson had pulled the second leg out he pulled on both legs. Counsel stated that there was a conflict in her evidence. He then summarised and reviewed her evidence and statements. It is not necessary to detail this. He pointed out that she said that she had become confused. He submitted that she came back to the description of pulling at the end of her cross examination.

During his address on the morning of 21 February 1996 the plaintiff's counsel returned to Sister Elliott, emphasising that she had been very reluctant to tell what had happened. She did not want to get involved. Counsel pointed to her explanation for various omissions from her statements and what she had said. Counsel powerfully reminded the jury that she had said "there is an allegiance a nursing sister has towards her medical profession and you are torn to perhaps tell what you saw and to keep that in silence and at all times
I have tried to respect that situation." Reference was also made to her evidence that in November 1992 she reduced the extent of the situation.

Counsel for the plaintiff after emphasising her allegiance and her not telling all submitted to the jury that they might think that that explained the reason why the other witnesses for the defendant came and gave the evidence that they did.

From the tenor of the address, the plaintiff's counsel put to the jury that some witnesses for the defendants had some association with the defendants and were not telling all they knew. As delivered the address was pungent and noteworthy. The defendants complained that this had never been put to Dr
Bishop (the paediatrician) or Dr Martin (a resident doctor) or Sister O'Toole.

A little later in his address counsel returned to a similar theme. Having referred to the plaintiff having seen Dr Hruz after the birth counsel asked two rhetorical questions, namely why didn't Dr Hruz give an explanation to the plaintiff for what had happened and was it because the only explanation was one that was damaging to Dr Nelson. The defendants complained that this had not been put to Dr Hruz. In its context it was an allegation that Dr Hruz had failed to give an explanation that was damaging to protect Dr Nelson.

It would have been open to the plaintiff to have attacked the witnesses on the basis mentioned. The evidence they gave was open to criticism as was that of
Dr Hruz and counsel for the plaintiff did criticise it. He was strongly critical (and was entitled to be) of Dr Bishop's explanation of one of his entries in the hospital records.

Counsel for the defendants submitted that the theme running through the address for counsel for the plaintiff was that a number of people on the defendant's side have been and were acting dishonestly. Counsel for the defendants submitted that gross allegations of an inflammatory nature had been made.

Counsel for the defendants complained that the case had changed from being a case about negligence to one about negligence and dishonesty.

Counsel for the plaintiff reminded the court that counsel for the defendants had used some colourful language and that his speech was not sedate. That is fair comment. The colour mainly came when counsel for the defendant was endeavouring to show that the allegations made against Dr Nelson were so gross as not to be credible. There was some overstatement of the plaintiff's case by counsel for the defendants.

In his final speech counsel for the plaintiff fell back from some of the more vivid descriptions used by her and her witnesses and emphasised that the point was whether inappropriate force had been used. However, the speech of counsel for the plaintiff was forceful and in parts somewhat inflammatory. Overall, there was an emphasis on information being withheld improperly as well as what occurred in the delivery suite. The emphasis on the alleged improper withholding was used as one of the reasons to reject the explanation proffered.

The defendants complained that counsel for the plaintiff made a populist-type appeal and I think that there is substance in this point.

The plaintiff relied on having put to Dr Bishop in cross examination that a private inquiry agent acting on behalf of the plaintiff had telephoned Dr
Bishop. Dr Bishop could not recall whether this had happened. It could have.
He had no recollection of the conversation. The matter appearing at T460 could not justify the contention that Dr Bishop was reluctant to tell all he knew when asked appropriately.

The defendants also complained that counsel for the plaintiff had not stated the full effect of certain answers to interrogatories. The plaintiff conceded that this was so. That problem can be readily cured.

The pressing question is whether I can cure the prejudice earlier mentioned which I think exists. I have considered whether it would be adequate to direct the jury that fairness required the plaintiff to put allegations to Dr Hruz and to the other witnesses that they had not told all because of their allegiance to, or desire to, protect Dr Nelson and that because this had not been done they might think it was not appropriate to attach much weight to such allegations. I have also given thought to whether I should tell the jury to disregard the submission made by counsel for the plaintiff as to applying what Sister Elliott said motivated her to the witnesses of the defendants.

I have considered whether the prejudice could be cured by giving counsel for the defendants a limited further address.

I have considered whether I should proceed and leave it to the Court of
Appeal, on appeal by the defendants, to resolve the matter. However, that approach would not be correct.

The contentions as to Dr Hruz and the other witnesses are potent. In a case against a doctor it was suggested that others in the medical and nursing professions called on behalf of the defendants have a feeling of loyalty or some broadly similar feeling and are not prepared to tell what they know, the plaintiff being an "outsider". That requires an evidentiary base which does not exist and cannot be first raised in final addresses.

I have considered whether I could separate the case against Dr Hruz but I do not think that is practicable or desirable.
 (I interpolate a correction. During argument I suggested that Sister Elliott gave the impression of being reluctant in chief. On reflection that puts the matter inaccurately. A better description would be nervous.) 
In all the circumstances, I have, after anxious consideration and with much regret reached the conclusion that the jury should be discharged.
 
AMANDA MARIA STRELEC versus DAVID NELSON & 2 ORS.
 /90 
MONDAY 12 FEBRUARY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SMART J 
JUDGMENT (On admissibility of advertisement placed in The Border Mail; see page 608 of the transcript).

HIS HONOUR: Mr Higgs has sought to tender microfiche copies of notice of birth of Duncan Gregory Strelec. Any handwritten application form is no longer available, those forms being destroyed in the ordinary course of business after 18 months. The notice records "thanks" to nominated doctors and nursing sisters. It appeared on 16 February 1985.

It is not relevant to its admissibility that at that stage the plaintiff did not know and Mr Strelec did not know the extent of damage to the child. That would be an argument as to its weight. There is no evidence as to who inserted the notice. Mrs Strelec was still in hospital and not well. It may have been inserted by her husband and she may or may not have contributed to the terms of the notice. The greatest difficulty as to admissibility at this late stage of the trial is that the matter was never put to either the plaintiff or her husband.

It is the sort of notice, in the circumstances that have been revealed in the evidence, which is well capable of explanation and it is the sort of inquiry and search that was reasonably capable of being undertaken.

I would reject the tender on that ground.

Mr Morrison has also relied on <case> (5) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and in particular the power in (a) that the court may refuse to admit evidence if that evidence might be unfairly prejudicial to a party.

On reflection, I would not rely on that ground, but on the ground that I have earlier indicated.

Mr Higgs has reminded me that he did point out that the court could rely on the text of the advertisement as to who might have inserted the advertisement.
I accept that, and that is why I took the view that it may well have been inserted by the husband, but my reason for rejecting the tender is that this advertisement was not put to either Mr Strelec or the plaintiff.

I will mark the advertisement MFI 3, it being the material in relation The
Border Mail of 9 February 1996.
 * * * 
