

Azzi and Ors versus Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd [2007] NSWSC 319 (5 April 2007) 
Last Updated: 23 April 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Azzi & Ors versus Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd <case>  
JURISDICTION: Equity Division 
Commercial List  
FILE NUMBER(S): 50146/03  /03  
HEARING DATE{S): 6-10 March, 13-17 March, 20-24 March, 27-31 March, 11-13
April 2006  
JUDGMENT DATE: 5 April 2007  
PARTIES:  /03: 
Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Limited (first plaintiff) 
Harissa Pty Limited (second plaintiff) 
Antonio Azzi (third plaintff) 
Asialink Pty Limited (fourth plantiff) 
Volvo Car Australia Pty Limited (defendant)  /03: 
Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Limited (first plaintiff) 
Harissa Pty Limited (second plaintiff) 
Antonio Azzi (third plaintff) 
Volvo Car Australia Pty Limited (defendant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Brereton J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
J L Trew QC w J E O'Sullivan (plaintiffs) 
J N West QC w A R Moses (defendant)  
SOLICITORS: 
McClellands Lawyers (plaintiffs) 
Letherbarrow Lawyers (defendant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CONTRACTS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES - Offer and Acceptance - pre- contractual negotiations - contracts evidenced other than by offer and acceptance - where "letter of intent" and formal agreement executed simultaneously - where letter of intent covers additional matters - whether parties intended to be bound by letter of intent - significance of commercial context and conduct of parties - Construction and Interpretation - where letter of intent contemplated further agreement on specific matters - where no such agreement reached - whether letter of intent required that offer of further agreement contain terms covering such matters - Discharge and Breach - repudiation - repudiatory intent not lightly to be inferred - where defendant had resiled from any repudiatory stance before termination. 
TRADE PRACTICES - Misleading and deceptive conduct - where representation made to recipient in circumstances that it was foreseeable it would be relied on by related party - where representation made to other party merely stated negotiating position of first party - whether statement of position if misconceived is misleading. 
TORTS - NEGLIGENCE - Economic loss - whether duty of care owed to third party not to cause economic loss by repudiating contract with second party - where third party related to second party - where relationship between first and second parties regulated by contract. 
INDUSTRIAL LAW - Unfair work contracts - whether contract one "whereby" person performed work in an industry - whether impugned provisions related to performance of work in industry - whether contract unfair by reason of imprecision. 
DAMAGES - assessment - no question of principle.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) 
Industrial Arbitration Act 1940, <case> 
Industrial Relations Act 1986, ss 105, 106  [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/), [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html)  [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/), [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s8.html)  [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), ss 51A,
AC, [52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html)  
CASES CITED: 
Accredited Aged Care Facilities Pty Ltd versus Banyan Tree (Australia) Pty Ltd <case> 
Auburn Council versus Austin Australia Pty Ltd (in liq) <case> 
Batterham versus QSR Limited <case>; [(1984) 3 FCR 95]; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1976) 136 CLR 529] 
D&G Motors Pty Ltd versus Capitol Motors Ltd [[1973] AR 806] 
Emanuele versus Chamber of Commerce & Industry SA Incorporated [[1994] ANZ
ConvR 417] 
Empirnall Holdings Pty Ltd versus Machon Paull Partners Pty Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR ] 
Fish versus Solution 6 Holdings Ltd [(2006) 227 ALR 241] 
Fortuna Seafoods Pty Ltd versus The Ship "Eternal Wind" <case> 
Hooper Bailie Associated Ltd versus Natcon Group Pty Ltd [(1992) 28 NSWLR ] 
Integrated Computer Services Pty Ltd versus Digital Equipment Corp (Aust) Pty Ltd [(1988) 5 BPR 11,110] 
Janssen-Cilag Pty Ltd versus Pfizer Pty Ltd <case>; <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 623] 
McDonald's Australia Ltd versus Industrial Relations Commission of NSW <case> 
Majik Markets Pty Ltd versus Brake & Service Centre Drummoyne Pty Ltd [(1991)
NSWLR 443](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%20NSWLR%20443 "View LawCiteRecord" ) 
Masters versus Cameron <case>; <case>; 141 IR 1 
Milner versus Delita Pty Ltd (1985) 61 ALR 557 
Mitchforce Pty Ltd versus Industrial Relations Commission <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1999) 198 CLR 180] 
Production Spray Painting & Panel Beating Pty Ltd versus Newnham (1991) NSWLR  
QSR Limited versus Industrial Relations Commission <case> 
Rosser versus The Maritime Services Board of NSW (No 2) NSWSC (Young J, 30 August [1993, BC 9301829)] 
Ross T Smyth & Co Ltd versus TD Bailey Son & Co [[1940] 3 All ER 60] 
RT & YE Falls Investments Pty Ltd versus State of New South Wales <case> 
Sinclair Scott & Co versus Naughton <case>; <case>; <case>; [(2004) 61 NSWLR 661] 
VG Haulage Services Pty Ltd, Ex parte; Re Industrial Commission of NSW <case>; <case>; <case>  
DECISION: 
In proceedings 50146/03, judgment for defendant, with costs. 2. In proceedings 50156/03, order that the proceedings be dismissed, with costs. 3.
Grant liberty to the parties to apply, within 7 days, to set aside or vary the costs orders, and for other costs orders in their place.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
COMMERCIAL LIST  
BRERETON J  
Thursday 5 April 2007  /03 Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd & 3 Ors versus Volvo Car (Australia) Pty Ltd  /03 Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd & 2 Ors versus Volvo Car (Australia) Pty Ltd  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: In 2000, the first plaintiff Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd ("TAA") carried on business under the trade name Larke Hoskins conducting a
Honda motor vehicle dealership from premises at Rosebery, Rushcutters Bay and
Homebush. The main facility, at Rosebery, was owned by the second plaintiff
Harissa Pty Ltd ("Harissa"), which also held and holds 99 per cent of the shares in TAA - the other one per cent being held by the third plaintiff Tony
Azzi, who is the controlling mind of both companies. In mid-2000, TAA was appointed by the defendant Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd ("Volvo") to be a Volvo dealer for its Sydney South Eastern region, pursuant to a letter captioned "Volvo Representation", which had evolved through several iterations - the last of which was dated and apparently executed by Volvo on 16 August 2000 and accepted by TAA on 16 September 2000 - and which provided, inter alia, as follows:  . Requirement - Dealer Agreement 
The initial Dealer Agreement will be for a period of one (1) year, which agreement will be replaced by a Dealer Agreement with a term of five (5) years, prior to the expiration of the one (1) year agreement.  
The conditions for renewal, non-renewal and termination will be clearly established within both the one year and five year agreements.  Also on 16 September 2000, TAA executed a dealer agreement for a term of one year, which was expressed to commence with effect from 1 July 2000, a date that corresponds with the time at which TAA began to sell Volvo cars. By the time that a year had elapsed from 1 July 2000, and before any five-year dealer agreement had been executed, the relationship between TAA and Volvo had soured. Volvo raised complaints about TAA's performance as a dealer, which TAA disputed. Volvo at first asserted that it was not bound to give TAA a replacement five-year agreement, though it was later to resile from that position. When Volvo eventually submitted a five-year dealer agreement to TAA, the draft included a provision for termination on 120 days' notice. TAA contended that inclusion of such a provision was inconsistent with the "Volvo
Representation" letter of 16 August 2000, and treated it as a repudiation, which it purported to accept; Volvo treated TAA's purported termination as a repudiation, which it in turn purported to accept.  In these proceedings, which were initiated in the Federal Court and transferred to this Court under the (CTH) [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-
Vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/), [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s5.html),
TAA alleges that there was a contract made between it and Volvo on or about 1
July 2000, the terms of which were subsequently incorporated in the "Volvo
Representation" letter ultimately executed by TAA on 16 September 2000, including the provision about one-year and five-year dealer agreements set out above. Alternatively, TAA contends that if there was no such contract at law, nonetheless there was an equitable estoppel of the type described in Waltons
Stores (Interstate) Limited versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387], to the same effect. TAA alleges that by a course of conduct, culminating in but not limited to the inclusion in the draft five-year dealer agreement of the 120-day notice provision, Volvo repudiated that contract, and sues for damages for breach arising from that repudiation, those damages said to be the lost profits that it would have made under the five-year agreement, and the lost opportunity to renew the dealership at the end of the five year term.  Alternatively, Harissa alleges that if there were not such a contract, then by making representations, in the "Volvo Representation" letter and elsewhere, to the effect that TAA would be granted terms of one plus five years, Volvo engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct contrary to (CTH) [Trade
Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), and/or [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html), and unconscionable conduct contrary to [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), <case>, by which Harissa incurred loss through its expenditure on improving the Rosebery premises in the belief that TAA would have a five-year dealership.  Further, TAA complains that by making representations after mid-2001 to the effect that TAA was not entitled to a further five-year term, when (on TAA's case) it was so entitled, Volvo thereby engaged in other misleading and deceptive conduct contrary to [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), by reason of which it is contended that third parties were influenced to the end that TAA lost the opportunity of participating in a float of its business in
Hong Kong and the expenditure it had so far incurred in pursuing that opportunity was wasted.  In addition, Harissa (which was and is the proprietor of the land and buildings from which TAA conducts its business) claims that Volvo's alleged repudiation of its contract with TAA was a breach of a duty of care owed by
Volvo not to cause foreseeable financial damage to Harissa.  Finally, in proceedings which were initially instituted in the Industrial
Relations Commission but transferred to this Court pursuant to [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/), [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/joca1987427/s8.html),
TAA contends that if the arrangements between it and Volvo did not include an obligation on Volvo and a right in TAA to a replacement five-year term, then those arrangements were unfair within the meaning of [Industrial
Relations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html) - the unfairness primarily being the circumstance that, on that hypothesis, those arrangements, by not providing for a right to the replacement term, both did not reflect the underlying negotiations between the parties upon which TAA had acted, and did not provide a reasonable opportunity for TAA to derive a fair return from the investment which it was going to make.  
Was there a Contract for a Replacement Five Year Term?  For Volvo, Mr West QC and Mr Moses submit that, though it was the intention of both TAA and Volvo that a new (five-year) agreement would replace the one year agreement, disagreements between the parties about the performance of TAA under the one-year dealer agreement, and failure to agree upon the terms of any replacement five-year Agreement, resulted in no such further agreement ever being made. Mr Trew QC and Mr O'Sullivan, for the plaintiffs, submit that a binding and enforceable agreement was made either between March and May , or between June and September 2000, providing for a total term of six years, comprising two segments or dealerships of one and five years respectively.  On the negotiations culminating in the various versions of the Volvo
Representation letter, there is, as well as the correspondence, the affidavit and oral evidence of Mr Azzi. Although Mr Eriksson and Mr O'Keefe swore affidavits, those affidavits were ultimately not read at the trial, and in those circumstances, I accept Mr Azzi's uncontradicted evidence on these issues.  From about June 1999, Mr Azzi (on behalf of TAA) was engaged in discussions with Messrs Eriksson and O'Keefe (of Volvo) concerning a proposal that TAA establish a Volvo dealership in the Rosebery premises. In the course of those discussions, Messrs Eriksson and O'Keefe described the proposed dealership as part of the beginning of a new phase of restructuring that Volvo was proposing to implement, with the proposed dealership to cater for the City, Rushcutters
Bay and Rosebery (as the hub dealership), and a satellite dealership based at
Sylvania to cater for the Sydney Southern region, including the Sutherland
Shire. They said that Volvo wished to reduce the number of its dealer outlets and intended to implement a three dealer strategy, and that TAA's area of responsibility (with the satellite site) would extend from the City down to the southern suburbs, covering a third of the Sydney metropolitan area, including areas up to then serviced by Monaco Motors and Dominelli. The parties discussed a long-term relationship and a long-term investment. Mr
Eriksson invoked Volvo's slogan of "Volvo for life". In cross-examination, Mr
Azzi said:  
I spoke to Mr Eriksson about a long term viability for the - for me becoming a
Volvo dealer and I mentioned, due to the large investment and even the investment down south, a minimum period of ten years plus ten. Mr Eriksson said something to the effect, 'Tony, we will give you a long term commitment, but it might have to come in various shapes. We are trying to sort it out between me and Paul [O'Keefe] because of the three dealer strategy. What we will commit to you is a long term commitment for your investment and Paul will come back to you as to how the term is to be set out in the agreement form.  In a letter to Larke Hoskins dated 1 July 1999, Volvo stated:  
Volvo is currently working intensively to deliver a rejuvenated dealer network in Sydney. An essential element of this plan is the consolidation of the current areas of responsibility (AOR) into larger AORs serviced by fewer dealer groups. It is our clear intention that Sydney will be serviced by only three such groups.  
Each of the newly expanded AORs will be serviced by a central 'hub' dealership. Satellite dealerships providing sales/service and parts or service and parts, as required, will be located so as to best service customers' needs and maximise the Volvo business in each AOR.  ...  
In line with our 'three dealer' strategy, we intend to deliver landmark retail outlets for Volvo in the three identified hub locations.  ...  
In addition to a reduction in dealer groups in Sydney, we intend to deliver a more even distribution of sales potential between the dealers. To achieve this, we intend to realign certain postcodes with our current Haberfield AOR to become part of the eastern Sydney AOR. The Hurstville AOR will be incorporated in full.  
These changes will deliver increased potential for the eastern AOR along with a more realistic alignment of the customers and their natural dealer locations.  In September 1999, Mr O'Keefe reported to Volvo's board:  
In May VCA tabled a 'three dealer' strategy for the Sydney metropolitan area.
This strategy involved the termination of all current dealers, the amalgamation of the seven AORs into three and the appointment of three dealer groups, who would operate hub and satellite operations within each AOR.  
We have now identified three dealer groups who have demonstrated an ability and willingness to meet our requirements and targets. We are currently engaged in detailed discussions with all three.  ... 
Larke Hoskins are a prominent dealer who have, in the recent past, been a multi-site, stand alone Honda dealer. They are well established as an eastern suburbs and inner city dealer and achieve strong result into the key areas of this AOR.  
Larke Hoskins have secured prominent facilities in Rushcutters Bay and in
Zetland, the two primary automotive precincts for the city and Eastern suburbs. They propose to provide facilities in both areas for Volvo.  ...  
The replacement of Dominelli Prestige is likely to take up to two years following the commencement of trading at Zetland.  In a letter to Larke Hoskins dated 3 November 1999, Volvo stated:  
Network proposals and requirements  
In relation to the establishment of a new dealer network structure in Sydney, and in addition to the information contained in the attached Ambition 21 documents, Volvo Car Australia intend to implement the following structures across Sydney: 
Volvo Car Australia shall determine, register, and own the trading names of all Volvo dealers in Sydney.  ... 
The Volvo Dealer Agreement shall be for a fixed term of five years, with established renewal, non-renewal and determination procedures.  
Ambition 21: Volvo's Formal Dealer Application:  
Further to the above information and all correspondence to date, we have attached a copy of the Volvo's Ambition 21 document for your perusal and response. Ambition 21 sets out Volvo's strategic ambitions for the development of our dealer network and through it the Volvo brand.  [Part
III](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/index.html#p3) of the Ambition 21 document was a form which required completion by the applicant for a dealership, which Mr Azzi completed and sent to Volvo on about December 1999. In it he described the name of the dealership as Larke
Hoskins. One of the strengths of the dealership was said to be "main facility owned". The company structure was stated to include Harissa, which was described as the "property company".  On about 4 January 2000, Harissa, at Volvo's request, engaged Gray Puksand, architects, to design and prepare plans for a redevelopment at Rosebery, including a temporary Volvo showroom, for which plans were prepared in
September 1999 and April 2000. On about 24 March 2000 Mr Azzi completed and returned to Volvo a questionnaire and application for a Volvo dealer agreement, in which he stated among his requirements:  * a ten year minimum agreement plus an option for another ten years, and  * "confirmation of Sydney market and dealer numbers appointment for future not to be greater, three only Sydney metro".  On 10 May 2000, Volvo issued to TAA the first (draft) version of the letter entitled "Volvo Representation", appointing TAA as the Volvo dealer for southern Sydney. Paragraph 2, entitled "Requirement - Dealer Agreement", was in the form already set out [see [1] above]. The letter defined TAA's area of responsibility, outlined Volvo's requirements, and included a requirement that
TAA develop a southern suburb satellite dealership.  A schedule of works for the temporary Volvo showroom was prepared, and a development application was lodged with South Sydney Council on 27 May 2000.
This work - to construct the first, temporary, Volvo showroom - was completed by 1 July 2000, to Volvo's apparent considerable satisfaction.  Following a conversation between Mr Azzi and Mr O'Keefe on about 16 May , and a letter from Mr Azzi dated 17 May 2000, some changes were made to the Volvo Representation letter, the second version of which issued on 26 June , and involved amendments of a relatively minor nature to: the time for completion of the permanent Volvo facility at Rosebery; the date for submission by TAA of a proposal for the Rushcutters Bay satellite; the identity of the postcodes for the southern satellite area; a requirement for the provision of a schedule for site procurement of that satellite; terms relating to the use of the name of the dealership; and an increase in the amount of business development support to be provided by Volvo.  TAA received Volvo cars from about 24 May 2000, and commenced trading as a
Volvo dealer at Rosebery from 1 July 2000. Mr Azzi sought further changes to the "Volvo Representation" letter, and by letter dated 3 July 2000, and Volvo issued a further version on 26 July 2000, which it described in a covering letter as a revision of "our letter of agreement". The final version of the
Volvo representation letter, dated 16 August 2000 and executed by TAA on 16
September 2000, is in substantially the same terms as that of 26 July 2000.  Also on 16 September 2000, TAA executed and returned the one-year dealer agreement, in respect a term of one year from 1 July 2000 to 30 June 2001. It included the following relevant provisions:  (1) The Dealer Agreement is subject to the Franchising Code of Conduct (the
Code) as prescribed under <case> of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (as amended).  ...  (5) (a) Prior to executing this Agreement Dealer acknowledges that it has provided to Volvo a signed statement that the Dealer has been given advice about the Dealer Agreement or the Dealership business by any of the following:  an independent legal advisor;  an independent business advisor;  an independent accountant;  
For each kind of statement not received under paragraph (a) above, a signed statement by the prospective Dealer that the prospective Dealer:  has been given that kind of advice about the proposed Dealer Agreement or
Dealer Business;  has been told the kind of advice that should be sought but has decided not to seek it.  ...  
Term. This Agreement shall commence on 1 July 2000 and shall continue thereafter for a term of one (1) year (the "Term") or until terminated by either party as set out hereunder.  ...  
Business relations following termination. Any business relationship between the parties continuing after termination the notice of this Agreement has been given or continuing after termination of this Agreement shall not be construed as renewal of the Agreement or waiver of notice of termination or termination but otherwise shall be subject to terms identical with the provisions of this Agreement so far as are applicable  ...  
Entire Agreement. This Agreement comprises the entire Agreement between the parties as at the date hereof and no amendment to or variation of this
Agreement shall be binding on either party unless in writing and signed by both parties or by their duly authorised officers.  For Volvo, Mr West and Mr Moses submit that there was no binding contract for a replacement five-year term, and that at least insofar as it made provision in that respect, the Volvo Representation letter was in the third class referred to in the Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353], the intention of the parties being not to make a concluded bargain at all unless and until they executed a formal contract, and that the only formal contract for that purpose was the one-year dealer agreement, which contained no provision for renewal. Mr Trew and Mr O'Sullivan, for the plaintiffs, submit that the Representation letter was within the first or fourth classes, namely one in which the parties had reached finality in arranging all the terms of their bargain and intended to be immediately bound to the performance of those terms, but at the same time proposed to have the terms restated in a fuller or more precise form not different in effect, or one in which the parties were content to be bound immediately and exclusively by the terms which they had agreed upon while expecting to make a further contract in substitution for the first, containing by consent additional terms [cf Sinclair Scott & Co versus Naughton <case>; [(1929) 43 CLR 310], 317; Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd versus G R
Securities Pty Ltd [(1986) 40 NSWLR 622], 627-8].  With reference to RT & YE Falls Investments Pty Ltd versus State of New
South Wales <case>, [53]-[58] (Palmer J), Mr West submitted that a cautious approach should be adopted in considering whether a binding contract had been made from negotiations between parties to a commercial transaction, prior to the execution of a formal document. In a case such as Falls - in which one of the parties was a government department and the issue was whether a binding contract had arisen from oral discussions - it is prima facie unlikely that the department will have committed itself to binding obligations without documentation, and one would be reluctant to infer that there was an intention to be legally bound in the absence of such documentation. But a less cautious approach is called for where there are commercial dealings between parties who act as if they are in legal relations and document their arrangements, albeit imperfectly: it is far more difficult to say that a contract which is apparently part-performed is no contract at all, since to do so must attribute to the parties an intention to perform work either at no cost, or alternatively on a basis yet to be determined, even though the work has been done in the context of an apparent agreement to perform it [cf Rosser versus The
Maritime Services Board of NSW (No 2) NSWSC (Young J, 30 August [1993, BC ], p15]. Thus in Vroon BV versus Foster's Brewing Group Ltd <case>; [[1994] 2 VR 32], Ormiston J held that in commercial transactions courts should strive to give effect to the expressed arrangements and expectations of those engaged in business, notwithstanding that there were areas of uncertainty and notwithstanding that particular terms had been omitted or not fully worked out - although there could be no binding and enforceable obligation unless the essential or critical terms had been agreed, and the courts would not enforce an agreement to agree at some time in the future.
Further, where parties had deliberately written out the terms upon which they wished to bargain, but had omitted or inadequately expressed a term which might in other circumstances have been expressly or more precisely stated, courts will endeavour to give effect to the fact that the parties did not see the absence or deficiency of such a term as preventing them from reaching agreement. And where the court is satisfied that the parties have reached agreement judged by objective standards, then it will be more generous in giving effect to what is necessary to achieve business efficacy and their intentions, although their communications may have had an air of uncertainty and incompleteness about them.  As Ormiston J also observed, a court can enquire as to the existence of an agreement evidenced otherwise than by offer and acceptance, and agreement can be extracted from circumstances where no acceptance of an offer can be established or inferred, and where the most that can be said is that manifestation of mutual assent must be implied from the circumstances. In
Integrated Computer Services Pty Ltd versus Digital Equipment Corp (Aust) Pty Ltd [(1988) 5 BPR 11,110], McHugh JA said, at 11,117:  ... It is an error 'to suppose that merely because something has been done then there is therefore some contract in existence which has thereby been executed'. ... Nevertheless, a contract may be inferred from the acts and conduct of parties as well as or in the absence of their words. ... The question in this class of case is whether the conduct of the parties, viewed in the light of the surrounding circumstances shows a tacit understanding or agreement. The conduct of the parties, however, must be capable of proving all the essential elements of an express contract ...  In many commercial situations, it can be seen that there is a contract, although it may be difficult to analyse at precisely what point in time there was an exact correspondence of offer and acceptance [Rosser versus The Maritime
Services Board of NSW (No 2), p 8]. In Brambles Holdings Ltd versus Bathurst City
Council <case>; [(2001) 53 NSWLR 153], Heydon JA (at 177 [74]) acknowledged that recognition had been given to the possibility of finding that contracts exist even though it is not easy to locate an offer or acceptance, referring with apparent approval to the judgment of Ormiston J in Vroon, and to that of the Court of Appeal in Empirnall Holdings Pty Ltd versus Machon Paull Partners Pty Ltd [(1988) 14
NSWLR 523] - in which McHugh JA, with whom Samuels JA concurred, said (at 535) that where an offeree with a reasonable opportunity to reject an offer of goods or services took the benefit of them under circumstances which indicated that they were to be paid for in accordance with the offer, it was open to hold that the offer was accepted according to its terms - concluding (at 179 [81]):  
In the light of the above cases, it is relevant to ask: In all the circumstances can an agreement be inferred? Has mutual assent been manifested?
What would a reasonable person in the position of the counsel and a reasonable person in the position of the defendant think as to whether there was a concluded bargain?  In this case, motor cars had been delivered by Volvo to TAA for sale since late May 2000, and it would be extraordinary if the parties did not intend in that setting that there be binding obligations between them, and at that stage the only documentation was the then iteration of the Representation letter.
That the parties in fact commenced trading indicates that they were content for their relations to be governed by the Representation letter, at least unless and until some further documentation was brought into existence.
Moreover, as Volvo knew, TAA would incur, or would cause its associates to incur, considerable expenditure in constructing the temporary showroom and service facilities on the faith of having been appointed on the terms of that letter.  The various versions of the Representation letter bear indicia of an intention that they be legally binding, although there are also indicia that a further, formal "dealer agreement" was contemplated. These include that the letter is expressed to set out "the key areas that will be part of the terms of [TAA's] appointment as the Volvo dealer for the Sydney South Eastern
Metropolitan Area of responsibility". It speaks in terms of "TAA agree" or "has agreed". It specifies extensive obligations that TAA (and Volvo) undertake. It speaks of "requirements" of Volvo upon TAA. It provides for eligibility for a business development grant payable "immediately upon signing this agreement, dealer agreements, all related security documentation", to be covered by "a separate agreement". Though described as a "letter of intent", it provides for formal acceptance, including an "undertaking to adhere to [Volvo's] stated requirements ...".  Accordingly, the conclusion that the parties intended the Representation letter to be a legally binding agreement is supported by: the terms and form of that agreement (which though in letter form are hardly informal); the circumstance that, to the knowledge of both parties, TAA was going to incur significant expenditure in the belief that it had an appointment as a Volvo representative in accordance with the Representation letter; and the fact that
TAA commenced to trade as a Volvo dealer with only the Representation letter in place. In my view, by the time that TAA commenced trading as a Volvo dealer on 1 July 2000, there was consensus on the terms of the then current version of the representation letter, and an intention that the parties would trade on those terms and that legal rights and obligations would arise from them; but their commercial relationship was a dynamic one and new terms could be introduced from time to time by consent [cf Brambles Holdings Ltd versus Bathurst
City Council [71]-[82]].  I do not accept that any agreement contained in the Representation letter was superseded by the one-year dealer agreement, or that that agreement was the only legally binding agreement between the parties. First, the final version of the Representation letter was submitted and executed contemporaneously with the one-year dealer agreement; that is inconsistent with any intention that the latter supersede the former, and indicative that both were seen as necessary components of the relationship.  Secondly, the Representation letter deals with matters not covered by the one-year dealer agreement, and outside its one-year term: for example, both the second and third versions of the Representation letter contain a requirement to develop a southern suburb satellite to be operational within eighteen months, with Volvo being allowed thirteen months to wind down the existing dealer. Those terms extend beyond the term of the initial one-year dealer agreement. (Other indications that the Representation letter extended beyond the first year were, in the earlier versions, a requirement (subsequently omitted) that a dealer management system be implemented within months of the commencement of the dealership; and a provision stipulating for updating of a market plan "on an annual basis").  The circumstance that the parties commenced trading with only the
Representation letter in place; that the final version of the Representation letter was executed contemporaneously with the one-year dealer agreement; and that it covered matters beyond the scope of a one-year dealer agreement; tell against Volvo's contention that the only binding agreement between the parties was the one-year dealer agreement. To treat the one-year dealer agreement as the exclusive contractual arrangement between the parties would be quite inconsistent with their intent as documented in the Representation letter, and the manner in which they each dealt with the other up to that point.  Mr West pointed to the terms of the one-year dealer agreement, and that TAA had been legally advised in respect of it, in support of the contention that it was the "entire agreement" between the parties. However, the one-year dealer agreement - and in particular its provision that it is "the entire agreement" - must be construed in the context of the Representation letter, as being issued pursuant to and in accordance with the Representation letter. In that context, the one-year dealer agreement did not replace or subsume the
Representation letter. To the contrary, it was the first of the dealer agreements contemplated by the Representation letter. In effect, the
Representation letter was the "Head Agreement", pursuant to which dealer agreements were to issue. This is consistent with what, according to Mr Azzi,
Mr O'Keefe said:  
The current situation of the dealers is just a mass of paperwork. Some of our country dealers do not even have a dealership agreement. The paper work is just a mess. We need time to put the three dealer strategy into effect. We need to look at the cancellation of a number of dealerships and bring the current dealer agreement all into line. We will guarantee the five year deal will be in place before the end of the first year. Don't worry about the one or the five year terms.  The one-year dealer agreement was the "entire agreement" in respect of the initial one-year dealership, but it did not supersede the Representation letter as the head agreement between the parties. Thus there was a "Head
Agreement", ultimately encapsulated in the final version of the Representation letter, which provided for a series of subsidiary agreements, each of which would relate to a particular period of the total head agreement.  But Volvo contends that the Representation letter did not create any enforceable obligation to grant a replacement five-year term, on the basis that, at least in that respect, it was in the third class of Masters v
Cameron. In my view, the context in which the Representation letter was issued - including imminent expenditure by TAA, prior discussions in which TAA had stipulated for a lengthy term in order to recoup its investment, and the content of the Representation letter as a whole - tell strongly against this vital aspect of it not having been intended to be binding. The stipulation to the effect that conditions for renewal, non-renewal and termination will be clearly established within the agreements is to be construed as "the conditions for renewal, non-renewal and termination if any will be clearly established ...". In other words, it was left open to the parties to negotiate conditions for renewal, non-renewal and termination, both in respect of the one-year and the five-year dealer agreements. But if they could not otherwise agree on such terms, then the Representation letter would continue to govern the relationship. It is illustrative of this that the one-year dealer agreement did not include any conditions for renewal, non-renewal or termination.  However, I do not accept Mr Trew's submission that the effect of the second limb of requirement 2, that "the condition for renewal, non-renewal and termination will be clearly established within both the one year and five year agreements", imposed on Volvo an obligation to include in such agreements, and any draft, a provision for renewal (and implicitly, although he did not expressly so submit, provisions for non-renewal and termination). Rather, the second limb of requirement 2 set out the intention or expectation of the parties that provisions for renewal, non-renewal and termination (if any) would be covered in the one-year and five-year agreements. It anticipated further negotiation on those topics, so that the subsidiary agreements might contain such provisions on those topics as the parties might later agree; to the extent that there was no further agreement, there would be no provision for renewal (or non-renewal), and as to termination the parties would be left to their rights at law, and the dealership would be terminable only for cause, or by effluxion of time.  Mr Trew invoked the judgment of Merkel J in Wesoky versus Village Cinemas
International Pty Ltd <case> to support the proposition that the effect of the second limb of requirement 2 was to oblige Volvo to offer terms as to renewal (even if the terms offered be unacceptable to TAA). But in that case the real issue was one of construction - whether the words "subject to mutual agreement" related to the commercial terms and conditions of the non-recourse loan, or to the obligation to offer a non-recourse loan, and those circumstances are far removed from those of the present case.  Thus, to the extent that analysis in terms of Masters versus Cameron is necessary or appropriate, the Representation letter was in this respect in the fourth class: the parties intended to be immediately bound, but contemplated that the dealer agreements might include, by consent, additional or different provisions. As Mr Trew accepted, if Volvo included in a draft dealer agreement renewal or termination provisions that were not acceptable to TAA, then the
Representation letter would continue to cover the situation.  Further support for the conclusion that the parties intended to be bound in this respect by the Representation letter may be gained from admissions made on behalf of Volvo. On 12 September 2001, after disputation had arisen,
Clayton Utz (then acting for Volvo) wrote to Bamford Hogg (then acting for
TAA), relevantly as follows:  
We note that, pursuant to the terms of the letter from Volvo to your client dated 16 August 2000 (accepted by your client on 16 September 2000), the initial dealer agreement was to run for a period one year which agreement was then to be replaced by a dealer agreement with a term of five years. We confirm, as we informed you during our telephone conversation call on Monday afternoon, that we believe that the term of the first agreement ran until 30
June 2001 and that accordingly the term of the five year dealer agreement commenced on 1 July 2001.  
In light of the application of the franchising code of conduct to the arrangements between our clients, and as we indicated during our telephone call on Monday, Volvo will provide your client with a disclosure document prepared in accordance with the franchising code of conduct, before the parties execute an appropriate document reflecting the terms of the current agreement between the parties.  In a further letter dated 13 September 2001, Clayton Utz wrote:  
We note that while Volvo is of the view that TAA has not met and is not meeting certain of its obligations under the agreement, the agreement remains on foot. Accordingly, we assume that TAA will continue to honour its obligations under the agreement. For its part, Volvo will continue to honour its obligations and act in accordance with the terms of the agreement.  ... 
Our client's position with regard to the further five year term is clearly set out in our letter to you of earlier today. We confirm, as we informed you during our telephone conversation on Monday afternoon, that we believe that the term of the first agreement ran until 30 June 2001 and that, accordingly, the term of the five year of the agreement commenced on 1 July And on 11 October 2001, Letherbarrow Lawyers (who by then were acting for
Volvo) wrote to Blake Dawson Waldron (who were then acting for TAA), relevantly as follows:  
You assert (in the alternative) that Volvo has, in fact, entered into a five year agreement with your client (the "Agreement"). We agree. Volvo's preparedness to do so, notwithstanding breaches of the previous one year agreement (in respect of which Volvo reserved its rights) was confirmed in
Volvo's letter of 7 September 2001, which stated that the agreement would remain unchanged until terminated in accordance with its terms, and Clayton
Utz' letter of 12 September 2001 on Volvo's behalf to Bamford Hogg Lawyers on behalf of your client. That letter drew attention to Volvo's obligations to comply with the franchising code of conduct by providing a disclosure to your client before the parties could execute an appropriate document reflecting the terms of the current agreement between them.  Although not conclusive, this correspondence contains clear admissions on behalf of Volvo that it was bound, by the Representation letter, to grant a replacement five-year term.  Accordingly, I conclude that there was a binding contract between Volvo and
TAA, ultimately encapsulated in the final version of the Representation letter, by which Volvo was obliged to grant TAA a dealership for a term of one year, to be replaced by a further dealership for a term of five years before or at the expiration of the initial one year period. The parties envisaged that in the case of both the one-year and the five-year dealerships, they might agree on additional terms, particularly in relation to renewal, non- renewal and termination; but were content to be bound in the meantime and in the absence of further agreement by the terms of the Representation letter.
However, it was not a term of the Representation letter that any further agreement must provide for a renewal (or for that matter for termination), though it contemplated that it might, since such provisions were subject to the further agreement of the parties.  My conclusion that there was a binding contract to this effect renders it unnecessary to consider the alternative argument based on equitable estoppel.  
Did Volvo Repudiate the Contract?  By mid-2000, TAA and/or Harissa, in performance of TAA's obligations to
Volvo, had spent considerable sums in upgrading the Rosebery premises to install the temporary showroom, and in the latter part of 2001 were expending further money in upgrading to a permanent showroom. TAA submits that in that context, from July 2001 onwards, Volvo repudiated the parties' contract.  Requirement 5 of the Representation letter obliged TAA to develop a satellite facility in the southern suburbs at a location agreeable to both parties, to be operational within eighteen months (that is, by 1 January ). On or about 11 July 2001, Mr Azzi, together with Messrs Snijders,
Clarke and Desselss of Volvo, inspected a property at Blakehurst that Mr Azzi considered a potential site for that purpose. After the inspection, Mr
Snijders questioned why Mr Azzi was going ahead at that stage with the satellite dealership, when he had been experiencing trading losses, and suggested that he focus on getting Rosebery in order first. Mr Azzi says that he expressed a view that the southern suburbs were essential, and that he had a commitment to set up a southern satellite dealership within eighteen months.
However, a suggestion on behalf of Volvo to focus on getting Rosebery in order first, rather than pressing ahead with the satellite dealership, hardly evinces an intention no longer to be bound by the contract. In the same conversation, Mr Azzi asked Mr Snijders when he was going to get his five-year written agreement, and Mr Snijders responded to the effect that it was underway and it was only a matter of the paperwork. Again, that does not begin to evince an intention on the part of Volvo not to be bound.  On 31 July 2001, Mr Snijders wrote to TAA, setting out Volvo's view of
TAA's shortcomings in its performance, and expressing for the first time the view that the original agreement had expired on 1 July 2001 and that Volvo did not then see itself in a position to renew the agreement:  
As you are aware, our original agreement expired on 1 of July 2001. In the brief period since that date we have had several discussions on the above matters, and I am aware that separate discussions have also been held between yourself and various departments within Volvo.  
Tony, at this time, we seek your input on any actions that you intend to undertake that would immediately address the above concerns and encourage us to renew our agreement and proceed with this partnership. Based on the above, and without a substantial change in approach, we do not currently see ourselves in a position to do so.  
We confirm that until we can resolve the above, we are not in a position to pursue a second location with Sydney City Volvo. Further, we reserve the right to retain the existing operator should we require, until such time as the above items are resolved and a clear forward direction is agreed.  
I look forward to your response in due course.  The position adopted by Volvo in this letter was inconsistent with the agreement, both in indicating that Volvo would not cooperate in the creation of the southern suburbs satellite, and in asserting that the agreement had expired. At this time, Mr Snijders was unaware of the contents of the
Representation letter and the first dealer agreement. Although Mr Trew submitted that the circumstance that Mr Snijders then had no knowledge of the
Representation letter gave these matters even greater significance, by making clearer that his conduct was in complete disregard of the agreement, I do not agree; the question is what one party's allegedly repudiatory conduct conveys to the other, not what the first party actually knows or intends in respect of the contract.  In any event, matters did not stand still with the letter of 31 July. Mr
Azzi immediately sought a meeting with Mr Snijders, which occurred on 9 August
The meeting was relatively informal, and conveyed to Mr Azzi that his dealership was secure. Mr Snijders told Mr Azzi that he would get his five- year agreement (even though Mr Snijders was unaware of the Representation letter). The conversation of 9 August 2001 conveyed nothing suggestive that
Volvo would not perform its obligations, and the fact that Mr Snijders was unaware of the Representation letter does not add to it any repudiatory flavour that it does not otherwise bear.  TAA wrote to Volvo on 15 August 2001, relevantly as follows:  
As you are aware, we have invested a substantial amount of money so far and remain committed to invest even more to bring our common vision to reality.
Our investment in the Volvo brand is based on the understanding that the dealer agreement is for an initial term of one year and extended by a further five years upon its expiration. In this regard, I would be obliged if you would send the engrossment of the five year dealer agreement at your earliest convenience, for us to complete the documentation of our association.  Although characterising Volvo's conduct up to this point as repudiatory, Mr
Trew eschewed a submission that there had been sufficient "repudiatory conduct" before 9 August to justify termination for repudiation immediately before the meeting of that date. In any event, TAA's letter of 15 August, requesting submission of the five-year dealer agreement, affirmed the contract.  A further meeting took place on 22 August. In the course of that meeting,
Mr Snijders told Mr Azzi that he would get his five-year agreement soon. On the same day, Mr Azzi wrote to Mr Snijders, advising that TAA was in the process of preparing for the listing of its shares on the Growth Enterprise
Market of the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong, and asking that Volvo acknowledge receipt and confirm that the dealer agreement would remain unchanged until terminated in accordance with its terms, and that Volvo agree to the inclusion of its name and the principal terms of the dealer agreement in the prospectus.  On 31 August 2001, however, Mr Snijders sent Mr Azzi a letter (responding to the request for consent to inclusion in the prospectus for the proposed
Hong Kong float):  
With regard to our inclusion within the prospectus documents, we confirm that at the current time our dealer agreement has expired and that the provision of the five year agreement is not yet guaranteed.  Mr Azzi replied on 3 September 2001, "with total disappointment":  
The statements contained in your letter relating to the dealer agreement are in stark contradiction with all of the verbal confirmation that you gave to me during our various meetings. I have on more than one occasion received your assurance that the dealer agreement between our respective companies is for a total of six years (one plus five) starting from [1 July 2000].  
It has always been my principle to clarify misunderstandings and to avoid legal disputes where possible, in the interest of business efficiency and relationships. On the other hand, it is also my principle to strenuously defend and relentlessly enforce the legal rights of my company.  
I have sought legal advice on the construction of the terms of the initial dealer agreement and the views of my lawyers concur with my understanding. I have also been advised that the third paragraph of your letter has amounted to a unilateral breach of the terms of the dealer agreement. In this regard, all of the legal rights of my company are expressly reserved.  
Unless I receive from you, within two days from the date hereof, a written statement setting out your company's position to confirm that the dealer agreement is and will remain for a full term of six years as agreed, legal action shall be commenced against your company for breach of contract without further notice and I shall present the matter on hand to your Head Office in
Sweden.  Later on 3 September, there was a telephone conversation between Mr
Snijders and Mr Azzi. In the course of a second telephone conversation that evening, Mr Azzi thought that Mr Snijders seemed agreeable, and his only question was the allegation of "unilateral breach of the terms of the dealer agreement". Mr Azzi explained that that was due to his interpretation, again, of the term as being one year, rather than six as Mr Azzi understood it. Mr
Snijders confirmed again that six years was agreed; "the only issue was that he felt pushed and on the other small concerns".  On 5 September 2001, Mr Desselss and Mr O'Keefe of Volvo sent a letter to
TAA, referring to their letter of 31 July and the meeting of 8 August and Mr
Azzi's response of 15 August (but not to what had happened since), relevantly as follows:  
Whilst we note the commitments made in your letter of 15 August 2001, we advise that we do not yet agree that these issues have been sufficiently resolved to enable a renewal of our dealer agreement.  
In order to give you the opportunity to demonstrate your commitment to resolving this situation, and to reinforce our absolute requirement that this occurs, we have decided to provide a three month period to allow you to undertake the necessary actions. This period shall commence on 5 September and end on 4 December 2001.  
We will reassess the situation at Sydney City Volvo at the completion of this period. Should we be satisfied that the performance of the dealership has been rectified and that an operating structure has been implemented which will ensure the ongoing development of the business, we will commence a positive review of our longer term agreement.  
Should, however, at the end of this period, the required actions and outcomes not have been achieved, we confirm that we will not be in a position to proceed with the renewal of our dealer agreements with Tony Azzi (Automobiles)
Pty Ltd. ...  Receipt of that letter was followed almost immediately by a telephone call from the person who had signed it on behalf of Mr Desselss, to the effect that the letter had been sent without Mr Snijders' endorsement and should be disregarded. Although Volvo's letter of 5 September was inconsistent with the contractual position, its immediate withdrawal as having been sent in error, before it was acted on, precludes it from being treated as repudiatory.  Mr Azzi responded on 6 September 2001, relevantly as follows:  
I refer to your faxed letter dated 5 September 2001 that arrived on my desk early yesterday afternoon. The letter was almost immediately followed by a phone call from Gayle Pugh who had signed the letter on behalf of Mr Alan
Desselss stating that it was sent to me without your endorsement and that I should disregard this letter.  
It is difficult for me to disregard the contents of the letter after having read it for it reflects a grave misunderstanding on the agreement reached between your company (under the leadership of your predecessor) and ours in
July 2000 and a lack of appreciation of the financial and legal implications for our respective companies flowing from that agreement.  ...  
There was no mention anywhere of any conditions for the renewal of the five year term or for a probation period under our agreement with Volvo. The imposition of any such condition at this point in time is without any legal or commercial justification.  
I note for the record the following:  * I was repeatedly assured by you as the Managing Director of Volvo Car Australia Pty Ltd up to Monday night that you understood that our dealer agreement is for a term of six years in total. No probation or conditions were ever stated or implied in writing or verbally by you in our numerous meetings.  * It was on your invitation that I became the Chairman of the National Volvo Dealer Council for Australia and to think that a franchisee that holds a one year dealer agreement would be invited by the local Volvo Managing Director to that post is against common sense and be unheard of in any country that Volvo carries on business;  * I was involved, with your knowledge, in the assessment on numerous occasions with the possibilities for a second location in Sydney; as contemplated by our agreement with you.  * I have been induced to invest a considerable sum of money and time on the basis of the above.  * You will no doubt understand that I have been in the motor business in Australia in excess of twenty years. I have a thorough understanding of the Australian market and an appreciation for good personnel that contributed to the growth of 'Larke Hoskins' under my management and ownership.  ...  * Your management has now brought our concerns to reality by going further to state that the dealer agreement, which induced my company to invest a considerable sum to develop its Volvo franchise is now conditional or carries a probation period and that it is for one year instead of six years in total (see paragraph 2 of letter dated 16 August 2000 from Paul O'Keefe to me).  ...  
For the purpose of the proposed application for the listing of the Larke
Hoskins group of companies on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited, I have personally delivered to you a letter requesting your confirmation for permission to refer to the name 'Volvo' in the prospectus and to refer to the principal terms of the dealer agreement.  
During our meeting on 22 August 2001, our plans were explained and intentions made clear to you relating to the purpose of the letter. Similar letters were delivered to the franchisors for both Honda (letter delivered 24 August 2001) and Mercedes Benz (letter delivered 16 August 2001) to which we have received favourable replies.  
Your letter in response to my request dated 31 August 2001 does not address my request or the complete issues in a professional manner and you do not appreciate that you could at least make a statement of fact relating to the currency of the dealer agreement whilst you have always verbally assured me that it is of a six year duration. ...  Mr Azzi forwarded a copy of that letter to Volvo's head office (Volvo
International) in Sweden.  In the absence of Mr Snijders from the office, apparently on vacation, Mr
Azzi wrote again to Volvo on 7 September 2001, relevantly as follows:  
I would appreciate if you could arrange for Richard to be in contact with me as soon as possible to resolve this matter given that I have received advice that the appointment is for six years.  
Given Richard's absence overseas I have not heard from anyone else from Volvo in response to my letter of yesterday to Richard. Things are now becoming very urgent in the context of potential loss that I and my company may suffer if the listing of my company does not now proceed as a result of the view that
Volvo appears to be adopting as to the term of appointment of my company as a
Volvo dealer.  
I would therefore appreciate if you would make every endeavour to contact
Richard so that communicating between the relevant decision makers in our respective organisations can be established to resolve this matter amicably if at all possible.  Mr O'Keefe on behalf of Volvo wrote to Mr Azzi on 7 September, apparently in response to Mr Azzi's letter of 22 August. Relevantly, the letter was as follows:  
Nevertheless, we can confirm that: 
The agreement between Volvo and Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd 'the agreement' will remain unchanged until terminated in accordance with the terms of that agreement; and 
Volvo will consent to the inclusion of its name and the disclosure of the principal terms of the dealer agreement in the prospectus provided that a complete copy of the draft prospectus is delivered to the company not less than 14 days before it is filed with any government agency or Stock Exchange or it is publicly released, whichever is the first to occur. 
The original agreement, which had a one year term, will be replaced by an agreement for a further five year terms on similar terms and conditions (other than any right to have the agreement extended for a further period of five years) operating from the date of expiration of the first agreement.  Although TAA submits that the statement that the replacement five-year agreement would not contain provision for extension for a further period of five years was inconsistent with the extant agreement, it follows from my conclusion that the parties' agreement did not oblige Volvo to grant a renewal, that this was not in fact inconsistent with the Representation letter. I do not accept, for reasons already explained, that the
Representation letter conferred upon TAA a right to have a further renewal of the five-year agreement. I therefore do not accept that the 7 September 2001 letter evinces an intention by Volvo not to be bound by the Representation letter; to the contrary it accords with the Representation letter and evinces an intention to perform it.  On 10 September, Bamford Hogg, acting for TAA, sent a facsimile to Volvo, relevantly as follows:  
I am instructed that Mr Azzi spoke with Mr O'Keefe earlier this morning prior to his departure to Hong Kong and informed him that in the absence of Mr Azzi that I was to undertake carriage of this matter with Volvo with a view to discussing the terms of the letter dated 07/09/01 from Mr Paul O'Keefe to Mr
Azzi (which I understand was in fact faxed to Mr Azzi on 09/09/01).  
I have made three telephone calls to Mr Paul O'Keefe requesting (by leaving messages on his voice mail) that Mr O'Keefe call me in relation to the letter.  
I have not heard from Mr O'Keefe and therefore I called you to discuss the matter at 1.45 p.m. and left a message with one of your secretarial support staff that you call me on an urgent basis.  
In the context of the progression of the float of our client's company the position with Volvo is assuming a great deal of urgency. It is anticipated that it will become critical by the end of work hours today if the position between Volvo and our client is not clarified.  
I would note that the letter dated 7 September 2001 placed in jeopardy the ability of our client to progress the proposed public listing. This will be causative of substantial loss to our client company and its shareholders.  On 11 September 2001, Mr Azzi wrote to Mr Desselss, to record his concern at the approach adopted by Volvo. While the letter was mainly concerned with issues pertaining to the Hong Kong float, it included relevantly: 
In relation to the terms of the material contracts that are to be set out in the prospectus, please note that the five year agreement is long overdue and it is a matter which should have been attended to by Volvo before the expiry of the initial agreement as provided for in the letter dated 16 August ... 
If the abovementioned could not be achieved, then my company will consider its position in light of the statement contained in the letter dated September to the effect that my company is not entitled to the further five year term. The fact that Volvo has subsequently sought to confirm the five year term on a conditional basis as set out in the letter dated 7 September is noted but is not acceptable in the light of the position as we see it.  
I look forward to advancing our discussions as soon as possible whilst all of my company legal rights are expressly reserved.  Mr Azzi'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s11.html)
September letter to Mr Desselss proceeds not on the basis that Volvo did not intend to perform its obligation, but that Volvo was offering a replacement five-year term, albeit on a conditional basis. The only respect in which the confirmation of the five year term was on a conditional basis was that it would not contain any right to have the agreement extended for a further period of five years; as I have sought to explain, that involved no departure from or inconsistency with the Representation letter. The letter reads as a continuation of a negotiation process in the context of the commercial dispute.  On 12 September 2001, Clayton Utz for Volvo wrote to Mr Bamford, relevantly as follows:  
We are instructed to confirm that the letter which your client Tony Azzi
Pty Limited received from Volvo dated 5 September 2001, was sent in error and should be ignored. We note that Mr Azzi was informed of this fact shortly after the letter was sent.  
We note that, pursuant to the terms of the letter from Volvo to your client dated 16 August 2000 (accepted by your client on 16 September 2000), the initial Dealer Agreement was to run for a period one year which agreement was then to be replaced by a Dealer Agreement with a term of five years. We confirm, as we informed you during our telephone conversation call on Monday afternoon, that we believe that the term of the first Agreement ran until 30
June 2001 and that accordingly the term of the five year Dealer Agreement commenced on 1 July 2001.  
In light of the application of the Franchising Code of Conduct to the arrangements between our clients, and as we indicated during our telephone call on Monday, Volvo will provide your client with a disclosure document prepared in accordance with the Franchising Code of Conduct, before the parties execute an appropriate document reflecting the terms of the current agreement between the parties.  ...  
As stated in our client's letter sent on 9 September 2001, Volvo will consent to the inclusion in your client's prospectus of its name and to disclosure of the principal terms of the agreement between Volvo and your client, subject to receiving a copy of the prospectus within the timeframe indicated in that letter for review by our client. Volvo has no in principle concern with the disclosure of material terms of the agreement in accordance with the law applicable to that prospectus, provided that Volvo first has opportunity to consider (and if necessary to comment upon and require appropriate amendment to) the form and context in which such disclosure is made.  This letter is an unequivocal statement of Volvo's intention to abide by the contract and to grant a five-year term. Then, on 13 September 2001,
Clayton Utz wrote to Mr Bamford in response to Mr Azzi's 11 September letter to Mr Desselss, relevantly as follows: 
This issue is addressed to our open letter of yesterday's date.  ... 
We note that while Volvo was of the view that TAA has not met and is not meeting certain of its obligations under the agreement, the agreement remains on foot. Accordingly, we assume that TAA will continue to honour its obligations under the agreement. For its part, Volvo will continue to honour its obligations and act in accordance with the agreement.  ... 
We believe the matters raised in the correspondence are now clarified. 
Our client's position with respect to the further five year term is clearly set out in our letter to you of earlier today. We confirm, as we informed you during our telephone conversation on Monday afternoon, that we believe that the term of the first agreement ran until 30 June 2001 and that, accordingly, the term of the five year of the agreement commenced on 1 July 
Please do not hesitate to contact the undersigned if you wish to discuss the matter further.  Again, this unequivocally acknowledged TAA's entitlement to a replacement five-year term.  By facsimile dated 13 September 2001, Volvo International in Sweden acknowledged receipt of a copy of Mr Azzi's letter of 6 September to Mr
Snijders. On 20 September, Mr Azzi wrote direct to Volvo International, expressing his disappointment with the current management of Volvo Australia, and in particular "the ever-changing position of Volvo relating to the status of the dealer agreement". Although referring to Mr O'Keefe's letter of 7
September 2001, which confirmed that the original agreement would be replaced by a five-year agreement, it did not refer to the Clayton Utz letter. It did refer to the 5 September letter, without mentioning that it had been sent in error and withdrawn. It concluded:  
I am prepared to travel to Sweden, if necessary to have a meeting with the relevant executives to resolve the issues in dispute. Unless I hear from
Sweden within five business days of the date of this letter, I would have no further option but to initiate legal proceedings against VCA to recover losses and damages as a result of its acts and/or omissions.  On 21 September 2001, Volvo submitted to Mr Azzi a draft five-year dealer agreement and a disclosure document for franchisees, asking that he review the documents for at least fourteen days, seek any appropriate advice on them, and then return a copy of the letter of acknowledgment. The draft five-year dealer agreement that accompanied that letter contained a provision that permitted termination on 120 days notice without cause. The letter concluded "Should you have any queries please do not hesitate to contact me on the above phone number."  On 26 September 2001, Volvo International sent a fax to Mr Azzi, acknowledging receipt of his letter of 20 September and advising that they were in contact with Volvo Australia and when in receipt of information would respond further. On 27 September Mr Snijders, having been informed of the letter of 20 September to Volvo International, wrote to Mr Azzi, proposing to meet urgently "to get the issues resolved". Mr Azzi replied on 28 September:  
I will inform you on Wednesday 3 October 2001 as to whether I am prepared to meet with you to discuss what you have described as "the issues".  On 3 October 2001 Mr Azzi wrote to Mr Snijders that he was prepared to discuss all outstanding issues but not with Mr Snijders, and suggested that a meeting be arranged in his absence with Volvo to be represented by someone Mr
Azzi considered neutral. He sought a response by 5 October. On 4 October,
Volvo International responded that they had full confidence in Mr Snijders, and that Mr Azzi should discuss the issues with Mr Snijders.  On 8 October 2001, Blake Dawson Waldron on behalf of TAA wrote to Volvo, relevantly as follows:  ... Your company has agreed to enter into a five year franchise agreement, commencing on 1 July 2001, with our client in the terms of the earlier one year agreement which concluded on 30 June 2001 other than a term entitling our client to extend the agreement for a further five years. Alternatively, your company has, in fact, entered into such an agreement with our client.  
With your company's letter of 21 September 2001, you submitted the formal document to give effect to the agreement. That document did not provide for a five year term but provided that the franchise could be terminated by your company on 120 days written notice (clause 24(5)). The requirement for such a change is clear evidence of your company's intention to repudiate both, or either, of the agreements to which we have referred.  
Our company has given your company the opportunity to reconsider its position, which you rejected.  
We are instructed to inform you that our client accepts the repudiation and proposes to sue for damages. ...  There is in fact no evidence that Volvo was given the opportunity to reconsider its position about the 120-day notice provision, and I accept that it was not afforded any such opportunity.  The thrust of TAA's case on repudiation is that, at the time of the
Representation letter in September 2000, the combination of the Representation letter and Mr O'Keefe's representations to the effect that the one-year agreement was a stop-gap measure so that all three dealers could be brought into line, had the effect that the issue of a five-year agreement when all dealers were in line was a mere formality. Then, come 30 June 2001 by which time there ought to have been a five-year dealer agreement in place, no such agreement was issued, and when the matter was pursued, the answer was that no such agreement is guaranteed. Then after some dispute, when the attention of
Volvo was ultimately drawn to the Representation letter, the response was that it would grant a five-year dealer agreement, but subject to a three month probation period. Then, in response to the suggestion that that was not what the Representation letter called for, a five-year agreement was provided, but one that was terminable on 120 days notice. There was thus a protracted course of conduct extending over a period of three months in which Volvo one way or another repeatedly avoided unequivocally putting a five-year dealer agreement on the table. Mr Trew submits that this sequence of events must be viewed as a whole, and in the context that Volvo knew that TAA was trying to float in Hong
Kong and needed Volvo's approval to a statement in the prospectus about the terms of the dealer agreement. He submits that, by September, Mr Azzi was receiving contradictory signals from Volvo about the agreement - in that when he was spoken to he was told he had an agreement (for a further five years), but in writing was told that there was no agreement or no guarantee of one and that he was in breach of the existing agreement. In those circumstances, so it is said, Mr Snijders could not be trusted and Volvo was not negotiating in good faith, and the inclusion in the draft five year agreement of the 120-day notice provision, coupled with the insistence of Volvo International that TAA would have to sort out its issues with the management in Sydney, was, so it was said, the last straw.  Repudiatory intent is not lightly to be inferred [Ross T Smyth & Co
Ltd versus TD Bailey Son & Co [[1940] 3 All ER 60], 71;
Rosser versus Maritime Services Board (No 2), p32; Hooper Bailie Associated
Ltd versus Natcon Group Pty Ltd [(1992) 28 NSWLR 194], 212;
Auburn Council versus Austin Australia Pty Ltd (in liq) <case>, [49]-[51]]. It is not in doubt that an accumulation of conduct by a party to a contract may amount to a repudiation, although no individual act can be identified on its own as doing so; and that repudiation may be established not only by conduct that evinces an intention not to perform the contract, but also by conduct that evinces an intention to perform it only in the manner in which it suits that party to perform <case>; [(1989) 166 CLR 623], 647-9 (Brennan J)].  Particularly in the context of how the obligation in respect of the southern Sydney satellite was expressed in the Representation letter, what Mr
Snijders said on 11 July 2001 does not permit a repudiatory intention to be attributed to Volvo. The pendency of TAA's proposed float in Hong Kong does not add colour in the circumstances: faced with a request to consent to its name being included in a prospectus, Volvo was entitled to take some time to review and consider its position in that respect. A side-issue about advertising - as to who normally paid for what component - was apparently a misunderstanding between the parties, but evinced no intention not to be bound by the contract. Insistence on a right or position inconsistent with the contract is a different matter, and Volvo's expressed positions, that Volvo would not cooperate in the creation of the southern suburbs satellite, that the agreement had expired and renewal was not guaranteed, and that there would be a three-month probationary period, were inconsistent with the contract and potentially repudiatory. Had matters stood still after those assertions, the case for repudiation would have been much stronger. But they were abandoned, and the proposed probationary period was almost immediately withdrawn as having been advanced in error.  In my view, even if, at some time prior to 7 September, Volvo's conduct could properly have been regarded as repudiatory, at the time of the purported acceptance of the alleged repudiation there was not then any current repudiatory conduct. The "double speak" of which Mr Azzi complained had ended with the unequivocal written confirmations, in Volvo's letter of 7 September and Clayton Utz' letters of 12 and 13 September, that TAA was entitled to a replacement five year term [cf Auburn Council versus Austin Australia, [30]]. The refusal of Volvo International to become involved cannot be repudiatory conduct: Volvo International was not a party to the contract. In any event, requiring Mr Azzi to negotiate with an officer of Volvo who he did not trust or like is not inconsistent with the contract.  TAA submitted that it was inconsistent with the Representation letter's provision for a replacement term of five years that the dealer agreement could have a termination provision in it. But it is a characteristic of a Masters v
Cameron class four contract that provisions different from or even inconsistent with the original agreement can be included, by consent, in the final agreement, and in this case the parties contemplated that provisions for termination might be included in the dealer agreements. The contention that submitting a draft five-year agreement that included a provision for termination on 120 days notice was repudiatory, is inconsistent with the basis upon which the agreement contained in the Representation letter was enforceable - namely, under the fourth class of Masters versus Cameron, that the parties envisaged further negotiation as to provisions for renewal, non- renewal and termination. As Mr West points out, the parties had not yet negotiated the terms of the five-year dealer agreement. Given that the
Representation letter left open for negotiation what provisions - particularly as to renewal, non-renewal and termination - would be included in the dealer agreement, there was no reason to assume that the five-year dealer agreement would be identical to the one-year dealer agreement save for its duration. Any provision that authorised termination in less than five years was, in a sense, inconsistent with an agreement to grant a five-year agreement, but it is plain from the Representation letter that the parties contemplated that the five- year dealer agreement might include provisions for termination. By proposing such a provision, Volvo was not acting inconsistently with the Representation letter, and cannot be said thereby to have evinced an intention not to be bound by the agreement contained in it. [Mr Azzi suggested that any termination clause would be limited to one that was standard by industry practice. Although I do not accept that proposition, even if correct it would not assist TAA's case, as TAA's dealership agreement with Honda included a provision for termination without cause on 120 days notice]. There is no reason to limit the reference to "termination" in the second limb of requirement 2 in the representation agreement to "termination for cause"; the parties reserved to themselves the ability to agree on any type of termination provision in the subsequent documentation. [While submitting that no provision for termination could be proposed by Volvo except those which were already in the one year agreement, TAA did not submit that no provision for renewal could be proposed other than what was in the one year agreement (there being none).
Indeed, on Mr Trew's submission - which I do not accept - although Volvo was bound to include in the draft a provision for renewal (and, it would seemingly follow, provisions for non-renewal and termination), TAA was not obliged to accept whatever Volvo proposed in that respect; if the parties could not agree on a provision, then the Representation letter continued to cover the situation]. The letter that accompanied the draft five-year agreement - Mr
O'Keefe's letter of 21 September - did not present the draft lease as a take it or leave it proposition; it invited further discussion. If the draft submitted were unacceptable, by reason of the inclusion of the 120 day notice provision or otherwise, then TAA's proper course was to reject, or propose amendments to the draft, on the basis that it did not accurately reflect the parties' agreement. If TAA did not accept the provisions of the draft five- year agreement, it continued to have its five-year rights under the
Representation letter. I do not accept that by sending to TAA a draft five- year dealer agreement and other relevant documents albeit including the -day termination notice provision, inviting TAA to take at least fourteen days to consider them and take advice and contact it should it have any queries, that Volvo thereby engaged in repudiatory conduct.  In my view, therefore, the evidence does not establish that as at 8 October Volvo was evincing an intention that it would not perform its contractual obligation by granting TAA a five-year dealership from 1 July 2001. Even if it had previously engaged in conduct that might have conveyed that intent, it had resiled from it by 7 September. Far from evincing an intention not to be bound, the Clayton Utz correspondence of 12 and 13 September manifested an acceptance that Volvo was bound, and an intention to perform, and effectively acknowledged that TAA already had their replacement five-year term, all that remained to be done being appropriately to document it. In the absence of further agreement, Volvo was not bound to include a provision for renewal, but it was entitled to negotiate for provisions both for renewal and for termination. Inclusion of a 120-day termination on notice provision in the draft was consistent with the intention of the parties that there be further negotiation as to, inter alia, provisions for termination.  Accordingly, I am unable to accept that there was any repudiation available to be accepted by TAA as at 8 October 2001. As the parties never agreed on what provisions should be included in the five-year agreement as to renewal, non-renewal or termination, their position remained governed in those respects by the Representation letter insofar as it made any provision, and, insofar as it did not, by the operation of law. It follows that as at 8 October 2001, there was no repudiation by Volvo available for acceptance by TAA, and TAA was not entitled to termination for repudiation as it purported to do.  
Did Volvo engage is misleading and deceptive conduct?  TAA and Harissa allege that Volvo is liable to them for having engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct, in that in reliance upon representations to the effect that TAA would be granted a Volvo dealership for a one-plus-five- year term in respect of the Sydney South Eastern (including Southern Suburbs)
Area of Responsibility (SSE AOR), TAA commenced trading as a Volvo dealership and incurred trading losses, and Harissa incurred expenditure in upgrading the
Rosebery premises, in particular in establishing a temporary Volvo showroom and subsequently the second Volvo showroom.  Mr Azzi's evidence of the representations insofar as they were oral being uncontradicted, and the documentary evidence - in particular the various iterations of the Representation letter - establishing them insofar as they were written, I accept that representations to that effect were made. However, while the evidence makes good the proposition that Volvo represented to TAA that it would grant TAA a dealership for a term of one year to be replaced by a term of five years in the SSE AOR, I do not accept that there was any representation that the one-year and five-year agreements would contain a provision for renewal, nor that they could not contain a provision for termination other than for cause: they might if the parties so agreed, but otherwise would not.  Although the representations were made to TAA, and Mr Azzi on behalf of
TAA, and not (at least directly) to Harissa, compensation may be recovered under [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), in respect of a contravention of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), by a person who relies on a misrepresentation if the representation was made in circumstances that were calculated to result in its being transmitted to persons including the victim, even though the representor never dealt directly with the victim [Milner versus Delita Pty Ltd (1985) 61 ALR 557, 573-4 (Lockhart
J); Accredited Aged Care Facilities Pty Ltd versus Banyan Tree (Australia) Pty
Ltd <case>, [95] (McDonald J); Emanuele versus Chamber of Commerce &
Industry SA Incorporated [1994] ANZ ConvR]. The originator of a misrepresentation, who does not itself convey the representation to the relevant audience, may be liable under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) if the intermediary was merely the convenient medium by which the misrepresentation was conveyed to the public (so that the wholesaler of goods who marks them with deceptive claims may be liable for damage suffered by members of the public who buy the goods from a retailer without ever dealing with wholesaler) <case>; [(1984) 3 FCR 95]; [54 ALR 541], 553], although that will not be so where the originator does not engage in conduct calculated to put the representation into circulation.
In Milner versus Delita, Lockhart J explained the basis of liability in such circumstances in terms of an implied intention of the originator that the representation be passed on to others (at ALR 573-4):  
Some wives of investors who themselves invested in the project with their husbands did not see or read any of the documents but relied on discussions with their husbands. They too should succeed in this case. It is a commonplace today for investments to be made by or in the names of various members of a family or of family companies or trusts. Indeed, the brochures not only recognized but suggested this course in the present case. I am satisfied that
Delita, Glasson, Lewin, Morrison and Bennett were well aware of the likelihood that the documents or their contents, and any oral representations that may be made by or on behalf of Robert Morrison & Associates, would be passed on to or come to the attention of such members of the family of clients of Robert
Morrison & Associates or members of the family of those who otherwise got in touch with the firm. Indeed, they supported and adopted this course of conduct. The forms of application to join the trusts and partnership and the moneys in support of them were all received and the moneys used and applied to the knowledge of Glasson, Lewin, Delita, Morrison and Bennett. 
I adopt as a correct statement of the law the following passage from Spencer
Bower and Turner on Actionable Misrepresentation 3rd ed, para 165: "But, further, even where B is not known or believed to be, and is not in fact, the principal or partner of, or otherwise associated with A, the representor may yet either accompany his representation to A with a direct instruction or authority to repeat it to B, or make it with an implied intent that it shall come to the notice of B, and be acted on by him -- such implication being made from the representor's express declarations or admissions, or from his making the representation with knowledge that A intends to pass it on to B, for him to act upon, or with knowledge subsequently acquired, but before B has acted upon it, that A has so passed it on to B for that purpose. In any such case B is deemed to be the representee, if and as soon as the representation has been so passed on to him, and he has altered his position on the faith of it, whether A is or is not also to be accounted a representee, which depends upon the question whether he was intended solely as the living medium of communication, or as a person himself to be influenced by the statement, as well as the transmitter of the influence to B, which again depends upon all the circumstances of the individual case. Whenever such intention is neither established directly by evidence, nor as an implication from the proved or admitted facts, B is not in law the representee; A, of course, is; but, in most of the cases which raise the question, he fails on the ground that he was not the person injured."  In Accredited Aged Care Facilities Pty Ltd versus Banyan Tree (Australia) Pty
Ltd, McDonald J (at [95]) explained it in terms of reasonable foreseeability that the representation would be brought to the attention of others.  Volvo knew - indeed required - that works would be carried out on the
Rosebery premises, and knew or ought to have known that TAA's related company
Harissa was the owner of the Rosebery premises, and that Harissa relied on the representations in undertaking work and incurring expenditure on the Rosebery property. It was plainly foreseeable that the representations would be brought to the notice of whatever entity in the Azzi group owned the property.  However, insofar as the alleged representations were made, it has not been established that they were false or misleading. Mr Trew relied on [Trade
Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), s
A, for the submission that Volvo not having put forward any evidence that it had reasonable grounds for making the representations, it was to be deemed to have none, and the representations were to be taken to be misleading.  I do not agree. I accept that the representations related to a future matter, in that they were a promise to grant TAA rights in the future.
Reasonable grounds for making such a representation include that the representor have the intention and capacity to perform the promise.  Section 51A(2) places an evidentiary onus on a defendant to adduce evidence of reasonable grounds. That evidence need not come from the persons who made the representation, and need not be testimonial: the existence of factors which would establish reasonable grounds may more often more reliably be ascertained from the overall probabilities to which the circumstances of the case give rise, the background and the conduct of the parties prior to the relevant communications [Cummings versus Lewis (1993) AZTPR (Digest) 46-103]. The tender bundle contains extensive documentary material, tendered by both parties, from which the plain inference is that when the representations were made, Volvo had every intention of granting TAA a one-plus-five-year dealership in the SSE AOR, and had the capacity to do so. It was part of
Volvo's "master plan" for Sydney to do so; and its capacity to do so is self- evident. To the extent that any such documents are to be regarded as having been tendered only by the plaintiffs, it would be artificial in the extreme to require that Volvo tender them a second time to comply with <case>.
Accordingly, on the documentary evidence tendered by Volvo as well as by the plaintiffs, I find that Volvo had reasonable grounds for making the representations when they were made.  Even if that conclusion be incorrect, the claims for damages would fail at the hurdle of causation. Even if the representations are taken to have been misleading for lack of reasonable grounds when they were made, the conclusions
I have reached on the contract and repudiation issues destroy any argument that loss was suffered as a result. If a prediction that is made without reasonable grounds nonetheless turns out to be accurate, the contravening conduct causes no loss or damage. Similarly, if a promise made without reasonable grounds is nonetheless performed, no damage results from the misleading and deceptive conduct. The fact that there were not reasonable grounds for it when it was made becomes a causal irrelevance if it in fact is performed. Here, I have concluded that Volvo was, by October 2001, ready willing and able to grant TAA a dealership as represented. The reason it did not do so had nothing to do with any insufficiency of grounds for making the representations when made, but everything to do with TAA's decision to terminate the arrangements.  On the documentary evidence tendered by Volvo as well as by the plaintiffs,
Volvo had reasonable grounds for making the representations when they were made. Accordingly it did not engage in misleading and deceptive conduct.
Moreover, any absence of reasonable grounds was causally irrelevant to any loss suffered by TAA or Harissa, which was occasioned by TAA's termination of the contract.  
Did Volvo engage in misleading conduct that derailed the Hong Kong float?  In the second (at least chronologically) part of the Trade Practices claim,
TAA claims that Volvo is liable for misleading and deceptive conduct, in that by making representations after 1 July 2001, to the effect that TAA was not entitled to a further five year dealership - when, on TAA's case, and as I have found, it was so entitled - Volvo engaged in misleading conduct, which caused the sponsors of the proposed Hong Kong float to abandon it. Although originally the damages claimed extended to the financial benefits which it was said would have flowed to TAA from the float, ultimately the claim was formulated as one for the fees for professional services (including merchant bankers, brokers, underwriters, accountants and legal advisors) related to the float, which TAA says it would not have incurred but for its belief that it had an agreement with a five-year term. Accordingly, the ultimate question is whether TAA's expenditure on the float was wasted, as a result of Volvo engaging in misleading conduct by making representations to the effect that
TAA was not entitled to a replacement five-year term.  In about May 2001, Mr Azzi determined to seek to have the Larke Hoskins
Group listed on the "Second Board" (known as the Growth Enterprise Market) of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. In June 2001, Mr Azzi on behalf of TAA engaged
Oriental Patron, a Hong Kong merchant bank, as sponsors and underwriters for the float. Mr Azzi's vision was to establish car dealerships in the south
China region. The vehicle was to be a company to be incorporated in Bermuda, the Peoples Republic of China or the Cayman Islands, and in due course, on about 16 August 2001, Tengda International Holdings Limited was incorporated in Bermuda for that purpose. Mr Azzi planned to retain at least 51% of the company, and separately to retain control of the real estate in Australia, which would not form part of the listed company's assets. He had what he regarded as solid long-standing relationships with Honda and with Mercedes
Benz, and although his relationship with Volvo was in its early stages and there were some teething problems, he thought it strong and likely to grow.  On 18 June 2001, Oriental Patron issued a "mandate letter", agreeing to act as sponsor, lead manager and book runner for the proposed float of Larke
Hoskins on the GEM. Mr Azzi signed the mandate letter on 30 July 2001 and paid the upfront fee of HK$350,000. Solicitors were retained in Hong Kong (Jennifer
Cheung & Co), Australia (Blake Dawson Waldron) and Bermuda (Conyers Dill & Pearman); and accountants (Arthur Anderson) in Hong Kong and Sydney. On July 2001, Oriental Patron and Arthur Anderson visited Larke Hoskins in
Australia, and undertook work relating to preparation of the prospectus. The proposed timetable for the listing required an application with a final draft of the listing document by 6 September, to go before the listing committee on October 2001.  On 21 August 2001, Mr Azzi sent letters to various international car manufacturers in relation to the prospect of Larke Hoskins obtaining franchise rights for them in China. The addressees were Volkswagen AG, BMW AG, Daimler-
Chrysler AG, Audi AG, Toyota-Cho, Honda Motor Company, Volvo - Sweden, Mazda
Motors (South China) Limited, BMW China, Honda Guangzhou Motors Co Ltd and
Chrysler. Letters were also sent to Honda, Mercedes-Benz and Volvo seeking their consent to the inclusion of their names and disclosure of the principal terms of their dealer agreements in the prospectus. Thus, on 22 August, Mr
Azzi wrote to Mr Snijders of Volvo, relevantly as follows:  
Application for listing of Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd trading as "Larke Hoskins" on the Growth Enterprise Market of the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited  
We refer to the dealer agreement (the "agreement") entered into between your company and ours signed on 16 September 2000.  
We are pleased to advise you that our company is in the process of preparing for the listing of its shares in the Growth Enterprise Market of the Stock
Exchange of Hong Kong Limited. As advised by the sponsor for the company, the project is expected to be completed by the end of the year 2001.  ...  
Please kindly sign and return to us a copy of this letter to confirm that the dealer agreement between your company and Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd will remain unchanged until terminated in accordance with the terms of the said agreement and that your company agrees to the inclusion of its name and disclosure of the principal terms of the dealer agreement in the prospectus.
We look forward to receiving the new five year dealer agreement.  Subscribed to the letter was an acknowledgement for signature on behalf of the addressee as follows:  
We acknowledge receipt of this letter and confirm that we have no objections to the proposed restructuring of Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd and its subsequent listing on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited as stated in this letter.  Volvo's reply of 31 August 2001 included that "with regard to our inclusion within the prospectus documents, we confirm that at the current time our dealer agreement has expired and that the provision of a five year agreement is not yet guaranteed".  Mr Azzi says that TAA would not have incurred the fees for professional services (including merchant banks, brokers, underwriters, accountants and lawyers) that it incurred relating to the float and wasted when the float did not proceed, but for Volvo's representations that he had an agreement with a five-year term. I have found that that representation was not misleading, and no entitlement to damages can therefore flow from reliance on it. However, the conduct said by TAA to have been misleading comprises the Volvo letter of 31
July 2001, the Volvo letter of 31 August 2001, the Volvo letter of 5 September , and the Volvo letter of 7 September 2001. Mr Leung of Oriental Patron says that having been provided with the Volvo letters of 31 August, 5
September and 7 September, he determined that the float could not proceed, a view that Oriental Patron communicated to TAA by letter dated 10 September
He says that he reached that view on or shortly after 31 August 2001, because, "according to those letters, I thought actually the relationship between Mr Azzi and Volvo was not really good and, anyway, they have a dispute. So at the time, if I thought there was any risk, I would not go further through the process until they can settle".  TAA did not rely on any representation contained in the Volvo letters.
Indeed, the Volvo letters, insofar as they conveyed a representation that TAA did not have an entitlement to a five-year term, could not mislead TAA; Mr
Azzi had a firm view of the position, and assertion of Volvo's misconceived position to him could not deceive him. But it is not essential that a plaintiff have relied on the relevant misrepresentation, if others are deceived to the detriment of the plaintiff: the passing-off cases are a plain illustration of this [Janssen-Cilag Pty Ltd versus Pfizer Pty Ltd <case>; [(1992) 37 FCR 526], 530, 532 (Lockhart J)]. TAA contends that the Volvo letters misled Oriental Patron by representing that TAA did not have a guaranteed five-year term, thereby derailing the float. If misleading conduct on the part of Volvo caused the float to be derailed, then TAA might be said to have suffered loss as a result, namely that the expenditure it had invested in the float process would have been wasted as a result of the relevant conduct.  Consideration of whether conduct is misleading within [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and its equivalents requires precision in identifying the conduct in which the defendant is said to have engaged, and the audience and context in which it takes place. What may be misleading in one audience and context is not necessarily misleading in another, and consideration must be given to the class likely to be affected by the conduct in question <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 191], 199]. Where the conduct is directed not at the public at large but to identified individuals, the potential for it to mislead or deceive must be judged in the context of those individuals <case>; [(2004) 218 CLR 592].]  Volvo'[s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s31.html) July letter, which asserted that "our original agreement expired on 1 July ", and that at present Volvo did not see themselves in a position to renew the agreement and proceed with the partnership, was addressed to Mr Azzi at
TAA. It was a "private" communication. Volvo did not then even know of the proposed float, and cannot have supposed that this communication would be passed on to Oriental Patron or anyone else. The only conduct in which Volvo engaged was sending the letter to Mr Azzi. Although on my findings the letter misconceived the position so far as TAA's entitlement to a five-year agreement was concerned, Volvo's conduct in sending it to Mr Azzi could mislead no one.
In any event, it does not appear that the 31 July letter was in fact communicated to Oriental Patron. Volvo did not engage in misleading conduct by communicating its contents to Mr Azzi, and Volvo communicated its contents to no one else.  The 31 August 2001 letter, in asserting that the provision of a five-year agreement was not yet guaranteed, again misconceived the position as I have found it to be. But it too was a communication only to Mr Azzi at TAA, in response to a letter from him. It was not addressed to Oriental Patron or anyone else. As with the 31 July letter, a statement to Mr Azzi of Volvo's position was not going to mislead Mr Azzi, who had his own firm view of the position.  The 5 September letter again contained statements which reflected a misconception of the true position between the parties, in indicating that issues had not been sufficiently resolved to enable a renewal of the dealer agreement, and that a three month probationary period would be imposed. It did not refer to the proposed float, and arose out of the consideration that Volvo was giving to TAA's performance under the dealership to date. It referred to the letter of 31 July and Mr Azzi's response of 15 August, but not to his letters of 24 August or Volvo's of 31 August. It was plainly a communication to Mr Azzi at TAA alone. As with the 31 July and 31 August letters, stating
Volvo's position - albeit a misconceived one - to Mr Azzi was not going to mislead him. And as has already been mentioned, the 5 September letter was withdrawn almost as soon as it was received.  As to the 7 September letter, it stated that the original agreement would be replaced by an agreement for a further five-year term on similar terms and conditions (other than any right to have the agreement extended for a further period of five years). On the conclusions I have reached as to the terms of the contract, this was not inaccurate. The 7 September letter also recorded:  
As you are aware, Volvo believes that Tony Azzi (Automobiles) Pty Ltd is in breach of certain of its obligations under the agreements. Volvo assumes that this fact will also be disclosed in the prospectus.  That was a statement of what Volvo believed. It was addressed to Mr Azzi at TAA. It has not been shown that Volvo did not hold that belief, and it has not been shown that TAA was not in breach of certain of its obligations. It is not to the point that Volvo has not pleaded that TAA was in breach of its obligations; the onus of proving that a representation is false, at least save where <case> can be invoked, is on the plaintiff; and in this case that onus is the relatively difficult one of proving a negative.  The only one of the four letters that Volvo might reasonably have thought would be passed on to Oriental Patron is that of 7 September 2001. It contained no relevant misstatement. As to the other three letters, there is no basis for finding an implied intent on the part of Volvo that they would be brought to the attention, nor that it was reasonably foreseeable that they would come to the notice, of others - in particular, Oriental Patron. It does not follow from Mr Snijders' acknowledgement in the course of his evidence that if the prospectus had gone ahead at that stage, it would have had to disclose that there was no five-year agreement guaranteed, that Volvo engaged in any misleading or deceptive conduct: even if Volvo was aware that the Volvo letters might be passed on, this was not a case in which it effectively put into circulation a misrepresentation: the letters contained a statement of
Volvo's position, in the context of the commercial dispute, and whether they were passed on was entirely in the control of the addressee, TAA, which could do so with any qualifications or disclaimers that it might wish to add.  For a party to a dispute or negotiation to state its position to the other, even though its position is a misconceived one, is not misleading. Such a statement is understood by the recipient as a position statement, not a reliable representation that the position adopted is the one true position.
The Volvo letters contained assertions made in the course of a commercial dispute by one party to another of its position or stance. The recipient TAA would have understood them as containing a statement of Volvo's then position, rather than as a representation that it was the one true position. At the highest, they represented that Volvo believed the position to be as stated, not that the position was in fact and law as asserted. By providing the 7
September letter to TAA, Volvo did not engage in misleading conduct.  Moreover, by 11 September 2001, the listing was already not "on track" according to the timeline. Mr Leung also said that despite the decision not to proceed further on 11 September 2001, that decision could be reversed and the matter reinstated if TAA settled its dispute with Volvo and Volvo was willing to continue the agreement for a further five years. The prospect of reinstating it was lost a month later, when TAA terminated its relationship with Volvo. Even if Oriental Patron had not withdrawn its support for the float when it did, similar circumstances would have caused it to do so, and the float would have been derailed in any event, by that termination, regardless of the "Volvo letters". Accordingly, even if there had been misleading conduct on the part of Volvo in the respects alleged, I would not accept that TAA has suffered damage as a result, because the float would have been derailed, and the expenditure wasted, as a result of the termination of the relationship in early October, in any event.  
Harissa's tort claim  Harissa contends that by repudiating its contract with TAA, Volvo breached a duty of care allegedly owed to Harissa to perform its obligations under the contract with TAA, and that as a result of that breach of duty, Harissa suffered damage - including loss of rental that would have been earned during the currency of the dealership agreement, expenditure incurred by Harissa in establishing the temporary Volvo showroom and service facilities and the permanent showroom and service facilities, and loss of the ability to recoup over the full term of the contract the expenditure and start up costs and losses incurred by Harissa in redeveloping the premises for the purpose of use as a Volvo dealership.  The short answer to this contention is that, as I have concluded, Volvo did not repudiate its contract with TAA, even if Volvo owed Harissa any such duty as is alleged.  The longer answer is that Volvo owed Harissa no such duty in any event. Mr
Trew submitted that a duty should be imposed because TAA were closely related companies operating for the benefit of the Azzi family, that Harissa owned the land and buildings from which TAA conducted its business, that Volvo knew or had the means of knowledge of the relationship between Harissa and TAA and that Harissa was part of an ascertainable group at risk if Volvo's conduct caused damage to TAA, and in those circumstances the likelihood of financial loss to Harissa in the event that Volvo repudiated its contract with TAA was reasonably foreseeable. Against that background, the judgment of the
Queensland Court of Appeal in Fortuna Seafoods Pty Ltd versus The Ship "Eternal
Wind" <case> was invoked. In that case, the ship Eternal Wind collided with the ship
Melina T, which was owed and operated by Fortuna Fishing Pty Ltd; a related company, Fortuna Seafoods Pty Ltd, as agent for Fortuna Fishing processed and sold the fish caught by Fortuna Fishing. Fortuna Seafoods sued the Eternal
Wind for damages for the loss resulting from its inability to process and market the catch, which but for the damage to Melina T, Fortuna Fishing might otherwise have made. In the Court of Appeal, the issue was whether
Eternal Wind, because of its negligent conduct resulting in property loss to
Fortuna Fishing and pure economic loss to Fortuna Seafoods, was liable to compensate Fortuna Seafoods in the tort of negligence. The two Fortuna businesses, though closely related, were conducted by different companies because of the operation of quotas in the industry, which created a commercial necessity for separation; but for that they could have been conducted within the one corporate framework. They were treated by their directors and shareholders as one company although with two bank accounts and separate books of accounts, so that in some respects transactions between them were at arm's length.  McMurdo P concluded, from Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd versus The Dredge
Willemstad <case>; <case>; [(1999) 198 CLR 180], that determination of whether a defendant owed a claimant a duty of care not to cause mere economic loss would depend on a combination of factors including: the reasonable foreseeability of the likelihood of harm; the defendant's knowledge or means of knowledge of an ascertainable determinate class of persons at risk of foreseeable harm; the claimant's vulnerability or whether they are unable to protect themselves from the foreseeable harm; whether the imposition of a duty would impair the defendant's legitimate pursuit of its autonomous commercial interests including the existence of any contracts between the claimant and the defendant; whether the damage flowed from the occurrence of activities within the defendant's control; the closeness of the relationship between the parties; and the existence of any other special circumstances justifying compensation (at [6]).  Critical to the existence of a duty of care in Fortuna was satisfaction that the Eternal Wind had the means of knowledge that Fortuna Seafoods was a member of a determinate ascertainable class of persons or entities who were at risk of foreseeable economic harm if Eternal Wind acted negligently in colliding with and sinking Melina T. That means of knowledge was found, despite the absence of direct evidence of knowledge of the commercial arrangements of the Fortuna companies, or even of the arrangements likely to apply to the ownership and operation of fishing vessels in Australia, from evidence that such arrangements were by 1997 common within the Australian fishing industry - from which it could reasonably be inferred that such information was within the means of knowledge of the Eternal Wind, which inference was the more readily to be drawn in the absence of any contradictory evidence from the Eternal Wind. Dutney J pointed out that the distinguishing feature of the case was that the catching and selling of the fish were necessarily related activities for a commercial fishing operation, and a relevant duty would less likely have been found if Seafoods had purchased the fish at arm's length from Fishing, which was not the case, because the fish were not sold, and Seafoods acted as Fishing's agent.  A significant distinction between Fortuna and the present case is that the relationship between Volvo and TAA was, on relevant assumptions and findings, regulated by a contract, whereas the Eternal Wind's liability to
Fortuna Fishing arose in tort. It was also significant to the imposition of a duty of care on Eternal Wind not negligently to cause economic loss to
Fortuna Seafoods by colliding with and sinking the Melina T, that imposition of such a duty did not impair the Eternal Wind's pursuit of its autonomous commercial interests, and that there was no contractual relationship between the Eternal Wind and Fortuna Seafoods (at [22]).  I would be content to accept that the relationship between Harissa and
TAA, both in terms of shareholdings, and their business relationship, made them a closely integrated group, with Harissa providing the land on which the business operated for a return in rent, and also employing the staff who worked in TAA's business. I would also be content to accept that the relationship between Harissa and TAA - at least to the extent that Harissa owned the land and buildings from which TAA operated - was within the means of knowledge of Volvo: there was evidence that Volvo had been provided with information by Mr Azzi that the main facility of the business (obviously,
Zetland) was "owned", and that Harissa was the "property company" within the group.  However, two significant distinctions deny the imposition of a duty of care to Harissa in this case. The first is that Harissa was remunerated by TAA for TAA's use of its premises by a rental calculated and valued at arm's length. As Dutney J observed (at [105]), in circumstances of arm's length dealings of that type, neither company has a direct interest in the results of the other. Harissa remained entitled to its rent, regardless of the profitability of TAA (and, in particular, regardless of whether or not the
Volvo dealership continued). The second, and more significant, distinction is that whereas in Fortuna the primary liability (in that case to Fortuna
Fishing) was in tort; in this case the primary liability (to TAA) was in contract. To impose on a party to a contract liability arising from breach of that contract to a third party, in circumstances where none of the recognised exceptions to the doctrine of privity apply, would impinge considerably on the ability of the first party to pursue its autonomous commercial interests, and would have the practical effect of extending the scope of liability for breach of contract far beyond its established limits.  Accordingly, Harissa's tort claim must be dismissed.  
The [Industrial Relations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html), claim  TAA contends that the arrangements between it and Volvo were a contract (or arrangement or related condition or collateral arrangement) whereby work was performed in an industry within the meaning of [Industrial
Relations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s105.html), and that the contract was "unfair" within [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html)  The contract was said to be one "whereby a person performs work" in an industry by reason that it obliged TAA to develop "an appropriate management structure and general staffing" and provided that it was "essential that TAA manages and staff proactively participate in the relevant training and develop programs scheduled by Volvo", and that Mr Azzi himself was a working director.
Mr Trew submitted that the word "whereby" did not require that the contract impose a legal obligation to work, and that it was sufficient that the contract anticipated that persons would work in the industry, no matter by whom they might be employed.  There has been extensive recent judicial consideration, in the Industrial
Relations Commission, in the Court of Appeal, and in the High Court, of the limits of jurisdiction under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html)
As it seems to me, the position may now be summarised as follows.  The critical jurisdictional fact in relation to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html) is the identification of a contract, as defined in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s105.html), whereby a person performs work in any industry. In Fish versus Solution 6 Holdings
Ltd [(2006) 227 ALR 241], <case> [see also Batterham versus QSR Limited [(2006) 227 ALR 212];
Old UGC Inc versus Industrial Relations Commission of New South Wales in Court
Session  <case>; [(2006) 227 ALR 190]], the central question was whether the relevant contract was one whereby a person performed work in any industry. In a joint judgment
Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Callinan, and Crennan JJ, after emphasising (at [19]) that the Act was concerned with matters industrial and that what may be avoided or varied was any part of the arrangements "in accordance with" which a person performs work, the court reviewed its earlier decisions on the predecessor sections and said (at [28]):  
The description of a contract as "one which leads directly to a person working in any industry" is not without its difficulty. What is meant, in this context, by "directly"? As Lord Diplock, giving the advice of the Privy
Council in Caltex Oil (Aust) Pty Ltd versus Feenan [[1981] [1 NSWLR 169]], pointed out, this, and other glosses on the section, must not be permitted to divert argument away from the words of the statute in an attempt to "construe" the words in which judges express their reasons for reaching a conclusion in a particular case.
To divert attention in that way is wrong. And even the gloss on the word "whereby" offered in Caltex Oil [at NSWLR 173], (in consequence of which or in fulfilment of which), like the gloss offered earlier in these reasons (according to which), must not be misunderstood as necessarily solving every difficulty that may be presented in seeking to apply the statutory language.  Thus although they are not to be substituted for the words of the statute, as a general indication a contract will be one "whereby" a person performs work in an industry if the work is performed in consequence or in fulfilment of or according to the contract. A contract will satisfy this test if it leads directly to a person working directly in the industry, but it is not enough that a contract lead only indirectly to the performance of work, or merely contemplates that work will be done: the contract must "directly, that is, under or pursuant to its terms, provide for the performance of work in an industry [Production Spray Painting & Panel Beating Pty Ltd versus Newnham
NSWLR 644, 657 (Priestley and Handley JJA); Mitchforce Pty Ltd v
Industrial Relations Commission <case>; [(2003) 57 NSWLR 212], 226 [49]]. That issue has been expressed in terms of whether the relevant contract "requires" a person to perform work [Majik Markets Pty
Ltd versus Brake & Service Centre Drummoyne Pty Ltd [(1991) 28 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2028%20NSWLR%20443 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 465A; Production Spray Painting, 657; Solution 6 (35)]. At least it is necessary that the impugned agreement or arrangement itself directly envisaged the employment of a person or persons in industry and have a recognisable impact upon the conditions of that employment [VG Haulage Services Pty Ltd Ex parte; Re Industrial Commission of NSW [[1972] 2 NSWLR 81], 88;
Solution 6, 217 [12]-[14]; Solution 6 Holdings Pty Ltd versus Industrial
Relations Commission of NSW <case>; [(2004) 60 NSWLR 558], 576].  It is not a jurisdictional requirement that a person performing the work be the contracting party <case>; IR 1, [46], [54]]. However, it is doubtful that the performance of functions as a director satisfies the jurisdictional requirements of <case> as "performance of work in any industry" [Brandster versus Tryak Pty Ltd [(1989) 28
IR 329](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2028%20IR%20329 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 333 (Glynn J); QSR Limited versus Industrial Relations Commission of New South
Wales <case> [42], [43]].  A proper approach to statutory interpretation requires <case> to be read and understood in an industrial context and within a legislative scheme relating to the performance of work, and the Commission's powers under <case> extend only to such aspects of the contract or arrangement as closely relate to the performance of work in an industry. What emerges importantly from Fish v Solution 6 in the High Court is that the power to avoid or vary a contract within the section is limited to those parts of the arrangements between the parties according to which a person performs work. As their Honours said (at [41]):  
The second consideration was mentioned earlier in these reasons and is not unrelated to the first. Performance of work in an industry is the hinge about which <case> turns. It is the arrangements (contractual and non-contractual) whereby a person performs work in an industry that the commission may avoid or vary. That is, it is the arrangements (contractual and non-contractual) according to which a person performs the work (or in consequence of which or in fulfilment of which a person performs that work) which may be avoided or varied. And although the notion of "avoiding" an arrangement that is not enforceable may be awkward, determining that some new arrangement will obtain for the future (thus "varying" the arrangement) presents no such awkward juxtaposition of ideas. Further, to focus attention upon the arrangements whereby a person performs work in an industry, no matter whether the arrangement is found in the contract the parties have made or only in some related condition or collateral arrangement, sufficiently meets the need, identified by Barwick CJ in Brown [at CLR [164; ALR 320]], to recognise that these provisions of the Act have, as one important purpose, dealing with subterfuges which take workers outside the operation of industrial instruments intended to protect workers in an industry. At the same time, to read <case> as hinged about performance of work in any industry and empowering the commission to deal only with such of the arrangements between parties as can be described as a contract whereby a person performs work in any industry confines the jurisdiction of the commission to declare a contract void or to vary it within bounds that leave intact the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court over other kinds of contractual obligations.  Section 106 does not authorise a finding of contractual unfairness in a particular case based on no more than conduct in breach of contract for which there is an adequate remedy under the general law. A contract is not unfair whenever it leaves the employee to remedies under the general law. Before it could be unfair on that basis there would need to be a finding that those remedies were relevantly inadequate or unfair in regard to the contract at hand, and it is doubtful that even that type of finding is within the contemplation of the section <case>; [(2004) 61 NSWLR 661].]  The clarification by the High Court in Fish versus Solution 6 that the power to avoid or vary a contract within <case> is limited to those parts of the arrangements between the parties according to which a person performs work facilitates resolution of the issue in the present case. The parties to the relevant contract were TAA and Volvo. TAA was appointed a non-exclusive dealer for the sale and servicing of cars and the sale of products in the relevant
AOR, and agreed to promote and market Volvo's products. The contract obliged
TAA to employ "such adequately trained and experienced sales and service personnel as may be necessary to ensure that the dealer provides to its customers the highest standard of service and to properly perform all of the dealer's duties, obligations and responsibilities pursuant to this agreement".  The work in TAA's business was performed by some 194 persons, employed not by TAA but by Harissa as trustee of the Tacasa Service Trust. Those employees apparently included Mr Azzi. Although the Representation letter contained provisions to the effect that it was essential that TAA managers and staff proactively participate in the relevant training and development programs scheduled by Volvo, and that TAA submit "a detailed management and staffing structure" for approval and appoint a dedicated general manager with responsibilities for all functions of the Volvo business, these were not provisions according to which the staff worked in TAA's business: they worked under and according to their employment contracts with Harissa. Insofar as it provided for the "management" of TAA by Mr Azzi, it did not regulate the conditions according to which he worked; moreover, that it contemplated his involvement as a director does not make it a contract whereby he worked in an industry [Brandster versus Tryak; QSR Limited versus Industrial Relations
Commission].  In the relatively early decision of D&G Motors Pty Ltd versus Capitol
Motors Ltd [[1973] AR 806],
Watson J held that the predecessor section, Industrial Arbitration Act , <case>, did not confer jurisdiction to give relief in respect of a motor dealership franchise, which was:  ... a contract or arrangement in the everyday commercial sense of the word dealing with the provision of goods and services. It is consequential and incidental to that main purpose only that persons are employed. It is not a situation to which <case> is directed.  His Honour's approach sits comfortably with recent authority in respect of s 106, including McDonald's Australia Ltd versus Industrial Relations Commission of NSW <case> and Solution 6. As his Honour said, the arrangements could not be described as a "cover for a one man or even perhaps a two man enterprise whereby the persons concerned may be said under the arrangement to be required directly to work in an industry".  While the arrangements between Volvo and TAA required TAA to appoint a general manager and obtain approval of a management and staffing structure, they did not prescribe, and had no impact on, the conditions of employment of anyone who performed that work. They were not arrangements "whereby" any person performed work. Accordingly, the contract between Volvo and TAA was not one whereby any person performed work in an industry.  If I be wrong in that conclusion, nonetheless the relief sought is not in respect of any provisions of the contract which relate to the performance of work in an industry. Avoiding or varying the arrangements between Volvo and
TAA that required TAA to appoint a general manager and obtain approval of a management and staffing structure would not avail TAA, and is not the relief that TAA seeks.  The "unfairness" for which TAA contended was apparently two-fold:  * If it were found that the contract did not require there to be renewal of the five-year agreement, that was unfair, because it was contrary to representations made to the effect that there would be such a renewal, and anything less than that would not provide a fair return on the investment;  * If there were a contract, nonetheless its terms were inadequate to spell out clearly TAA's rights and thus enabled Volvo to dispute them, the unfairness lying in the contract's failure precisely to provide for the rights of the parties in such a way as to avoid disputes between them.  As to the first suggested basis of unfairness, my conclusion that the contract did provide for a replacement five-year term is a complete answer.
Breach, or repudiation, of a contract by a contracting party does not make the contract unfair [Sydney Water, 661]. As to the second, a contract is not relevantly unfair because its terms are not precise. Just how it was said that the terms were not sufficiently precise was never articulated.  Accordingly, the <case> claim fails on the grounds that the contract is not one within <case>, that the relief sought is not in respect of any provisions of the contract that relate to the performance of work in an industry, and in any event the contract was not relevantly unfair.  
Damages  The result of my conclusions to this point is that all the plaintiffs' claims fail on liability, so that there is no need to assess damages. However, lest I be found to have erred in the conclusions I have reached on liability,
I will address, albeit in less detail than I otherwise might, the question of damages.  The plaintiffs' damages claims may be summarised as follows:  * TAA claims damages for breach of contract, being its lost profits for the Volvo dealership from October 2001 to June 2006 (said to be $532,576) and the lost opportunity of renewing the dealership for a further term or terms (said to be $518,872);  * Alternatively, TAA claims damages under the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [ss 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), and/or [Industrial Relations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html), being its trading losses incurred by reason of having embarked on the Volvo dealership in reliance upon Volvo's representation that it would have a one-plus-five-year term (said to be $162,102);  * Additionally, TAA claims damages under [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [ss 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), being the expenditure it incurred and claims to have wasted on the Hong Kong Float (said to be $315,123); and  * Harissa claims damages under [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [ss 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), and/or in tort for negligence, and/or under [Industrial Relations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s 106](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html), being the expenditure it incurred in effecting improvements to the Rosebery property in reliance upon Volvo's representation that TAA would have a one-plus-five-year term (said to be $1,002,030).  
TAA's damages for breach of contract  Two experts - Mr Watt of Horwaths for the plaintiffs, and Mr Ross of Ernst & Young for Volvo - prepared separate reports, and subsequently conferred and prepared a joint report [CX32]. On his assumptions and opinions, Mr Watt concluded that TAA had lost profits of $532,576 for the five-year segment from to 2006 [CX32, Appendix B1], whereas Mr Ross was of opinion that during the same period TAA would have made losses under the Volvo dealership of some $543,863, meaning that there was no loss of profits at all [CX32, Appendix
B2]. A later revision by Mr Ross, referred to under the heading "new to used car ratio" below, reduced his projected losses by $160,000, to $383,783.  The effect of the joint report to leave in dispute six parameters which substantially accounted for the differences in their overall assessment of the lost profits claim. Mr Watt and Mr Ross indicated that upon resolution of the disputed parameters, they would then readily be able to produce the final mathematical calculations. I indicated that I would resolve the disputed parameters and remit the matter to the accountants for the final calculation of loss under this head if required. The remaining disputed issues were:  * New car market share;  * New to used car sales ratio;  * Used car gross margins;  * Used car days supply;  * Interest expense in [Parts Department](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/index.html#p500epartment);  * Allowance for donations and bad debts.  These parameters have varying impacts on the ultimate calculations of the two accountants. Mr Ross prepared a schedule which indicates the approximate impact of adopting one assumption rather than the other on their respective valuations, in respect of the SSE AOR (but not the Southern AOR, so the overall impact would be somewhat greater). Where I indicate below the potential impact of a parameter, it is taken from Mr Ross' schedule [DX44], as amended [DX47], and indicates the effect of changing only that one parameter; because the parameters are inter-related, it is not possible to accumulate them to produce a final overall result. However, it does give some indication of the relative significance and impact of each disputed parameter.  While there might be something to be said for the view, advanced by Mr
West, that on occasion Mr Watt seemed to lose the detached objectivity expected of an expert, ultimately, on the issues which remain for determination, the decisive matters are whether the assumptions on which each relied are made good, and whether, to the extent that each made projections from those assumptions, they are reasonable projections having regard to all relevant considerations. I have resolved these matters according to the content of their evidence, and not impressions of their demeanour.  
New car market share  Mr Watt projected that TAA's market share would progressively grow from .6% of the Australian Volvo new car market (being its average over the last four months of operation of the dealership) to reach 6.1% in 2001/02 and 6.8% in 2002/03 until 2006. Mr Ross considered that TAA's new car market share would be in the range 5.1-5.6% throughout that period, but ultimately was prepared to concede 5.6%. This is a very material parameter: adoption of Mr
Watt's assumption would reduce Mr Ross' projected losses by about $400,000; whereas adoption of Mr Ross' assumption would reduce Mr Watts' projected profits by about $440,000.  In my view, Mr Watt's reliance on the last four months of operation was unduly selective, and resulted in a projection based on the best months of the last twelve that overlooked the poorer months. Consideration of the data, as recorded in the graphs in evidence - in particular, those which show TAA's actual Volvo sales as a percentage of total Australian sales [PX48] - persuade me that the starting point should be the average of the last twelve months, not four months, which was 5.1%, rather than 5.6%, for the period to June However, Mr Ross failed to take into account the impact of Volvo's three- dealer strategy, which would probably increase the market share of the remaining dealers. The Volvo "Dealer Sales All" summary for year to date 24
June 2001 [TB6/2035] indicates that the total Australian market was $10,678,577, of which nearly 33% was attributable to seven Sydney dealers (Alto, SVM, Denlo, TAA (Sydney City Volvo), Peter Warren Liverpool, Dominelli and Annlyn). Removal of Dominelli alone - which was in TAA's AOR, was contemplated in the negotiations with TAA and was ultimately implemented - would have freed up a further 2.43% of the Australian market, at least some of which would have flowed to TAA. However, it was also anticipated - and was the case - that Dominelli would take some two years to wind down. Some of that flow would already have commenced by late 2001, but it is reasonable to project that TAA's market share would not have remained static but grown further as Dominelli closed down, and to allow for increments in market share of 0.5% per annum from a starting point of 5.1% to June 2002, to 5.6% for the year to June 2003, 6.1% to June 2004, and thereafter 6.6%.  
New to used car sales ratio  Mr Ross initially assumed a new/used car sales ratio of 1:0.30 throughout the projection period; in the joint report he was prepared to accept 1:0.51 for 2002 and 1:0.4 thereafter. However, in the course of his evidence he reconsidered his position and produced a supplementary report in which he expressed the view that it was not safe to rely upon some of the data he had included in his projections (namely the results for the first four months of trading, which were not a reliable indicator), and that a reasonable projection was in the range 1:0.5 to 1:0.6, in which range Mr Watt'[s :0.57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s1.html) fell.  I therefore accept a ratio of 1:0.57. As foreshadowed above, this impacts on the overall result by reducing Mr Ross' projected losses for the five-year period by $160,000, to $383,783.  
Used car gross margins  Mr Watt assumed used car margins of $2,450 for 2002 and 2003, reducing to $2,140 in 2004 to 2006. Mr Ross originally assumed $2,600, but reduced this to $2,000 (for all relevant years) in the Joint Report. The difference has a potential impact of $85,000 on Mr Ross' calculation, and of $140,000 on Mr
Watt's calculation.  Mr Ross' assumption proceeded on the basis that Mr Watt's calculations made no allowance for write-downs in the value of TAA's used car stock during the relevant period. Mr Watt acknowledges that when a write-down which occurred in 2001 is taken into account, the gross margin per unit achieved during the 16 months to 31 October 2001 was just over $2,000, but considers that that write-down was a one-off transaction, relating to a delivery of a tranche of vehicles from Volvo, which would not usually be a supplier of used cars, without which the margin was $2,450. To that figure he applied the "Horwath benchmarks" for luxury dealerships, deflating the figures for later years to $2,140. He considers that by deflating the gross margin by the apparent downward trend in the industry as a whole, sufficient allowance was made for future write-downs. Mr Ross rejoins that an assumption that TAA would not incur write-downs in later years is inconsistent with its own experience in the Volvo and Honda dealerships between 2001 and 2005, and with normal business conditions. Mr Smith gave evidence that there were in fact write- downs each year at balance sheet date.  In my view there is force in the contention that Mr Ross has used as the basis of his projection a year in which there was an atypical write-down, but there is also force in the view that some write-downs would occur in the future. Accordingly, the most probable position lies somewhere between the two positions: I would allow used car margins of $2,300 for 2002 and 2003, reducing to $2,100 in 2004 to 2006.  
Used car days supply  Mr Watts assumed that TAA would hold on average 2.5 months' supply of used cars; Mr Ross assumed 3.5 months. This affects car stock levels and resultant interest expenses. This parameter has a potential impact of about $67,000 on
Mr Ross' calculation, and $70,000 on Mr Watt's.  Mr Watts' assumption was based on instructions that "days supply" in 2002 and thereafter would be 2.5 months. Mr Smith gave evidence that TAA usually held 2.5 months supply, but in cross-examination conceded that this was not a figure that he had worked out, but a "benchmark". Mr Ross' 3.5 months was the figure originally worked out by Mr Watts as being the actual experience in ; it is not right to say that it was simply the figure first used by Mr
Watt, as it appears to be Mr Watt's calculation of the actual 2001 result. Mr
Watt responds that there is no reason why later years should be consistent with 2001, if management had determined to reduce the level of inventory carried. However, actual results show holdings increasing to 10.0 months in
September and 6.7 months in October 2001. They were 2.9 in July and August. Mr
Ross points out, and Mr Watt agreed, that 3.5 months in fact was consistent with TAA's reported stocking levels for used cars in its Honda dealership. Mr
Ross also points out that Mr Watt's calculations of the projected holdings are circular, because they assume a target of 2.5 months, rather than the actual result for 2001 of 3.5 months.  In my view the consistency of the figures for the Honda dealership (3.5 months), and the actual result for 2001 for the Volvo dealership of 3.5 months, and the apparent results for the first four months of 2001/02, and Mr
Smith's concession that it was a benchmark and not an actual calculated figure, seriously undermine Mr Smith's evidence that it was practice to hold only 2.5 months of used car stock. I prefer, and would adopt, Mr Ross' 3.5 months.  
Interest expense in [Parts Department](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/index.html#p500epartment)  Although Mr Ross originally proposed a charge of 6.8% of calculated parts supply, in the Joint Report he did not press this position, accepting that the funding cost for parts was incorporated in the projections through movements in the cash balances.  
Miscellaneous expenses allowance: donations and bad debts  Mr Watt made no allowance for donations, on the basis that they are a discretionary expense. He allowed 0.1% of gross profit for bad debts, based on actual results. Mr Ross provided for a miscellaneous expenses allowance of 1% of dealership gross margin covering donations (which he originally separately allowed at 0.4%), bad debts (which he originally separately allowed at 0.3%), data processing and miscellaneous expenses. The difference potentially impacts on Mr Ross' valuation by $104,000, and on Mr Watt's by $190,000.  Mr Watt's bad debt figure is calculated from TAA's actual results, excluding a debt associated with a venture capital transaction outside its normal trading operations. Mr Smith said that bad debt related to vehicle sale transactions was very rare. Mr Ross conceded that in a context of sales of new and used vehicles, parts and services on a cash on delivery basis, provision for 0.3% bad debt would be excessive.  Mr Ross' donation figure is based largely on a donation of a motor vehicle ($86,000) in 2001 to Yeshiva College; in later years donations were about $10,000 per annum. On the one hand, donations generate goodwill. On the other, they are discretionary, but rather like advertising expenditure, that does not mean that they are to be excluded. Some donations were likely to continue, but much more likely in the order of $10,000 per annum than $86,000 per annum.  I would allow for these, and any other miscellaneous expenses, by a general allowance of 0.4% of gross profit.  
Other parameters  There were some other parameters in respect of which Mr Ross did not agree with Mr Watt's assumptions, in particular (1) Service Department monthly revenue, (2) [Parts
Department](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/index.html#p500epartment) monthly revenue, (3) New Car Department advertising costs, and (4) Finance and
Insurance Department performance. However Mr Ross, in his alternative lost profits calculation, adopted Mr Watt's assumptions in these respects, though considering that they should be changed. Although the evidence traversed these issues, they were not addressed in the parties' submissions.  In my view, it is reasonable, based on the trends of the preceding twelve months to October 2001, to assume that Service Department revenue would continue to grow, consistent with Mr Watt's prediction, and having regard also to the progressive implementation of the "three-dealer" policy. As to [Parts
Department](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/index.html#p500epartment) revenue, I prefer Mr Ross' prediction, because Mr Watt's is considerably influenced by the "out-of-line" result for September 2001. As to New Car
Department Advertising expenses, I prefer Mr Ross' projection, as it is based on the relationship between the actual experience of TAA's Volvo dealership and the Horwath industry benchmarks for luxury vehicles, whereas Mr Watt's is based on the relationship between the experience of TAA's Honda dealership and the Horwath industry benchmarks for non-luxury vehicles; the former is a much more direct analogy. And on Finance and Insurance Department performance, I prefer Mr Ross' assumption that there would be no change in employees and no change in performance, as it reflects the historical position.  
Opportunity of renewed term  I would not allow damages in respect of any lost opportunity for a further term after the five-year term, as I have found that there was no contractual right to any such term, and damages are to be assessed on the basis that the contract would have been performed in the manner least unfavourable to the defendant.  
TAA's trading losses claim  In assessing damages under [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), one is generally concerned to compare the position of the plaintiff as it has eventuated, with the position in which it would have been had the contravening conduct not taken place. On relevant assumptions, had the representations not been made, TAA would not have commenced the Volvo dealership.  Although TAA incurred trading losses from the Volvo franchise of $162,102 in the first twelve months of the dealership, which amount is the subject of its claim, these were offset by profits of $196,958 for the following five months [CX32: Joint Report of Watt and Ross, Appendix N, Sch 11A, 11B].
Overall, TAA did not make a loss as a result of the Volvo dealership.
Accordingly, I would reject its claim for "start-up costs" or "trading losses".  
TAA's Hong Kong float claim  In respect of the Hong Kong float, TAA claims damages in the sum of $315,123.10, being its expenditure on the float. This amount is said to be proved by the evidence of Mr Smith, who aggregated the invoices and ledger entries in respect of what was said to be expenditure on the float at $327,596.58, after deducting two invoices totalling $12,473.90 which were shown by his cross-examination to be legal fees relating to the current dispute and not to the float. However, cross-examination of Mr Smith also demonstrated that other expenses - including legal costs of Bamford Hogg totalling $12,306, and audit fees of Horwaths totalling $13,250 - had also been wrongly included. Accordingly, I would disallow a further $25,256, reducing the claim to $289,867.  Moreover, it became apparent that Mr Smith had no personal knowledge of the application of payments, apparently to Hong Kong, of $56,000 and $200,000, in respect of which he merely relied on what he was told by Mr Azzi; nonetheless, on balance I would be prepared to accept that these were probably costs of the float.  Accordingly, had TAA succeeded on this claim, I would have allowed damages in the sum of $289,867.  
Harissa's expenditure claim  Harissa's damages claim (for misleading and deceptive conduct, or in tort, or for a monetary payment under [s )](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s106.html) is based on its expenditure on the development and improvement of the Rosebery property. Harissa claims the cost of the development work for upgrading the
Rosebery property to meet the requirements of Volvo. The first stage of these works, carried out in mid 2000, comprised a temporary Volvo showroom, temporary Volvo service facilities, and showroom and service facilities for
Mercedes Benz Light Commercial. The second stage of these works, underway in late 2001, comprised the second Volvo showroom, permanent Volvo service facilities, and areas for common use by the Volvo, Mercedes and Honda dealerships.  The total expenditure on Stage 1 attributable to the Volvo dealership, apportioned according to the evidence of the project manager Mr Bowman to exclude work attributable to the Mercedes dealership, amounted to $264,210.69 [Schedule 1 to Plaintiffs' Submissions]. The total expenditure on Stage 2 included payments direct to contractors and suppliers of $297,401.36 [Schedule ], and payments to the project manager Bowcon of $1,060,000 [Schedule 3]. I accept that it was reasonable for Harissa to complete the works once commenced, and not leave the property incomplete, and so I would not exclude expenditure incurred after the contract was terminated to complete the works.
A few items could be allocated with certainty to the Volvo dealership.
Otherwise, Mr Smith, Harissa's accountant, allocated 50 percent of the building costs to the Volvo dealership, producing a total of $732,294.82 [Schedule 4]; Mr Bowman, the project manager, where he was unable to allocate an item precisely to one dealership or another, estimated that at least 33.3% of the balance was attributable to the Volvo dealership works, producing $556,993.74 [Schedule 5]. Mr West submitted that there was no sufficient analysis of the stage 2 expenditure on which the court could safely rely in determining how much was attributable to the Volvo dealership, but Mr Bowman, who was the project manager, was able to express the view that not less than .33% was attributable to it. That assessment is an imperfect one, but in assessing damages one has to do the best one can with the material available, and having regard to the scope of the Stage 2 works and their apparent relationship to each of the dealerships and "common areas", and to the circumstance that Mr Smith's assessment is that 50% was attributable to the
Volvo dealership, I can be satisfied that Mr Bowman's assessment is reasonable, if not conservative. As Mr Bowman was the project manager who supervised the works, I am inclined to prefer his somewhat more conservative assessment to that of Mr Smith; in other words Harissa has not established to the requisite standard that more than one-third of the works not precisely allocated were attributable to the Volvo dealership. Accordingly the cost of the relevant Stage 2 works was $556,993.74, and the total upgrade costs of both stages $821,203.  Mr West submits that the costs of Stage 1 are not recoverable, because they were expenditure incurred (1) before the commencement of the dealership, and (2) to support an income stream which was realised for the life of the temporary showroom, so that Harissa should not be entitled to the costs of establishing the temporary facility which enabled the economic activity to commence and income to be generated by that activity during the life of the temporary showroom: in other words, the expenditure on the first temporary showroom should not be recoverable because the benefit it was intended to generate was realised. As to Stage 2, Mr West accepted that they fell into a different category, as expenditure that might well have been wasted by reason of any relevant misrepresentation or repudiation. In respect of Stage 1, Mr
Trew responds that the expenditure on the temporary showroom was incurred as part of the costs of establishing the whole (one-plus-five-year) dealership, not just the first year or so of it, and would not have been incurred but for the expectation that there would be a long-term dealership.  In my view, there are elements of accuracy in both submissions in this respect. On relevant assumptions, had the representations not been made, TAA would not have commenced the Volvo dealership, and Harissa would not have undertaken any of the Stage 1 or Stage 2 improvements; whereas because of the representations, TAA traded as a Volvo dealer for 16 months, and Harissa undertook the improvements. TAA ultimately traded at a profit of $24,912 for the 17-month period of the dealership, after appropriate adjustments [CX32:
Joint Report of Watt and Ross, Appendix O]. Accordingly, the relevant comparison for the purpose of assessing damages is that prima facie TAA is better-off by $24,912, and Harissa worse off by about $821,203, than would have been the case but for their reliance on the relevant conduct. Given the relationship between TAA and Harissa, in my view it is appropriate to assess
Harissa's loss on the footing that a small part, namely $24,912, of the economic benefit which the improvements were intended to generate has been realised, which amount should be deducted from Harissa's claim: although not a benefit gained directly by Harissa, Harissa's purpose in upgrading the premises was to create income for TAA, and to the extent that that purpose was achieved, credit should be given.  I have considered whether there should be a further discount on account of the improvements having added value to Harissa's property regardless of the loss of the Volvo dealership, or having produced some further economic benefit in their subsequent use. However, Mr Azzi's evidence, which I accept on this issue because it is consistent with his documented insistence that he needed a long-term dealership, is that they would not have been undertaken but for the
Volvo dealership. Since the loss of the dealership, the plaintiffs have been unsuccessful in obtaining another dealership to replace it; they used the temporary showroom area for storing pre-delivery Honda cars on an ad hoc basis (but it was easier to store them elsewhere), and from December 2001 to January the temporary Volvo showroom was used to display "prestige used cars".
Since September 2003, parts of the former Volvo service and parts facility have been leased. The possibility of redeveloping and subdividing the whole site has been explored, and may well be the highest and best use of the property. In short, the evidence does not enable me to conclude that the Stage and Stage 2 improvements are now reflected in additional value in Harissa's property. There was no need to have an upgrade to park pre-delivery Hondas, nor to have service bays and hoists areas to rent out space to Design
Warehouse. The fact that the former Volvo facilities have to some extent been economically exploited subsequently does not require a conclusion that this is a return on the improvements; the previously existing, unimproved facilities might have generated an equivalent return. Ultimately, the evidence does not establish that any economic benefit subsequently generated from the premises was attributable to the improvements or could not otherwise have been derived, and on this issue the defendants bear at least an evidentiary onus; accordingly there is insufficient evidence to establish that any such discount is justified.  Accordingly, under this head, had Harissa succeeded, I would have allowed $796,291.  
Conclusion  My conclusions may be summarised as follows.  There was a binding contract between Volvo and TAA, ultimately encapsulated in the final version of the Representation letter, by which Volvo was obliged to grant TAA a dealership for a term of one year, to be replaced by a further dealership for a term of five years before or at the expiration of the initial one-year period. The parties envisaged that in the case of both the one-year and the five-year dealerships, they might agree on additional terms, particularly in relation to renewal, non-renewal and termination, but were content to be bound in the meantime and in the absence of further agreement by the terms of the Representation letter. It was not a term of the
Representation letter that any further agreement must provide for a renewal (or for that matter for termination), since such provisions would require the further agreement of the parties.  My conclusion that there was a binding contract to that effect renders it unnecessary to consider the alternative argument based on equitable estoppel.  As at 8 October 2001, Volvo was not evincing an intention that it would not perform its contractual obligation by granting TAA a five-year dealership from 1 July 2001. Even if it had previously engaged in conduct that might have conveyed such an intent, it had resiled from it by 7 September. Far from evincing an intention not to be bound, the Clayton Utz correspondence of 12 and 13 September manifested an acceptance that Volvo was bound, and an intention to perform, and effectively acknowledged that TAA already had their replacement five-year term, it remaining only appropriately to document it. In the absence of further agreement, Volvo was not bound to include a provision for renewal, but it was entitled to negotiate for provisions both for renewal and for termination. Inclusion of a 120-day termination on notice provision was consistent with the intention of the parties that there be further negotiation as to, inter alia, provisions for termination. Accordingly, I am unable to accept that there was any repudiation available to be accepted by
TAA as at 8 October 2001. As the parties never agreed on what provisions should be included in the five-year agreement as to renewal, non-renewal or termination, their position remained governed in those respects by the
Representation letter insofar as it made any provision, and, insofar as it did not, by the operation of law. It follows that as at 8 October 2001, there was no repudiation by Volvo available for acceptance by TAA, and TAA was not entitled to terminate for repudiation, as it purported to do.  Volvo made representations, to TAA and Mr Azzi on behalf of TAA, to the effect that Volvo would grant TAA a Volvo dealership for one year, to be replaced by a five-year dealership, in respect of the SSE AOR, including the
Southern Suburbs territory. It was reasonably foreseeable to Volvo that those representations would be relied on by Harissa, which incurred expenditure on the works on its property, in particular in establishing the temporary showroom and subsequently the permanent showroom. However, there was no representation that the one-year and five-year agreements would contain a provision for renewal, nor that they could not contain a provision for termination other than for cause.  On the documentary evidence tendered by Volvo as well as by the plaintiffs, Volvo had reasonable grounds for making the representations when they were made. Accordingly it did not engage in misleading and deceptive conduct. Moreover, any absence of reasonable grounds was causally irrelevant to any loss suffered by TAA or Harissa, which was occasioned by TAA's termination of the contract.  The only one of the four Volvo letters that Volvo might reasonably have thought would be passed on to Oriental Patron is that of 7 September 2001, which contained no relevant misstatement. As to the other three, there is no basis for finding an implied intent on the part of Volvo that they would be brought to the attention, nor that it was reasonably foreseeable that they would come to the notice, of others - in particular, Oriental Patron. Although the letters misconceived the true position, they were a statement by Volvo of its position to TAA, in the context of the commercial dispute, and not a reliable representation that Volvo's position was the correct one. At the highest, they represented that Volvo believed the position to be as stated, not that the position was in fact and law as asserted. By sending the Volvo letters to TAA, asserting its position, Volvo did not engage in misleading conduct. Moreover, even if there had been misleading conduct on the part of
Volvo in these respects, TAA did not suffer damage as a result, because the float would have been derailed, and the expenditure wasted in any event, as a result of the termination of the relationship by TAA in early October.  Volvo did not breach a duty of care owed to Harissa to perform its obligations under the contract with TAA, by repudiating its contract with TAA: first because Volvo did not repudiate its contract with TAA; and secondly because Volvo owed Harissa no such duty, having regard to the circumstances that Harissa was remunerated by TAA for TAA's use of its premises by a rental calculated and valued at arm's length, and thus had no direct interest in the results of TAA, remaining entitled to its rent regardless of the profitability of TAA (and, in particular, regardless of whether or not the Volvo dealership continued); and because any primary liability of Volvo (to TAA) was in contract not tort, and to impose on a contracting party liability arising from breach of that contract to a third party, in circumstances where none of the recognised exceptions to the doctrine of privity apply, would impinge considerably on the ability of the first party to pursue its autonomous commercial interests, and would have the practical effect of extending the scope of liability for breach of contract far beyond its established limits.  While the arrangements between Volvo and TAA required TAA to appoint a general manager and obtain approval of a management and staffing structure, they did not prescribe, and had no impact on, the conditions of employment of anyone who performed that work. They were not arrangements "whereby" any person performed work. Accordingly, the contract between Volvo and TAA was not one whereby any person performed work in an industry. Moreover, the relief sought by TAA is not in respect of any provisions of the contract that relate to the performance of work in an industry, and is therefore not within power under [Industrial Relations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html)  The conclusion that the contract did provide for a replacement five-year term is a complete answer to the contention that the contract was unfair by reason of not providing for such a term. And a contract is not relevantly unfair just because its terms are imprecise; evaluation of its fairness depends on identification of its terms, however imprecise they may be.  Accordingly, all the plaintiffs' claims fail on liability. Had it been necessary to assess damages, I would have reached the following conclusions.  On TAA's claim for damages for breach of contract, being its lost profits for the Volvo dealership from October 2001 to June 2006:  * TAA's new car market share would have been 5.1% to June 2002, and would have grown further as Dominelli closed down, to 5.6% for the year to June 2003, 6.1% to June 2004, and thereafter 6.6%.  * The new to used car sales ratio would have been 1:0.57.  * Used car margins would have been $2,300 for 2002 and 2003, reducing to $2,100 in 2004 to 2006.  * TAA would have maintained 3.5 months used car stock supply.  * No provision should be made for interest expense in the [Parts Department.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/index.html#p500epartment)  * Bad debts, donations, and any other miscellaneous expenses, should be covered by a general allowance of 0.4% of gross profit.  * On Service Department revenue I prefer Mr Watt's prediction. As to [Parts Department](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/index.html#p500epartment) revenue, I prefer Mr Ross' prediction. As to New Car Department Advertising expenses, I prefer Mr Ross' projection. And on Finance and Insurance Department performance, I also prefer Mr Ross' assumption.  * I would not have allowed damages in respect of any lost opportunity for a further term after the five-year term, as I have found that there was no contractual right to any such term.  On TAA's claims for damages under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), and/or [Industrial Relations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html), being its trading losses incurred by reason of having embarked on the Volvo dealership in reliance upon Volvo's representation that it would have a one- plus-five-year term, I would hold that TAA suffered no relevant loss or damage, as although it incurred trading losses from the Volvo franchise of $162,102 in the first twelve months of the dealership, these were offset by profits of $196,958 in the following five months.  On TAA's claim for damages under [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), being the expenditure it incurred and claims to have wasted on the Hong Kong
Float, I would have allowed damages in the amount of $289,867.  On Harissa's claim for damages under [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) and [82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html), and/or in tort for negligence, and/or under [Industrial Relations
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/s106.html), being the expenditure it incurred in effecting improvements to the Rosebery property in reliance upon Volvo's representation that TAA would have a one- plus-five-year term, I would have allowed damages in the amount of $796,291.  My orders are:  
In proceedings 50146/03, I give judgment for the defendant, with costs.  
In proceedings 50156/03, I order that the proceedings be dismissed, with costs.  
I grant liberty to the parties to apply, by arrangement to be made with my associate within 7 days, to set aside or vary the costs orders, and for other costs orders in their place.  
LAST UPDATED: 20 April 2007 * * * 
