

C. I. and D. Industries Pty Limited versus Keeling and Ors [1997] NSWSC 91 (26
March 1997) 
C. I. & D. Industries Pty Limited versus Keeling & Ors /97 
WEDNESDAY 26 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
ABADEE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, C. I. & D. Industries Pty Limited ("Industries") seeks an order that the first defendant, the partners of McCulloch & Buggy ("the solicitors") be restrained from acting or continuing to act as solicitors for the second defendant, Mercantile Mutual Insurance (Australia) Limited ("the insurer") in Supreme Court proceedings No. 20096 of 1996. A further order is sought restraining the solicitors from disclosing to any person confidential information acquired or obtained during the course of the solicitors acting for the insurer during the period from 23 July 1996 to 21 January 1997. As and against the insurer orders are sought that the insurer be restrained from employing or retaining the solicitors, that it be restrained from disclosing to any person any confidential information concerning the plaintiff and relating to the common law action earlier referred to, and finally that it produce to the Court all investigation reports, correspondence, statements, file notes, memoranda, photographs and diagrams obtained whilst the solicitors "acted for the insurer".

On 6 February 1997 upon the usual undertakings as to damages being given, interlocutory injunctions were made as and against the defendants.

The proceedings were listed before me on 4 March for the purpose of the making of final orders in the proceedings. On that occasion Mr Laughton appeared on behalf of the plaintiff and Mr Stitt QC on behalf of the first and second defendants. I should observe that, perhaps somewhat surprisingly in the circumstances, both defendants have chosen to defend by the same solicitors, who are in fact the first defendants.

The facts relevant to the determination of the summons are as follows. At all material times the Industries was one of a number of a group of insured companies insured under a combined public and products liability policy with the insurer. The policy insured the joint and several liabilities of the named insured companies. It is accepted that one of such companies was a "related" company called C. I. & D. Manufacturing Pty Limited ("Manufacturing").
That policy provided to the plaintiff an indemnity subject to certain terms, conditions and exceptions against all sums which the plaintiff became legally liable to pay for compensation in respect of personal injury or property damage occurring within geographic limits during the period of insurance as a result of an occurrence and happening ... "in connection with the business".
The policy contained the following exceptions: "5. Personal Injury or Property Damages: 
For which insurance against such liability (whether the insurance is limited in amount or not) is or would have been provided under a policy in a form prescribed or approved under or issued in pursuance of any Workers' or
Workmen's Compensation Legislation applicable to the Insured or any extension of such policy granted on request as a matter of usual practice by insurers authorised to issue such policies.
Personal Injury to any employee of the Insured arising out of his employment in the Insured's business ..." 
The policy contained a number of clauses dealing with "Claims Provisions and
Procedures". Claims provision 5 was in the following terms: "The Insured shall give all information and assistance as the company may require in the prosecution, defence or settlement of any claim".
 
The policy also contained a claims provision to the effect that the insurers "shall be entitled to prosecute in the name of the Insured at its own expense and for its own benefit any claims for indemnity for damages or otherwise see Claims Provision 4.

On 4 February 1993 one Christopher John Moodie sustained serious injuries at work. On 5 February 1996 he commenced proceedings in the Common Law Division of this Court No 20096/96 claiming damages in respect of such injuries. C. I.
& D. Manufacturing Pty Limited is named as the first defendant in those proceedings. The second defendant named is Industries, the plaintiff in the instant proceedings. At all material times Manufacturing (and presumably)
Industries had in place a policy of insurance issued under the Workers'
Compensation Act.

In that action Mr Moodie alleges that on 4 February 1993 whilst in the course of his employment with Manufacturing at factory premises located at Somersby at which the "defendants carried on business" and under the direction and control of Industries or alternatively, the defendants jointly, he was called upon to perform certain duties which allegedly resulted in his hand being caught in a machine resulting in serious crushing injuries to the right hand.
The statement of claims alleges common law negligence and breaches of statutory duty.

On 5 June 1996 the solicitors for Manufacturing (presumably acting under instructions from the workers' compensation insurer of that company) filed a defence on behalf of Manufacturing. The defence contained a number of denials, and a plea of contributory negligence. Of relevance particularly on the issue of "worker" and "who was the employer" of Mr Moodie, the Manufacturing defence referred to benefits under <case> of the Workers' Compensation Act having been paid for and on behalf of the plaintiff.

On 25 June 1996 the solicitors for the workers' compensation insurer advised
Manufacturing that it was instructed to act for Manufacturing by that insurer.
In the advice it was stated that Manufacturing was said to have been the company which had employed Mr Moodie. Advice was given that because Mr Moodie did not work for Industries and because Industries was a defendant "their workers' compensation policy does not cover it". Further advice was given, to the effect that "strictly speaking" Industries should be represented by its public liability insurer. The identity of that insurer was also sought.

On 23 July 1996 the solicitors herein wrote to the plaintiff. Because of the importance attached to this letter particularly by the defendants, I propose to set forth its contents. The letter was in the following terms: July, 1996 "The Manager 
C. I. & D. Industries Pty Ltd 
PO Box 176 
LIVERPOOL NSW 2170 
Dear Sir/Madam, 
RE: Claim Made Against Your Company By Christopher John Moodie 
We advise we have received instructions from Mercantile Mutual Insurance
Limited to act in this matter. We advise our client insurer is currently considering whether indemnity should be extended to your company and we will be in further communication in this regard in due course. In the meantime, so as to ensure that the interests of both our client insurer and your company are protected we have been instructed to file a Defence on your behalf. The filing of this Defence is not to be construed as an agreement to grant indemnity.

In addition to the above, we advise we have received instructions to carry out a factual investigation into this matter and advise we have retained Apex
Investigations Pty Limited to carry out this investigation and accordingly, you can expect to be contacted by a representative of that company in the near future.

We will be in further communication in due course.

Yours faithfully, 
McCULLOCH & BUGGY 
R. Oldfield per" 
The letter was signed by Mr Oldfield, a partner of the firm of solicitors.

The letter was presumably written in order to make clear the terms upon which the solicitor was, or would act, and presumably was couched in terms, to ensure that the filing of the defence, would neither give rise to any waiver by the insurer of a right to deny indemnity or even to avoid, any suggestion that the insurer was thereby representing that the claim must or would give rise to an indemnity under the public liability policy. Perhaps the letter was also intended to further prevent any suggestion of conduct on the part of the insurer that might later found a claim of an estoppel by Industries against the insurer, or to preclude an assertion by Industries that the insurer had acted upon the basis that indemnity would be furnished: see also Soole v
Royal Insurance Company Limited [(1971) 2 Lloyd's Rep 332] at -340. Although no response by Industries to this letter was tendered in evidence, I am prepared to infer that it accepted the contents, was willing to let the solicitors act in accordance with it, understanding that there was no agreement as to the grant of indemnity. Industries did not apparently take any objection to any of the matters raised.

In respect of this letter, it is to be observed that whilst the solicitors were stating that the filing of the defence was not to be construed as an agreement by the insurer to grant indemnity, they were not however indicating or suggesting, that in acting for Industries that they were not to be regarded as being Industries' solicitors, pending the resolution of the indemnity issue, or that a solicitor client relationship with Industries was to be regarded as arising pending resolution of that issue.

The letter is consistent with the instructions that both the interests of
Industries and the insurer were to be protected by the solicitor who was the solicitor selected by the insurer to act for Industries.

The letter written by the solicitor however has some background to it, which I shall refer to.

On 15 July Mr Oldfield and Burston had a telephone conversation at which time the Moodie action was discussed and advice given that the matter was listed for a DCM Conference on 17 July 1996. Mr Burston forwarded certain documents to Mr Oldfield with a covering letter which inter alia stated "we understand you act for C.I. & D. Industries Pty Limited the Second Defendant". On 16
July Mr Oldfield arranged for company searches to be made. On 17 July 1996 (prior to an appearance and defence on behalf of Industries being filed by the solicitor) Mr Oldfield arranged for a solicitor of his firm to attend a DCM
Conference in the Moodie action. Directions were given including directions that Industries do a number of things. These directions were accepted by the solicitor and acted upon them on behalf of Industries. The matter was listed for an Arbitration on 7 February 1997. On 23 July 1996 Mr Oldfield retained
Apex to conduct a factual investigation. He also furnished an advice to the insurer on liability and quantum. Mr Oldfield, in his affidavit, said that he declined to reveal the contents of the advice on the grounds of solicitor and client privilege. It is not disputed that the solicitors obtained an investigator's report regarding Mr Moodie's case. Indeed, on 23 July 1996 Apex
Investigations was retained by McCulloch & Buggy to investigate.

On 25 July 1996 the solicitors filed a Notice of Appearance on behalf of
Industries. It was filed in accordance with Part 11 r 4 of the Supreme Court
Rules for address for service to be given. The Notice of Appearance thus provided details of Industries legal representation and address for service.
On 25 July 1996 a Defence was filed bearing the name and address of the solicitors. It was signed as "Second Defendant's Solicitor (Industries)". The defence consisted of a number of denials including of negligence and a defence of contributory negligence.

I am prepared to accept that the Notice of Appearance and Defence were apparently filed to also implement what had been foreshadowed by the solicitors in the earlier letter of 23 July 1996. Mr Oldfield, the solicitor swore that in filing the Notice of Appearance that he was acting upon instructions from the insurer and on terms stated in his letter of 23 July to Industries. He did not in terms refer to acting upon instructions pursuant to Claims Provision 4 of the policy. He claimed that he so acted in order to preserve and protect the parties' position and to maintain the status quo whatever such might mean. As stated in that letter Mercantile was still considering whether indemnity should be extended to Industries.

It appears from Mr Oldfield's affidavit that on 4 July 1996 the solicitors received instructions from the insurer (letter dated 2 July 1996) in the
Moodie matter. The instructions were from the insurer and included instructions to file a Defence "to protect our interests and those of our client" an apparent reference to Industries [my emphasis]. An initial advice was also sought by the insurer in relation to liability, quantum and recovery. Included in the material provided to the solicitors was a letter (26 June 1996) from Mr Herd of Industries asking the solicitors to contact Mr Burston solicitor of Dexter Healey who was the solicitor instructed by the workers' compensation insurer to act for Manufacturing.

It appears that earlier on 15 July 1996 there also had been a meeting between the insurer to undertake factual investigations referred to in the letter of July 1996. Mr Oldfield claimed that a purpose of the investigation was among other purposes, to determine whether the Moodie claim fell within the terms of the indemnity under the policy. On 23 July 1996 Mr Oldfield retained
Apex Investigations to undertake the factual investigation. It is clear that a number of letters were subsequently sent to doctors to furnish reports. This was part of the conduct of the proceedings in the action brought by Mr Moodie.
Doctors reports were received in relation to the defence of the action. On 23
July a preliminary advice on liability and quantum was furnished by the first defendant solicitors to the insurers.

Following the entry of the appearance on behalf of Industries plaintiff, documents such as medical reports, clinical notes, documents obtained under subpoena were from time to time received by its solicitors from Mr Moodie's solicitors and from the solicitors for Manufacturing. From August to September the first defendant received medical reports from doctors retained to examine Mr Moodie in connection with the proceedings against Industries. Their accounts were paid by the Insurer.

It appears that on or about 27 August 1996 Mr Oldfield of the first defendant met with Mr King, National Litigation Manager of the Insurer. At that conference a representative of Apex arrived. Mr King gave certain instructions in relation to the investigation of Apex. On 20 September 1996 the solicitors received a detailed report from Apex. In his affidavit Mr Oldfield stated that he declined to reveal the contents of the report again relying upon the grounds of solicitor client privilege. I presently note that a matter arising for consideration in this case is whether such a claim was misconceived in the sense that the solicitor client privilege is in fact that of Industries and not that of the insurer: Garry F. S. Boyce t/as Hunt & Hunt Lawyers v
Goodyear Australia (CA, 16 September 1996, unreported) After considering the report a lengthy letter was written by Mr Oldfield to the insurer allegedly advising of matters the subject of his retainer from the insurer.
This advice also considered the material in the report from Apex.

It would appear that prior to the Apex report being prepared, a person (probably Mr Oldfield) from the solicitors office advised Mr Herd, the Company
Secretary of the Industries that an investigator was being sent and assistance to that person was requested. I accept Mr Herd's claim to this effect. The investigator, Mr Wangman rang and introduced himself advising that he was to come out to investigate the accident. During August 1996 Mr Wangman attended on three separate occasions, spoke to a Mr Grigor and took photographs.
According to Mr Herd, (and I accept his evidence), Mr Wangman told Mr Herd during an interview in August that the dispute really did not affect
Industries and was just a fight between two insurance companies. According to
Mr Herd, Mr Wangman of Apex said or made the following representation: "This doesn't really affect you in any way. This is just a fight between the two insurance companies. From my reading of the matter, Industries has no case to answer. It's a simple Workers Comp case".

During the last interview on or about 30 August 1996 Mr Wangman had in his possession a computer and produced a statement at the interview. Mr Herd was requested to sign it. At each interview at the request of Mr Wangman copies of various records of Industries and/or Manufacturing were given to him. Mr Herd subsequently received the statement but no other documents.

According to Mr Grigor (of Industries), in August 1996 he was introduced by Mr
Herd to Mr Wangman. He was with Mr Wangman and Mr Herd when Mr Wangman inspected the machine. He also gave an explanation as to how the machine was operated. Photographs were taken by Mr Wangman. He was also questioned by Mr
Wangman as to the relationship between Industries and Manufacturing. Sometime after the inspection of the machine Mr Wangman telephoned and sought an appointment to obtain a statement in relation to the facts surrounding Mr
Moodie's accident and indicating that he was particularly interested in the relationship between Manufacturing and Industries. As I have observed I accept that Mr Wangman said that there was a dispute between two insurers as to who would pay any compensation claim. He stated that there were no legal ramifications as in giving the statement, that legal proceedings were complete as regards the accident and that information being gathered was "purely for the two insurance companies to decide who is liable". Mr Grigor referred enquiries about information touching on the relationship between Manufacturing and Industries to Mr Herd. Neither Mr Grigor nor Mr Herd were cross-examined.
I accept what they both deposed to in their affidavits.

Subsequently, on 13 January 1997 the solicitors wrote to Industries advising that because Mr Moodie was an employee of the company, Industries was not entitled to indemnity under the Public Liability Policy. Reference was made to
Exceptions 5 and 6 of the Policy supra. Advice was given that indemnity was denied, and that the first defendant solicitors were in the process of filing a Notice of Ceasing to Act. No suggestion was made that the indemnity was being denied for breach of any policy condition as well. There was a further reference to the "our client insurer" reserving its right to rely upon any other remedy available in law or in equity. A suggestion was made that the matter should be referred to Industries workers' compensation insurer.

On 22 January 1997 copies of certain documents were forwarded to Industries by the solicitor.

On 23 January 1997 the solicitors filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act for the second defendant C. I. & D. Industries Pty Limited. The document was signed "R J Keeling by his Partner - Solicitor for the Second Defendant". A copy of this notice was sent to the plaintiff's solicitors as well as to the solicitors for Manufacturing.

Before me Mr Rockcliff, solicitor was called to be cross-examined. He had sworn two affidavits, one of 28 January and the second of 6 February 1997.
These affidavits were read without objection. Mr Rockcliff is the present solicitor for the Industries. It appears that on 24 January 1997 he spoke to
Mr Oldfield expressing disappointment of its decision to cease to act on behalf of the Industries particularly as the matter was listed before an
Arbitrator on 7 February 1997. In the conversation he also foreshadowed that a cross-claim would be filed against Mercantile.

In a letter to the solicitors dated 24 January 1997, Mr Rockcliff confirmed
Industries' disappointment at the solicitors ceasing to act, foreshadowed the filing of a cross-claim against their client Mercantile Mutual, requested advice that new solicitors would be acting for Mercantile, the insurers and objecting to the solicitors continuing to act for the insurer. He noted the indication that the solicitors proposed to continue to act for the insurer, despite having ceased to act for Industries, and contended that the real employer was in fact "our client, C.I. & D. Industries Pty Limited".

On 28 January 1997 Industries filed a cross claim against the insurer claiming an indemnity under the policy, declaratory relief in relation to the indemnity and damages for breach of the policy by the insurer.

On 28 January Mr Rockcliff, the solicitor swore an affidavit which was to an extent based on information furnished to him by Mr Grigor of Industries. He claimed that Mr Grigor had not been advised of the date of the arbitration, had not been interviewed by the investigator engaged by the solicitor, had not been requested to attend court to give evidence on matters relevant as to issues including the Industries' "relationship" with Manufacturing or on the employment of the plaintiff.

In cross-examination Mr Rockcliff admitted that the thrust of both his letter of 24 January 1997 and the affidavit of 28 January 1997 was that he was complaining that there has been an incomplete investigation of the claim including as to the real employer of Moodie. Although I shall return to the matter in greater detail when dealing with the matter of confidential information, it is appropriate if I here mention that Mr Rockliff's evidence in cross examination (and the inference therefrom) is relied upon by Mr Stitt appearing for both defendants as really being evidence of complaint that not enough information had been provided to the solicitor, rather than evidence with specific information said to have been disclosed in circumstances giving rise to a duty of confidence. It was submitted that the obvious time for any confidential information to be identified and for a claim of confidentiality to be made was in Mr Rockcliff's affidavit of 28 January. It was said that this was not done, but rather complaint was made of inadequate information being provided to the solicitors.

I shall return to consider this evidence in due course. I now continue to deal with a narrative of what took place after the cross claim was filed on 28
January 1997.

On 31 January the solicitors wrote to the solicitor for Industries (Mr
Rockcliff). They advised that they acted for the insurer, that the cross claim had been referred to it, and they were preparing a defence. It is clear that the solicitors perceived no embarrassment in acting for the insurer despite the history of the matter that I have recounted.

On 31 January Mr Rockcliff wrote on behalf of Industries objecting to the solicitors appearing for the insurer in the matter. Astonishment was expressed that the solicitors having purported to act for Industries up to a "short time ago" now intended to act against it in respect of the cross claim. The matter of seeking a ruling of the Law Society in relation to the solicitors acting for Mercantile was also mentioned. It is not clear why the solicitors didn't adopt this preferred course. However, I mention in passing that counsel for the plaintiff referred me to an earlier ruling of the Law Society under the
Legal Practitioners Act 1898 to the effect that a solicitor who files a defence on behalf of an "insured" defendant thereby establishes the relationship of solicitor and client with him and an obligation not to disclose confidential information obtained from the client absent waiver:
Atkins - NSW Solicitors Manual p 238 see also Law Society Rules 2 and 3 made pursuant to <case> of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/). On January the solicitors responded by submitting that the matter should however be determined by the Court. Hence my earlier expressed surprise that the solicitors are representing themselves as well as the insurer in the instant proceedings, can perhaps therefore be better understood.

On 5 February 1997 a Notice of Appearance and Notice of Grounds of Defence to the second cross claim was filed by the solicitors on behalf of the insurer.
In its Defence the insurer relied upon Exceptions 5 and 6 of the policy, to deny indemnity and asserted that liability to Mr Moodie is a liability for which insurance is or would have been provided under a workers' compensation policy. However, a further defence was raised that Industries was not entitled to indemnify because it had been in breach of General Condition 5 of the
Policy in that it had failed to take reasonable care, failed to take reasonable precautions in various respects and failed to comply with statutory obligations. Assuming an entitlement to indemnity under the policy (and not excluded by the Exceptions) a breach of a condition under the policy could of itself entitle the insurer to avoid an indemnity in respect of the claim.

It is appropriate for me to record, that on the evidence, there is nothing to indicate that a reliance or possible reliance upon General Condition 5 had been raised or foreshadowed by the first defendant, or by the insurer at any time between the 23 July 1996 and the filing of the cross claim defence. It had not in terms even been raised as a basis for denying indemnity in the solicitor's letter of 13 January 1997. The solicitors continue to act for the insurer. In these proceedings the solicitors are acting for themselves as well as for the insurer.

On 5 February 1997 the solicitors wrote to the plaintiff's solicitors complaining about its conduct in several respects particularly over the question as to whether the solicitors should act for the insurer. Another letter was written furnishing information in response to Mr Rockcliff's letter of 28 January 1997.

On 6 February 1997 Grove J made certain ex parte orders in these proceedings.

Against the above background of facts I shall deal with the rival submissions of the parties in the order in which they were advanced.

The Relationship of Solicitor and Client: 
It was submitted on behalf of Industries that there existed between the
Industries and the first defendants the relationship of solicitor client who thereby retained the solicitors as his solicitors. Mr Laughton essentially relied upon the matters to which reference has already been made and which do not need to be again repeated. In particular he submitted the solicitors accepted the instructions of the insurer, with the interests of the insurer and Industries separated and that this was consistent with the solicitor's letter of 23 July 1996. He also argued that the letter was consistent with the instructions that both the interests of the insurer and the plaintiff were to be separately protected by the solicitor. He submitted further that the insurer was the agent of Industries to give instructions. Mr Laughton pointed to the events and actions of the solicitor including the filing of an appearance and defence on the part of the plaintiff, attending at DCM, implementing "DCM" directions involving Industries, arranging medical examinations, obtaining documents on subpoena. Mr Laughton did not in terms however put his case that there was a solicitor client relationship upon any estoppel. It is not necessary to determine whether a case could be so based.

It is submitted that the solicitors acted for both Mercantile Mutual and
Industries and should be restrained from acting on behalf of the insurer in defending the cross claim for indemnity.

For the insurer it was submitted that in the circumstances there was no relationship of solicitor and client because there was no retainer, that a retainer was contractual. He also submitted that there was no intention on the part of the solicitors or Industries that a retainer or solicitor client relationship should be created. Mr Stitt argued that the letter of 23 July made it clear that no relationship of solicitor/client was intended by the solicitor between it and Industries. This argument should be immediately rejected. What the letter reveals is that the filing of "this Defence" is not to be construed as an agreement to indemnify but this is a different matter.
Further, it was claimed that Industries did not retain the solicitor, had no intention to do so, and that the retainer was between the solicitors and the insurer, only. This argument too should be rejected, despite the absence of reference in that submission to the provisions of Claims Provision 4.

Next, it was submitted that the plaintiff was under a contractual obligation under Claims Provision 5 of the Policy to give "all information and assistance as the insurer may require in the prosecution defence or settlement of any claim", and that the insurer was entitled to use that information for all purposes authorised under the policy. In relation to this point, I would observe that it was not submitted by the plaintiff (or argued by the defendants) that such a clause upon its true construction did not extend to permit the insurers to obtain information and assistance on the question of whether or not indemnity under the policy should be granted. Nor was it submitted that "claim" in Claims Provision 5 only referred to the claim of Mr
Moodie against Industries, and not otherwise. Whilst I advert to these matters
I express no views in relation to such. It is also appropriate to note, that
Mr Laughton for Industries, submitted that the defendants had really in effect put its case upon the basis that whilst indemnity had not been granted or refused, pursuant to the policy, it was on foot for the limited purpose of creating an obligation in Industries to provide the insurer with information before it determined whether to indemnify Industries or not.

Dealing with Mr Laughton's last submission it does seem to me that were it necessary to rule in relationship to it (and it is not) that such a submission should be rejected. Claims Provision 5 is a provision in favour of the insurer to enable it to take steps to at least reduce the liability of the insured who it will be required to indemnify if Mr Moodie's action were to succeed. It seems to be capable of being regarded (and particularly so in the circumstances of this case) as independent of the insurer's obligation to indemnify. In any event as at the time Claims Provision 5 (and indeed a provision such as Claims Provision 4) comes into operation there is no strict legal liability by the insurer to indemnify at all: Distillers Co Bio
Chemicals (Aust) Pty Limited versus Ajax Ins Co Limited <case>; [(1973-1974) 130 CLR 1] at 25-26. The liability to indemnify has strictly not then arisen. Thus were it necessary to reach a firm decision, then I would reject Mr Laughton's last submission.

It seems to me that the existence of the relationship of solicitor client does not in the circumstances turn upon whether or not there was a contractual obligation on the part of Industries to furnish under the policy information and assistance to the insurer. However, a failure to do so could carry with it ordinary breach consequences. Even though the solicitor stated (and the
Industries apparently accepted) that the filing of the defence was not to be construed as an agreement by its "client insurer" to grant an indemnity, there was no statement to the effect that in filing of a defence the solicitors were seeking to reserve or otherwise purporting to qualify the bringing into existence of a solicitor-client relationship between it and Industries (apart from difficulties associated with whether it might do so).

I reject Mr Stitt's submission that unless and until indemnity was confirmed a solicitor and client relationship did not arise. In a case such as the present
I am satisfied that it did. I do not see why the matter of an indemnity by the insurer could not be left to be determined with the solicitors nevertheless entering into a solicitor client relationship with the insured. Such relationship would not depend only upon the implementation of the insurer's right to defend, (which it could seemingly have the right to do under the policy), even though a liability to indemnify was yet to be established: see the Distillers' case where the High Court considered a condition of a policy entitling an insurer to take over the conduct of and defence of a claim. In that case it was held that the duty of good faith and fair dealing on the part of the insurer arose not only when the insurer took over the insured's defence under a contractual condition in the policy entitling it to do so.

It is however correct to say, that many of the cases dealing with the relationship between solicitor and client, where the insurer has under a contractual policy condition, or statutory provision, arranged for the solicitor to act for the party insured are cases where there was no dispute as to the existence of an indemnity under the relevant policy. It is also true to observe that they are not in terms cases where, as in the instant matter, there was an agreement that the solicitors' conduct of the defence was not to be construed as an agreement by the insurer to grant an indemnity. That said I consider that the cases provide some assistance. In Groom versus Crocker [(1939) 1 KB 194] the insurer exercised a contractual right under the policy to act for the insured in third party proceedings brought against him. In such circumstances a relationship of solicitor and client was created between the solicitor nominated and selected by the insurer to act for the party insured.
It was held that a solicitor nominated by the insurer was the solicitor for the insured who was his client and that a condition as to the insurer having control of the proceedings was subject to an implied term that the solicitor selected by the insurer "shall act in the interests of both" insurer and insured: see Groom versus Crocker per McKinnon LJ at 227. Groom was applied in Distillers' case by Stephen J. Groom was considered by the Victorian Supreme Court in Club Motor Insurance Agency Pty Ltd v
Swann <case>; [(1954) VLR 754] where there was a specific statutory provision conferring a right to the authorised insurer to take over control of third party proceedings against the insured owner. The section was perceived on its true construction, to give the insurer a right to tell the solicitor employed for the purpose of litigation how it should be conducted so long as the instructions were for the purposes of the contract of insurance, with the solicitor being bound to accept such "even though they conflict with those given by the client" (at 758) [my emphasis]. However, the statutory right to conduct the proceedings on the part of the insurer, and to give instructions was not regarded as precluding the establishment of a solicitor client relationship between insured and the solicitors appointed by the insurer. Perhaps to similar effect is the decision of the South Australia
Supreme Court in SGIC (SA) versus Paneros [(1989) 5 ANZ Ins Cas -940.] That was a decision founded upon [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s124.html) of the [Motor Vehicles
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/mva172/) 1959 (SA), being a provision conferring a statutory right on the insurer to conduct the defence of the insured and further conferring a statutory right to information in circumstances where a statutory privilege was also imposed in respect of the information so furnished.

It would appear that when an insurer takes over the defence of the action and appoints a solicitor to conduct the defence in the name of the insured, the insured is a client of the solicitor being entitled to his rights as such even having the right to production of documents by the solicitor including a right of inspection and copying: Re Crocker [(1936) Ch 696.] This said the situation might be otherwise in a case involving statutory provisions such as illustrated in Paneros. There is however no need to express a concluded view on this point.

Although Groom versus Crocker was a case where the insured's right of indemnity was not in dispute, the principles stated therein I believe are of assistance. In my view they also point to the existence of a solicitor client relationship in the circumstances of this case between the solicitors and
Industries.

Next, the approach of the High Court in Vocisano versus Vocisano <case>; [(1973-1974) 130 CLR 267] also would suggest that as and between solicitors and Industries, (being the defending party to the Moodie litigation) a relationship of solicitor and client existed. In Vocisano the Court whilst noting the interest of the authorised insurer who had "taken over" the action against the insured, held that the insurer was not "a party" for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/mva172/s60.html) of the
Evidence Ordinance 1971 (A.C.T.).

Further, the reasoning in the recent decision of the Court of Appeal in
Goodyear also supportive of the existence of the relationship of solicitor client between Industries and the solicitors.

I have already referred to the factual situation as pointing to the relationship of solicitor and client. However, in the instant case the instructions (2 July 1996) from the insurer to the solicitors were to file a defence to protect both its interests and those of "our client". This letter also reveals a separation in the instructions, between the differing interests. For the purposes of giving instructions to "protect" the interests of Industries, the insurer appears to have regarded itself as also being the agent of Industries. Thus, the solicitors also appear to have accepted an obligation to perform legal work for the Industries even prior to the letter of 23 July 1996 based upon the earlier letter. It seems to me that this further acceptance of the obligation to perform legal work is in itself an objective indication of an intention by the solicitors to create a solicitor client relationship. Again, the letter of 23 July 1996 is itself an indication that the solicitors were to protect the interests of both the insurer and the insured. Were it necessary to so conclude, the letter, and acceptance of it by the conduct of the insured, points to the establishment of a solicitor client relationship. The solicitor at no time advised Industries to seek independent legal advice, or that the relationship of solicitor and client was conditional upon an indemnity being granted. In my view Industries was entitled to accept and did accept that the solicitors were its solicitors for the purpose of defending the claim by Mr Moodie. They acted for Industries in its capacity as a party, they commenced to prepare the case on Industries behalf. The solicitors held themselves out to others acting for Industries, as a party to the Moodie proceedings. These are some of the additional matters pointing to the existence of a solicitor and client relationship, apart from those matters already stated. Finally, by reference to the case law, the application of the principles found therein are also supportive of the existence of the relationship.

I find that there was a solicitor client relationship between the solicitors and Industries in relation to the proceedings instituted by Mr Moodie.

The solicitors are now acting for the insurer in respect of defending cross claim proceedings brought by Industries in the proceedings instituted by Mr
Moodie in such a case. There is a real and sensitive possibility of confidential information being disclosed or used to the detriment of a former client: Mallesons Stephen Jaques versus KPMG [(1991) 4 WAR 357] applied by the Court of Appeal in Goodyear. As that case illustrates a solicitor's duty to a former client goes beyond disclosing confidential information.

Many of the cases, dealing with "conflict of interest" and the granting of injunctions to restrain a solicitor from acting for "an opponent" of the former client, are discussed by Gummow J in National Mutual versus Sentry
Corp [87 ALR 539](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=87%20ALR%20539 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 558 to 561. His Honour discussed at length the relevant principles. Those cases include Rakusen versus Ellis, Munday & Clarke [(1912) 1 Ch .] In
Goodyear the insurer "accepted" the test of whether there existed, or might be reasonably anticipated to exist, a danger of a breach of duty by the solicitor not to communicate confidential information. In D. J.
Constructions Pty Ltd versus Head & Ors [(1987) 9 NSWLR 118] (a case which was decided on the footing that there was never any relationship of solicitor and client between the parties), Bryson J referred to the importance of the appearance of justice being done, with the spectacle of a solicitor changing sides perhaps adversely reflecting on such appearance.

In the instant case to the reasonable observer, the appearance of the solicitors now acting for the insurer in defending Industries' cross claim for indemnity, could subvert the appearance of justice being done. The risks that the solicitors might consciously or inadvertently make use of the information in breach of their duty to the former client Industries is a risk that I would regard as being a significant one. In any event to a reasonable observer it could at least look that way. In my view the existence of the possibility of conflict is present.

The duty of confidentiality is the duty of a solicitor to put at the client's disposal not only skill but also all relevant knowledge. In some respects there is a relationship between the duties of confidentiality and disclosure which may give rise to conflict of interest problems when acting in litigation against a former client, (in this case Industries): see "Restraining Lawyers from Acting in the Face of a Conflict: Discussion and Advice in Australia" [(1995) 12 Australian Bar Review 244.] Again there is perhaps also some similarity between the equitable obligation of confidence and legal professional privilege. There is an underlying principle that a person should be entitled to seek and obtain legal advice in the conduct of his affairs without the apprehension of his/her being thereby prejudiced. The concern is with the general preservation of confidentiality and encouragement of full and frank disclosure between solicitor and client. This is so even among fiduciaries (and not merely solicitor and client) although solicitors stand in a special position: see
National Mutual case per Gummow J at 559. Further, where there is a solicitor client relationship, as I have found in the instant case, then legal professional privilege could attach in circumstances where the solicitors were also in confidence for the purpose of defending the proceedings: Grant v
Down <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 674.] 
I have already adverted to Rules 2 and 3 of the Law Society Rules made under <case> of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/).
These I consider are also supportive of Industries' position in a case such as the present. Industries is now opposed in proceedings by the insurer (who is defending its cross claim for indemnity) and for whom the solicitor is also now acting.

In the Goodyear case there was discussion of the basis for impermissible disclosure of information. Much of what the Court of Appeal said despite Mr
Stitt's submissions to the contrary, is on point in a case such as the present. Indeed it is appropriate to observe that in Goodyear Giles AJA (when dealing with a submission in that case that the same privileged material was required to be disclosed pursuant to the "provisions of the policy") observed (at 5): "The issue as between Goodyear and NEM in Mr Jeal's proceedings in the Dust
Diseases Tribunal, although an issue of indemnity under the insurance, turned on the same dispute as an issue between Mr Jeal, Goodyear and Hardie, namely whether Mr Jeal was last exposed to asbestos prior to 30 June 1983 or after that date. It was not suggested that the Privileged Material was irrelevant to that dispute, and indeed despite what was said so earnestly this morning its potential relevance was clear enough, and Hunt & Hunt was saying that the privileged material was confidential to NEM as between Goodyear and NEM. It was saying this because it was asserting legal professional privilege as the ground for refusal to produce that material to Goodyear. So Hunt & Hunt was withholding from Goodyear information which on its argument on this appeal was Goodyear's information, even though the argument suggested a sense in which it was also NEM's information, and there was at the least a real prospect of Hunt & Hunt using that information in the interests of NEM and against the interests of Goodyear" 
In may respects the situation is similar. At issue is whether Moodie was when injured, an employee of Industries or of Manufacturing, and the issue of indemnity (leaving aside the belated issue of breach of General Condition 5), turns on resolution of the same dispute.

In my view Industries has made good in relation to confidentiality (and "conflict of interest"). As earlier observed Goodyear further makes clear a solicitor's duty to a former client goes beyond not disclosing confidential information.

Confidential Information 
For reasons that will appear this issue is one associated with some difficulty.

It was submitted on behalf of Industries that the solicitors retained Apex
Investigations to obtain a factual investigation of the circumstances in which
Mr Moodie was injured and that the investigator in the circumstances deposed to by Mr Oldfield was at least the agent of the solicitors. It is appropriate
I make a number of findings. information was obtained by investigators in
August 1996 after a person from the solicitors (probably Mr Oldfield) advised
Mr Herd of Industries that an investigator was being sent and that his assistance to the investigator was required. The investigator obtained certain records of Industries. It would seem that he was acting as agent of the solicitor. No copy of the investigator's report has been furnished by the solicitors to the plaintiff, Industries. Indeed, a claim of solicitor client privilege has been made by the solicitors in relation to that report. In my view such a claim is not supported by Re Crocker or by the reasons of the Court of Appeal in Goodyear, nor can it be founded upon the decision in Paneros. The solicitors were on the record in the principal proceedings for Industries from 25 July 1996 to 23 January 1997 and the information was obtained by the investigator whilst the solicitors were on the record for Industries (and on the record for the insurer after 5 February when they filed a Notice of Appearance and Defence to the cross claim). I accept that in late July 1996 it was the solicitors who actually retained Apex
Investigators to carry out the investigations, and at a point of time when they were acting for and on the record in the Moodie proceedings as acting for
Industries. I would infer that such information was probably provided by the solicitors to the insurer. Further, despite the indemnity not being declined until January 1997 I am satisfied that the information was probably also used as a basis for denying indemnity or at least influenced such. The information as provided to Mercantile Mutual was obtained by investigators retained by
McCulloch & Buggy while they were acting for Industries. It is appropriate to identify the source of the confidential information. I accept Industries submission that the source of the confidential information was as a consequence of conversations which Mr Wangman of Apex had with Messrs Gale and
Fenton (who worked for Manufacturing - per affidavit of Mr Herd 7 February ), the statement which Mr Herd gave to Mr Wangman, photographs of the GR machine, and the investigator's report generally which was received by the solicitors on 20 September 1996. I am satisfied that at the very least some of the material again also went to the question of the relationship between
Industries and Manufacturing in response to Mr Wangman's telephone request of
Mr Grigor (see affidavit of Mr Grigor sworn 7 February 1997). I would also infer that other confidential information comprised records that went to the issue of employment of Mr Moodie furnished again after Mr Wangman (Apex) had interviewed Mr Herd in August 1996 during which he said, as I have already mentioned words to the effect "This is just a fight between two insurance companies. From my reading of the matter Industries has no case to answer.
It's a simple workers' comp case".

It is also submitted that the fact that Mr Wangman also took away documents after asserting he was interested in the relationship between Manufacturing and Industries, together with the fact that the denial of indemnity is based in part on Mr Moodie being an employee of Industries, was information which other than between Moodie and Industries, Moodie and the Commissioner for
Taxation and Industries and the Commissioner for Taxation was confidential.
Since it was not argued I say nothing as to whether some of the information may also have been used by the insurer to also support a claim of breach of
General Condition 5 of the policy.

Mr Laughton, for Industries submitted that in order to make out a case in
Equity for the protection of allegedly confidential material certain criteria needed to be satisfied. Both he and Mr Stitt agreed that the criteria which must be satisfied to establish that protection is to be found in the judgment of Gummow J Corrs Pavey Whiting Byrne versus The Collector of Customs (Vic) & Anor [(1987) 14 FCR 443.] His Honour said (at 444): "It is now settled that in order to make out a case for protection in equity of allegedly confidential information, a plaintiff must satisfy certain criteria. The plaintiff: (I) must be able to identity with specificity, and not merely in global terms, that which is said to be the information in question; and must also be able to show that (ii) the information has the necessary quality of confidentiality (and is not, for example, common or public knowledge); (iii) the information was received by the defendant in such circumstances as to import an obligation of confidence; and (iv) there is actual or threatened misuse of that information: Saltman Engineering Co Ltd v
Campbell Engineering Co [(1948) 65 RPC 203] at 215; [[1963] 3 All ER 413n], at 415; The Commonwealth versus John Fairfax and Sons Ltd <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 39] at 50-51; O'Brien versus Komesaroff <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 310] at 326-328. It may also be necessary, as Megarry J thought probably was the case (Coco versus A N Cark (Engineers) Ltd [[1969] RPC 41] at 48), and as
Mason J (as he then was) accepted in the Fairfax decision was the case (at least for confidences reposed within government), that unauthorised use would be to the detriment of the plaintiff. This last aspect may be put to one side in the present case, because the use to which Syntex would put the information would plainly be detrimental to Alphapharm." 
For the plaintiff Industries it was submitted that the information is identified, has the necessary quality of confidentiality (it is not common or public knowledge) and is confined to a number of parties and goes to the relationship between Industries and Manufacturing, was received by the solicitors as solicitors for Industries or as solicitor for Mercantile Mutual in circumstances when a representation had been made by Wangman (Apex) to
Industries to the effect that "this doesn't really affect you in any way. This is just a fight between two insurance companies" (affidavit of Mr Herd 7
February 1997). It is also claimed that it has been established an actual or threatened misuse of that information upon the basis of the insurers defence to the second cross claim filed by the solicitors on its behalf, with the solicitors continuing to act in the proceedings. The grounds of defence in denying an indemnity are no longer merely based upon Exceptions 5 and 6 but in addition assert a breach of the General Condition 5 ie failure to take reasonable precautions etc on the part of Industries. Equity it is argued thus will intervene in the circumstances. Next, to the extent that there is a need that it may be necessary for the plaintiff to establish that substantial detriment would be caused, it is submitted that there is such detriment in circumstances where Industries has not received a copy of the information which has been taken.

If as I have concluded that Industries was in a solicitor client relationship with the solicitors then it would be entitled to have the right to the copy of the information: Re Crocker. The insurer would not have a right to object to such production: see also the Goodyear decision. The information given to an agent of its insurer in circumstances where it had been told in effect, that it would not affect Industries and that it has according to Mr Oldfield also been used to form a basis for denying indemnity under the Industries policy. Since the matter was not argued I say nothing as to whether it may also have been relied upon by the insurer in support of a claim of breach of General Condition 5. Then it was argued that the use to which the information could be put by the solicitors (acting for Mercantile) would be detrimental to Industries.

Further I am deposed to accept, if it be necessary to do so, Mr Laughton's submission that if there was a solicitor client relationship between the solicitors and Industries there was a duty to disclose information within the solicitors knowledge relevant to the client's affairs, and that a breach occurred when the solicitors did not disclose to Industries or the investigator Wangman that the information received may have been used by the insurer to deny indemnity.

Mr Stitt has submitted that the plaintiff has failed to meet the first criterion required by equity for the protection of allegedly confidential information, namely that the plaintiff at the threshold had not only not failed to identify the relevant confidential information but further had not identified such with required specificity. He submitted it was not sufficient to identify it merely in global terms that which is said to be the information in question confidentiality disclosed to the solicitors. Mr Stitt argued that not only did the affidavit of Mr Grigor not identify any information which was said to have been disclosed but much less it failed to identify information claimed to be confidential. He argued that a similar submission could be made in relation to the affidavit of Mr Herd, that neither Mr Grigor nor Mr Herd suggested that information in the statements was confidential, since the obvious time to say so was in their affidavits, and they had not. Mr Stitt also relied upon the affidavit and oral evidence of the solicitor for
Industries, Mr Rockcliff. I have already earlier referred to this evidence.
Indeed, it was claimed that Mr Rockcliff not only did not identify the confidential information at the time of his affidavit but further that his evidence, rather than evidence with specific information said to have been disclosed in circumstances giving rise to a duty of confidence, it is the case of Industries that not enough information was in fact provided to the solicitors. Thus, it was said Industries cannot satisfy the Court that any confidential information has come into the possession of the solicitors.

In my view the submission by Mr Stitt that Industries has failed at the threshold to identify with preciseness. the information said to be confidentially disclosed to the solicitor (to the extent that reliance is placed on a solicitor client relationship), ought not to be accepted. In my view, it has been sufficiently identified for the reasons essentially referred to by Mr Laughton.

To the extent that Mr Stitt also asserts that it has not been established that there is any risk of misuse of the information with respect, I do not agree.
The first defendants are now acting for the insurer in defence of the
Industries cross claim for indemnity: see Corrs Pavey Whiting &
Byrne; see also D. J. Constructions Pty Ltd applying Rakusen per Cozen Hardy at 835. In D. J. Constructions Pty Ltd Bryson J (at 122) observed "when confidential information has been communicated by a client to a solicitor and is relevant to litigation in which that client is now engaged (as it is in the instant case) and is still available to the solicitor, the court should adopt a cautious approach to any proposal that it should allow the solicitor to act against that client". With respect I agree with these observations.

Mr Laughton submitted that the solicitors owed, as part of their fiduciary obligation to Industries, a duty to preserve the confidential information received on its behalf whilst they acted for them. It was submitted that even if there were no solicitor and client relationship (and I have found there was) nevertheless, there was as and between Mercantile Mutual the insurer and the solicitors. Mr Stitt has not in his written submissions in terms addressed this issue. In cases such as the present, it is a submission also complicated by the fact that the insurer also had an interest in the matter: see the cases of Crocker; Groom and Distillers.

In Breen the High Court stated that the relationship between solicitor and client (at least in some circumstances) is a well recognised one. It acknowledged that there are accepted relationships such as principal and agent, solicitor and client, which may be characterised as relations of trust and confidence: see Dawson and Toohey JJ at 782. As Lord Jauncey also observed in Clark Boyce versus Mouat (1994) 1 AC 428 at 437 "that a solicitor owes a fiduciary duty to a client is not in doubt". The nature and content of that relationship, the duties and obligations arising from it have been also recently considered by the Court of Appeal in Macedone & Ors versus Collins & Ors (20 December 1996, unreported, per Cole JA, with whose judgment I agreed). I have here found a relationship of solicitor and client or former client. As I have earlier observed, even among fiduciaries, solicitors stand in a special position.

In my view assuming it be necessary for me to so decide, (absent a relationship of solicitor and client which I have found) I would also conclude that in the circumstances, a relationship of trust and confidence as and between the solicitor and Industries existed as to give rise to a duty of confidence and a duty on the part of the solicitors to protect confidential information. However, this is not the occasion to also explore whether, it is an answer to what might be said to be a breach of duty by a fiduciary (to protect confidential information) to consider the presence or otherwise of informed consent on the part of Industries. Without so deciding, it does seem to me that in any event, the solicitors' letter of 23 July 1996 does not appear to disclose or suggest to Industries the existence of a potential conflict of interest, generally, or even in the event that indemnity was not to be granted by the insurer.

Further, were it necessary to so conclude that even if there were no solicitor and client relationship between Industries and the solicitors, there are additional reasons suggesting that the relationship between the solicitors and
Industries was such as to create a fiduciary relationship between them and
Industries. I would be disposed to such a view because the solicitors were, according to their own letter of 23 July 1996 required to at least protect the interests of Industries, that Industries by their conduct accepted such,
Industries was not told that the investigation by Mr Wangman despite his representation to the contrary could affect the entitlement of Industries to indemnify under the policy, Industries was entitled to accept (and did accept) that Industries was acting for it, especially absent in the solicitor's letter of 23 July 1996 any reservation or qualification that the solicitors were not, or advising that they obtain independent legal advice. Indeed the solicitors by their actions "acted" consistently in the protection of the interests of
Industries in a number of respects including seeking statements and the conduct of the proceedings.

Next, Mr Laughton submitted that the duty of good faith and fair dealing discussed by Stephens J in Distillers (at 31) also applied to agents of the insurers. Thus it was argued that even if there were no solicitor client relationship between Industries and the solicitors, then at least the solicitor was the agent of the insurer, so that if the investigators were the agent of the solicitors they were the agent or sub agent of the insurer. It was submitted it would be a breach of good faith and fair dealing for the insurer acting by its agent the solicitors and the investigators to receive information in the circumstances (based upon the agent's representations to
Industries) to be received into the hands of the solicitor agents of the insurer to be passed on to the insurer then used against Industries. By reference to such argument it was claimed that use of information having been received in such circumstances is able to be protected by injunction.

This is an interesting argument but I would not conclude that by the mere reference to duty of good faith and good dealing on the part of the insurer that the solicitors should be restrained by injunctive relief.

Before turning to the matter of relief against the solicitors it is appropriate to consider the case advanced against the insurer.

The case against the insurer 
It is submitted that Mercantile Mutual has received information of a confidential nature, the confidentiality of which has not been waived, and further, that the information has not been provided to Industries. By reason of the fact that there has been no waiver of confidentiality, it is claimed that the information cannot in the circumstances be used by the insurer against Industries, particularly so, in circumstances where the representation, was made by Mr Wangman in August 1996 (and it is appropriate to repeat what was said) that: "... This doesn't really affect you in any way. This is just a fight between the two insurance companies. From my reading of the matter, Industries has no case to answer. Its a simple workers' comp case".

Mr Laughton sought to rely upon the provisions of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s118.html) and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s119.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). Although no submissions were in terms addressed by the insurer to reliance upon such provisions, it seems to me that there is a threshold difficulty with the argument based upon these provisions. The insurer is not seeking in the instant proceedings to adduce the evidence. I am not hearing the cross claim proceedings. Whether it does the insurer may be able to utilise the evidence in the cross claim proceedings for indemnity brought by Industries against it,
I consider to be a matter that should best fall for determination in such proceedings rather than the instant proceedings, whatever view I might now form as their being the subject of legal professional privilege (which as I have said has perhaps some similarities with the equitable principle of confidence). Thus to the extent that it may be accurately said, as I believe it can be, that the investigator's report having been commissioned by the solicitors, whilst a solicitor client relationship with Industries existed, it appears to me not to be necessary to determine in this matter whether it is also subject to legal professional privilege within the meaning of ss 118 and of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). Nor do I consider it to be one where I should express a view. The decision in
Goodyear was a decision where the solicitors had been restrained by injunction from acting or disclosing to any person other than Goodyear or its lawyers what was described as the privileged material. In that case there were no proceedings on foot as against the insurer seeking injunctive relief. This said the views of the trial judge Lunn AJ in Paneros at 75, 375 (a decision overruled on appeal because of the express statutory provisions making the information furnished to the solicitors that of the insurer) however suggests that an injunction might be granted against the insurer in proceedings such as the present where information is conveyed by the solicitors and agents to the insurer client in breach of confidence or of legal professional privilege. His Honour held that an injunction could be made against the solicitors other client insurer from using the information to the detriment of the client having the benefit of the privilege. In the instant case it is submitted that the privilege or confidentiality which attaches to the information obtained in the circumstances could only be waived by
Industries and that it has not done so.

It is also argued that as the insurer has solicitors who have acted for both
Industries (and the insurer), the insurer should be restrained from instructing the solicitors in the proceedings and further that having received information which is confidential and/or the subject of legal professional privilege and/or the subject of litigation privilege should be restrained from disclosing or using it. Whether or not I can or should make such an order against the insurers is a question with which I have some difficulty, particularly in this class of case where the insurer has an interest in the proceedings, that were instituted by Mr Moodie. An order is also sought that the documents produced to the Court pursuant to the call made by Industries, pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s36.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/), should be the subject of an order for access. The fifth order sought is addressed to the insurer requiring it to produce to the Court the documents referred to in that order. There is some overlap between the documents referred to in the fifth order and those produced in response to the call made.

For the defendants, Mr Stitt submitted that the granting of an injunction would have the effect of barring the insurer from using information which it legitimately obtained and is contractually entitled to receive to meet a claim by its insured where cover had been denied. It is submitted that the granting of an injunction would involve the giving of drastic relief. Next it was argued that if the injunction was limited to an injunction restraining the solicitors from acting, then the insurer could instruct new solicitors with the information, which could then properly be used in the defence of
Industries cross claim against it. Therefore, it was claimed that an injunction should not be granted because it would be futile. I do not accept the submissions in the terms advanced. For reasons given appropriate injunctive relief can be granted in circumstances such as the present to prevent the solicitors from acting for the insurer in the cross claim proceedings for indemnity or acting for them in respect of the claim for indemnity. Such a view is consistent with the authorities to which reference has been made in this judgment: see also National Mutual case. I see no difficulty in making an order restraining the solicitors from disclosing to any person other than the insured or its solicitors (absent legal compulsion to do so) what has been described as the confidential (or privileged) material. Such would include material on the relationship between Industries and Manufacturing as set out in the conversations between Mr. Mr Wangman with
Mr Grigor and records going to the issue of employment of Moodie. I also see no difficulty in making an appropriate order that the documents produced to the Court pursuant to the call made by Industries pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/s36.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) should be the subject of an order of access. In Crocker's case a similar order was made against the solicitor, although the insurer was not a party. In the instant case the insurer is a party. Indeed I consider that it is appropriate to make such an order. The fifth order sought is too wide and I would not make it in the terms stated. The order should be confined in general terms, to the production of documents produced in response to the call, with liberty to apply for a further orders after access and inspection.

On one view it might be thought that it is not appropriate to make an order restraining the insurer from employing or retaining the solicitors from acting for them in the cross claim proceedings, particularly since an order has been made against the solicitors. It might be thought that the granting of injunctive relief as against the solicitors would be sufficient. Nevertheless, at the end of the day it seems to me that the plaintiff is entitled to similar further relief as and against the insurer. There is nothing to suggest that prejudice of such kind would be caused to the insurer such that the relief ought not to be granted: National Mutual at 567. In the circumstances I consider that relief should be also granted against the insurer.

Next, it seems to me appropriate to indicate that orders in the nature of orders 2.1 and 3.1 as suitably modified to reflect my reasons, should be confined to the cross claim proceedings brought by the Industries in No 200096 of 1996 and further or alternatively, in respect of any claim for indemnity by
Industries in respect of Mr Moodie's action or claim against it.

There is a difficulty in making order 2.2, since there maybe a possible obligation for lawful disclosure at some time in the future. An appropriate order can be made to reflect such a difficulty.

Despite some reservations, and the insurer's "interest" in the information I consider that an order generally in terms of that asked in 3.2, subject to a similar qualification should also be made.

I have already indicated that access should be given to the documents produced on call by the insurer, with Industries to have the right to inspect and copy such. Again there should be liberty granted to the parties for further orders after access and inspection by Industries.

I propose to grant relief to Industries. However, I consider that the matter should stand over to 2pm on Wednesday, 26 March 1997 to permit the parties to agree upon Short Minutes of Order to reflect these reasons for judgment and to address the issue of costs.
 * * * 
