

Regina versus Peterson Matter No Cca 60261/98 [1998] NSWSC 368 (12 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
REGINA versus PETER PETERSON 
CCA 60261/98 August 1998 
Wood CJ at CL, James J, Adams J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
WOOD CJ at CL: The applicant has brought an application for extension of time in which to apply for leave to appeal against the severity of sentence imposed upon him in the District Court by his Honour Acting Judge Gallen. 
On a previous occasion he brought an application for leave to appeal against sentence, which was heard by this Court on 5 May 1997. The applicant was on that occasion represented by counsel.

In that appeal the Court intervened to adjust the sentences originally imposed so as to set a new commencement date. In so doing, the Court corrected an error of law made by the sentencing Judge. The order of the Court has now been entered in the computer record of the District Court Criminal Registry and as a consequence it has been perfected.

In substance, the applicant now seeks to re-open the appeal so that an additional argument may be entertained to the effect, that in all the circumstances, the sentence imposed was too severe. The circumstances in which an appeal can be re-opened were considered by this Court in R v. Saxon,
CCA , unreported 21 April 1998. It was there held the Court had no jurisdiction to re-open an appeal or to entertain a fresh appeal, subject to certain exceptions, where the order of the Court in the original appeal had been perfected by entry of the judgment.

None of the exceptions which were there noted apply to the present case. What the applicant now seeks to do is to present fresh argument on a ground which was available for consideration in the earlier appeal.

I am of the view that it would be inappropriate to grant the extension of time which has been sought, since the appeal would be bound to fail. Accordingly, I propose that the application for extension of time be refused.

JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Judge. 
ADAMS J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Judge also but I would like to add some remarks. 
The matters which the applicant wishes to bring to this Court have, on his own account, arisen since the occasion of his sentencing. It can never be appropriate for such matters, however advantageous to the prisoner and indeed in the public interest, to provide a ground for determining that the sentence was in error at the time it was imposed.

I do not wish this occasion, however, to pass without some measure of acknowledgment to the prisoner of the real level of rehabilitation that he has exhibited and to express the wish that that rehabilitation will continue.

It is not out of lack of sympathy or a refusal in this Court to acknowledge either the genuineness of or the difficulty facing this prisoner, or indeed any prisoner, in obtaining a significant level of rehabilitation in our prison system. It is not easy. But the law as it stands - and to my mind, if I may say so without impertinence, rightly - cannot permit a review by the Courts of a sentence initially correct because the prisoner has shown a real level of rehabilitation. All one can do is express a hope that that rehabilitation will continue and upon release will enable the applicant to live a life which is meaningful to him, which is supportive of his children, and which is useful to the community.

WOOD CJ at CL: The order of the Court is the application for extension of time is refused. * * * 
