

Owners Strata Plan 73162 -v- Dyldam Developments Pty Limited [2014] NSWSC (15 December 2014) 
Last Updated: 16 December 2014 |

Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Owners Strata Plan 73162 -v- Dyldam Developments Pty Limited  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): November 2014  
Decision Date: December 2014  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Technology and Construction List  
Before: 
Nicholas AJ  
Decision: 
First defendant pay plaintiffs' costs on and from 15 June 2013. 
First defendant pay interest on plaintiffs' costs on and from 26 July 2013  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - damages claim against builder for rectification of defective works - proceedings settled prior to hearing - competing claims for costs - whether conduct of builder in failing to agree to owner's proposal for settlement was reasonable - whether settlement a compromise or capitulation by builder - whether costs orders should be made - turns on facts - no question of general principle  
JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed 10 December 2010 in which the plaintiffs claimed damages for rectification of defective building work carried out by the defendants for the development of their common property at Five Dock, New South Wales.
The first plaintiff owns the common property in the two multi-unit residential developments at Five Dock, and the second plaintiff owns the common property in the commercial premises there.
The first defendant ("Dyldam") was the builder of the properties. Prior to 11 August 2004 it constructed buildings on the properties for the second defendant, the developer, and then owner, of the properties. The second defendant has since been de-registered. 
Under the terms of the Deed of Settlement and Release ("the Deed") made on 6 November 2014 between the plaintiffs and Dyldam these proceedings were settled, with the exception of claims for costs.
Dyldam has agreed to pay the plaintiffs' costs as agreed or assessed up to and including 14 June 2013, being the date of the last expert report concerning the rectification work to be done.
The outstanding issue is in respect of legal costs for the period commencing 15 June 2013 to date. The plaintiffs seek orders that Dyldam pay their costs, and interest on costs, for that period on the basis that costs should follow the event, and they have been substantially successful in the proceedings. Dyldam denies the claims, and seeks an order that the plaintiffs pay its costs for that period, or alternatively, that there be no order as to costs for that period.
Under the Deed it was agreed that Dyldam would rectify the defects in respect of which it had admitted liability in accordance with the scope of work specified in the agreed experts' reports, and under the supervision of an independent superintendent. The parties also released each other from all claims with the exception of the costs of these proceedings, which is the issue now for determination.

Background
The following non-exhaustive history is necessary for an understanding of the competing claims.
Between January 2011 and May 2012 the parties obtained and exchanged expert evidence, and attended to the requirements of orders made at directions hearings, and to the general conduct of the matter.
On 6 June 2012 Dyldam filed its Technology and Construction List Response, a pleading which included the following: "6. As to paragraph C21 of the List Statement: 
The Defendants state in respect of the defects which they acknowledge exist and for which they acknowledge they are responsible: in some cases no or only nominal loss or damage arises in respect of the defect; in some cases the defect is not as extensive as alleged by the
Plaintiffs; where appropriate the Defendants wish to implement alternative risk management solutions to address the defects; the Defendants wish to rectify defects at their cost where an alternative risk management solution is not appropriate and the defects are defects for which they are responsible and the defects have caused or will cause the
Plaintiffs more than nominal damage; and the Defendants otherwise do not admit the paragraph pending consideration of the particulars of loss and/or damage when provided by the Plaintiffs."
On 26 November 2012 the parties received the joint report of Mr John Palmer and Mr Mark Kavanagh.
On 27 November 2012 Mr Adrian Batterby, Dyldam's solicitor, confirmed to the plaintiffs' solicitors that Dyldam was proceeding on the basis that it would rectify all the agreed defects.
On 29 November 2012 the plaintiffs' solicitor informed Mr Batterby that the plaintiff did not agree to enter into a rectification arrangement with Dyldam, but invited provision of a written proposal.
By email of 30 November 2012 to the plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Batterby stated that Dyldam was "...ready and willing to rectify, at its costs, the defects for which it is responsible". It was said that the scope of the works would be, with some exceptions, that set out in the reports of Dr Shestopal, Mr Allan Harriman, the joint report of Mr Palmer and Mr Kavanagh, and the report of Mr Colin Cass. Included was a preliminary draft deed of settlement and release which had been earlier prepared by the plaintiffs' solicitor for another matter. The document included a clause 2.1 which, relevantly, provided: "Execution of the Works.

Dyldam will with due diligence execute the Works in a proper and workmanlike manner at no costs to the Owners in consideration of the Owners entering into, and being bound by, this Deed of Settlement and Release with the Works to commence on 15 April 2012 and be completed within a reasonable time but no later than six (6) months from the commencement date."
By email of 16 December 2012 to the plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Batterby advised that Dyldam "... remains ready, willing and able to rectify all the agreed defects and wishes to do so at no cost to the Owners Corporation and in accordance with the agreed expert reports", and ready to settle under a deed based on the draft which had been sent with the email of 30 November 2012.
On 14 June 2013 Mr Colin Cass delivered his report in response to questions concerning ceramic floor tiling. (This was the final expert's report in respect of the scope of the rectification works.)
By email of 2 July 2013 to Mr Batterby the plaintiffs' solicitor requested, inter alia, that Dyldam urgently attend to rectification of water penetration defects. It included the following: "Rectification 
My client asks that your client either: subject to compliance with licensing and other laws, attend the property to rectify the defects referred to above, or otherwise arrange for rectification of those defects; or undertake to pay for the rectification of those defects to be arranged by my client.

I attach a draft contract for your review and comments in respect of rectification of the items by your client under option (a) above.

My client will attend to rectify the items after 30 days from the date of this letter should your client choose not to rectify within that period and will rely on this letter as evidence of providing a reasonable notice and seeking to mitigate its damages.

Superintendent 
A superintendent needs to be appointed to supervise the rectification works to ensure the quality of the work." 
The draft contract included a provision for the appointment of a superintendent engaged by the plaintiffs, whose role included inspection of the works and supervision of Dyldam in relation to them.
On 19 July 2013 orders were made for the parties to serve evidence as to quantum.
By letter of 26 July 2013 to the plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Batterby advised that Dyldam remained willing to rectify any defects for which it was liable. It advised of Dyldam's acceptance of the report of Mr Harriman with some exceptions, of the joint report of Mr Palmer and Kavanagh of 26 November 2012, the report of Dr Shestopal of 7 June 2013, and the report of Mr Cass of 14 June 2013. It also stated that Dyldam was prepared to rectify all of the defects referred to in the letter of 2 July 2013 provided that the plaintiffs permitted it to rectify all of the defects for which it has accepted responsibility by reason of its acceptance of the findings of the reports earlier referred to.
By letter of 1 October 2013 to Mr Batterby, the plaintiffs' solicitors complained of Dyldam's failure to provide written confirmation that it would undertake the urgent rectification works, or the balance of the defects where these were the subject of joint expert reports, and a large number of which were not in dispute. They also advised that, due to the failures complained of, the plaintiffs could only proceed on the basis that Dyldam would not agree to undertake any remedial works, and would thus proceed with (a) rectifying the urgent defect work itself without further notice; and (b) the Supreme Court proceedings for recovery of the rectification costs accordingly.
By letter of 2 October 2013 to the plaintiffs' solicitors, Mr Batterby, inter alia, requested the plaintiffs to advise in writing whether or not they wished to accept Dyldam's offer made on 26 July 2013 to rectify all of the defects for which it had accepted responsibility.
In his email of 12 March 2014 to Mr Batterby, the plaintiffs' solicitor stated that it was in the interests of all parties that a building contract be entered into. He suggested the terms of the contract include: "2. A mechanism whereby the Superintendent may approve designs and variations to the works as proposed by your client: ...
Appointment of the Superintendent, role of the Superintendent"
By letter of 22 May 2014 to Mr Batterby, the plaintiffs' solicitor reported that Dyldam had indicated to the plaintiffs that it would not agree to the appointment of a superintendent, and would not enter into a contract in relation to rectification building works.
By letter of 10 June 2014 to the plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Batterby confirmed Dyldam's readiness to carry out the rectification works, but advised that it did not agree to the appointment of a superintendent.
By letter of 19 June 2014 to the plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Batterby advised: "8. Dyldam Developments affirms that it will rely on the failure of the
Plaintiffs to mitigate their loss by permitting Dyldam Developments to carry out the rectification works agreed by the parties' experts or determined by the third party experts agreed by the parties' experts to resolve the differences of opinion between them." 
He proposed that what he described as "... the defence of failure to mitigate loss" be determined as a separate issue by the Court.
On 11 July 2014 the Court ordered the parties to serve evidence in relation to mitigation. 
By letter of 29 August 2014 to Mr Batterby, the plaintiffs' solicitor responded to the draft deed of settlement and release which had been submitted on 10 July 2014. He referred to earlier emails which indicated the plaintiffs' requirement for a superintendent to ensure quality control of any rectification works that Dyldam performed. He proposed amendments to the draft which included provisions for the appointment, and the role and powers, of a superintendent (clauses 4 and 5).
On 5 September 2014 the proceedings were before his Honour Mr Justice Hammerschlag for directions. The Court was informed to the effect that liability was admitted and the scope of defects agreed. It was advised that there was a difference in estimates of quantum of about $400,000. 
By letter of 10 September 2014 to the plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Batterby submitted an amended draft deed of settlement and release for consideration. It did not provide for a superintendent. It included a dispute resolution clause providing for the expert determination of any issue raised by the plaintiffs in relation to the execution of the rectification work by Dyldam. It proposed that, assuming agreement, a Notice of Discontinuance be filed which included orders that Dyldam pay the plaintiffs' costs to 14 June 2013, and the plaintiffs pay Dyldam's costs from 15 June 2013 to date.
By letter of 11 September 2014 to Mr Batterby, the plaintiffs' solicitor rejected the proposed draft, and suggested amendments. He advised of the continuing requirement for the appointment of a superintendent, and that Dyldam should pay the plaintiffs' costs.
By email of 12 September 2014 the plaintiffs' solicitor informed Mr Batterby that "... In view of the dispute between the parties in relation to the supervision of rectification works (the plaintiffs propose) that the matter now be set down for hearing." Later that day the Court set the matter down for hearing on 10 and 11 November 2014, and made the usual orders.
By letter of 16 September 2014 to the plaintiffs' solicitor, Mr Batterby confirmed that Dyldam agreed to the appointment of an independent superintendent to supervise the execution of the work identified in the agreed experts' reports as defective. He submitted a draft deed which included provisions to this effect.
On 26 September 2014 the Court noted that settlement discussions were proceeding, and confirmed the hearing dates.
By email of 1 October 2014 to Mr Batterby, the plaintiffs' solicitor advised that the draft was accepted subject to ratification by extraordinary general meetings.
On 6 November 2014 the Deed was executed by the parties. Relevantly, it provided that Dyldam would execute the rectification work, at no costs to the plaintiffs, in accordance with the directions of the superintendent appointed under the Deed (Clause 1). It intended provisions relating to the appointment of the superintendent, and to his duties and powers (cls 2 to 8). The rectification work was the work identified in the report of Mr Harriman of 23 November 2010 (with some exceptions), and in the joint report of Mr Kavanagh and Mr Palmer (with some exceptions), and in the report of Dr Shestopal of 7 June 2013, and in the reports of Mr Cass of 14 March 2013 and 14 June 2013. 
Principles
The principles applicable in cases such as this where the sole issue left for determination is whether orders for costs should be made are conveniently summarised in ONE.TEL Ltd versus Deputy Commissioner of Taxation <case> by Burchett J: "5 It is accepted that, in a case which terminates before there has been a hearing, the Court should not resolve the issue of costs by engaging in something in the nature of a hypothetical trial: Australian Securities
Commission versus Aust-Home Investments Ltd <case>; [(1993) 44 FCR 194] at 201; Re The Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs of the Commonwealth of Australia; Ex parte Lai Qin <case>; [(1997) 186 CLR 622] at 624. But this does not mean that the Court can never make an order for costs. Often, it will be unable to do so; but in other cases an examination of the reasonableness of the conduct of the parties, respectively, may provide the basis of an order, or "a judge may feel confident that, although both parties have acted reasonably, one party was almost certain to have succeeded if the matter had been fully tried", as McHugh J put it in Ex parte Lai Qin at 625. His Honour added: "If it appears that both parties have acted reasonably in commencing and defending the proceedings and the conduct of the parties continued to be reasonable until the litigation was settled or its further prosecution became futile, the proper exercise of the cost discretion will usually mean that the court will make no order as to the cost of the proceedings." 
Although his Honour thought this would "usually" be so, he made it clear that he was not laying down an invariable rule. At the beginning of his discussion of the applicable principles (at 624), he referred to the discretionary nature of the power to order costs, and to the "general rule [that] the successful party is entitled to his or her costs", and he said: "In an appropriate case, a court will make an order for costs even when there has been no hearing on the merits and the moving party no longer wishes to proceed with the action." 
As Sackville J pointed out in Rizal versus Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs <case> at para 16, the remarks made by McHugh J evince "a somewhat more flexible approach" than that taken by the Court in Gribbles Pathology Pty Ltd versus Health
Insurance Commission <case>; [(1997) 80 FCR 284] at 287, when it suggested that "there will be very few cases where the issues will be sufficiently clear, in the absence of a hearing, for an order for costs to be made in favour of a party." What is well established is that frequently the determining factor will be the reasonableness of the conduct of the parties, a matter which was emphasized in each of the decisions
I have cited, and also in Reddy versus Hughes [(1996) 37 IPR 413]; Sun Zhan
Qui versus Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs <case>; and Australian Securities Commission versus Berona Investments Pty Ltd [(1995) 18
ACSR 772.] In the last case, Cooper J commented (at 774), concerning the principles laid down in Australian Securities Commission versus Aust-Home
Investments: "These propositions are of assistance in focusing attention upon some of the relevant circumstances which should be considered in the exercise of the discretion to award costs where proceedings do not proceed to a final hearing.
However they are not the only circumstances; nor are they intended to limit the discretion." In my opinion, it is important to draw a distinction between cases in which one party, after litigating for some time, effectively surrenders to the other, and cases where some supervening event or settlement so removes or modifies the subject of the dispute that, although it could not be said that one side has simply won, no issue remains between the parties except that of costs. In the former type of case, there will commonly be lacking any basis for an exercise of the Court's discretion otherwise than by an award of costs to the successful party. It is the latter type of case which more often creates problems, since there may be difficulty in discerning a clear reason why one party, rather than the other, should bear the costs. In Ex Parte Lai
Qin, McHugh J was careful to state (at 624) that the principles with which he was concerned were those that "govern an application for costs when a party elects not to pursue an action because he or she has achieved the relief sought in the action either by settlement or by extra-curial means"."
Relevant to the issue of mitigation are the principles explained in Owners - Strata Plan No. 76674 versus Di Blasio Constructions Pty Ltd  <case> by Ball J: "44 In the case of building contracts, it is also generally accepted that the owner must give the builder a reasonable opportunity to rectify any defects.
Often, of course, the building contract itself requires the owner to repair defects or sets out a procedure by which defects are to be made good: see, eg,
Bitannia Pty Ltd versus Parkline Constructions Pty Ltd  <case>; (2010) 26 BCL 335. But, even if it does not, the owner is required to give the builder an opportunity to minimise the damages it must pay by rectifying the defects, except where its refusal to give the builder that opportunity is reasonable or where the builder has repudiated the contract by refusing to conduct any repairs: see J Bailey, Construction Law, (Vol II, 2011, Informa
Law) at [14.109]; Cassidy versus Engwirda Construction Co (No 2) [[1968] Qd R ]
(reversed on other grounds in Cassidy versus Engwirda Construction Co (No 2) [[1968] QWN 47 (HC)]; [(1968) 42 ALJR 168).] That obligation may be an aspect of the duty to mitigate, since it may be less expensive for the builder rather than a third party to rectify the defects, particularly if the builder is still on site. But the obligation is not simply an aspect of the duty to mitigate. The cost to the builder of undertaking the repairs is likely to be less than the amount that a third party would charge the owner for the same work. In that case, the owner is not mitigating its loss, but rather the builder's damages.
 The question of what is reasonable depends on all the circumstances of the particular case. One relevant factor is what attempts the builder has made to repair the defects in the past and whether, in the light of the builder's conduct, the owner has reasonably lost confidence in the willingness and ability of the builder to do the work: see A Chambers, Hudson's Building and
Engineering Contracts, (12th ed, 2010, Sweet & Maxwell) at [4-144];
Eribo versus Odinaiya <case> at <case>.
 It is for the defendant to prove that the plaintiff has acted unreasonably.
It is not for the plaintiff to prove that it acted reasonably: TC Industrial
Plant Pty Ltd versus Robert's Queensland Pty Ltd <case>; [(1963) 180 CLR 130] at 138; Burns versus MAN Automotive (Aust) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 653] at 673 per Brennan J; TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd versus Hayden
Enterprises Pty Ltd [(1989) 16 NSWLR 130] at 158 per Hope JA (with whom Priestley and Meagher JJA agreed); Karacominakis versus Big
Country Developments Pty Ltd <case> at <case> per Giles JA (with whom Handley and Stein JJA agreed).
 The obligation not to act unreasonably does not come to an end once court proceedings have commenced. But the existence of court proceedings is relevant to the content of the obligation. Once there is a dispute concerning whether a plaintiff has failed to mitigate its loss, or failed to act reasonably in some other respect, the plaintiff is entitled to have that question tested in court; and the mere fact that it does so is not itself evidence that it has failed to act reasonably. As Oliver J explained in Radford versus de Froberville [[1978] 1 All ER 33]; [[1977] 1 WLR 1262] at 1287E-F: [O]nce proceedings have been commenced and are defended, I do not think that the defendant can complain that it is unreasonable for the plaintiff to delay carrying out the work for himself before the damages have been assessed, more particularly where his right to any damages at all is being contested, for he may never recoup the cost. If, therefore, the proceedings are conducted with due expedition, there seems to me to be no injustice if, by reason of the time that it takes for them to come to trial, the result of inflation is to increase the pecuniary amount of the defendant's ultimate liability... "
Absent clear words in a contract which give the builder the right to remedy the defective work, the owners' failure to give the builder the opportunity to do so would be relevant to an issue of mitigation, to be taken into account in the overall assessment of damages. If the builder proved that the owner had acted unreasonably, the owner may be liable to some reduction in the damages which would ordinarily be awarded (Keating On Construction Contracts: 8th Edition para 10-023). 
The Court's discretion to order the payment of interest on costs is under the Civil Procedure Act (2005) NSW which, relevantly, provides: "101 Interest after judgment 
The court may order that interest is to be paid on any amount payable under an order for the payment of costs.

Interest under subsection (4) is to be calculated, at the prescribed rate or at such other rate as the court may order, as from: the date or dates on which the costs concerned were paid, or such later date as the court may order."
The approach to be taken on the issue of interest on costs was stated in Illawarra Hotel Company Pty Ltd versus Walton Construction Pty Ltd (No.2) <case>; [[2013] 84 NSW LR 436:] "38 A party who contends that there should be an order for interest on costs must do more than point to the fact that the proceedings were protracted and that it had to outlay moneys on its own costs over a long period. The reasons for the protracted nature of the proceedings are of obvious relevance. To take a hypothetical example, one can imagine a case in which one party deliberately seeks to prolong proceedings with an eye to some collateral benefit of its own for which it is quite happy to pay the price of being out of the money it progressively outlays for costs. That hypothetical case can be contrasted with another in which a party has made strenuous effort to expedite matters and to avoid all delay with a view to the earliest possible trial but has been frustrated in those efforts by actions of the other party. A middle course is where each party acts with reasonable diligence and dispatch but the nature of the proceedings and their subject matter is such as to prolong them. A court might well take different attitudes to applications for interest on costs in these hypothetical cases.
 This litigation was, of its nature, time-consuming and exacting. Building cases often descend into what, to the outside observer, seems to be tedious analysis of a vast myriad of minutiae. In the absence of some sufficiently clear explanation of the reasons why this litigation proceeded as it did, in a timing sense, there would be no sound basis for exercise of the discretion concerning interest on costs, even if it were now exercisable by this Court in relation to the costs in the court below." 
The submissions
For the plaintiffs it was submitted that the settlement evidenced not a compromise of the litigation but the capitulation of Dyldam on the eve of the hearing. It was put that by June 2013 there was no dispute as to the existence of defects, the rectification of which would cost between about $650,000 and $1,050,000, and that the plaintiffs could not be ordered to engage Dyldam to do the work. It was put that the only relevance of Dyldam's proposal to do the work was to the issue of mitigation of damages, as to which it bore the onus. Accordingly, it was put, it was inevitable that the plaintiffs would succeed in obtaining an award of damages at a trial. 
Furthermore, it was put that, in the circumstances, Dyldam's conduct in failing to agree with the proposal that it perform the rectification work under an independent superintendent, at least since 14 June 2013, unreasonably delayed and protracted settlement of the proceedings, with the consequence that the plaintiffs were entitled to an order for the costs of the whole proceedings. Also relevant was Dyldam's failure to protect itself against the risks of a costs order by making a monetary settlement offer, for example, in the form of Calderbank Letter.
Dyldam's submissions may be encapsulated as follows.
By reason of the unreasonableness of their conduct after 14 June 2013, the plaintiff should be refused the cost orders they claimed, and any order for costs for the period should be in favour of Dyldam. It was put that the matter should have been settled soon after the receipt of Mr Cass' report of 14 June 2013, when all the relevant experts' reports had been obtained.
It was put that since about June 2011 Dyldam had repeatedly indicated its willingness to rectify defects for which it was liable, which was confirmed by letter of 26 July 2013 to the plaintiffs' solicitor. It was put that the plaintiffs' requirement for Dyldam to work under the supervision of a superintendent was, in the circumstances, unreasonable and unnecessary having regard to the sufficient safeguards which would apply where no superintendent was appointed. These were said to include the protections and the dispute resolution provisions under the [Home Building Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/hba1989128/) , the usual contractual warranties, and the opportunity for the involvement of a Fair Trading building inspector. It was argued that a superintendent was not necessary where the scope and manner of execution of the work was set out in the agreed experts' reports, and the manner of execution was not complex. A further consideration was that Dyldam had the expertise and resources to rectify the defects.
On the issue of mitigation, Dyldam's position was said to have always been that although it had no entitlement to demand that it be permitted to rectify defects in respect of which it had admitted liability it was, nevertheless, entitled to rely on the plaintiffs' obligation to mitigate its (sic) loss by permitting it to rectify the defects for which it was liable.
It was also submitted that the settlement was a compromise, not a capitulation, because, with the exception of the provisions in relation to supervision, the terms of settlement were not substantially different to those proposed by Dyldam at the outset. It was said that the decision to agree to a superintendent was for the purpose of avoiding the risk of an award of damages against it in excess of $500,000 more than it would cost Dyldam to rectify the agreed defective work. It was pointed out that the plaintiffs' expert assessed the cost of rectification by another builder in the amount of $1,157,690, whilst Dyldam's expert assessed the cost of rectification by Dyldam in the amount of $649,754.
In support of its alternative case that there should be no order for the costs of the parties for the period commencing 15 June 2013 the submission, as I understood it, was to the effect that, in the exercise of its judicial discretion, the Court should treat the issue as neutral, in that the conduct of the parties until settlement was reasonable so that no order should be made.

Determination
Analysis of the correspondence shows that at least since the filing of its List Response on 6 June 2012, Dyldam expressed its willingness to undertake agreed rectification work at its cost. Following delivery of Mr Cass' report of 14 June 2013, the plaintiffs' solicitor in the letter of 2 July 2013 requested Dyldam to rectify the works under a contract, the draft of which included a provision for the appointment of a superintendent. It also advised that, failing rectification after thirty days, the plaintiffs would attend to rectification themselves and rely on the letter in proof of reasonable notice and in mitigation of damages. On 26 July 2013 Mr Batterby advised that Dyldam "...as a gesture of good faith" was willing to rectify any defects for which it was liable, and accepted, with some exceptions, that the scope of the work was as identified in the reports of Mr Harriman, Mr Palmer and Mr Kavanagh, Dr Shestopal and Mr Cass. The plaintiffs' request for a contract was, in effect, left unanswered, and met with a counter-proposal.
The letter of 1 October 2013 evidenced the plaintiffs' concern at Dyldam's failure to agree to undertake the works under the arrangements proposed on 2 July 2013, and their intention to proceed with their claim in Court.
On 12 March 2014 Dyldam was reminded of the requirement for a superintendent if it was to do the work. As the letters of 22 May and 10 June 2014 show, Dyldam refused to agree.
On 12 September 2014 the plaintiffs proposed that in view of the dispute in relation to supervision the matter be set down for hearing. Later that day the matter was set down for hearing on 10 and 11 November 2014. Mr Batterby's letter of 16 September 2014 advised of Dyldam's agreement to the appointment of an independent superintendent to supervise the execution of the work. He submitted a draft deed which included provisions to this effect. The deed was executed by the parties on 6 November 2014.
The evidence supports the finding that, after receiving Mr Cass' report of 14 June 2013, the parties were in agreement as to the scope of rectification work to be done. It also supports the finding, in my opinion, that from at least that time it was inevitable that the plaintiffs would obtain an award of damages for the cost of the work. Dyldam's acceptance that an award was inevitable if the matter proceeded to trial may be readily inferred from the repeated assertions of its willingness to do the work for which it was liable, at no cost to the plaintiffs.
Thereafter, as the correspondence shows, the plaintiffs were willing to engage Dyldam to do the work provided it was performed under supervision. Dyldam's refusal to agree to this requirement was maintained until 16 September 2014 when it agreed to settlement under a deed which included terms for the appointment of a superintendent.
In the circumstances the crucial question for determination is the reasonableness of the conduct of the parties in the conduct and maintenance of these proceedings until settlement. As Dyldam has agreed to pay the plaintiffs' costs to 14 June 2013, it is the conduct of the parties thereafter which is relevant to the issue of costs.
Dyldam was faced with the prospect that the plaintiffs would recover as damages the reasonable costs, objectively assessed, of the rectification work of an appropriate standard and quality. Nevertheless, its position was that it be allowed to carry out the work free of supervision. In my opinion, there was no reasonable justification for this position which, ultimately, protracted the proceedings and delayed their resolution.
The plaintiffs were under no obligation to engage Dyldam to perform the work, and the Court would not have required it to do so. The willingness of Dyldam to perform the work, as pleaded in the List Response and stated in the correspondence, would have been relevant only to the issue of mitigation in the assessment of damages at a trial.
I fail to see that, in the circumstances, it was unreasonable for the plaintiffs to require as a term of agreeing to Dyldam doing the work that a superintendent be appointed to supervise the work. Furthermore, in my opinion, the plaintiffs cannot be criticised for declining Dyldam's counter-proposal that it be permitted to do the work under a different regime. If, at trial, Dyldam raised an issue of mitigation based on the plaintiffs' failure to accept its proposal, it carried the onus of proving that such failure, in all the circumstances then prevailing, was unreasonable. This task probably required Dyldam to prove that it was unreasonable for the plaintiffs to require the appointment of a superintendent, alternatively, that it was unreasonable to decline Dyldam's proposal that the work be done by it free of the superintendent, and under the arrangement proposed in the letter of 26 July 2013. Furthermore, it cannot be said that it was unreasonable for the plaintiffs to proceed to a trial which involved an issue of mitigation for which Dyldam carred the onus (cf:Owners-Strata Plan at No. 76674 versus Di Blasio Constructions Pty Ltd paras 46, 47).
It is difficult to see any rational explanation for the rejection by Dyldam of the plaintiffs' terms until the eve of the hearing. The opportunity for Dyldam to do the work had been offered by the plaintiffs on, and since, 2 July 2013. Had their proposal been accepted it would have resulted in settlement of the proceedings. By this time Dyldam and its legal advisers knew the strength of the case against them. The proposal presented the opportunity for it to do the work at its own cost, doubtless for less than the amount of damages which almost certainly would have been awarded against it. If accepted, settlement would have avoided further legal costs to both parties.
Ultimately, and as a matter of practical reality, the plaintiffs have achieved by the settlement the relief they sought from the outset. The fixing of the dates for trial obviously focused the corporate mind of Dyldam, and it may be reasonably inferred that it then accepted that the likelihood of a substantial award of damages could no longer be avoided. Alternatively, Dyldam may have accepted the difficulty it faced in establishing its case on the issue of mitigation that the plaintiffs' conduct had been unreasonable.
My surmise is that Dyldam's stance until the end was simply an exercise in brinkmanship. Its eventual acceptance of a superintendent conclusively undermines its submission that such an appointment was unnecessary and unreasonable in the circumstances. In my opinion, the plaintiffs' submission that settlement represented a capitulation by Dyldam rather than a comprise of the litigation should be accepted. Had the matter gone to trial, the plaintiffs would have succeeded, and the ordinary rule that costs follow the event would have applied. Accordingly, I propose to order Dyldam to pay the plaintiffs' costs for the period commencing 15 June 2013 to date. It follows that Dyldam's claims for costs are rejected.
As to the issue of interest on costs, in my opinion, the plaintiffs are entitled to interest calculated on their costs incurred for the period commencing 26 July 2013. As the letter of that date to the plaintiffs' solicitor shows, Dyldam had by then accepted liability for substantially all of the work identified in the experts' reports, but did not accept the agreement suggested in the plaintiffs' solicitor's letter of 2 July 2013. The period between these letters was a reasonable one in which to allow Dyldam to consider the plaintiffs' proposal. In my opinion, the failure of Dyldam to take the opportunity to settle the matter then had the effect of unreasonably protracting the proceedings, and justifies the exercise of discretion to order it to pay interest on the plaintiffs' costs thereafter. I am unpersuaded that there is any evidentiary basis for an order for interest on costs prior to 26 July 2013.

Orders
It is ordered that: 
The first defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs on and from 15 June 2013.

The first defendant pay interest on the plaintiffs' costs on and from 26
July 2013.
 * * * 
