

Australian Prime Realty Pty Ltd versus Chase Property Investments Pty Ltd
Matter No 2196/97 [1997] NSWSC 213 (22 May 1997) ` 
Australian Prime Realty Pty Ltd versus Chase Property Investments Pty Ltd & Anor` ` 2196/97` `22 May 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `2196/97 - AUSTRALIAN PRIME REALTY PTY LTD versus CHASE PROPERTY INVESTMENTS PTY
LTD & ANOR` `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for continuation of an interim injunction, which was first granted by Hamilton J on 24 April 1997. The application today has been fully argued on an interlocutory basis. It has taken approximately two hours to do that, and there are still a large number of matters in the duty list. So, it is not possible to give full reasons but I will outline the submissions and the reasons as briefly as I can and if either party so requests, provide full reasons in due course. 
The plaintiff is a company whose capital is three dollars and who is a real estate agent and marketer. The defendant has a development at Leichhardt, which is being carried out on land which is zoned commercial, and it is intending to construct commercial and residential units for sale to the public.

By two agreements, the later bearing date 29 November 1994, the parties entered into what might have the appearance of being an exclusive agency agreement whereby the plaintiff had the right to be the defendant's exclusive selling agent. The defendant has now made it clear that it wishes to enter into an underwriting agreement and the consequence of that underwriting agreement will be that another company of estate agents will have the exclusive right to market or, at least, the bulk of the right to market, the project. The plaintiff seeks continuation of the injunction which stops this happening.

The plaintiff says, in effect, that the proper construction of the agreement is that it is an exclusive sales agreement which contains an implied negative stipulation that the defendant will not allow any other agent to market. It says that implied negative stipulations are, as a general rule, to be enforced by injunction to keep people to their bargains: Doherty versus Allman [(1878) 3
App Cas 709] at 720. Although Mr Wheelhouse and Mr Titterton for the plaintiff, were unable to refer to any actual case where this Court had granted an injunction to protect an estate agent's exclusive agency agreement, they submitted that it was analogous to a licence agreement which, in the appropriate case, would be protected through the courts by injunction.

Mr Wheelhouse and Mr Titterton then went on to say the balance of convenience favours the granting of an injunction and damages are not an adequate remedy.
At one stage, they seemed to be touching on what might be called "the actors' equity", that is that the reputation of the plaintiff in the marketplace was an important commercial matter and if this exclusive agency agreement was lost, the plaintiff could lose face. However, that was not pressed with any vigour.

The main argument in favour of an injunction rather than other remedy was that officers of the plaintiff had been working hard for two and a half days a week for some years without remuneration knowing that as soon as the first units were sold they would have some cashflow and that if they were left to damages it might be some years before the first moneys would come in. The evidence shows that the plaintiff's position is that it is technically insolvent but Mr
Wheelhouse says that this is because it has already done a lot of the work and has had to live off its resources in the expectation that there will be a relatively prompt inflow of funds.

Mr Robb QC and Mr Donaldson, who appeared for the defendant, raise about eight defences to the claim for an interlocutory injunction. Time does not permit me to deal exhaustively with these but essentially they are: that on a proper construction of the agency agreements, there was no negative stipulation that no other agent would be appointed and that no terms should be implied in this particular case to that effect; that this is not the sort of case where courts would grant an injunction; that damages would be an adequate remedy; that the continuation of the injunction would have the effect of specifically enforcing the relationship of principal and agent; that there were doubts as to the plaintiff's capacity to carry out such a large project; that <case> of the Property Stock & Business Agents Act 1941 disentitled the plaintiff to any relief; that if the exclusive agency agreement was enforceable, there would be an unreasonable restraint of trade; that the balance of convenience favoured the defendant because if the plaintiff were right it would, in any event, get damages but if the plaintiff were wrong a large project would be held up or might have to come to an end.

I must add a ninth matter because Mr Robb did not raise it (in accordance with the traditions of the Bar that such arguments are not put forward) viz - that until stamp duty is paid on the agreement it has no force or effect so that as at today there are no rights in the plaintiff at all.

I have not time at the moment to rule on each of those matters. It seems to me that it is a very unusual case where this Court would grant an injunction to enforce a sole agency agreement. The highest that the law seems to go is expressed in Article 61 of Bowstead & Reynolds on Agency 16th Edition p 316, par 7.045. Like Mr Wheelhouse, the learned authors have found no example where such an agreement had been protected by injunction, though they do refer to some cases where a distribution or a franchise agreement has been protected by injunction and predict that the law is moving in this direction.
They, however, at para 10-022 at p 674 reject the proposition that agency cases are analogous to those of licences.

It seems to me that in this case it would run counter to the way in which this
Court considers injunctions, to grant an injunction to compel a developer to develop a large project through an exclusive agency agreement and so be completely tied to the personal services and qualifications of a particular person. If the project is continued and the plaintiff's agreement is upheld, then the plaintiff would be entitled to damages. It may be that if the lawyers for the plaintiff did not competently handle this case, it may take two to three years for the damages claim to come on but, if there are few questions of fact involved and if the matter is handled efficiently, it may be heard much sooner. In any event, the damages that will flow, to my mind, would be an adequate remedy.

I need further time to consider the matter of <case> and the matter of restraint of trade. It may be that it would be simpler to say the court does not consider it appropriate to deal with those matters at this stage because the other reasons for disposing of the application are sufficient.

For these reasons, I decline interlocutory relief. If either party wants me to give more expansive reasons, their lawyers should so inform my Associate within seven days.

I stand the suit over for mention before the Registrar on 5 June 1997.

I order that the plaintiff pay the costs of the interlocutory application.
This order is not to affect the order already made by Santow J.

Liberty to the defendants to apply to the Master to assess the damages occasioned by the injunction within twenty-eight days of the final determination of these proceedings. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
