

Egan versus Willis and Cahill [1996] NSWSC 583 (29 November 1996) 
EGAN versus WILLIS & CAHILL /96; AD 3008/96 
Friday 29 November 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, MAHONEY P, PRIESTLEY JA 
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW - PRIVILEGES OF PARLIAMENT - LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL - ORDERS
FOR PRODUCTION OF STATE PAPERS - SUSPENSION OF MEMBER IN BREACH OF ORDERS.

The plaintiff, a member of the Legislative Council of New South Wales, was a
Minister and Vice-President of the Executive Council. The Legislative Council by resolution ordered the production to the Council of certain State papers.
Cabinet agreed that Ministers should not comply with the order. The
Legislative Council by resolution called upon the plaintiff to produce the papers. The plaintiff declined upon the basis of the Cabinet agreement, and asserted that the Legislative Council had no power to order the production of
State papers. The Legislative Council then adjudged the plaintiff guilty of contempt, suspended him from the service of the House for the remainder of the day's sitting, and ordered him to attend on the next sitting day to explain his conduct. The plaintiff refused to accept the suspension and the first defendant, the President of the Legislative Council, directed the second defendant, the Usher of the Black Rod, to escort the plaintiff from the precincts of Parliament. The second defendant then escorted the plaintiff, against the plaintiff's will, into Macquarie Street. The plaintiff claimed a declaration that the resolution of the Legislative Council was invalid and that his removal from the precincts of Parliament was a trespass.

HELD The Legislative Council has such implied or inherent powers as are reasonably necessary for its existence and for the proper exercise of its functions.

Barton versus Taylor [(1886) 11 App Cas 197]; Willis and
Christie versus Perry <case>; [(1912) 13 CLR 592]; Armstrong versus Budd <case>; [(1954) 349 US 155] at 160 followed.
 The resolution of the Legislative Council suspending the plaintiff was within power as a measure of self-protection and coercion.

Armstrong versus Budd, above; Harnett versus Crick [[1908] AC 470] applied.
 The resolution of the Legislative Council was not shown to be invalid.
 The Standing Orders of the Legislative Council warranted the removal of the plaintiff only from the Legislative Council Chamber and not from the land occupied by the New South Wales Parliament. The extent of the removal was, therefore, excessive, and there had been a trespass.

O R D E R S Plaintiff's claim for a declaration that the resolutions of the Legislative
Council of 2 May 1996 were invalid dismissed.
 Declare that the defendants committed an actionable trespass to the person of the plaintiff by reason of the extent of his removal on 2 May 1996.
 No orders as to costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: These proceedings, which were commenced in the Administrative
Law Division of the Supreme Court and were removed into the Court of Appeal, raise issues concerning the rights, powers and immunities (sometimes collectively called privileges) of the Legislative Council of New South Wales and of its members.

The proceedings were commenced in the Administrative Law Division of the
Supreme Court and were, by consent, removed to the Court of Appeal. The judge who made the order for removal formulated certain questions which appeared to arise for decision, but, whilst those questions have been convenient reference points for argument, the parties have not pressed us to answer the specific questions. The argument has been conducted upon the basis that, in the light of our views upon the issues raised by the questions, we should be able to dispose of the entire proceedings. The material facts are not in dispute, and have been either admitted on the pleadings or agreed.

The plaintiff claims to have been the victim of an unlawful trespass to the person. The plaintiff is the Treasurer of the State, the first defendant is the President of the Legislative Council, and the second defendant is the
Usher of the Black Rod. An action for trespass, brought by a person claiming to have been forcibly and unlawfully ejected from Parliament, or otherwise unlawfully dealt with following a parliamentary resolution, has on a number of occasions required a judicial decision concerning important questions about the privileges of Parliament. (eg Kielley versus Carson <case>; [(1842) 4 Moo PC 63]; Barton versus Taylor [(1886) 11 App Cas 197]; Toohey v
Melville <case>; [(1892) 13 LR 132];
Willis versus Perry  <case>; [(1912) 13 CLR 592).] The plaintiff claims an unlawful invasion of his legal rights in the form of trespass to the person and, since he has made that claim, the court is obliged to adjudicate. (Stockdale versus Hansard <case>; [(1839) 9 Ad. & E 1], 112 ER 1112).

The plaintiff seeks declaratory relief only. That the plaintiff was, against his will, physically removed from the precincts of Parliament is not in dispute. The issues in the case arise out of the matters upon which the defendants rely to justify the removal.

The defendants say that the plaintiff was lawfully removed pursuant to a resolution of the Legislative Council. The resolution in question suspended the plaintiff from the service of the House for a certain time. The plaintiff refused to accept such suspension and was, in consequence, forcibly removed.

The question of the validity of the resolution for suspension is at the centre of the case. The plaintiff's suspension was the culmination of a series of unsuccessful attempts by the Legislative Council to compel the production to the Council of certain State papers relating to matters of government business which the Council wished to debate. The power of the Legislative Council to require the production of such documents, the remedies available in the event of failure to comply with an order for production, and the responsibilities of a member in the position of the plaintiff in the face of such an order, were the principal issues argued before this court.

As the High Court observed in The Queen versus Richards; ex parte Fitzpatrick and Browne <case>; [(1955) 92 CLR 157] at 162, after a long period of controversy in England, it was established that disputes as to the existence of a power, privilege or immunity of a House of Parliament are justiciable in a court of law. The same principle applies in Australia. However, whilst it is for the courts to judge the existence in a House of Parliament of a privilege, if a privilege exists it is for the House to determine the occasion and the manner of its exercise.
Hence the argument before us has been directed towards questions of power rather than factual issues going to the appropriateness of the exercise of such power, if it existed. On that common understanding, it was unnecessary to debate questions of justiciability which might otherwise have arisen.

The suspension of the plaintiff: 
What the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 refers to as the Legislature is composed of three elements (see s3): the Queen, the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly.

The plaintiff belongs to the political party which at the present time has a majority in the Legislative Assembly. The parliamentary leader of that party in the Legislative Assembly is the Premier, who was called upon by the
Governor of the State, following the last general election, to form a
Government. The plaintiff is the Vice-President of the Executive Council which, pursuant to s35B of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act, advises the Governor in the government of the State. He holds office as a Minister of the Crown pursuant to s35E of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act. He is the Treasurer, Minister for Energy, Minister for State
Development, and Minister Assisting the Premier.

On 2 May 1995 the plaintiff, who is also the Leader of the Government in the
Upper House, (the Legislative Council), informed the House that, in the matter of the representation of Government responsibilities in that parliamentary chamber he would, in addition to acting in respect of his own portfolios, represent the Premier and a number of other named Ministers, including the
Minister for Urban Affairs and Planning.

In this context, the concept of representation has a significance based upon convention and parliamentary practice. It has no defined legal or constitutional status. A Minister who is a member of one of the two houses will be represented in the other house; the representative, the court was informed, undertakes "the accountability obligations" of the Minister being represented "to the extent permitted by the cooperation" of the latter.

The Standing Orders of the Legislative Council, in Part V, contain a number of provisions under the heading: "Papers". They include the following: "18. Any Papers may be ordered to be laid before the House and the Clerk shall communicate to the Premier's Department any such order.
The production of Papers concerning the Royal prerogative, or of
Despatches or other Correspondence addressed to or emanating from His
Excellency the Governor, or having reference to the Administration of Justice, shall be asked for only by Address to the Governor." 
The context shows that Standing Order 18 refers to what are sometimes called
State papers, that is to say, papers which are created or acquired by
Ministers, office-holders, and public servants by virtue of the office they hold under, or their service to, the Crown in right of the State of New South
Wales, (cf Brazier, "Who Owns State Papers?" [[1996] CLJ 65).] 
Under the system of responsible government, which has operated in this State since the middle of the nineteenth century, in ordinary circumstances the
Premier and the Ministry enjoy the confidence of the Legislative Assembly. It is not uncommon, however, for a majority in the Legislative Council to be opposed to the government. To use political terms, the government may not, and at the present time does not, control the Legislative Council.

During 1995, in respect of a number of politically controversial government proposals, the Legislative Council, under Standing Order 18, resolved that there be tabled, in the House, documents relating to various activities of "the Government".

There was nothing novel about such resolutions. The Court has been given details of many occasions, going back to 1856, when the Legislative Council has passed resolutions requiring the production to the Council of State papers. It appears that, in the great majority of such instances, the requirement has been obeyed without demur. However, on several of the occasions in 1995 mentioned above, the power of the Legislative Council to require the tabling of State papers was disputed.

The issue came to a head with respect to a matter concerning a proposal by a mining company in relation to a gold mine at Lake Cowal near West Wyalong. The nature of the political controversy in relation to the proposal is irrelevant.
It suffices to say that the Opposition in the Legislative Council moved for the appointment of a Select Committee to enquire into and report upon certain decisions that had been made by a Commission of Inquiry, and advice or information that had been received by the Government about the matter.

On 23 April 1996 the Legislative Council resolved: "(1) That there be laid on the Table of the House by 30 April 1996 all papers relating to the Government's consideration of the Report of the
Commission of Inquiry into the Lake Cowal gold mine and associated facilities at Cowal West, West Wyalong, proposed by North Gold (WA) Limited, and the determination of the consent to the project.
 
It is a sufficient compliance with this Order for the Minister to table the documents required by delivering them to the Clerk of the House ..............................................." 
The records of the debates in the Legislative Council make it clear that, by "the Minister", the resolution was referring to the plaintiff.

In accordance with Standing Order 18, that resolution was communicated to the
Premier's Department on 24 April 1996.

On 29 April 1996 Cabinet considered the resolution of the Legislative Council and made the following decision: "The Cabinet agreed that Ministers should act on advice previously obtained from Crown Law officers and, accordingly, decline to comply with any orders from either House of Parliament to table documents on the grounds that such orders are invalid and beyond power." 
As will appear, in conformity with that decision the plaintiff has declined to comply with orders of the Legislative Council to table documents.

On 1 May 1996 it was drawn to the attention of the Legislative Council that no documents had been laid on the table by 30 April 1996 as required by the resolution.

It has been agreed between the parties that the plaintiff had in his custody and control at least four documents which were capable of being regarded as falling within the resolution of 23 April 1996. One of those documents was a report, or a copy of a report, from the Director-General of Urban Affairs and
Planning to the Minister for Urban Affairs and Planning, dated 2 April 1996.
The other three documents were described as Ministerial briefing notes which had been prepared for the purpose of enabling the plaintiff to answer questions in the Upper House on the subject of the Lake Cowal project. There is no agreement, or evidence, as to whether the plaintiff had, or could obtain, any other documents, or copies of documents, falling within the resolution. The plaintiff has taken his stand, not upon any suggested compliance with the orders of the Council, but upon what he contends is the
Council's inability to compel compliance.

An Opposition Member of the Upper House, on 1 May 1996, moved to censure the plaintiff, the Leader of the Government in the House, "as the representative of the Government in this House for the Government's failure to comply with the resolution of the House of 23 April 1996".

In the ensuing debate one of the Members of the Upper House directly asked the plaintiff why he did not table documents pursuant to the resolution. The plaintiff replied: "The House does not have a right to do anything merely because the House asserts that right. Today the Leader of the Opposition argued that the
Government of this State is accountable to the Legislative Council. The constitutional principle, of course, is that the government of the day has responsibility to the Legislative Assembly. That is the key." 
Following debate, the Legislative Council passed the following resolutions: "1 That this House: notes that the documents relating to the Government's consideration of the Lake Cowal gold mine project, ordered by Resolution of the House of 23
April 1996 to be laid on the table by 30 April 1996 have not been received by the House; is of the opinion that this House is fully entitled to scrutinise and demand accountability for all aspects of executive Government behaviour; affirms the right of the House to call for the production of documents under the implied or inherent powers of the House which are necessary to its existence or to the proper exercise of its functions; notes with great concern the Government's apparent belief that it is not accountable to the people of New South Wales through this House of the
Parliament; and affirms the need to protect the high standing of this House of Parliament and to ensure that it may discharge its duties and responsibilities with the confidence of the community which elects its Members.
 That this House: censures the Leader of the Government as the representative of the
Government in this House for the Government's failure to comply with the
Resolution of the House of 23 April 1996; and calls upon the Leader of the Government to table in the House or deliver to the Clerk of the House, before 9.30am on Thursday 2 May 1996, the documents referred to in the Resolution of the House of 23 April 1996, that is, all papers relating to the Government's consideration of the Report of the
Commission of Inquiry into the Lake Cowal gold mine and associated facilities at Cowal West, West Wyalong, proposed by North Gold (WA) Limited, and the determination of the consent to the project." 
No documents were tabled.

On 2 May 1996 there was further debate, after which the Legislative Council passed the following resolutions.
 "1 That this House regards it as an affront to the full and effectual exercise of its important functions: that the Government has failed to comply with the Order of this House dated 23 April 1996 to table certain papers as required by that Order by 30
April 1996; that the Treasurer has failed to comply with the Order of this House dated May 1996 to table in the House or deliver to the Clerk certain papers as required by that Order by 9.30am this day.
 That this House accordingly adjudges the Treasurer guilty of a contempt of this House for his failure to comply with the Order of this House dated 1 May requiring him to table in the House or deliver to the Clerk by 9.30am today all papers relating to the Government's consideration of the Report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Lake Cowal gold mine and associated facilities at Cowal West, West Wyalong, proposed by North Gold (WA) Limited, and the determination of the consent to the project.
 That this House, regarding it as necessary to obtain information on any matter affecting the public interest and in order to protect the rightful powers and privileges of the House, and to remove any obstruction to the proper performance of the important functions it is intended to execute: hereby suspends the Treasurer from the service of the House for the remainder of today's sitting; orders the Treasurer to attend in his place at the Table of this House on the next sitting day to explain: his reasons for continued non-compliance with: the Order of the House dated 26 October 1995 to table certain documents concerning the closure of veterinary laboratories; the Order of the House dated 26 October 1995 to table certain documents concerning the Government's negotiations with Twentieth Century Fox relating to the Sydney Showground; the Order of the House dated 1 May 1996 to table certain documents concerning the Lake Cowal gold mine; the Government's failure to comply with the Order of the House dated 26
October 1995 to table certain documents concerning the recentralisation of the
Department of Education." 
The Minutes of the proceedings of the Legislative Council of 2 May 1996 then record the following: "In accordance with Standing Order 262 and the Resolution adopted by the
House Mr Egan was suspended from the service of the House for the remainder of the sitting. The Usher of the Black Rod was directed to escort Mr Egan from the precincts of the Parliament.
 
Following Mr Egan's refusal to leave the Chamber, the Usher of the Black Rod reported to the President that Mr Egan had defied the Order of the House and the direction of the President.

The President left the Chair at 4.05pm due to disorder arising from the
Member's actions.

The Usher of the Black Rod, having been further directed by the President to remove Mr Egan, escorted Mr Egan from the parliamentary precincts. Mr Egan made a statement as he was escorted from the Chamber.

The House resumed at 4.40pm." 
It is the action of the second defendant, pursuant to the direction of the first defendant, in escorting the plaintiff from the parliamentary precincts which is said to constitute the actionable trespass the subject of these proceedings.

In that connection the plaintiff points out that, quite apart from any of the constitutional considerations arising in the case, the plaintiff was forcibly taken, not merely from the Chamber in which the Upper House sits, but from the parliamentary precincts and into Macquarie Street.

The two Houses of Parliament in New South Wales: 
Examination of the question of the nature and extent of the relevant powers of the Legislative Council (and the Legislative Assembly) requires some consideration of the history of the New South Wales Parliament.

Unlike the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of the Commonwealth of Australia, which took legal effect as part of an Act of the United Kingdom Parliament, the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 of New South Wales, an Act of the New South Wales Legislature, did not establish a comprehensive constitutional scheme, or create new offices or institutions. It is described in its long title as an Act to consolidate other statutes relating to the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of
New South Wales. New South Wales, which had previously been a colony, upon
Federation became a State; a part of the Commonwealth established by the
Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/). A number of provisions of the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) relate to the States. In particular, s106 of the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) preserved the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of each State as at the establishment of the Commonwealth, and [s107](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s107.html) preserved, subject to the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), the power of the Parliament of a colony which became a State.

The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 took State institutions as it found them. Whereas the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) instituted the office of Governor-General, declared by [s2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s2.html) to be the Queen's representative in the Commonwealth, and established the two Houses of the Federal Parliament, the Senate and the House of Representatives, when the New South Wales [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 was enacted the office of Governor, the Queen's representative in
New South Wales, had long been established, and the two Houses of Parliament, the Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly, were already in existence.

From European settlement until the mid-nineteenth century, the progress in New
South Wales towards responsible and representative government was gradual.

From 1788 until 1824 the colony had no parliament. All legislative and executive power was vested in the Governor subject to the overriding control of the Imperial authorities in London.

As a consequence of the United Kingdom Act 4 Geo IV c.96, which also established the Supreme Court of New South Wales, from 1824 there was a
Legislative Council which advised the Governor in relation to his function of making laws and ordinances for the peace, welfare and good government of the colony. Until 1843 the members of the Legislative Council were all nominated by the Governor. From 1843 until 1856 the Legislative Council was partly elected and partly nominated by the Governor.

As a result of the United Kingdom Act 18 and 19 Vic c.54, of 1855, New South
Wales achieved a form of responsible government in 1856. There came into existence a bicameral legislature. The Upper House was the Legislative
Council, whose members were nominated, for life, by the Governor. The Lower
House was the Legislative Assembly, whose members were elected, although the right to vote was restricted. The legislature, consisting of the Queen with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and Legislative Assembly, had power to "make laws for the peace welfare and good government of the ...
Colony in all cases whatsoever"; although revenue bills had to originate in the Legislative Assembly.

The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 was enacted by the New South Wales Parliament after the colony became a State, upon Federation.

Up until 1933 the members of the Legislative Council were nominated by the
Governor, although, with responsible government, nominations were made on the advice of the Executive Council. Since 1933, the members of the Legislative
Council have been elected. The method of election has changed from time to time.

At the present time New South Wales has a responsible and representative system of government, with a Legislature comprising the Queen, the Legislative
Council, and the Legislative Assembly. The members of both Houses are popularly elected, although the methods of election, and terms of office of the members, are different.

An account of the present legal status of the two Houses of Parliament in the
State also requires reference to the developments that have occurred in relation to the Commonwealth of Australia, of which the State is a part.

It is unnecessary for present purposes to examine the detail of the historic changes in the relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom. It is sufficient to go directly to the Australian Acts of 1986.

Those Acts of the Commonwealth Parliament and the United Kingdom Parliament were enacted to bring constitutional arrangements affecting the Commonwealth and the States into conformity with the status of the Commonwealth of
Australia as a sovereign, independent and federal nation.

The Acts contain a series of provisions directly relevant to the power of the
State legislatures. They include the following. No Act of the United Kingdom
Parliament shall extend to a State (s1). The powers of State legislatures are declared to be plenary, and to include all powers in relation to State matters that might previously have been exercised by the United Kingdom Parliament . The Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865 has ceased to apply to the States . State legislation which has been assented to by the Queen's State representative, the Governor, is not subject to disallowance by the Queen (ss7, 8). Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom is declared to have no responsibility for the government of any State (s10).

The development of the New South Wales Parliament from a subordinate colonial legislature to a legislature of a State which is part of a sovereign, independent, and federal nation, is of central importance to the application, in modern circumstances, of the common law principles relating to the powers of parliament.

Responsible government: 
Both in the parliamentary debates leading up to the suspension of the plaintiff, and in argument in this court, aspects of the concept of responsible government were relied upon, on both sides, to support particular arguments.

Care needs to be exercised in relating political concepts, which, although of great importance, are flexible, and may be differently understood by different people or at different times, to principles of law. In McGinty versus Western
Australia <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 200] the High Court rejected an attempt to draw, from the concept of representative democracy, implied constitutional requirements as to the kinds of electoral system for which a State parliament could validly legislate. Representative democracy means different things to different people; the High Court held that it does not necessarily involve equality of voting power. Indeed, opinions may vary as to what constitutes equality.
McHugh J said, at p243, with reference to the task of determining what representative democracy requires in that connection: "That is a political question and, unless the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) turns it into a constitutional question for the judiciary, it should be left to be answered by the people and their elected representatives acting within the limits of their powers as prescribed by the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)." 
Much the same can be said of responsible government. It is a concept based upon a combination of law, convention, and political practice. The way in which that concept manifests itself is not immutable.

Some aspects of responsible government, as it presently exists in New South
Wales, are reflected in the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902; others are not. The Act provides (s35B) that there is to be an
Executive Council to advise the Governor in the government of the State. It also provides (s35E) that the Premier and other Ministers of the Crown for the
State are to be appointed by the Governor from among the members of the
Executive Council. It contains provisions as to the power and authority of
Ministers. The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act makes no reference to Cabinet. It does not refer to the conventional requirement that Ministers be chosen from amongst the members of one or other of the Houses of Parliament. It does not reflect the conventional requirement that the Governor may only appoint as Premier a person who commands the confidence of the Legislative Assembly, or that the Ministry must have the confidence of that House. No reference of any kind is made to the party system, which is of such importance at the level of political practice.

All of these matters are relevant to responsible government as it exists now in New South Wales. (See Brugger and Jaensch, Australian Politics, Theory and
Practice, 1985, Allen & Unwin, pp104-111; Lucy, The Australian Form of
Government, 1985, McMillan, Part III; R. S. Parker, The Meaning of Responsible
Government, Politics, XI(2), November 1976 pp178-184). The nature and extent of the responsibility which is involved in responsible government depends as much upon convention, political and administrative practice, and the climate of public opinion, as upon rules of law. A newer term, accountability, has entered into political discourse. Its meaning, also, is protean.

What is involved in the present case is a contest the outcome of which may have an effect upon the shape of responsible government in this State. No one doubts that the New South Wales Parliament, if it so desired, could legislate to empower either House of Parliament to compel the production of documents by the executive government and to provide sanctions for defiance. Since 1881 there has been in force legislation empowering either House to summon, and examine on oath, witnesses before the House, or a Committee of the House. (The current legislation is the [Parliamentary Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pea1901220/). It is not suggested that it is of direct relevance to the present dispute). The [Freedom of Information Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/foia1989222/) also provides machinery for compelling access to official documents subject to certain restrictions. However, in the absence of any relevant legislation, the
Legislative Council is seeking to compel the production, to the House, of
State papers which the executive government is unwilling to provide. The question is whether, as a matter of law, it has powers of the kind it has purported to exercise.

The answer to that question will not be found in an appeal to political theory. Depending upon the view that is taken of what responsible government, in the current circumstances, ought to involve, the answer may cause satisfaction or dissatisfaction. Since the dispute has been brought to a court of law, the question must be answered according to law.

Other legislatures: 
One reason for the uncertainty surrounding the power of the Legislative
Council to compel the production of documents is that there are, for historical and other reasons, differences between the New South Wales
Parliament and other parliaments where such an issue might arise.

It has long been established that the New South Wales Parliament did not, as a matter of common law, inherit the powers and privileges of the United Kingdom
Parliament. However, it is convenient to look first to that Parliament, because its powers and privileges have been used as a reference point in relation to a number of Australian legislatures.

The law and custom of Parliament, upon which the powers and privileges of the
Houses of Parliament at Westminster are based, and which do not apply to the
New South Wales legislature, are to be understood, in part, by reference to the origins of that institution. The English Parliament was originally a court, consisting of royal appointees, who assisted the King in matters of government including the making of laws, public administration, and dispensing justice. (The term "court" is here used in its regal sense, which originally embraced the more modern, juridical, sense).

Over the centuries that court developed into a bicameral assembly, with the
House of Lords retaining a judicial function, and with a popularly elected
House of Commons. From the end of the seventeenth century the Parliament (comprising the King, the House of Lords and the House of Commons) enjoyed complete legislative supremacy.

In Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, 21st Ed, pp213-214 the following appears: "Each House has the power to call for the production of papers by means of a motion for a return. A return from the Privy Council or from departments headed by a Secretary of State is called for by means of a Humble Address to the Queen; other information is sought direct by means of an order of the
House. The power to call for papers was frequently exercised until about the middle of the nineteenth century. It is rarely resorted to in modern circumstances since much of the information previously sought in this way is now produced in the form of Command or Act papers but the power has a continuing importance since it may be delegated to committees, thus enabling them to send for papers and records. Formerly the two Houses required the production of papers from local and other authorities not in the service of the Crown and in general such bodies may be said to be under an ill-defined obligation to produce papers to the order of either House. It cannot, however, be said that this requirement is absolute, either in the case of government departments or of public or private bodies since there are cases recorded in which obedience to an order for papers has not been insisted on. There is, however, a general rule that papers should only be ordered on subjects which are of a public or official character." (The second sentence of the above passage may be compared with Standing Orders and 19 of the Legislative Council.) 
Section 49 of the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) empowered the Commonwealth Parliament to declare the powers, privileges and immunities of the Senate and the House of Representatives and provided that, until declared they should be those of the Commons House of Parliament of the
United Kingdom. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s49.html) "carries with it the full powers of the House of Commons". (The Queen v
Richards; Ex parte Fitzpatrick and Browne, above).

The author of Odgers' Australian Senate Practice, 7th Ed, at pp453-454 writes: "The Senate may make an order for the production of documents ... Orders ...
are sometimes known as 'orders for returns' and the documents when produced as 'returns to order' ...........................................

Orders for the return of documents are relatively common. They are used by the
Senate as a means of obtaining information about matters of concern to the
Senate. They usually relate to documents in the control of a Minister, but may refer to documents controlled by other persons. Documents called for are usually the subject of some political controversy ........." 
The author also discusses (at p454 and at pp488-491) problems that have arisen in the Senate when objection has been taken to the production of documents on grounds related to public interest immunity. There have been some widely publicised examples in recent political history.

The [Parliamentary Privileges Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ppa1987273/) (Cth) provides penalties, including fines and imprisonment, which operate as sanctions for defiance of an order of a House of Parliament.

In most Australian States there is legislation conferring upon the State
Houses of Parliament the powers, privileges and immunities of the House of
Commons. (See Campbell, Parliamentary Privilege in Australia, pp23-27; [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1975 (Vic), s19; [Parliamentary Privileges Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/wa/consolact/ppa1891273/) (WA); [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1934 (SA) s9; [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1867 (Qld) s40A); [Parliamentary Privilege Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/tas/consolact/ppa1858255/) (Tas)).

Subject to a provision in the Western Australian statute concerning objections to the production of private documents, none of this legislation seeks to specify excuses that may lawfully be made for non-production of documents. In particular, the issues of executive or public interest immunity are not addressed.

The New South Wales Parliament has never enacted legislation to declare its powers, privileges or immunities. That does not mean, of course, that it has none. A familiar example of a privilege enjoyed by all Parliaments, including the New South Wales Parliament, is the absolute privilege relating to freedom of speech in Parliament.

It is important to bear in mind that, even in the case of other Australian legislatures whose privileges are declared by statute, and whose powers undoubtedly include power in one House to order the production of documents, including State papers, there are major unresolved questions as to certain issues that may arise in respect of the exercise of such a power. Those questions include the following.

First, there is a question whether the power extends to cover documents of a private nature. As appears above, in the United Kingdom House of Commons there is "a rule" that papers should only be ordered on subjects which are of a public or official character.

Second, the existence of a power to order the production of documents of a public or official character clearly raises the question of the availability of claims for public interest immunity, and the manner in which they would be dealt with. On this important subject, the legislation in other parts of
Australia is silent. The experience of the Australian Senate shows that this can be a controversial matter.

Third, there is the question of the sanctions available to a House of
Parliament in the event of non-compliance with an order for the production of documents. In the absence of legislation spelling out the powers of a House to deal with a recalcitrant person, (and such absence appears to be the rule rather than the exception), this can be a most difficult problem.

Fourth, and related to the third point, there is the question of the conventions and courtesies observed in relations between two Houses in a bicameral legislature. What if, in the case of an order of the Australian
Senate, the recalcitrant person were a member of the House of Representatives?
What if the person were a Prime Minister? 
The existence of these questions, in the cases of Australian Houses of
Parliament which unquestionably have powers of the kind asserted by the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, reinforces a point which deserves emphasis.

Powers of the kind here in question are exercised in a context in which conventions and political practices are as important as rules of law. When a
House seeks to force an unwilling executive government to produce documents, it will ordinarily be an Upper House which is in that position. Ordinarily, the government of the day will "control", or at least have the support of, the
Lower House; and, conversely, the Lower House will have the power to bring down a government. Thus, for practical reasons, a conflict of this kind is more likely to arise between a government and an Upper House than between a government and a Lower House. When such conflicts have arisen in the past, in
New South Wales and elsewhere, they have usually been resolved in a practical manner. Normally, there are political pressures at work, which often result in compromise.

The very form in which an "order for returns" is made, consistently with parliamentary practice and long established usage, may appear unfamiliar to the eye of a lawyer accustomed to the more specific and direct commands which issue from a court when documents are required on subpoena. However, it is to be understood in the light of the constitutional and political considerations which form part of the context in which such an order is made.

A comparison between the language of Standing Orders 18 and 19 of the
Legislative Council, which language reflects the United Kingdom practice, is instructive. Standing Order 18 contemplates the communication to the Premier's
Department of an "order". On the other hand, Standing Order 19 contemplates that the Council "asks" for papers of certain kinds, including papers relating to the administration of justice.

Conventions and courtesies which apply to dealings between the three branches of government, or between the two Houses of Parliament, are not lightly to be disregarded. They are an important aspect of our constitutional arrangements.
At the same time, failure to comply with a command, or a request, issuing from a House of Parliament, is a serious matter, which could have political and other consequences, even if there is no direct remedy available to the House.

Problems of the kind considered above do not tend against a conclusion that the Legislative Council has the power it asserts. They are problems inherent in the nature of the power. Most of them exist even in the case of legislatures which undoubtedly have such power.

The powers of the Legislative Council: 
There is no statute which declares or defines the powers, privileges and immunities of the two Houses of Parliament in New South Wales. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s15.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902, which authorises the making of Standing Orders, is not a source of power of the kind presently in question. Standing Orders 18 and 19 assume the existence of a power, but do not operate as a source of power; rather they regulate in certain respects the exercise of a power which, if it exists, must have some other source.

The relevant principles of common law were considered in Armstrong versus Budd [(1969) 71 SR 386], a case dealing with the power of the Legislative Council to expel a member adjudged to be guilty of conduct unworthy of a member, and to declare the member's seat vacant. The court decided that the Legislative Council had such power.

The law and custom of parliament, which by ancient usage and prescription is part of the common law of England, and determines the privileges of the Houses of Parliament at Westminster, does not by common law apply to other parliaments.

However, at common law, a legislature such as the New South Wales Parliament, and each House in a bicameral legislature, has such powers, privileges and immunities as are reasonably necessary for the existence of such a body and for the proper exercise of its functions. (Barton versus Taylor [(1886) 11 App
Cas 197](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281886%29%2011%20AC%20197 "View LawCiteRecord" ); Willis and Christie versus Perry <case>; [(1912) 13 CLR 592] at 597; Armstrong versus Budd, above, at 391, 394, 395, 403, ).

As Wallace P observed in Armstrong versus Budd (71 SR at 402), the critical question is to decide what is reasonable, under current circumstances, to preserve the existence and proper exercise of the functions of the Legislative
Council.

Armstrong versus Budd was decided before the Australia Acts of 1986. Since the enactment of that legislation there is even stronger reason to insist upon a consideration of this issue unfettered by the habits of thought of a past age.

A power to order the production of State papers, which is possessed by the
House of Commons, the Australian Senate, and other State Houses of Parliament, is reasonably necessary for the proper exercise by the Legislative Council of its functions. The reasons for that conclusion are as follows.

Although the legal source of the power of the House of Commons, and other
Houses of Parliament, is found either in ancient custom, or in statutes inapplicable to the Legislative Council, when the existence of the power has been justified, the justification has been put upon the basis of necessity.

Such necessity is related both to the legislative functions of Parliament and also to the role of the Parliament, (including both Houses of Parliament), in scrutinising the workings of the executive.

A century ago, Sir William Anson, in The Law and Custom of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) [(Part 1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s1.html), p319) wrote of the "criticism and control of the executive" which is the function of the legislature, and went on: "By questions addressed to Ministers of the Crown, by motions for papers on matters of present interest, the members of either House can keep a check on current business and obtain explanation of its conduct, so far as is not inconsistent with the current advantage".
 
In the United States the strict separation of powers between the legislature and the executive affects the practical form in which a problem such as the present might arise. However, the highest courts have repeatedly and emphatically declared the necessity for a legislature to have the power to compel the production of documents relevant to the business of the legislature.

In Quinn versus The United States <case>; [(1954) 349 US 155] at 160 Warren CJ, delivering the opinion of the Supreme
Court, said: "There can be no doubt as to the power of Congress, by itself or though its committees, to investigate matters and conditions relating to contemplated legislation. This power, deeply rooted in American and English institutions, is indeed co-extensive with the power to legislate. Without the power to investigation ... Congress could be seriously handicapped in its efforts to exercise constitutional function wisely and effectively." 
The same reasoning applies in New South Wales.

The capacity of both Houses of Parliament, including the House less likely to be "controlled" by the government, to scrutinise the workings of the executive government, by asking questions and demanding the production of State papers, is an important aspect of modern parliamentary democracy. It provides an essential safeguard against abuse of executive power.

The extent of the power to compel the production of documents is governed by the source of the power; necessity. The present case does not require a consideration of the extent to which there may be power to compel the production of private documents. Necessity at least embraces a power to order a return of State papers, subject to just exceptions. Nor does the present case require a decision as to what constitute just exceptions. No claim for public interest immunity or any other form of privilege has so far been made in relation to the documents called for by the resolutions of the Legislative
Council. The only reason advanced, either by Cabinet or the plaintiff, for the refusal to produce documents is the Legislative Council's asserted lack of power to order their production. It may be, of course, that some issue of immunity will be raised at a later stage if the dispute goes further; but no such issue has arisen yet.

To conclude that the Legislative Council has a power, of the kind assumed by
Standing Order 18, to order the production of State papers, raises the question of the sanctions available in the event of non-compliance with such an order. A person thinking in terms of a subpoena which issues from court may tend to assume, without further consideration, that the necessary corollary of the proposition that a body may order a person to produce documents is that such a body may punish a person who fails to comply with such an order. For the reasons explained above, however, in the case of an order for the production of State papers made by a House of Parliament the position is not so simple. Even in a purely legal context, the powers of the Supreme Court to punish, by way of proceedings for contempt, non-compliance with its orders are not universally enjoyed by courts, or by quasi-judicial tribunals, or investigative bodies, even though such bodies have the power to summon witnesses and to call for the production of documents.

When considering the application of the common law principle of necessity in relation to the powers and privileges of legislatures at common law, the courts have had to address the question whether necessity requires that a legislature, or one house of parliament, in addition to powers of self- protection and coercion, should have an implied or inherent power to punish people for failure to comply with requirements or orders issuing from the legislature.

The issue at stake was important. Whilst the English Houses of Parliament, originally a court, have, by the law and custom of parliament, power to punish for contempt, such a power has the potential to work as an infringement of the liberties of the subject. The claims of local colonial legislatures to have power to punish citizens, outside courts of law, and outside the operation of the ordinary legal system, were strongly resisted. The view was taken that necessity did not require that such legislatures have punitive power. It was, of course, open to them to assume such power by the enactment of valid legislation. An alternative course was to enact legislation to confer power upon the judiciary to administer punishment for contempt of parliament.

This was the issue that arose in Fenton versus Hampton <case>; [(1858) 11 Moo PC 347]; [14 ER 727.] The plaintiff in that case was the Comptroller-General of
Convicts in Van Dieman's Land. The first defendant was the Speaker of the
Legislative Council of the Colony, and the second defendant was the Serjeant- at-Arms of the Legislative Council. In the course of an inquiry into certain aspects of the convict system in the Colony, by a Select Committee of the
Legislative Council, the plaintiff was summoned as a witness. He refused to appear. In his absence he was adjudged guilty of contempt. The Speaker issued a warrant for his arrest, to be held in custody during the pleasure of the
Council. The Supreme Court held that the arrest was unlawful. That decision was upheld by the Privy Council. His Honour was prepared, for the purpose of argument, to assume that it would have been within the power of the
Legislative Council, in the exercise of its proper inquisitorial functions, to cause the plaintiff to be apprehended for the purpose of bringing him before the Legislative Council to be examined in relation to matters the subject of the enquiry. The Chief Justice was prepared to assume, without deciding, that this would have been a proper exercise of coercive power. However, what was held to be beyond the power of the Legislative Council was to punish the plaintiff for contempt. The Chief Justice said (at 367): "No one, I conceive, will be found to contend, that the exercise of that power could legally be carried one iota beyond the necessity which calls it into play. And what would be this limit? That on the Plaintiff's disregard of the summons of the Committee and of the order of the House, requiring his attendance at the bar, he be ordered to be brought up in custody for the purpose of being examined on the inquiry, and that the warrant be shaped accordingly. But this is not what has been done; the Plaintiff for his refusal to attend, has been adjudged guilty of a contempt, and his arrest and imprisonment are the penalty for that offence; it is not simply the coercive enforcement of his presence, but punishment for his disobedience in not being present." 
Since that time, the Privy Council, the High Court of Australia, and the
Supreme Court of New South Wales as recently as Armstrong versus Budd, in decisions relating to the New South Wales Parliament, have held that neither
House of the New South Wales Parliament has as an implied or inherent power to punish people for refusing to obey an order of the House. The Privy Council decided that in Barton versus Taylor. The High Court reached the same decision in
Willis and Christie versus Perry. Those decisions were followed in Armstrong v
Budd.

The dividing line between coercion and punishment is often difficult to draw.
In the area of contempt of court the distinction between coercion and punishment was originally made the basis for the categorisation of contempts as either civil or criminal. The practical and conceptual difficulties involved in making a clear distinction between those remedies for contempt of court that are coercive in nature, and those that are punitive, were emphasised by the High Court in Witham versus Holloway <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 98).] 
In United States authorities dealing with the implied or inherent powers of legislatures, the importance, and the difficulty, of distinguishing between coercion and punishment has long been recognised. (eg McGrain versus Dougherty <case>; [273 US 135] (1927); Marshall versus Gordon <case>; [243 US 521] at ).

To summarise thus far: The Legislative Council has such implied or inherent powers as are reasonably necessary for its existence and for the proper exercise of its functions.
 A power to order the production of State papers, of the kind assumed by
Standing Order 18, is reasonably necessary for the proper exercise by the
Legislative Council of its functions. Standing Orders 18 and 19 validly regulate the exercise of that power.
 Whilst the Legislative Council has such coercive powers as are reasonably necessary to compel compliance with an order for production of State papers, it has no power to punish anybody for failing to comply with such an order.
The practical availability and utility of coercive measures will depend upon the circumstances of an individual case, and may be affected by constitutional conventions and proprieties as well as by legal considerations.

In view of what has occurred in the present case it is also necessary to refer to powers of suspension of members. Here, the relevant distinction, also imprecise, is between self-protection and punishment.

In the context of disorderly behaviour on the part of a member, disrupting the proceedings of the House, the principle of necessity gives the President of the Legislative Council power to order the suspension and removal of a member.
However, it does not give the President power to order the arrest outside the
Chamber of a member who has been disorderly on a previous occasion so that he or she may be brought both into the Chamber to be admonished. (Willis and
Christie versus Perry, above). This is an example of the difference between the
House acting to preserve its own procedures and the House exercising punitive power in relation to past conduct.

The Standing Orders of the Legislative Council contain the following provisions which enable the House to deal with members, and strangers, whose conduct interferes with or obstructs the business of the House.
 "258 A Member having been called to order for a breach of any of these Rules and Orders, or for disorderly conduct, shall be guilty of contempt if he attempts to leave the Chamber before his conduct has been dealt with, except in cases were a Member has been called upon to withdraw, pending consideration of his conduct.
 A Member named by the President or reported by the Chairman as having been named by him in Committee of the Whole House as guilty of a wilful or vexatious breach of any of the Standing Rules and Orders, or as interrupting the orderly conduct of the business of the House, may be adjudged by the House on Motion, without notice, guilty of contempt, no debate being allowed on such
Motion except an explanation by the Member named.
 A Member adjudged by the House, for any of the causes hereinbefore mentioned, guilty of contempt, may be suspended from the service of the House for such time as the House shall by resolution declare.
 A Member who shall so conduct himself as to make it necessary for the
President or Chairman of Committees to call him to order three times in the course of any one sitting for any breach of the Rules and Orders may, by the order of the President or Chairman of Committees, be removed by the Usher of the Black Rod from the Chamber until the termination of such sitting.
 When a Member is suspended from the service of, or removed from the House, he shall be excluded from the House and from all the rooms set apart for the use of the Members.
 A person, not being a Member, who interrupts the orderly conduct of the business of the House, or obstructs the approaches to the House, or occasions a disturbance within the precincts of the House, may, by order of the
President, be removed by the Usher of the Black Rod or his Assistants, and may be excluded from the House for such period as the President may direct".

Although the headings to the Standing Orders describe suspension pursuant to
Standing Order 260 as "punishment", the assumption and exercise of a power of suspension in such circumstances has been justified, as a self-protective measure, upon the principle of necessity. In Armstrong versus Budd Sugerman JA said at 406: "It has uniformly been held unnecessary to the existence of a local legislature and the proper exercise of its functions ... that it should have power to punish for contempts committed beyond its walls or even within them, by strangers or by members ... . As distinct from punishment the doctrine of necessity has been described in various terms - whatever is necessary as a matter of self-protection, or self-defence, or self-security or self- preservation or for the proper conduct of business or exercise of functions ... .Within these limits it would appear that the power of a House extends even to expulsion of a member - indeed expulsion has been referred to as a less serious matter in certain aspects than suspension." 
The power to suspend, at least temporarily, or remove, a member, in certain circumstances, is clearly necessary to preserve the capacity of a House to conduct its business in an orderly fashion.

However, the requirements of necessity have been held to extend further. They have been held to embrace a power temporarily to suspend a member who is the subject of a charge of grave misconduct. Such suspension is permissible "not by way of punishment, but in self-defence" (Harnett versus Crick [[1908] AC ] at ).

The procedures laid down by Standing Orders 259 and 260 were not followed in the present case. The plaintiff was not named or reported as having been guilty of a wilful or vexatious breach of any of the Standing Rules or Orders, and there is no suggestion that he interrupted the orderly conduct of the business of the House.

Another Standing Order to which reference was made in argument is Standing
Order 2. It is a general provision in the following terms: "2 In all cases not specially provided for by these Rules and Orders or other Rules and Orders hereafter adopted resort may be had to the Rules,
Forms, and Usages of the Imperial Parliament, as laid down in the latest
Edition of May's Parliamentary Practice, which shall be followed so far as the same can be applied to the proceedings of this House, and in the Committee of the Whole House, or any other Committee." 
Although some argument was addressed to the matter, it is not necessary to decide whether the reference to the "latest Edition" of the work referred to is ambulatory. The rule was adopted in 1951. All editions of May's
Parliamentary Practice since then have referred to the penal jurisdiction of the Houses of the Westminster Parliament and, in the context of a discussion of the power of Houses to punish members and non-members, refer to a general power of suspension, of ancient usage, pre-dating the specific powers contained in Standing Orders corresponding to the Standing Orders of the
Legislative Council set out above. The origin of the power to punish is said to lie in the medieval concept of parliament as primarily a court of justice.
(See 21st Edition at p103). This is the very power which the courts have held does not belong, at common law, to the Houses of the New South Wales
Parliament, and other local legislatures. Standing Order 2 cannot be regarded as a source of punitive power, although it may be of significance in other ways.

Standing Orders 258 to 263 are supported by [s15(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s15.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902, which empowers the Legislative Council to adopt Standing Orders regulating the orderly conduct of the Council. However, neither as a matter of construction of the Standing Orders as a whole, nor as a matter of inherent power, can Standing Order 2 be relied upon to give the Legislative Council a punitive power of suspension of a member existing outside the powers conferred by Standing Orders 258 to 263.

It is to be noted that in Harnett versus Crick, above, the power of suspension of a member who was the subject of a pending criminal charge was contained in a
Standing Order which was made pursuant to [s15(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s15.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act. In the proceedings in the Supreme Court (Crick versus Harnett [(1907) 2 SR ] at 132) it was observed that a House of the New South Wales
Parliament has no inherent power to make Standing Orders; its power to do so derives from s15.

However, the Standing Orders do not exclusively define the circumstances in which a member may be suspended or removed from a House. Every such body has an inherent power to protect itself against disturbance of its proceedings by the misconduct of members in the course of proceedings. It was held in Toohey v Melville ((1892) <case>; [13 LR 132)] that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly had the power, without a resolution of the House, to eject a disorderly member. The need to preserve order, in the light of the exigencies of a particular case, may require prompt action, tailored to the circumstances of the case.

The decision in Armstrong versus Budd provides a strong example of the extent to which necessity may take the power of self-protection. It is not limited to dealing with disorderly conduct. The Legislative Council was held to have the power to expel a member in order to protect its own reputation and integrity.

The resolution of 2 May 1996 
The events of 1 May and 2 May 1996 illustrate the procedural difficulties confronting a House of Parliament when there has been a failure to comply with an order for a return of papers.

The Legislative Council, in the due exercise of its implied or inherent power, and in accordance with Standing Order 18, had ordered the production of "all papers relating to the Government's consideration of the Report of the
Commission of Inquiry into the Lake Cowal gold mine ... and the determination of the consent to the project". This order had been communicated to the
Premier's Department. The response had been an assertion by Cabinet that that such orders were invalid and beyond power. Cabinet had agreed that individual
Ministers should decline to comply with any orders from either House of
Parliament to table documents. The plaintiff was a party to that agreement.
The principle of collective responsibility of members of Cabinet is well established. (The Commonwealth versus Northern Land Council <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 604] at 615).

On 1 May 1996 the Legislative Council, by resolution, declared its dissatisfaction with the Government's response. It censured the plaintiff "as the representative of the Government in this House" for the Government's failure to comply with the resolution of 23 April 1996.

Then, in an attempt to find a practical method of enforcing its previous order, the Legislative Council made the plaintiff the focus of its attention.
By resolution, it called upon the plaintiff to produce all the documents referred to in the previous resolution.

No attempt was made to give further notice to the Premier's Department, pursuant to Standing Order 18, of the resolution of 1 May. The view appears to have been taken that the resolution requiring the plaintiff to produce the documents in question was the natural working out of the earlier resolution, and the failure to comply with that resolution. The Government had been ordered, under Standing Order 18, to produce papers. That Order had been defied. The plaintiff was the Leader of the Government in the Upper House, and the Vice-President of the Executive Council. Accordingly, so it appears, the view was taken that the appropriate next step was to pass a resolution specifically requiring the plaintiff to produce the documents. His capacity to comply with that resolution, if he were otherwise willing to do so, was not raised as an issue. The plaintiff took his stand upon the Cabinet resolution.

There might have been a number of alternative courses open at that stage.
There is no complaint, of present relevance, as to any failure on the part of the plaintiff to answer questions put to him in the House even though there appears to be a close association between a refusal to table documents and a refusal to answer questions.. Nor was any attempt made to have the plaintiff examined on oath under the provisions of the [Parliamentary Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pea1901220/). Whether the provisions of that Act would themselves have justified a requirement to the plaintiff to produce documents for the purpose of such an examination has not been argued in the present case.

On 2 May 1996, the plaintiff having failed to comply with the requirement of 1
May 1996, the Legislative Council, relevantly, did three things. First, by paragraph 2 of its resolution of 2 May 1996, it adjudged the plaintiff guilty of contempt of the House for his failure to comply with the order of 1 May
Second, by paragraph 3(a) of its resolution it suspended the plaintiff from the service of the House for the remainder of that day's sitting. Third, by paragraph 3(b) of the resolution it ordered the plaintiff to attend in his place at the table of the House on the next sitting day to explain his conduct in relation to this and other similar matters.

There has been no argument in these proceedings about the third aspect of the resolution of 2 May. It is the first and second aspects of the resolution, which formed the basis of the plaintiff's removal from the House, and the precincts of Parliament, when he refused to accept his suspension, which have provided the focal point of the debate.

The record of the proceedings in Parliament, in Hansard, which is before this court, shows that it was accepted on all sides, in the course of the debate, that, even if the plaintiff were adjudged to have been in contempt of the
House, the House had no power to punish him for such contempt. It was accepted, correctly, that the House had no power to fine or imprison him.

In a context such as the present, the differences between self-protection, coercion, and punishment are blurred. Ordinarily, the sanctions of fine or imprisonment are immediately recognisable as punitive in character. However, as the decision in A.M.I.E.U versus Mudginberri Station Pty Ltd, above, illustrates, even in such cases the distinction is not always clear.

When a question arises as to whether a sanction for contempt is to be characterised as self-protective, or coercive, or is purely punitive, the nature of the contempt involved may be important. This is a familiar problem in the area of contempt of court. Some of the elaborate distinctions that have been made in the past are now discredited, but even so, different circumstances may warrant different conclusions. Here, the supposed contempt arose out of conduct on the part of the plaintiff which was part of a continuing, and unresolved, state of affairs. Hence the third aspect of the resolution of 2 May mentioned above. The present is not a case of a single act which was over and done with before the House came to deal with its consequences. Although the analogy is not perfect, it was similar to the case of a continuing refusal to comply with a court order.

The Legislative Council had, in the due exercise of its powers, directed to the executive government, and then specifically to the plaintiff as the representative of the government in the House, a requirement to produce certain State papers. The plaintiff's response, in accordance with a Cabinet agreement, was a flat refusal to comply with the requirement. The plaintiff did not suggest that he had no documents of the kind in question, or that he was unable to obtain such documents. He made it clear that he considered that the Council could not compel him to produce the documents, and that, in the absence of such compulsion, he would not produce them voluntarily. The fact that the plaintiff's response may have been based in part upon an honestly mistaken view of the nature and extent of the powers of the Legislative
Council does not alter the case. Once it is accepted that the Council had the power to require the production of State papers, the plaintiff's refusal to comply with such a requirement was conduct which the Council, within its power, could judge to be contempt. Furthermore, in the circumstances of the case, the Council's powers to act in self-protection to preserve the integrity of its own procedures, and of coercion, to compel compliance with its orders, warranted the brief temporary suspension of the plaintiff coupled with a requirement that he should appear on the following day to be further questioned.

The resolutions of 2 May 1996 cannot, in the circumstances, be characterised as a mere invalid attempt to punish the plaintiff for his past conduct. They were, in their nature, coercive and self-protective, and did not exceed the powers of the Legislative Council.

In the result, the primary issue in the case, which is the validity of the resolutions of 2 May 1996, should be resolved in favour of the defendants.

The footpath point: 
There remains to be considered the issue referred to in argument as the footpath point.

The plaintiff contends that, even assuming the validity of the resolutions of May 1996 and, in particular, of his suspension from the House for the remainder of the day's sittings, there was no justification for the direction that he be escorted from the precincts of Parliament; a direction which evidently meant, and was taken by the second defendant to mean that he be removed, not only from the Legislative Council Chamber, and from the rooms set apart for the use of Members of the Legislative Council, but into Macquarie
Street.

It may be that the direction of the first defendant that the plaintiff be removed from the precincts of Parliament was based upon a view that Standing
Order 2, mentioned above, imported the practice of the House of Commons. A member of the House of Commons who is suspended from the service of the House must withdraw from the precincts of the House, which have been declared to be bounded by the walls of the Palace of Westminster. Reference to a similar provision in the Standing Orders of the Queensland Legislative Assembly was made by E A Douglas J in Barnes versus Purcell [(1946) St.R.Qd 87] at 105. His
Honour pointed out, however, that those Standing Orders, like Standing Order of the New South Wales Legislative Council make provision for the consequences of suspension. Thus, Standing Order 2 does not apply.

It is the language of Standing Order 262 which governs the matter. That language did not justify the forcible exclusion of the plaintiff from more than the Chamber of the Legislative Council and all rooms set apart for the use of Members.

On this point the plaintiff is entitled to succeed.

Orders: 
The court should declare that the defendants committed an unlawful trespass to the person of the plaintiff.

The court should decline to make a declaration that the resolutions of 2 May were invalid.

Since each side has been partially successful, and the defendants have succeeded on the main issue, there should be no order as to costs.

MAHONEY P: This proceeding raises for determination issues of constitutional importance. The facts giving rise to them and the context in which they arise are set forth in the judgment of the Chief Justice, a draft of which I have had the advantage of reading. What the Chief Justice has said and my agreement with it enables me to go directly to the issues and to deal with them without elaboration and without recording the details which otherwise it would be necessary to record.
THE ISSUES: 
As the proceeding has been conducted, the issues to be determined are issues of principle. They are: whether the Legislative Council has power to require a Member of that
House to produce papers to it; (if it has) whether it has power to require that of a Minister of the executive Government; and (if it has) whether it has power, upon a refusal to produce such papers, to impose the sanction of removal of the Member from the House.

In stating the issues in terms of principle in this way, I do not mean to indicate that points of detail have not been, or may not be, taken in the litigation of cases of this kind. As with any case, a great case may turn upon a technical point. However, I understand the parties to desire that the case be dealt with in terms of principle and I shall, subject to what I shall say, deal with the issues in that way.

Subject to what I shall say, I have not pursued the detail of the Standing
Orders of the Legislative Council. With respect to those who have considered the present and similar problems, I believe that the present issues can and should be determined without calling in aid the powers, or additional powers, which valid Standing Orders may confer upon the House.

In doing this, I act upon the basis that the terms of the Standing Orders and of the Resolutions of the House are to be understood as they are intended to be understood by Members of a busy legislature. Such documents are not drawn by equity counsel for the purposes of regulating nice legalities. They are, I infer, documents intended to guide those involved in the day to day operation of such a legislature in deciding what they can and should do. Their interpretation is, special cases apart, committed not to courts but to those who ultimately must determine what the House should do. Documents of this kind are, I believe, pre-eminently documents to be construed in the light of what is the purpose and the intended operation of them. The Standing Orders and the resolutions in question in this proceeding are, in my opinion, to be construed in this way.
THE CONTEXT IN WHICH THE ISSUES ARISE: 
In order to make clear my conclusions and my reasons for them, it is necessary to outline the context in which the issues have arisen. It is proper to record that, whether or not political differences were involved, the plaintiff and the defendant have taken their respective stands upon matters of constitutional principle.

There have, from at least 1995, been disputes within the Legislative Council as to the power of that House to require a Member, and in particular a Member of the Ministry, to produce papers to the House. The material to which the
Court has been referred in argument shows that the plaintiff, as Treasurer and
Leader of the Government in the House, had on at least three previous occasions refused to comply with an order of the House to produce documents.
By a Resolution of the House of 13 November 1995, the Standing Committee on
Parliamentary Privilege and Ethics was asked to inquire into and report upon the sanctions which should be enforced "where a Minister fails to obey an order of the House to table papers ...". The Committee reported that "the powers of the Parliament to order the tabling of papers and to enforce such orders by the imposition of sanctions are uncertain and the subject of conflicting legal opinion". On 10 May 1996, the Committee's report was ordered to be printed.

The present problem arose in relation to a Report of a Committee of Inquiry into the Lake Cowal Gold Mine and the consideration by Government of that
Report. On 23 April 1996 the Legislative Council resolved that the Lake Cowal papers be produced. On 29 April 1996 the Cabinet made a determination of the principle which it should adopt. Its decision was: "That Cabinet agreed that Ministers should act on advice previously obtained from Crown Law Officers and, accordingly, decline to comply with any orders from either House of Parliament to table documents on the grounds that such orders are invalid and beyond power".
 (Underlining added).

Subsequently, resolutions were passed which have been detailed in the judgment of the Chief Justice. Their purpose and effect was to require the plaintiff, as a Member of the Legislative Council, a Minister, and the representative of the Government in the House to produce the relevant documents. The plaintiff took the stand taken by Cabinet: his refusal to produce the documents to the
House has, I infer, been based and based only upon the view that it was beyond the constitutional power of the House to require him to produce the documents and that the Resolution of the House was "invalid and beyond power".
THE POWER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL TO ORDER PAPERS TO BE PRODUCED TO
IT: 
This issue does not concern the legislative capacity of the Parliament. There is no doubt that, subject to the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), the Parliament of New South Wales has power to enact legislation which requires, or which enables a person or body to require, that papers be produced to the Parliament or to a House of the Parliament. The plenary nature of the Parliament's power has been stated in the [Australia Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aa1986114/). That Act recognises that the power of a State legislature such as the Parliament of New
South Wales is plenary and that such a Parliament may (subject to limitations not here relevant) exercise all such powers as previously were exercised by the United Kingdom Parliament: see [Australia Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aa1986114/) [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aa1986114/s1.html)-[2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aa1986114/s2.html).
The plenary nature of the Parliament has been affirmed by the High Court and by this Court: see Union Steamship Co of Australia Pty Ltd versus King <case>; [(1988) 166 CLR 1] at 9-10; Kable versus Director of Public Prosecutions <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 814] and the cases there referred to.

The Parliament may by legislation determine its powers and the powers of each of the two Houses in relation to the production of papers. It may do so subject to such limitations as are now seen to be imposed by the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) upon the legislative powers of the New South Wales Parliament: see generally
Kable versus Director of Public Prosecutions for New South Wales and the cases which the members of the High Court of Australia there discussed. But no legislation has been enacted which determines the present issues. Accordingly, the existence of the relevant power must be determined by the court.

What is here in question is (as I shall describe it) the inherent power of one of the two Houses of the Parliament to make an order for such production. Such powers may be granted by the enactment of legislation. The distinction between inherent powers of the Parliament or of a House of the Parliament and the power which it has been given by legislation is important. The grant of power by an Act of the Parliament involves formalities which enable what is to be enacted to be the subject of scrutiny during the process of its enactment. The procedural requirements of successive readings, of successive votes, and of (in some cases) the scrutiny in the Committee or the like ensure that the powers proposed to be given are known, can be examined, and are open to criticism before they are given. As has been said, safeguards of substance are often contained in the interstices of procedures: the procedures, though they may be irritating, are followed because of the substantial benefits which lie behind them.

The powers here in question are of a different kind. If they exist, they exist, not because of parliamentary enactment but inherently, because of the nature of a parliamentary body. Their existence is determined, not by the parliamentary processes to which I have referred, but by judicial decision.

The fact that a legislative body has such powers can give rise to apprehension: cf the way in which they were used in R versus Richards; Ex parte
Fitzpatrick and Browne <case>; [(1955) 92 CLR 157.] The extent of the powers is not known in advance: they are not specified in legislation and the content of them has not been examined by public scrutiny prior to affirmation of their existence. It is therefore, in my respectful opinion, proper that the principles by which the existence and the extent of such powers are to be determined be the subject of careful consideration.

It is accepted that whether such powers exist in the Parliament or a House of the Parliament is to be decided not by the parliamentary body itself but by the courts. This, in relation to the Australian Parliament, is the effect of the decision of the High Court in the Fitzpatrick and Browne case. In
Armstrong versus Budd [(1969) 71 SR 386], this Court determined that the Legislative Council had power to pass a resolution expelling a Member of that House and declaring his seat vacant. The correctness of Armstrong versus Budd has not been seriously questioned in this proceeding.

Whether the Parliament or a House of the Parliament has inherent power of the kind in question has traditionally been determined in accordance with principle. It is not left to a judge to decide that a power does or does not exist by reference to his own idiosyncratic view of what powers it would be good or bad for the Parliament to have or to whether the existence of such a power would produce a more or less efficient Parliament or House. It is right that this be so. Assessments of such matters are apt to vary, between individuals and with the times. The decisions of courts of final appeal in
England and America illustrate that judicial views of the needs of institutions vary with changing social philosophies or ideologies or even with the intellectual fashions of the times. The verities of one era become the footnotes of the next. It is therefore proper that these matters be determined by principle and that the principle adopted be one which allows what can be done to develop with the development of the legislative bodies and the theories and assumptions applicable to them.

There is a long history of decisions in which the courts have had to consider the powers of colonial and emerging national legislatures. Kielley versus Carson <case>; [(1842) 4 Moo PC 63], has been seen as a starting point: Armstrong versus Budd at 392. In that case, the Privy
Council held that an emerging legislature (the House of Assembly of
Newfoundland) had such powers as were "necessary to the existence of such a body and the proper exercise of the functions which it is intended to exercise": at 88-89; 234-5. That principle, as the test of the existence of inherent powers, was adopted in later decisions of the Privy Council: see
Barton versus Taylor [(1886) 11 App Cas 197]; Doyle v
Falconer (1866) LR 1PC 328; Hartnett versus Crick [(1908) AC 470]; and of the High
Court of Australia: Willis versus Perry [(1912) 13 CLR 593] at 597.
After a detailed examination of the cases, it was adopted by this Court in
Armstrong versus Budd.

The term "necessary" is to be given a meaning appropriate to the purpose to which the principle is directed. The term does not restrict the inherent powers of legislative bodies to those which are necessary in the sense that without them the body could not possibly function as a parliament or a House of a parliament. It may protect itself from "all impediments to the due course of its proceeding": Willis versus Perry [(1912) 13 CLR 593] at 600.
"Necessary" has, in the law, been used frequently to denote those things which are clearly adapted to the needs or the purposes of the body or function in question: see generally Water Board versus Glambedakis [(1992) 28 NSWLR ]
at 707. The decisions in this area of the law show that the powers which have been held to be inherent in legislative bodies have not been limited to powers without which it would not have been possible for the bodies to function. They have extended to powers which are clearly adapted to the needs and purposes of the body in question. I do not mean by this that the test is mere convenience.
The distinction between necessary and convenient in this sense is a familiar distinction met in various parts of the law and it is not necessary that I pursue it here.

This principle, in my opinion, was a proper principle for the determination of the powers which inherently such bodies have. Its origin was seen initially to lie in the concept of grant. The English Parliament was seen to have made a grant of powers to the colonial legislature which it had created and it was held to have granted, not merely the powers stated expressly in the grant, but also such other powers as were necessary for the grant to be efficient. Thus, in Kielley versus Carson, the principle was that embodied in the ordinary legal maxim "Quando lex aliquid concedit, concedere viditur et illud, sine quo res ipsa esse non potest": ubi supra.

But the origin of a principle does not determine the content of it. Nor is its content to be determined by what was necessary to the legislative body in question at the time when the power was originally given: Armstrong versus Budd at 402. The concept of necessity involves that the court must consider, from time to time and as the need arises, what are the functions of the body and the purposes it is to achieve and accordingly what it must be able to do.
These will change as society changes and the functions and purposes of the body in question change with it. See, eg, Armstrong versus Budd at 401-2.

In accordance with this principle, is it necessary that the Legislative
Council have power to require the tabling of papers that it requires in order to carry out its functions? 
The power to require the tabling of the presently relevant documents is, in my opinion, necessary to the proper exercise of the functions of the Legislative
Council. The functions of the Legislative Council include the consideration and the passing of Bills coming before it and, to an appropriate extent and in the proper manner, the oversight of the activities of the executive government. In order that it may do each of these, it is necessary that the
House have before it information as to the matters in question. Subject to what I shall say, it would be extraordinary if, having a matter before it for consideration, it could not do what was necessary to inform itself about it.
It is accordingly within its power to obtain such information in various ways.
Thus, it may cause a study to be made of matters which are before it to be dealt with. It may do this by Committees, by consultants and by the provision of information by Members and others.

In earlier times, the legislature may not have had available to it or may not have seen it necessary to have information of this kind. Legislatures may have been content to judge whether a mischief existed warranting legislation, what remedy was needed to deal with the mischief, and how that remedy was to be put into effect: cf Heydon's case [(1584) 3 Co Rep 7a]; 76 ER ; and Metal Manufacturers Pty Ltd versus Lewis [(1988) 13 NSWLR 315] at 325-6; from the knowledge or the assumptions of its members. There is now available to legislatures information which was not available previously. It is, I think, to be expected that legislation in this State will now be based, not upon assumptions or ideologies, but upon what that information shows to be necessary and appropriate. It is not merely convenient but necessary that the legislature have access to information of every kind relevant to the informed discharge of its functions. As the Chief Justice has indicated, the power to obtain information is seen as a necessary incident of other comparable legislative bodies.

The plaintiff does not, I think, deny that the House has power to obtain such information as is necessary for the performance of its functions. As I understand the submissions, his contention is that it does not have the power to obtain it compulsorily. It is therefore necessary to determine whether the power to compel the production of papers could be necessary to "the proper exercise of the functions of" the House. The matter may be tested by an example.

It is, I think, possible to envisage circumstances in which it is necessary for the proper exercise of its functions that the House have particular information or particular documents. Thus, to adapt an instance which was before the Parliament, the House may be required to consider the enactment of legislation authorising the acquisition and use of land for the purpose of a film studio, in accordance with a plan, an agreement or the like. In the proper exercise of its functions, to consider and to pass or reject legislation, the House would ordinarily desire to know the terms of the plan and the content of the agreement. The plan or the agreement may be in the possession of a person who is not willing to produce it.

In my opinion, the House would have power to order that person to produce the plan or the agreement to it. To know the details of the plan or the agreement would, in my opinion, be clearly necessary to the proper performance of the functions of the House. It would be possible for the House to take the attitude that, if it did not have the documents, it would not pass the legislation. But that cannot be the test of what is necessary to the House and its proper functioning. The House may take the view - perhaps ordinarily it would take the view - that its functions required that it decide whether the legislation was to be passed according to the facts relevant to it and not in the absence of them.

It has been said that there are reasons, and that the cases show that there are reasons, why such documents should not be produced or compulsorily produced: see, eg, McGuinness versus Attorney General of Victoria [(1940) 163 CLR ];
Baker versus Campbell [(1983) 153 CLR 52]; and
Jacobsen versus Rogers <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 572.] That may be so. But that does not mean that the House does not have the power to order production. The first (and the relevant) question for determination in this matter is whether it is, in the relevant sense, necessary to the exercise of its function, to determine whether to pass or reject the legislation, that the House have power to secure production of the documents. If it is, questions may arise as to whether there should be exceptions or qualifications to the generality of the documents which, though necessary, it should be allowed to have, and whether there should be, eg, public interest immunities or the like which should produce the result that some documents, though clearly necessary to the performance of the House's functions, should for other reasons not be available to it. But such matters (exception, immunities and the like) are decided upon, not because the documents are not relevantly necessary, but because there are other factors (factors of personal freedoms, confidentiality, privacy or the like) which should result in documents, though relevantly necessary, not being made available to the House.

In this regard, it is proper to consider the effect of the decision of the
Privy Council in Fenton versus Hampton <case>; [(1857) 11 Moo PC 347]; [14 ER 727.] In considering that case and similar cases, it is proper to recognise distinctions which in the 19th century have been seen as important.

First, there is the distinction between the functions of the legislature and
Houses of it which are or are appropriately related to its legislative functions and the functions which it has merely to inquire and authorise inquiry upon matters which interest it. Where the Crown or the legislative arm of government is concerned merely with an inquiry, it has the power to obtain but in general not to compel information. If compulsion of information is required, that power must be found in legislation, eg, the Royal Commission
Act.

Second, there are distinctions to be observed when a House comes to deal with a failure to obey or comply with orders made by it in the exercise of powers which it has. Putting the matter generally, the House may apply a sanction to prevent impediment of what is going on in the House. Thus, if a Member is impeding what the House is doing by, eg, interrupting debate or the like, the
House may remove that impediment to what it is doing by having him removed from the Chamber and may do so forcibly against the Member's wishes. But if that Member, having impeded what the House was doing, is already outside the
Parliament (perhaps, the Chamber), the House may not forcibly bring him back to the Chamber to be dealt with. There is, as it has been said, a difference between removing impediments to the exercise of the House's functions and punishing for such impediments. The latter course has been seen as being merely punishment.

These determinations are important in understanding what the Privy Council decided in Fenton versus Hampton. The Legislative Council of Van Dieman's Land had set up a Select Committee of Members to inquire into abuses in the Council
Department: at 347. Hampton was "a necessary witness" and was summoned by the
Chairman to appear before the Select Committee. He refused. The Council then summoned him to appear at the Bar of the Council. He refused. The Council thereupon resolved he was guilty of contempt of the Council. It issued a warrant, through the Speaker, for his arrest. He was arrested away from the precincts of the Council. To the Pleas of Justification, the plaintiff demurred upon the following grounds: "that the Legislative Council had no power by law to adjudicate upon, as a contempt, any act done not in the presence of the Council, in Council assembled, by any person not being a member or officer of the Council, and to punish for the same by imprisonment; that the Appellant, Fenton, was not by law justified, under the circumstances set forth in the pleas, in issuing the warrant there mentioned for the apprehension and detention of the Respondent during the pleasure of the Council, ..." 
It was, I infer, to those grounds of demurrer that the argument was directed.

Before the local court, a number of matters were referred to. The Chief
Justice, in his judgment, dealt with a number of matters, some of which might have been relevant to issues which could have arisen for complaint: see, eg, at 359 et seq. However, the Privy Council refrained from dealing with matters beyond those in issue on the record. At 395, their Lordships said: "The question was argued before the Committee at considerable length, and many points were raised and discussed, upon which we think it unnecessary to form any opinion in order to decide the present question. The principal point is, undoubtedly, of great importance, involving, as it does, on the one hand, the constitutional rights and authority of the Legislative bodies in various parts of Her Majesty's Colonial territories; and, on the other, the right to personal liberty (unless deprived of it by law), which Her Majesty's subjects take with them, as part of their birthright, to every portion of Her dominions. The subject is not new to this Court; it has been discussed before on more than one occasion. In the case of Beaumont versus Barrett, from Jamaica (1 Moore PC Cases, 59), it was decided, that an Assembly possessed of supreme legislative authority had the power of punishing contempts; that the power was inherent in such an Assembly, and incident to its legislative functions; and, according to the judgment in that case, every Colonial Assembly or Council possessed the same authority to punish for contempts which the House of
Commons has exercised in this Kingdom for a long series of years." 
The basis of the decision was, in my opinion, that the wrong complained of, viz, the arrest of Hampton, and the contempt for which he was arrested, took place away from the Council; what the Council did was done "with a view to punish for an act alleged to be a contempt, but committed away from the House of Assembly". Their Lordships did not determine whether the Council could summon Hampton to the Bar of the Council, whether it summoned him for contempt of the Select Committee, or to answer the questions which might have been asked by the Select Committee, or whether the Select Committee or the Council could have compelled him to answer questions put to him by either.

Their decision does not determine the issues in the present proceeding. Here, the documents were required of the plaintiff while he was in the Chamber. He did not refuse because of anything relating to the nature of the documents or the occasion of the demand of them. His stand was taken, as far as the material before the Court indicates, by reason of the stand taken by the
Cabinet: a denial of the powers of the House to require the production of any documents (" ... any orders from either House of Parliament to table documents ...").

In an appropriate case, it may be necessary to determine how far the House is empowered to require third parties outside the House to produce documents or to give evidence. That is not this case. The position of a Member who is within the House and who denies generally a power which the House has, whether in a general or qualified form, is different from such a case.

I am conscious that such a power may be abused. It is possible that such a power may be used to secure the production of a document not for the purposes of the House but for other purposes. It is possible (I adapt the example taken in Armstrong versus Budd: at 397F) that the House might exercise the power to benefit its majority or to disadvantage a political opponent. Ideally, the power or the exercise of it should be based upon an accommodation between the need of the House to obtain information and the claim of the individual concerned to preserve the privacy of his documents. But, in my opinion, that accommodation is to be arrived at not by the restriction of the inherent power of the House but by legislation or otherwise imposing limits upon the exercise of the power which responsibly the House should observe. The possibility of abuse is a matter for electoral sanction rather than judicial restriction.

This is the approach adopted by this Court in Armstrong versus Budd. As Herron CJ there indicated, "... it is not to be assumed that the House will exercise the power irresponsibly or capriciously. History suggests that the power will be exercised seldom and then only after a serious and weighty consideration of the issue": at 397. And, as the Chief Justice said: "... this Court has a jurisdiction to determine whether in a particular case the House has exceeded the powers conferred upon it by the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
In the exercise of that jurisdiction the Court will determine whether the limits upon the power of expulsion enjoyed by the House have been exceeded or not (see In re Glass (1869) 6 WW and A'B 45). This Court has power in a proper case to declare a resolution for expulsion null and void." 
These observations, mutatis mutandis, are applicable to the present case.

It is proper to recall that an element of compulsion is or may be involved in other powers exercisable by a House of the legislature. Thus, where a power exists to suspend a Member from the service of a House, that power includes the power forcibly to remove him from the House if, contrary to the suspension, he refuses to leave it. In Hartnett versus Crick [(1908) AC ], a
Member, Mr Crick, had been found by a Royal Commission to have guilty of misconduct in office. The House enacted a Standing Order authorising it to suspend a Member whose conduct was to be the subject of consideration by the
House after the Member had been dealt with in a pending criminal trial. The
House passed a resolution to the effect that Mr Crick be suspended from the service of the House until the verdict of the jury in the criminal trial.
Notwithstanding the resolution, Mr Crick "persisted in attending the House and claimed to take part in its proceedings". He refused to withdraw. He was removed from the House. The validity of the Standing Order and consequently of what was done came before the Privy Council. The Privy Council dealt with the matter upon the assumption that Mr Crick had done what he had done "from consciousness of rectitude and a singular devotion to the rights and interests of his constituents". It was held that, if the House took "the less favourable view of the plaintiff's attitude" and removed him, it in doing so acted within its powers: at 473-4. It was held that the Standing Order was valid notwithstanding that, as had occurred, it authorised the compulsory removal of the Member from the House.

In my opinion, therefore, the House had power to order documents to be tabled.
THE POWER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL TO ORDER PAPERS TO BE PRODUCED BY A
MINISTER: 
In general, there is no distinction in this regard between Members of the
Legislative Council who are Ministers and Members who are not. I am conscious that, in some respects, the papers of Cabinet are accorded a confidentiality not accorded to others: see generally Sankey versus Whitlam <case>; [(1978) 142 CLR 1.] The documents here in question are not argued to fall within any such category. As I understand the arguments, no such argument has been pressed. Whether and to what extent Cabinet papers may be the subject of orders for production to a House of the Parliament and whether claims may be made for public interest immunity or the like are matters which may require consideration in an appropriate case.
THE POWER TO IMPOSE SANCTIONS UPON REFUSAL TO OBEY: 
This question is to be considered upon the basis to which I have referred, namely, that the House has power to order the production of relevant papers.
Therefore the question is whether the House may take steps to ensure that its order is obeyed or to deal with the situation which arises when a Member, in proceedings in the House, denies and defies the power of the House; and (if it may) whether the action that it took (the suspension of the plaintiff from the service of the House) is one of the things that it may do to deal with one or both of these.

As I have said, it is necessary to the proper exercise of the functions of the
House that on the appropriate occasion and for proper purposes it have power to order the tabling of relevant papers and that it is necessary that it have the power to order the tabling of papers by an unwilling Member. It therefore remains to consider what it may do to ensure that its order is obeyed.

The ordinary bystander might think that it follows that the House has the power to do whatever is necessary to achieve the tabling the papers in compliance with its order. Thus, he might think that the power to compel involves the power to seize the papers if the person ordered to table them refused to do so. But it is not necessary to pursue that matter. What is here in question is and is only whether it is within the power of the House to suspend from the service of the House a Member who has (in the relevant sense) deliberately refused to obey the order of the House and, in doing so, has denied the power of the House so to order. What the House did in this case was to suspend the plaintiff from the service of the House for a short time. The question therefore becomes whether such a suspension is, upon these principles, within the power of the House.

It has been said that the test of what a House may do to enforce the exercise of a power is the same as the test of the existence of a power: is it necessary to the existence of the House and the proper exercise of its functions? This appears to have been the approach adopted at least by Herron
CJ in Armstrong versus Budd: 71 SR at 396A. I do not differ in general from what was there said by the learned Chief Justice. In the end, the justification of any power of the House lies in its necessity "to the legislative body in the proper exercise of its functions": ibid. But, where it is accepted that the House has power to order the tabling of papers, what it may do to ensure that its order is carried out may more correctly be determined by what is necessary to ensure that its power to order the tabling of papers is not futile and is obeyed. However that be, it is sufficient if what was done was "necessary" for that purpose.

It has frequently been said that the powers of a House of a legislature may, in this regard, be used to protect but not to punish. The power extends to those things which are necessary to enable the House to perform its functions; they may not be used to punish a person for what he has done, even though what he has done impedes the performance by the House of its functions. The authorities in this regard are referred to in the judgments of the members of the court in Armstrong versus Budd. I shall refer subsequently to this aspect of the matter. I shall at this stage assume that this restriction exists on what the House may do.

Suspension from the service of the House is a measure which is clearly within its powers; it is a measure which has frequently been used by a House in respect of a member: see, eg, Hartnett versus Crick [(1908) AC 470.] What is in question is whether that power may be exercised in relation to a Member who has done what the plaintiff here did.

In my opinion, there are two bases on which the House could do what it did: if it was done as a means of removing an impediment to its carrying out its functions; and if it was done as a means of inducing the plaintiff to do what the House had ordered him to do.

As I have indicated, there is no doubt that the House may suspend a Member from and remove him from the House if he is impeding the proper operation of it and if suspension will remove that impediment: see Hartnett versus Crick [(1908) AC 470.] What the plaintiff had done, by refusing to acknowledge the power of the House and by refusing to obey its order, operated, in my opinion, in the relevant sense to impede the performance by the House of its functions.
Its functions included the scrutiny of what the Ministry had done in relation to Lake Cowal; to do that effectively, it was, in the opinion of the House, necessary that it have the relevant papers; if it did not have those papers, it could not perform its functions by scrutinising what the Ministry had done; and accordingly the refusal to table the papers impeded the performance of the functions of the House.

I do not mean by this that every difference from the ruling of the Speaker or the view of the House will, even if persisted in, amount to an impeding of the
House. Each case must be assessed. But a blanket refusal to admit or comply with the exercise of an important part of the powers of the House, by a Member who is the Leader of the Government in the House may be such.

In my opinion, it was such in this case. But, once it be accepted that what was done may be seen to be an impediment to the exercise by the House of its functions, it is for the House to determine whether, in the circumstances as they are before it, it is so. There are, of course, limits to what the House may decide in this regard. But, in this case, having regard to the history of what has been done in the House, the stand taken by the plaintiff could, within its powers, be judged by the House to be such.

It is, I think, within the powers of the House to do what was necessary to induce a Member to do something which, in its proper opinion, will assist it in the performance of its functions. It would accordingly be within its powers to suspend the plaintiff for the purpose of inducing him to table the relevant papers. I shall assume that the distinction remains between inducement and punishment. But this, I think, was not punishment. The suspension was for a short time. It was, I infer, to induce him to consider the stand he had taken and emphasise the need to change it. It was, I think, a means of resolving the situation that had arisen because of the attitude which, on principle, the
Cabinet and the plaintiff had adopted.

Moreover, as I have indicated, once (as I think it was) it was open to the
House to take the view that such a suspension would be apt to resolve the situation, it was for the House to decide what should be done.

The Fitzpatrick and Browne case <case>; [(1955) 92 CLR 157] made clear that, while it is for the court to determine whether a power or privilege exists in the Parliament, it is for the
Parliament to determine whether the occasion has arisen for the exercise of the power and the manner of its exercise. That view was adopted and applied in
Armstrong versus Budd. It is not necessary to attempt to draw the line between the powers of the courts and the powers of the Parliament where what is in dispute is the power to act in a particular way in respect of a particular act of a Member or of a third party. What is in question in the present case is different. It was necessary for the House to determine whether the suspension of a Member from the service of the House would be apt to induce him to accept that it was within the power of the House to order the tabling of papers and to obey a particular order of that kind. The House might well take the view that such a suspension was either the traditional means of inducing a Member to recognise the powers of the House and to do what the House required or, in the particular case, was in effect apt to lead the Member, the plaintiff, to recognise the powers of the House and to act accordingly. Whether the House was correct in the judgment that it made in respect of such matters is not for the court to determine. Such matters are for the decision of the House and the
House is entitled to make a judgment upon them, whether that judgment be right or wrong. The fact that it may happen to be wrong in a particular case would not affect the validity of what was done.

The submissions made to this Court and the observations in argument have dealt with the concept of contempt of the House and the orders which may be made in relation to contempt. I do not think that it is necessary to pursue in the abstract what the House may do in this regard or whether contempt, in the sense of disobedience to an order of the House, may be the subject of punishment. As I have emphasised, what in fact happened in this case was that, consequent upon the plaintiff's actions, the House ordered his suspension from the service of the House. It is the validity of that suspension, however it be described, which is essentially in question. For the reasons to which I have referred, I am of opinion that what the House did was valid.

Accordingly, the plaintiff's submissions fail upon the main issue before the court.
THE EXTENT OF THE REMOVAL: 
It was submitted for the plaintiff that, if the House acted within its powers in passing the resolutions that it did, it, or its officers, had acted beyond the power in removing the plaintiff, not merely from the Legislative Council chamber or the rooms of the Council appurtenant to the chamber, but also from the area of the House. The submission suggested that he should not have been taken or escorted as far as the area of Macquarie Street outside the gates of
Parliament House.

The resolution of the House was that the plaintiff be suspended "from the service of the House for the remainder of today's sitting". He refused to leave the chamber. Accordingly, it was proper procedure for the President of the Legislative Council in such a situation to direct the defendant Mr Cahill, the Usher of the Black Rod, "to escort Mr Egan" from the chamber. The plaintiff refused to leave the chamber and, as the minutes of the proceedings of the House noted, "had defied the order of the House and the direction of the President". The minutes record: "The Usher of the Black Rod, having been further directed by the President to remove Mr Egan, escorted Mr Egan from the Parliamentary precincts. Mr Egan made a statement as he was escorted from the chamber." 
I shall assume (without deciding) that, insofar as Mr Cahill "escorted" Mr
Egan, he did so in a manner which would in law constitute trespass.

It has been submitted for the plaintiff that, whatever be the extent of the
Council's powers, there was trespass insofar as the plaintiff was "escorted" not merely from what, in the plaintiff's contention, were the relevant portions of the Parliament, but from there to Macquarie Street. Whether, on the plaintiff's assumptions, that would constitute an actionable trespass raises questions of some nicety. The right of Mr Cahill as Usher of the Black
Rod to do what he did in "escorting" the plaintiff from the chamber and through the relevant portions of the parliamentary complex was not actionable trespass: on the conclusions which I have reached, he was to that extent entitled to do what he did. The plaintiff's argument involves that a trespass occurred when Mr Cahill escorted him beyond the relevant parliamentary area towards the street. Whether the plaintiff took objection to this matter in particular, whether what Mr Cahill did in this portion of his acts involve acts which physically interfered with the plaintiff to the extent necessary to constitute actionable trespass, are matters which would require careful investigation. The facts relevant in this regard have, I think, not been fully investigated.

The court has been asked to deal with the matter upon the basis of the factual material placed before it and to determine the issues of principle involved.
In the circumstances, I am content to adopt the view adopted by the Chief
Justice and to concur in the orders that he proposes.

Before parting with this appeal, it is proper to add a further observation.
This matter and in particular the issue of the extent of the powers of the
Legislative Council, has been dealt with upon the basis that the decisions to which I have referred correctly state the present law. It has been assumed that the decisions, culminating in the decision of this Court in Armstrong v
Budd [(1969) 71 SR 386] correctly state the principles by which the issues are to be determined and correctly determine the result of the application of those principles to the particular factual situations which have been in question. These matters may, in a future case, warrant reconsideration. In Armstrong versus Budd Wallace P: at -2; said: "Now whilst this Court is not necessarily bound by all decisions of the Privy
Council on appeals from other countries, the decisions to which I have referred contain dicta of a relevant and general application and so we are bound by them, even though uttered over 125 years ago. Yet such dicta must in my opinion be construed and applied in the light of modern conditions and current constitutional situations. Thus the members of the Privy Council who decided the cases to which reference has been made lived in an age when New
South Wales if not in every sense a colony was customarily described as such by the Privy Council - for example, Cooper versus Stuart [(1889) 14 App Cas ] at and indeed CF Robins versus National Trust Co [(1927) AC 515] at 519 - and long before the establishment of a Commonwealth of Australia [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and the enactment of the Statute of Westminster. The Constitutional scheme under which Australia has been organised and governed since 1901 is that the
States have plenary powers subject to the stated powers of the Federal
Government and subject also to certain residual qualifications such as those which derive from the Colonial Laws Validity Act, the Third Charter of
Justice and the Ordinances dealing with appeals from State Courts direct to the Privy Council. But to speak of the New South Wales Parliament - the oldest in the Commonwealth - as a colonial legislature would today be an anachronism, even though it is not within the Statute of Westminster.
Nevertheless it cannot be overlooked that any power of our Legislative Council to expel a Member on the stated ground can only derive from the fact that we were established by, and gained our common law from, England.

When, therefore, Lord Selbourne said that whatever in a reasonable sense is necessary to the existence of proper exercise of the functions of a self- governing colonial legislature has been impliedly granted, the critical question is to decide what is "reasonable" under present day conditions and modern habits of thought to preserve the existence and proper exercise of the functions of the Legislative Council as it now exists. ... " 
Since 1969 there have been further fundamental changes in the position of the
New South Wales Parliament. The Chief Justice, in his judgment, has referred to the effect of the [Australia Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/aa1986114/). The effect and, indeed, the purpose of the legislation of that time was (to follow the language of Kelson) to alter the grundnorm of the Australian legal system.
If they were not so before, the parliaments of the Australian States became (subject to what I say) the legislatures of independent political entities in a federal system and had the plenary powers appropriate to such legislative bodies. The powers of the State legislatures, and accordingly, of the Houses composing them cannot now be determined upon the basis that their legislative powers are limited to the powers appropriate only to a colonial legislative body, that the functions which they are to perform are limited accordingly, and that the powers which they are to have because of what they are and what they may do are to be measured by legal maxims appropriate to powers which are derived from grant. The State Parliaments are, in the relevant sense, legislatures with plenary powers which derive not from grant but from their characters as organs representative of the democratic societies which they represent. Insofar as inherent powers are concerned, they have the powers appropriate to a body of that character.

What I have said is, of course, subject to the provisions and effect of the
Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/). I am conscious of what recently has been said in decisions of the High Court of
Australia as to the relationship between the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and the States. Some aspects of the matter have been referred to in cases such as Grollo versus Palmer <case>; <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 814.] Whatever be the view to be taken of this matter - whether the States, by force of ss and 107 of the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) or otherwise, have become part of or now derive their powers from the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) - remains to be determined. It is sufficient for present purposes to observe that the nature of State legislatures is now quite different from their nature when such decisions were given. The nature and extent of their powers will require reconsideration.

This does not mean that the individual Houses of a State Parliament (where there be such) each have the powers which the Parliament itself has. It will remain the function of the Courts to determine what are the powers of each legislative body and the parts of it as the occasion arises.

The Court should make declarations and orders in accordance with the proposals of the Chief Justice.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: It appears from the papers put before the court in this case that the New South Wales Legislative Council has for some time been considering the question whether it has an implied power to impose sanctions upon one of its members who fails to obey an order of the House to table papers. The effect of the present case is to ask this court to answer that question, by reference to a member who is also a Minister of the Crown and thus a member of the Executive Government.

The court was told by the parties, who are effectively the Executive
Government on the one hand, and the Legislative Council on the other, that the question cannot arise in the same form in any other House of Parliament in
Australia; by <case> of the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and subsequent Commonwealth legislation the two Houses of the Commonwealth
Parliament, and by legislation in the other States, all other Houses of
Parliament have acquired the same powers, privileges and immunities as those of the United Kingdom Parliament. The House of Commons and House of Lords undoubtedly have the power to enforce compliance with requests for information from persons and for the production of documents. The power is to obtain information from persons whether they are members of the House or not.
Possession of the power carries with it many problems in its exercise, usually decided by political forces rather than court decision, but those problems are not in question in the present case.

In New South Wales the [Parliamentary Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pea1901220/) empowers the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council to require witnesses to attend before the Assembly or the Council, where they may be obliged to answer questions. The present case arises from the fact that there is no corresponding legislation in regard to the production of documents.

The circumstances of the suspension of Mr Egan, the member by reference to whom the case has been raised, from the service of the House, and then of his being removed from it, are set out by Gleeson CJ in his reasons, which I have had the benefit of reading in draft.

I will not repeat the details, neither will I go in detail into the matters of legal, Parliamentary and political significance which provide the background to the question to be answered in the case. That has been done both in the
Chief Justice's reasons and a Report to the Legislative Council by its
Standing Committee on Parliamentary Privilege and Ethics, ordered to be printed 10 May 1996, which was made available to the court as part of the materials to be used in the court's consideration of the case. This very useful document states the arguments for and against the conclusion that the council had power to suspend Mr Egan for his failure to table documents and sets out the historical and more immediate considerations relevant to the arguments.

On the general question whether sanctions may be enforced against a Minister member of the Council who fails to obey an order of the Council to table papers by a certain date, the Report contains opinions by Mr Mason QC, the New
South Wales Solicitor General, who, before this court, argued the case for the
Executive Government, and also by Mr Walker SC, who argued the case for the
Legislative Council. The arguments before this court ran along much the same lines as in their two opinions, with some elaboration.

In their opinions they agree that the only possible basis for the power which the Legislative Council was and is asserting, was that it was a necessary incident of the powers and function of the Council. On the Executive
Government side the argument was that the principle of necessity did not empower the Council to require production of documents from the Executive
Government and visit a sanction upon a person refusing to co-operate. On the
Council side it was submitted that it had such powers as were necessary to its existence and to the proper exercise of the functions it was intended to execute, and that these included the power in question.

Each side relied upon the same 19th century Privy Council decision as providing the starting point for its argument. This was Kielley versus Carson <case>; [(1842) 4 MOO PC 63] The case came from Newfoundland. A member of the Legislative Assembly there, "in his place in the House, had made some animadversions on the management"1 of the colony's principal hospital. Mr Kielley, the manager of the hospital, shortly afterwards spoke to the member outside the House, in language which the House held required explanation. Mr Kielley appeared at the bar of the House where his conduct was such as, in the judgment of the House, warranted his being imprisoned, and he was imprisoned accordingly. He brought proceedings for trespass and false imprisonment against the Speaker of the House and others in the Supreme Court of the colony. These proceedings failed. Mr Kielley appealed to the Privy Council.

The Legislative Assembly had been established by a Royal Commission issued pursuant to the prerogative in 1832. The Privy Council however did not enter upon the question whether in a settled colony, as Newfoundland was regarded, the Crown could, by its prerogative which entitled it to create the
Legislative Assembly, additionally bestow upon that Assembly an authority, not otherwise incidental to it, of committing for a contempt. Their reason for not dealing with that question was that they were of the opinion that upon the proper construction of the Commission and its accompanying documents no such authority was meant to be given to the Legislative Assembly.[2] This led them[3] to make the following statement, which is the starting point for the arguments of both the Executive Government and the Legislative Council in the present case: "The whole question then is reduced to this, - whether by law, the power of committing for a contempt, not in the presence of the Assembly, is incident to every local Legislature.
 
The Statute Law on this subject being silent, the Common Law is to govern it; and what is the Common Law, depends upon principle and precedent.
 
Their Lordships see no reason to think, that in the principle of the Common
Law, any other powers are given them, than such as are necessary to the existence of such a body, and the proper exercise of the functions which it is intended to execute. These powers are granted by the very act of its establishment, an act which on both sides, it is admitted, it was competent for the Crown to perform. This is the principle which governs all legal incidents. 'Quando Lex aliquid concedit, concedere viditur et illud, sine quo res ipsa esse not potest.' In conformity to this principle we feel no doubt that such an Assembly has the right of protecting itself from all impediments to the due course of its proceeding. To the full extent of every measure which it may be really necessary to adopt, to secure the free exercise of their
Legislative functions, they are justified in acting by the principle of the
Common Law. But the power of punishing any one for past misconduct as a contempt of its authority, and adjudicating upon the fact of such contempt, and the measure of punishment as a judicial body, irresponsible to the party accused, whatever the real facts may be, is of a very different character, and by no means essentially necessary for the exercise of its functions by a local
Legislature, whether representative or not. All these functions may be well performed without this extraordinary power, and with the aid of the ordinary tribunals to investigate and punish contemptuous insults and interruptions.
 
These powers certainly do not exist in corporate or other bodies, assembled, with authority, to make bye-laws for the government of particular trades, or united numbers of individuals. The functions of a Colonial Legislature are of a higher character, and it is engaged in more important objects; but still there is no reason why it should possess the power in question."  
Taking this statement as its starting point, the argument for the Executive
Government proceeds by next referring to subsequent cases which took a narrow view of what was "necessary to the existence of such a body", and finally by submitting that those cases support the conclusion that the power claimed by the Legislative Council in the present case was not necessary to its existence or the proper exercise of its functions.

For two reasons I do not think it is necessary to trace through the case law from 1842 until today. The first is that this has already been done by this court, at least as at 1969, and quite sufficiently for present purposes, in
Armstrong versus Budd [(1969) 71 SR 386.]
The second is that if, as was said in Kielley versus Carson, the "Common Law" is to govern the present question, then it is the common law as it stands today which must be looked at.

In the passage above set out it was said that "what is the Common Law, depends upon principle and precedent". The common law which is to be applied by courts in New South Wales today depends upon principle, precedent and the effect upon that principle and precedent of statutes of the Imperial
Parliament affecting New South Wales, statutes of the Commonwealth Parliament affecting New South Wales and statutes of the New South Wales Parliament.

Armstrong versus Budd was a case whose facts were quite different from the present one. A member who had been expelled from the Legislative Council because the Council considered him guilty of conduct unworthy of a Council member sought a declaration that the Council's resolution to expel him was ultra vires. All the judges in the case, however, made general statements necessary for deciding it, and also relevant to the present case, after full consideration of the materials to that time.

Herron CJ said: "This case appears to me to warrant a decision that in special circumstances there is an area of misconduct of a Member of Parliament committed outside the
House and disclosed in curial proceedings which may, in special circumstances, form a basis for the exercise of the power of expulsion based upon a finding by the House that such is necessary to its existence or to the orderly exercise of its important legislative functions." (at 394-5) 
Wallace P's conclusion was that the Legislative Council had the implied power which it claimed. He said: "The nature of this power is that it is solely defensive - a power to preserve and safeguard the dignity and honour of the Council and the proper conduct and exercise of its duties. The power extends to conduct outside the
Council provided the exercise of the power is solely and genuinely inspired by the said defensive objectives. The manner and the occasion of the exercise of the power are for the decision of the Council." (at 403) 
The words I have emphasised in the last citation are those relevant for present purposes.

Sugerman JA said: "Before us the learned Solicitor-General has argued that the scope and extent of the power called for by the requirements of necessity is to be determined, inter alia, by the need to protect the high standing of Parliament and of ensuring that it may discharge with the confidence of the community and its members the great responsibilities which it bears. This necessity compels not only the conceded power of expulsion arising from disorderly conduct within the Chamber, but also expulsion arising from conduct outside the chamber, which, in the opinion of the Council, renders a man unfit for service and therefore one whose continued membership of the Council would disable the
Council from discharging its duty and protecting its dignity in the sense mentioned. That the proper discharge of the legislative function by the
Council demands an orderly conduct of its business is undoubted. That it demands honesty and probity of its members should be equally undoubted.
Indeed, the need for removal and replacement of a dishonest member may be more imperative as a matter of self-preservation, than that of an unruly member. 
This being a case of first impression, not concluded by any authority directly in point, I agree, as a matter of the correct application of the principle of the implied grant of necessary powers which pervades the authorities, with this statement by the learned Solicitor-General of what is comprehended within it." (at 408) 
Again, the parts of the citation which I have emphasised are those relevant in the present case.

The statements extracted from Armstrong versus Budd show that in considering whether the Legislative Council has the implied power claimed in the present case the court must consider the common law as it stands today. The court must also bear in mind that the common law which was applied in 1842 in Kielley v
Carson was the common law as it applied to an inferior (or subordinate)
Legislature established in 1832 by the Royal Prerogative and that the implication then in question had to be considered in light of the terms of the commission issued by virtue of that Royal Prerogative. In 1832 Newfoundland had a population of 60,000.[4] 
The present [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of
New South Wales had its origin in an Imperial Act which became law on 16 July .[5] The New South Wales Legislature which existed prior to that date (a
Legislative Council) had passed an Act to confer a [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) on
New South Wales. The Act was reserved for the Royal Assent. This was not given. Instead, the Imperial Parliament made various amendments to the New
South Wales Act, which in its amended form was made a schedule to an Imperial
Act. The Imperial Act made the statute in the schedule a lawful Act of the New
South Wales Legislature which preceded the Legislature subsequently brought into existence under the new Act.[6] 
Section 1 of the new Act made provision for a new Parliament of New South
Wales, consisting of a Legislative Assembly and a Legislative Council constituted and composed as set out in later sections taking up the greater part of the Act.

The Executive was more briefly dealt with, but sufficiently for constitutional purposes. Section 1 also gave Her Majesty "power by and with the advice and consent of the said Council and Assembly to make laws for the peace, welfare and good government of the Colony in all cases whatsoever". Section 2 made it lawful for Her Majesty to authorise the Governor to exercise various regal
Executive powers. Other sections also had the effect of conferring on the
Governor the powers of the Executive (inter alia, ss 30, 32, 35, 55, 56 and ).

The Judiciary was also dealt with comparatively briefly, but again sufficiently for constitutional purposes. The commissions of the then judges of the Supreme Court were to continue and remain in full force during their good behaviour (s 38) and it was lawful for any one or more of them to be removed upon the address of both Houses of the new Legislature (s 39).

In saying that the Act dealt with the Executive and Judiciary sufficiently for constitutional purposes I am referring to the fact that the new [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) created a new Parliament and also established the other two traditionally recognised branches of government, the Executive and Judiciary. Although the latter two branches were established, broadly speaking, by incorporating them into the new [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) as they previously existed, the Act could nevertheless be fairly regarded as a
Constitutional document, setting on foot all the machinery needed for the government of New South Wales.

It was from the provisions of that [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act, as it became known, that the present [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of
New South Wales developed. In the form it took in 1902 provisions relating to the judicial branch of government were dispersed through a number of other
Acts. In recent years some of these have been restored to the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902, in its presently amended form.

An important provision of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1855 was <case> which gave the new Legislature "full power and authority ... to alter the provisions or laws for the time being in force" under it (ie under the new 1855 Act itself). This power was subject to a number of qualifications which effectively left ultimate control over the then Colony in the hands of the Imperial Government and the Imperial Parliament.

In Armstrong versus Budd Wallace P referred to the gradual falling away of the various aspects of Imperial control. He pointed out how, in the United Kingdom in the later 19th century cases, recognition of the changing status of New
South Wales lagged behind the facts. He drew attention to the habit of the
Privy Council, although New South Wales was no longer in every sense a colony, of customarily describing it as such. Indeed he noted one case in the Privy
Council where their Lordships in 1927 described Canadian courts as Colonial
Courts. He further pointed out the constitutional scheme under which Australia had been organised since 1901 was one whereby the States had plenary powers subject to the powers of the Federal government and certain residual qualifications deriving from the Colonial Laws Validity Act and the provisions which then enabled appeals from State courts direct to the Privy Council. He said, with complete justification in my opinion, that to speak of the New
South Wales Parliament in 1969 as a colonial Legislature was an anachronism even though it was not within the Statute of Westminster. He went on to say that in deciding what was reasonably necessary to the proper exercise of the functions of the New South Wales Legislative Council in the conditions of , it would be unthinkable to do so by reference to the conditions in New
South Wales over 125 years before. He noted that Kielley versus Carson had been decided one year after the ending of the transportation of convicts from the
United Kingdom to New South Wales.[7] 
Since Wallace P's comments on these matters in 1969, the situation has changed still further from what it was in 1842. The New South Wales Legislature now has power "to make laws for the peace, welfare and good government of New
South Wales in all cases whatsoever" (s 5 [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 (as amended)). This power is "subject to the provisions of the
Commonwealth of Australia [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act" and subject also to various other provisos regulating the way in which the power of the Legislature may be exercised. It is no longer subject to any
Imperial control. Subject to the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), all the limitations external to New South Wales upon the power and capacity of the State to make laws for itself which were referred to by Wallace P as still existing in 1969, have, principally by virtue of the Australia Acts , altogether disappeared.

There is no need in the present case to examine the consequences of the developments since 1969 upon the relationship of the States to the
Commonwealth. The development of Australia as one nation is ensured by the
Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
The maintenance of coherence of that development in a legal sense, as between the States themselves and the Commonwealth, is likewise ensured by the fact that the High Court is Australia's final court of appeal not only in constitutional but in all legal matters.

Nevertheless, there is undoubted constitutional and legal significance in the enhancement of the powers of the New South Wales Legislature since Armstrong v Budd was decided. It is in the light of that present situation that the question what is reasonably necessary for the Legislative Council to exercise its functions properly must be considered.

To decide whether a particular power is reasonably necessary for the
Legislative Council to carry out its constitutional function, it is necessary to state what that function is.

Section 5 of the New South Wales [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/)
Act 1902 (as amended), already referred to above, gives the New South Wales
Legislature general legislative powers. Section 3 defines the Legislature as meaning the Queen with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council and
Legislative Assembly. Each of the three named institutions is thus, for purposes of constitutional law, as necessary to the coming into force of legislation as each of the others. Literally then, the function of the
Legislative Council is to advise the Queen (in fact the Executive Government) in regard to the making of laws, and to consent, when it thinks fit to do so, to the making of laws.

Bearing in mind the way the legislative process actually works, I think the advice and consent formula justifies the statement, using present day language, that "one of the major functions of the Houses [is] that of inquiring into matters of concern as a necessary preliminary to debating those matters and legislating in respect of them". This observation is taken from
Odgers' Australian Senate Practice, (7th edn, 1995, page 51) and its direct subject is the Australian Senate. The function spoken of was said to be supported by the power to require the attendance of persons and production of documents and to take evidence under oath. As earlier mentioned, the
Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) itself is the source of these powers in the cases of the two Houses of the
Commonwealth Parliament. That does not take away however from the point that the power supports the function of the Houses referred to in the quotation.
Indeed, Odgers mentions next that the power is one long regarded as essential for a Legislature as indicated by United States authority that the power to compel evidence is coextensive with the power to legislate: Odgers at 51;
Quinn versus US <case>; [(1955) 349 US 155] at 160-1.

I agree with this view. In my opinion it is well within the boundaries of reasonable necessity that the Legislative Council have power to inform itself of any matter relevant to a subject on which the Legislature has power to make laws. The common law as it operates in New South Wales today necessarily implies such a power, in my opinion, in the two parts ordinarily called
Parliament of the three [part
Legislature.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/index.html#p50egislature)
This seems to me to be a necessary implication in light of the very broad reach of the legislative power of the Legislature and what seems to me to be the imperative need for both the Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council to have access (and ready access) to all facts and information which may be of help to them in considering three subjects: the way in which existing laws are operating; possible changes to existing laws; and the possible making of new laws. The first of these subjects clearly embraces the way in which the
Executive Government is executing the laws.

In the US Supreme Court decision (Quinn) above referred to, the court remarked that without the power the Legislature could be "seriously handicapped in its efforts to exercise its constitutional function wisely and effectively" (at 161). The court also went on to recognise that the power to investigate was subject to limitations. These are more clearly defined in the
United States than in this country, because of specific individual guarantees there contained in the Bill of Rights. However, limitations are recognised also in regard to the exercise of the powers of investigation of Houses of
Parliament in Australia. These limitations are principally asserted by persons claiming privilege of various kinds. The boundaries of these privileges are not well defined. There is no need to explore them in the present case which is looking at the earlier question of the power of the Legislative Council.
If the court holds, as I think it should, that the power exists, then it may be that questions of privilege from production of documents may arise at some later time. If that happens, that will be the time for the question to be dealt with.
 
Conclusion.

In my opinion the Legislative Council has inherent common law power to call upon one of its members to produce documents to the House. I can see no basis for denying the existence of the power in the case of a member who is also a member of the Executive Government. In order for the power to be effective, the House must have power to enforce its call for the production of the documents. This power must not be used for punishment of the refusing member but in aid of the obtaining of the documents for the carrying out of the
House's proper function. To achieve that purpose, suspension of the member is, in my opinion, an appropriate means. What would happen if a member acknowledged the existence of the power, instead of denying it, but claimed that for stated reasons the member was not obliged to submit to the power, would depend upon the precise circumstances and arguments in the case.

I express no opinion on the question whether expulsion is also a possible means. Suspension is all that has happened in the present case. The different case of expulsion should in my opinion be dealt with if and when it happens, and not before.

A further matter was argued in this case. In the circumstances available to the court from evidence and argument about it, it received as much dignity as it deserved by being referred to as "the footpath point". Although it may be possible to imagine situations in which this point could be of real consequence, I have seen no sign of such here. In dealing with the point, I content myself with agreeing with what the Chief Justice has said about it.

In my opinion the Court should make the orders proposed by the Chief Justice.
 (at 63, 225) [2] (at 87, 234) [3] The advice of the Privy Council was prepared by Mr Baron Parke.
 [4] Encyclopedia Britannica, 9th ed. vol 17, p 385.
 [5] 18 and 19 Vic c 54.
 [6] The Queen in Council declared her assent to the scheduled Act on 21
July 1855.
 [7] This paragraph is drawn from Wallace P's reasons at 402.
 * * * 
