

Black versus Rta of NSW [2000] NSWSC 326 (19 April 2000) 
Last Updated: 16 October 2000 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT 
CITATION: Black versus RTA of NSW <case> 
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law 
FILE NUMBER(S): 18085/93 
HEARING DATE{S): 6, 7, 8 and 9 March 2000 
JUDGMENT DATE: 19/04/2000 
PARTIES: 
Iain Black 
RTA of New South Wales 
JUDGMENT OF: Master Harrison 
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable 
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable 
COUNSEL: 
Mr R McIlwaine SC with 
Mr Stevens 
Mr P R Sternberg 
SOLICITORS: 
Mr John F Joseph 
Lithgow 
Mr G Ball 
Crown Solicitors Office 
CATCHWORDS: 
Personal injury 
Damages 
ACTS CITED: 
DECISION: 
See para 75 
JUDGMENT: 
THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER HARRISON 
WEDNESDAY, 19 APRIL 2000 /93 - IAIN BLACK versus RTA OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
JUDGMENT (Personal injury; damages) MASTER: The plaintiff sues the defendant the Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales for damages for personal injury sustained by him on 22
March 1991, when the vehicle he was driving hit excessive road aggregate. The plaintiff lost control of the vehicle and hit a guard rail and road sweeper.
The plaintiff alleges that the injuries were caused by the negligence of the defendant. Breach of duty of care has been admitted and no contributory negligence is pressed. The matter has been discontinued against Harold Arthur
Riggs (formerly the first defendant).
 The plaintiff was a 41 year old married man who had three children at the time of the accident. He was employed by Prospect County Council as a senior storeman. The defendant has admitted that at about 4.45 pm on 22 March 1991 the plaintiff was involved in an accident on the Bells Line of Road, 2.8 kilometres east of the intersection of the Bells Line of Road and the Darling
Causeway. The plaintiff has no memory of the accident. The defendant owed a duty of care to road users. The alleged breaches of duty of care were firstly, allowing or permitting the placement and/or application of road aggregate on the surface of the road which was excessive in the circumstances; secondly, allowing or permitting the plaintiff to drive on the roadway in the knowledge that the amount of aggregate on the roadway at the time would expose him to a risk of danger and injury; thirdly, failure to warn or otherwise alert the plaintiff to the presence of a dangerous quantity of aggregate on the roadway which was a hidden trap known to the defendant or which should have been known to the defendant; and fourthly, placing the plaintiff in a position of extreme danger without providing any or any adequate warning thereof. During the second day of the hearing these breaches of duty were admitted by the defendant. It is not disputed that the plaintiff suffered injuries in this accident. I find that the defendant was negligent. As previously stated, the claim for contributory negligence is not pressed. It is common ground that damages are assessed at common law.
 I carefully observed the plaintiff both giving evidence and being cross examined. When he spoke his speech was at times indistinct. There was minor slurring in his speech. By the luncheon adjournment on the second day the plaintiff when giving evidence had become markedly tired and had lost concentration. I formed the view that the plaintiff was giving evidence to the best of his ability. It was largely truthful although his memory was inaccurate on a few occasions. The plaintiff's wife also gave evidence and was cross examined. She was visibly upset during the proceedings. She gave truthful and straight forward evidence.

A brief history of the plaintiff's life prior to the accident The plaintiff was born on 10 April 1950 in Scotland. In 1962 when the plaintiff was aged 12 years he migrated to Melbourne with his family. Between and 1967 the plaintiff completed his schooling in Victoria. He was an outstanding athlete who swam at State level in breaststroke, played rugby for
Victorian Junior State team between 1964 and 1967 and was the school representative in shot put, discus and cross country running. He was also involved in surf lifesaving.
 In 1968 the plaintiff obtained employment with the English Scottish and
Australian Bank (ES & A) at its head office in Melbourne as a counter clerk. He then became a teller and was involved in ledgers and exchanges. He continued his competitive swimming and played in the under 18's and the colts rugby for Victoria. He also continued with his lifesaving. In late 1968 the family moved to Redcliffe near Brisbane Queensland. The plaintiff was transferred to the Brisbane office of ES & A where he worked until he enlisted in the RAAF. He also continued surf lifesaving at Woody Point near
Redcliffe.
 On 21 March 1969 the plaintiff enlisted in the RAAF. He commenced his basic training in Adelaide and was posted to Toowoomba. He was involved in guard dog and general security training. He was then posted to Melbourne as a security guard and subsequently as an audit clerk. Finally he was posted to Richmond as a audit clerk. He was a block orderly responsible for supervising 40 men in their living quarters, ensuring that both personal possessions and the block were clean, neat and tidy.
 In 1972 the plaintiff commenced living with his wife and her two daughters.
They married on 21 December 1985. On 20 March 1975 the plaintiff was honourably discharged from RAAF at the end of his period of enlistment. While enlisted in RAAF he played rugby league and rugby at first grade level for
Penrith. He continued with competitive swimming and squash. In April 1975 he commenced work at the Lister nursing home which was owned by his mother-in- law. For about 8 months he worked as a bookkeeper and handyman.
 In December 1975 the plaintiff commenced employment with Dickens and Carey as a salesman selling house products on a door-to-door basis. He did not enjoy this work and lasted for about four to five months. In 1976 he purchased his current house which is at 2 Pau Street Lithgow. Between April 1976 and August the plaintiff was employed by Lithgow district hospital as a stores assistant. In August 1978 the plaintiff was employed by Hartley County Council which became Prospect County Council in 1980 (now Integral Energy). The plaintiff commenced employment as a disbursements officer. In 1980 he was promoted to an enquiries clerk/cashier at the Lithgow branch for six months.
He was then transferred to the Bowenfels stores at Lithgow as a storeman. He was promoted to a senior storeman and held that position at the time of the accident.
 In 1983 the plaintiff became a qualified AUST Swim instructor for the disabled. Between 1975 and 1985 he and his wife bred Dobermans, Irish Setters and Blood Hounds. They showed these dogs. In 1988 the plaintiff commenced playing rugby with the "Golden Oldies" a central west team. I shall refer to the "Golden Oldies" in more detail later in this judgment. The plaintiff also became a hockey umpire as his two step daughters were involved in hockey. He used to umpire games in their competition. From 1980 the plaintiff sailed competitively at the Wallerawang Sailing Club at Wallace Lake as well as sailing at a State and International level. The plaintiff enjoyed playing sport. He trained his dogs by running 5 kilometres with them nearly every night. He was a physically fit man and an outstanding sportsman. He took pride in his body image and appearance.
 When the plaintiff and his wife moved to Lithgow his wife studied to become a nurse and then worked as a nursing sister at the local hospital. From 1980 when the plaintiff's wife started work, the plaintiff was responsible for the shopping, cooking, washing and general maintenance of the house, including the painting and gardening and mowing of lawns and looking after the children. The only housework he did not do was the ironing.
 While at work the plaintiff managed a work touch football team. He was team manager and captain of the Lithgow swimming club. He played first grade rugby for Lithgow as fullback and winger. He became a grade referee and umpired for
Parramatta. He spent his holidays attending sailing regattas. He established a touch football team in Lithgow as well and spoke on local radio each Saturday morning about the upcoming weekend touch football games.
 Prior to the accident the plaintiff was actively involved in recreational sports. He was outgoing and had a wide circle of friends. He was physically fit. He had no difficulties with his speech and he was a confident speaker. He had excellent verbal communication skills and enjoyed social interaction. He had no problems with his memory. He was confident in his abilities and described himself as a go-getter who would embrace any opportunities with both hands. He had no problems with his balance, no problems climbing up or down ladders and no clumsiness with his hands. He was highly motivated. He had no problems sleeping and was not sensitive to loud noises. He did not have any problem with his tongue movements. He did not have any weakness in his right arm and right leg. He had boundless energy. He wore glasses and had no problems with blurred and double vision. He took his glasses off when he played sport.
 The plaintiff gave evidence that prior to the accident he had a wine collection which he enjoyed and found it satisfying both drinking and collecting that wine. However this was disputed by the plaintiff's wife. She was adamant that the plaintiff started collecting wine, particularly red wine after the accident. It is my view that this is an example of the plaintiff's memory being inaccurate. I prefer the plaintiff's wife's evidence that the wine collection started after the accident.

Two prior accidents in 1985 and 1988 When the plaintiff was a teenager he had an operation on his left knee. His left knee healed. There were no lasting effects from this injury. Prior to the motor vehicle accident, the plaintiff had two prior accidents in 1985 and
In 1985 when the plaintiff was at work he slipped on some oil and fell on his back. He suffered some low back pain and was off work for about one week. The symptoms and back pain settled after a short period and he was able to continue with all of his activities without limitations. In 1988 as he was getting off a forklift he slipped over in oil. He was off work for about one week and his back settled. For a short time afterwards he had episodes of back pain but this did not prevent him from working or undertaking any of his recreational activities. He was referred to Dr Dan in order to investigate the cause of the pain and took one week off work. Physiotherapy was recommended.
No compensation is sought for this injury. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that the 1985 injury resolved itself within a short time after the accident and did not cause any lasting problems. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that after the 1988 accident he occasionally experienced back pain usually precipitated by over exercising. The 1988 back injury did not necessitate him taking time off work (except for an initial period of one week) or curtail any of his numerous sporting activities.

The accident At the scene of the accident the plaintiff was unconscious. He had a
Glasgow coma score of 5. He was transported by ambulance to Lithgow hospital, where on admission he had a Glasgow coma score of 3. He was then transferred to Westmead hospital where he remained in a coma for 19 days. The plaintiff had post-traumatic amnesia for 7 weeks. After discharge from Westmead hospital he was transferred to Bathurst Base hospital for rehabilitation. He underwent months of rehabilitation and was discharged at the end of July 1991.
 It is common ground from the medical evidence that the plaintiff suffered an extremely severe traumatic brain injury. His brain injury caused dysarthria, reduced planning and organisation skills, slowed information processing, preservation, cognitive rigidity, decreased memory and decreased co-ordination. He had a large laceration on his right forehead and temple. He also had right upper and lower limb paresis, paresis of the left leg and foot.
Initially he developed pain and restricted movement in his left shoulder. He had undergone a tracheostomy.
 The plaintiff has a vague recollection and fleeting memory of being transported from Bathurst hospital to Westmead hospital and seeing a cliff face at around Mount Tomar. The next memory he has is being at Bathurst rehabilitation centre. While the plaintiff in the rehabilitation centre his vision was blurred, he was walking into doors and everything was mixed up. He had double vision. He and his wife recounted that he went with his wife and son Cameron to an Anzac ceremony at the Crillion and he did not perceive the drop between the curb and the road. He lost his balance and had to be supported by his wife and son.
 While undergoing rehabilitation, he had pain in his back and the right hand side of his body. He could not use his right arm or his right leg very well.
His speech was terrible and he started speaking with a broad Scottish accent.
His balance was not stable and he was unable do very much. He tried to do as much as he could. His wife initially took him home on weekends. She visited him every Tuesday and Thursday for 8 hours each day. She cut her working hours from full time to 3 days per week. While in hospital his wife had to supervise him eating, shaving, bathing. Once the plaintiff tried to shave himself and sliced his face. The plaintiff's wife was asked to do these tasks by the hospital staff both at Westmead and Bathurst. When the plaintiff moved home his wife had to help him bathe, shower, organise his dressing and physically support him to get in and out of the residence. I shall refer to this topic in more detail later in this judgment under the heading "Past and future care".
 According to Sophia Lahz, director of rehabilitation at Bathurst Base hospital (report dated 24 July 1996) the plaintiff's cognitive deficits are those involved in planning and organisation, memory and pragmatic communication. She stated that he coped well and had a great deal of insight into his difficulties. She stated that there was no doubt that there was a persistence of a higher order balance impairment which is stable and permanent. She opined that the plaintiff had done extremely well and this outcome was attributable to his high level of motivation coupled with good family and social support networks. I accept this evidence. Peter Rawling (report dated 16 September 1996) stated: "The brain damage had also led to a number of significant neuropsychological deficits. Primary among these was a generalised impairment in memory. His approach to tasks requiring memory and learning was characterised by defective planning and organisation. This rendered his memory unreliable and inconsistent. His monitoring of his errors was poor and he was prone to confabulate. Verbally mediated intellectual skills also showed a degree of impairment. His verbal working memory span was significantly reduced meaning that he had difficulty with tasks requiring the subvocal manipulation of information. This rendered him prone to careless errors and caused him at times to lose track of his progress through a task. He still made a number of dysphasic (word substitution errors, word blocks, particularly for names) but his speech was functional at a simple conversational level." 
The Golden Oldies and other sports After the accident the plaintiff could no longer play in the "Golden
Oldies". However, he continued to persevere and attempted to referee games. He has travelled to various world championships in England and Ireland but he was never been able to referee a complete game. He said that at one stage he was on the 25 metre line when a try was scored and that it was very difficult to work out whether or not to award a try. He feels embarrassed because he is unable to run properly and runs in an unusual manner. After the refereeing experiences he felt that he was not worthwhile and felt embarrassed because he realised that others in the team were trying to help him.
 Since the accident he has not undertaken any sailing, he has not umpired hockey nor helped the disabled with swimming as he is unable to keep up. In he attended the world festival of the "Golden Oldies". He was not able to complete the umpiring of any games because he was not agile. He did not drive on the trip as he did not want to inflict his injury on any one else. Had the accident not occurred he would certainly have driven while overseas.
 In June 1998 he went on a holiday to Ireland, Scotland and England for six weeks. He attempted to referee a "Golden Oldies" game but he could not run at all. He since has made a decision not to participate in any more of these events. He used to enjoy the ambience and the festivals' philosophy of "fun, fraternity and friendship" but now he comes away disappointed. However in
October 1999 he attended another "Golden Oldies" festival in Adelaide. His wife did the majority of driving and his refereeing was not very good. He feels despondent because he cannot help the disabled and he feels he is not putting anything back into the community. He feels that he is achieving nothing.
 In 1995 or 1996 he tried to paint the house. He borrowed some scaffolding as he knew that he was not safe on a ladder and a safety harness. The plaintiff's wife gave evidence that it was she and Cameron and herself who constructed the scaffolding with the plaintiff being given directions to assist. The painting was not completed because the plaintiff could not balance to paint above his head.

General damages Taking into account the matters mentioned above the extent of the plaintiff's brain damage and the significant problems it causes him as detailed earlier in this judgment. I have also taken into account the significant changes to the plaintiff's lifestyle due to the accident particularly the loss of his sporting ability and the enjoyment he gained from sport. The plaintiff has suffered constant low back pain since the accident although I accept that he had previously experienced some short episodes of mild back pain prior to the accident. After the accident he experienced back aches after maintaining prolonged static posture. Prior to the accident he had a fulfilling and satisfying sex life. Since the accident his libido has decreased and he has difficulty in having a sexual relationship. Since the accident he has had two short periods where he has blacked out. He has difficulty swallowing. Dr Mellick in his reported dated 25 May 1998 referred to the possibility of the plaintiff developing epilepsy. There is a possibility that the plaintiff will need to undergo a further operation to his left knee. (see Dr Kohan's report 28 June [1999 Ex 5).] He now has to wear different prescription glasses.
 For reasons that appear later in this judgment I have made a finding that lack of balance caused the plaintiff to fall from a ladder and causing injury to his right ankle and exacerbating the condition of his left knee. He now walks with a limp. The plaintiff is no longer employable on a full time basis.
He enjoyed working and would prefer to do so.
 Prior to the accident the plaintiff led a very active life. He was an excellent and enthusiastic sportsman. He had a wide circle of friends, was confident and enjoyed life. He did all the housework (except ironing) and garden maintenance around the house. I accept that the plaintiff is no longer able to participate in competitive sport nor carry out the housework and maintenance around the house and garden to the extent he did before the accident. He can drive a motor vehicle. While he still has a circle of friends, goes to the movies and has a social life, the quality of his social life has diminished and he finds it less satisfying. The plaintiff has made his best efforts to recover from his injuries and returned to work as soon as he could and made his best attempt to hold down his job. The doctors have favourably commented about his good recovery from a very serious brain injury.
 The plaintiff submitted that the amount for general damages should be $300,000, whereas the defendant submitted $100,000-$125,000. I have taken into account all of the disabilities and injuries and the effect they have had on the plaintiff's lifestyle (as detailed earlier in this judgment) and it is my view that an appropriate award for general damages is $182,000. Interest on past general damages is calculated at $82,000 x 2% x 9 years = $14,760.

Past and future loss of earning capacity Prior to the accident the plaintiff was employed by Integral Energy as stores officer class 14, earning a salary of $586 per week. The plaintiff submitted that had the 1991 accident not occurred he would have been employed by his current or like employer until the age of 65 years and during this time he may have been promoted. The defendant agreed that for the period 23 March to 28 July 1991, the plaintiff's past economic loss is $7,145. The plaintiff claimed past economic loss from 23 April 1999 to date in the sum of $21,984 and future economic loss at $536.20 x 15 years at 3% less 15% for vicissitudes which amounts to $288,183. The defendant submitted that the appropriate amount to award for future economic loss is a cushion. According to the defendant, the plaintiff's employment with the Council ceased for two reasons firstly, his injuries to his left knee and right ankle which made him unable to do the work and were not related to the 1991 accident and secondly, because he was part of an employer's retrenchment programme which affected all employees of the Council.
 After the accident, the plaintiff attended Out Reach where he was re-taught to drive. In 1991 the plaintiff regained his driving licence. On 28 July 1991 the plaintiff returned to work initially for one hour per day. This gradually increased to three hours per day. A Council vehicle picked him up and drove him to work and drove him home again. While he had been on sick leave, the workplace had introduced a new computer program which he had to learn as well as relearning the old one. The plaintiff said that his learning was slow and he had difficulty in co-ordinating his work between using a keyboard and reading the screen. His mobility was not good and he had balance problems and weakness down his right side. He was not able to use his right hand properly.
 The plaintiff found it emotionally difficult to return to his pre-accident employment because he had held a senior position as a senior storeman. The employees were supportive but he felt embarrassed when he had to tell them that he was not good. Now with the benefit of hindsight, he thinks he was under the impression he was doing better than he really was.
 In October 1991 the plaintiff returned to his employment on a full time basis. The plaintiff thought that he was getting a handle on what was going on but he now realises that he was being carried. He could not trust himself to use a forklift because of his lack of balance nor could he carry heavy boxes by himself. He had to ask for assistance. Although his position was number two in charge of the warehouse, in reality he was doing a job right down the bottom of the ladder and this caused him to feel very depressed. He had difficulty in remembering things. For example to remember his contact person at the New South Wales brain injury clinic Miss Siedel, he remembered her name because it was spelt similarly to "diesel" so he would ring up the brain injury clinic and ask to speak to Ms Diesel. He realises now that he was making mistakes by putting codes on bulk stores and the computer records did not reconcile with what was actually in stock. By now his back injury caused him pain and restricted his duties.
 In February 1992 he described himself as still being optimistic and not having a full appreciation that he had a serious disability. The deputy principal at Lithgow school gave him a job to help his memory. The plaintiff was required to open and close the school hall where karate classes were held twice per week. He was paid $5 to open and $5 to close. It was thought that the regular and structured work would help him. The plaintiff would still be capable of undertaking this task.
 In 1992 the plaintiff thought that he had got a bit better but he still had problems moving around the house. His wife still had to supervise and monitor him to make sure that he attended to his daily activities. The plaintiff was depressed and withdrawn. At work he said that he did not really make any advances and that his mates continued to carry him. In 1993, he lost his balance and tripped on the front steps of his house. He was not injured. In he continued to be carried at work and while he still had memory problems and lack of fluency with balance it had improved but not to any significant extent. The plaintiff still felt sad and morose.
 From about October 1996 the plaintiff's left knee was causing him problems in that he had difficulty in walking up stairs, kneeling, standing and walking for long periods of time. In October 1997 the plaintiff underwent an arthroscopy on his left knee performed by Dr Hargraves. The plaintiff was off work for one week. This operation was related to an old condition and not to the subject accident. No amount has been claimed for this injury and the plaintiff did not have any time off work.
 In 1997 he had a subsequent motor vehicle accident in Bathurst. The plaintiff went through a give way sign and hit another vehicle. The impact was on the left hand side of the vehicle. The plaintiff was not injured.
 February 1998 accident On 23 February 1998 the plaintiff had an accident at work. His account of the accident was that the chain on the roller door spun off and jumped. The plaintiff was on his own. He climbed to the top of a ladder to try to free the chain to let the roller door come back down again. As soon as he changed his centre of balance he lost balance and threw his arm up and grabbed hold of a cross member above him and then the ladder fell to the floor. He lost his grip on the cross member and fell to the concrete. The plaintiff's right foot hit the edge of a pallet and his heel hit the concrete and he snapped his achilles tendon. (t 43). He said that it was his problem with balance which caused him to fall and he did not have this type of balance problem prior to the 1991 accident.
 However the plaintiff's account of the accident does not accord with the accident report form completed by the plaintiff. On 23 February 1998 the plaintiff wrote "ladder slid on concrete floor, fell aprox 12 foot landing on ankel (sic) was trying to free chain on roller door so I could close it." (Ex ). In cross examination the plaintiff stated that he was unaware that the cause of the accident was that the ladder had been placed improperly against the wall. The plaintiff acknowledged that there was no mention made in the accident report form that the accident was caused by him simply losing balance and falling (t 63).
 Dr Hargraves in his report dated 21 February 2000 is of the view that a very significant factor in the plaintiff's fall from the ladder was his impaired balance and co-ordination as a result of his head injury and brain damage. It is my view that there were two factors which caused the accident, namely the plaintiff's problems with balance and incorrect positioning of the ladder. The plaintiff's loss of balance when adjusting the position of his head to look up materially contributed to or caused him to fall from the ladder. Although the plaintiff did not specifically refer to the loss of balance in the report form, the rest of the account is consistent with his evidence. In addition to the plaintiff's evidence there is medical evidence before the court to the effect that he suffered from a high order balance impairment. If the plaintiff had not suffered brain damage which resulted in a high order balance impairment, the 1998 accident most likely, on the balance of probabilities would not have occurred.
 The plaintiff underwent surgery for his achilles heel and was off work for about three weeks. He returned to work while he was still in a wheelchair. The plaintiff suffers from gout in his left big toe but this is not related to the accident and is successfully controlled by medication.
 The plaintiff's evidence is that the 1998 accident occurred at a stage when his left knee had not properly healed. After the right ankle operation his balance was bad and his right ankle was no good so he compensated by weight bearing on his left knee. Dr Hargraves operated on the plaintiff's right ankle and is his treating orthopaedic surgeon. It is his view that the severe right leg injury the plaintiff sustained in February 1998 overloaded the arthritic left knee and has affected its progress adversely. The left knee condition was aggravated by the work related right leg injury. I accept his view. The defendant is responsible for the damage to the right ankle and the added damage to the left knee attributable to the fall from the ladder.
 In February 1996 the plaintiff's job was reclassified as a material co- ordinator. This occurred at the time of the amalgamation of Prospect County
Council with Integral Energy. The reason for the regrade was due to the plaintiff's responsibilities increasing to include the maintenance of the
Stores at Katoomba, Lithgow and Kandos, the courier service between those depots and clearance of monies from Kandos. (Ex 3).
 On 27 October 1997 Integral Energy by letter informed the plaintiff that: "... in relation to your substantive position of Material Co-Ordinator being declared surplus to requirements on the basis of lack of work in the Bowenfels/Kandos area. As discussed, you have two choices available to you ie accept an offer of voluntary redundancy and leave Integral on a date to be determined or seek redeployment within Integral possibly at a different work location and possibly performing different duties..." (Ex 2).  The plaintiff elected redeployment. On 2 February 1998 Integral Energy informed the plaintiff that his position as Logistic Support at Lithgow on his current salary was confirmed. However, the position was offered to him on a six months trial basis and subject to the satisfactory performance of his duties. (Ex 6).
 On 5 October 1998 when he returned to work after six weeks long service leave the plaintiff was told by a district officer Greg Dewer that his position as senior storeman was no longer available. Mr Dewer told the plaintiff they had no work for him other than filing and the plaintiff did two hours filing and then went home. There was no other work for him to do. By letter dated 14 September 1999 the plaintiff's employer stated that selected duties were unavailable in the last six months due to restrictions put in place by treating doctors. This was compounded by the fact that his position had become redundant due to a restructure of the business.
 On 20 April 1999 Mr Wallace from Integral Energy called at the plaintiff's home and handed him a letter. (Ex H). It stated that six months had elapsed since the plaintiff had first become unfit by reason of a non-related condition and that due to his continued absence from work the contract of employment had been frustrated. The notice of termination was to take effect from 23 April 1999. (Ex H) The plaintiff gave evidence that when he received this letter he felt like someone had taken a gun to his head and shot him.
Neither party called any evidence from the plaintiff's employer which would have enabled the court to better assess the plaintiff's work performance both pre and post 1991 accident.
 Peter Rawling, clinical neuropsychologist stated in his report dated 16
September 1996 that the plaintiff had made an excellent adjustment to his neurological and neuropsychological deficits. However without wishing to downgrade his achievement he opined that his work duties had been reduced and he was working in a protected and safe environment.
 Dr Buckley a consultant in rehabilitation, stated that the plaintiff remained capable of a full day's work or a 40 hour week. He did not believe that the plaintiff would be capable of increasing his hours and working any overtime and believed that any change in his routine or the requirements of his job would be extremely difficult for him to adjust to. This part, at least proved prophetic. Mr Fathers, psychologist, in May 1998 reported that although the plaintiff remained in his job there was concern for his well being at work. Mr Fathers felt further rehabilitation particularly support at work was recommended. He felt that the plaintiff's employment prospects were not as limited but noted that if the plaintiff was retrenched, given where he lives his job prospects were not good.
 Dr Buckley in his report dated 22 March 1999 said that if the demands at work increased, and they moved beyond the plaintiff's capacity. This was due to his traumatic brain injury and it was unlikely that these demands would have been beyond his capacity had he not suffered the brain injury. Dr Buckley holds the opinion that the plaintiff is unemployable on the open employment market and his cognitive impairment has ruled out work with cognitive demands.
Dr Greenburg a psychologist in his report dated 26 June 1996 and Dr Coffey in his reported dated 6 June 1996 did not comment on the plaintiff's working capacity.
 The medical evidence supports the view that the plaintiff was having difficulties coping with his employment. I accept that after the accident the plaintiff was being "carried" in his job. I find that by 1998, the plaintiff could not perform his duties in a satisfactory manner and the reason he could not do so was his cognitive impairment and his neuropsychological deficits, together with the injury to his right ankle and exacerbation of the injury to his left knee. However it is difficult to reconcile that the plaintiff who held down a job for eight years after the accident, which involved driving hundreds of kilometres each week and controlling stock in the stores depot has no residual earning capacity. From the medical evidence, the plaintiff is not capable of intellectually demanding work or work where the routine changes regularly. He is not capable of work involving heavy manual labour. The plaintiff is almost 50 years of age and says that he is not capable of competing on the open labour market for any form of work as he continues to have problems with his memory and is depressed. He has mood swings, problems with concentration, weakness with the right hand and has no motivation. He has balance problems. Lithgow has limited employment opportunities.
 Taking these factors into account and doing the best I can, I assess the plaintiff's residual earning capacity at $100 net per week. Taking the plaintiff's wage at $536.20 less $100.00 = $436.20 x 15 years at 3%. As previously stated past economic loss for the period 23 March 1991 to 28 July is agreed at $7,145. Past economic loss from 23 April 1999 to 3 April = 49 weeks x $436.20 = $21,373.80. Past economic loss = $28,518.80.
Interest on past economic loss = $2,700.
 Future loss of earning capacity is calculated at $436.20 x 15 years @ 3% = .20 x 632.3 = $275,809.26. The appropriate amount for vicissitudes of 15% is deducted. Future loss of earning capacity = $234,437.88.

Loss of promotion In 1989 (prior to the accident) the plaintiff had a discussion with Mr
Harry Hicks who was the stores superintendent concerning his promotional prospects. Mr Hicks told the plaintiff that in order to get a promotion he would need to firstly undertake tertiary study and secondly probably transfer to the main stores depot at Seven Hills. If the plaintiff followed Mr Hicks' advice he would be qualified to ultimately compete for Mr Hicks' job. There were several steps between the plaintiff's current position and that held by
Mr Hicks. Mr Hicks as stores superintendent was responsible for the management of all of the stores depots belonging to Prospect County Council. On 10
November 1989 Mr Hicks wrote to the enrolment officer at Blacktown TAFE concerning the plaintiff undertaking a management course at Blacktown TAFE.
(Ex F). In January 1990 the plaintiff commenced studying at Blacktown TAFE two nights per week. On 31 December 1990 he gained a certificate in purchasing and supply. He successfully completed that course. (Ex G). In January 1991 he commenced a material management course. As previously stated this was for two nights per week each Wednesday and Friday night and the course ran for three years.
 In order to gain a promotion at work the plaintiff undertook the TAFE course. He intended to move to Seven Hills, if required. The plaintiff's plans were that once his son had finished his HSC at the Blue Mountains Grammar
School, which was either in 1991 or 1992 he would transfer to Seven Hills and rent a mobile home from his wife's cousin. I accept that had the accident not occurred the plaintiff would have remained in employment with Integral Energy.
The plaintiff would have completed his course and may have moved to Seven
Hills. He would have placed himself in a position where it was likely he would be promoted. However, it is uncertain whether he would have ultimately been successful in obtaining the stores superintendent job. The plaintiff has claimed $7,288 for this loss of a chance of promotion. The differential between Mr Hicks and the plaintiff's current earnings was $176. The defendant submitted that only a nominal amount should be allowed. It is my view that an appropriate amount for the past lost chance of promotion is $5,500. The plaintiff may have gained one or two promotions over the 15 years he had left of his working life. I assess the loss of a chance for promotion in the future as $32,000. Past and future loss of promotion = $37,500.

Loss of superannuation The plaintiff claims $34,440 for the loss of employers superannuation contributions and calculated this loss at 712 x 632.3 = $450,197 less 15% = $382,667 the employers contribution of this is 9% from 2001 = $34,440. Using the same method as the plaintiff's counsel, I assess the plaintiff's loss of employer superannuation contributions at 7% of $234,437.88 = $16,410.65.

Out-of-pocket expenses Out-of-pocket expenses have been agreed at $39,510.

Past and future care and assistance To determine the applicable amount to be awarded for home care services it has to be identified which services the plaintiff would reasonably need, as a result of the defendant's wrong. Or expressed another way the plaintiff is to be compensated for the loss of his capacity to look after himself, which was caused by the accident - see Van Gervan versus Fenton <case>; <case>; [(1999) 47 NSWLR 319.] In relation to the period between 30 March 1991 and 8 July 1991 when the plaintiff was in hospital and undergoing rehabilitation the plaintiff claims the sum of $10,440. The defendant did not make any submissions in relation to this item. The plaintiff's wife assisted the plaintiff in his personal hygiene, meals and the like, as detailed earlier in this judgment for this period and I allow this amount.
 After the accident the plaintiff was unable to walk properly and he was not confident that he would not fall down. He was unable to drive or shop. His wife took him to Coles at Lithgow and Woolworths at Bathurst where as an exercise he had to push a shopping trolley between two aisles. He was unable to walk in a straight line and hit things. He felt very embarrassed and unsure. He could not remember things and got embarrassed when he met his friends and could not stand up when talking to them. He had to sit down as he could not balance. His wife supervised him taking medication.
 The defendant submitted that no allowance should be made after 8 July 1991 as there is no supporting medical evidence that care is required and secondly, if any care is required it is due to injuries to the left knee and right ankle and these injuries are not related to the accident. I have already dealt with the further injury issue and made a finding that they are attributable to the accident.
 Prior to the accident the plaintiff undertook all the household duties except the ironing. From the time of the accident to date, the plaintiff's wife has undertaken all the household tasks and supervises and motivates the plaintiff. She initially helped him with his speech therapy. Since the accident to date the plaintiff has been unable to operate the washing machine or dishwasher and he gets confused. He is unable to read a book as he cannot keep up the concentration. He used to like reading before the accident and had no problems in this regard. He cannot plan what he wants to do. If he is told to do something he will carry out that instruction but will not take the initiative to do it. The plaintiff's wife has taken over the burden of looking after the home and she helps buy his clothes, picking out the correct size.
She ties his laces, puts his socks on and he describes their roles as being reversed since the accident. Actually he would go further and describe himself as being more like a child than an adult. He admitted his will is waning a lot. He had found difficulty in accepting that he has a severe disability and he has tried very hard to get over it.
 Both the plaintiff and his wife stated that if she was unable to provide these services he could not look after himself. He could not live alone. For example if his wife went out one night and did not leave him dinner he would just go without. He has enough insight to recognise that this would occur yet is not motivated to redress it. Before the accident he could organise shopping for a week's worth of meals and cook meals each night without any difficulty.
Recently the plaintiff attempted to do a wood turning course at the Uniting
Church. He was cutting a circle of timber and he nearly chopped off his left ring finger. He would not wash his hair nor have a shower without being prompted to do so.
 As previously stated, the plaintiff's wife is of the view that since the accident the plaintiff needs to be motivated and supervised. She gave evidence that she spends about 2 hours each week day and one day (about 6 hours) on the weekend doing the cleaning and vacuuming undertaking household chores and supervising and motivating the plaintiff.
 Their routine for the week is as follows. The plaintiff's wife wakes up, she puts the kettle on and makes the plaintiff's breakfast and prepares his lunch and leaves it out for him. If she puts his meal in the fridge, she writes a note telling him it is there otherwise he will not eat it. She eats her own breakfast and gets ready for work in about 10 minutes. She leaves for work at 6.30 am. At 4.00 pm she returns home from work. She puts on the kettle and they take their coffee out to the backroom where they do the daily crossword puzzle to stimulate the plaintiff's mind. Prior to the accident they never had coffee together in the afternoon nor did they ever do a crossword puzzle together. He is not capable of completing a crossword puzzle by himself. The plaintiff's wife attends to the laundry and cooking of dinner and this takes up to 6.00 pm. After dinner, the plaintiff's wife puts the plates in the dishwasher. Before she goes to bed she puts the plaintiff's clothes out on the chest for him, takes the washing up stairs and puts the plaintiff's clothes away.
 Dr Buckley in his report dated 13 August 1996, stated that the plaintiff was clearly capable of looking after himself and living alone independently.
Mr Fathers, psychologist in his report dated 8 May 1998 stated that the plaintiff could function independently in most things. However, given professional rehabilitation he could improve further in terms of cognitive and physical functioning. According to Mr Fathers the plaintiff needed further rehabilitation and assessment to evaluate his ability to organise himself and undertake the activities of daily living. These activities were somewhat interfered with.
 There is medical evidence namely the reports of Dr Lahz and Peter Rawling that support the view that the plaintiff has lack of motivation, and has defective planning and organisational skills. Mr Fathers was of the view that the plaintiff can function independently in most things and Dr Buckley is of the view that the plaintiff is capable of looking after himself. These medical opinions do not accord with the plaintiff and his wife's assessment. It also has to be taken into account that for over 7 years after the accident the plaintiff held down a job, albeit with some difficulty, to do so he would have been able to follow instructions and carry out tasks. I prefer that the plaintiff and his wife's assessment of the plaintiff's capabilities on a day to day basis. The plaintiff would have continued to perform the household tasks with the exception of the ironing, while his wife continued to be in employment. This would have continued until her retirement. He is no longer capable of carrying out these tasks. He can do some tasks provided that he is supervised. The inability to carry out household tasks has been brought about by reason of the plaintiff's brain injury. Had the accident not occurred the plaintiff would have done these things himself. In addition the plaintiff needs to be supervised and kept motivated by his wife. A reasonable amount to allow for these household services is 1.5 hours per day and 3 hours on the weekend.
 From 8 July 1991 to date, I allow past care at 1.5 hours per day and an additional 3 hours for the weekend. I have taken into account that the plaintiff's wife has always done the ironing, I consider these rates as reasonable. This equates to 13.5 hours per week at $18 per hour = $243 x 8 years and 8 months = $108,864.
 For future care, I allow 12 hours as on retirement, the jobs may have been shared if the accident had not occurred. 12 hours x $18 per hour = $216 x .7 = $226,519.20. Past and future care totals $335,383.20.

Future medical treatment 
Ophthalmic Prior to the accident the plaintiff wore glasses. On 19 April 1996 Dr
Hanson, optometrist stated that the car accident exacerbated the previous binocular difficulties and the plaintiff's double vision has persisted. He now has to be prescribed a separate reading lens which allows for his eyes to drift apart. In terms of cost the plaintiff requires special reading lenses to be updated every 12-24 months. These lenses have to be made for him, and are not a stock lens. The average cost for a set of hard coated plastic lenses with prism is $110. The average set of spectacle frames of reasonable quality is around $120. The total cost every two years would be around $230. The plaintiff has claimed $2,097 and the defendant made no submission on this item. This amount is reasonable and necessary and I allow it.

General practitioner and rehabilitation Dr Buckley suggests that the plaintiff's ability to monitor his own health is somewhat diminished and he should therefore see his general practitioner four times annually, once at the Level C extended service rate and three times at the Level B specific service rate. The plaintiff agreed that he has continued to be monitored by his general practitioner. The plaintiff has claimed $3,741. The defendant made no submissions. This is necessary and reasonable and I allow the sum of $3,741.

Psychiatrist  Dr Schultz in his reported dated 29 March 1999 stated in the longer term the plaintiff will cope without significant psychiatric impairment although the effects of the brain injury will definitely limit his ability to maintain a useful working life, particularly if as a result of the more recent injury it would be necessary for the plaintiff to adapt to a new work situation. The plaintiff claimed a monthly amount of $156 which amounts to $37,753 plus petrol of $7,341. The plaintiff gave evidence that he needed to be monitored by a psychiatrist. Dr Schultz stated that the plaintiff is now essentially well from the point of view of depression but he continues to have and will obviously always experience difficulties in relation to his head injury. It is possible that he will again have problems with depression but at this stage he can be managed by his general practitioner. The plaintiff gave evidence that he found it useful to consult a psychologist as he gives an independent opinion as to how he is coping. The psychologist acts as a reality check. He has suffered depression which was attributed to his precarious position at work and is in part attributable to the 1991 accident. He wishes to continue with these consultations. In accordance with Malec versus J C Hutton <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638] an award for damages should reflect this possibility. Doing the best I can I allow $26,000 which includes petrol.

Physiotherapy Dr Buckley suggested that due to the plaintiff's poor balance he is at a significant risk of falls and therefore the suffering of minor musculoskeletal injuries and suggested six physiotherapy visits. The plaintiff is currently not undergoing physiotherapy or hydrotherapy because even though there is a heated hydrotherapy pool at the new Lithgow hospital, there is no physiotherapist to run the classes. Hence it is necessary to travel to
Bathurst. The plaintiff claimed 12 visits per year for physiotherapy or hydrotherapy at $47 per visit and petrol of $7,341 = $11,374. This amounts to $18,715. The defendant submitted that physiotherapy is due to the plaintiff's right ankle and knee problems which were not related to the car accident and no allowance should be made. For reasons given earlier, the injury to the right ankle and the worsening of his left knee are attributable to the car accident. I also take into account that the plaintiff may not avail himself of each of the monthly physiotherapy and hydrotherapy. I allow $12,000 for this item which includes an allowance for petrol.

Medication In the past the plaintiff has taken Naprosyn and Zyloprim to control his back pain. He has also taken Fluoxetine and Aropax, an antidepressant. He is currently not taking any medication. The plaintiff claimed $2,000. The defendant submitted that no allowance should be made as the plaintiff is not currently using medication. It is my view that the plaintiff may need to take painkillers or other medication in the future. This is a modest sum and I allow it.

Handyman Dr Buckley proposed that the plaintiff would require four hours a week handyman assistance to assist in the management of the heavier outside household duties such as mowing, gardening and ladder maintenance. The plaintiff has claimed 2 hours per week for mowing the lawn and gardening plus hours every 3 months for general maintenance around the house. For example the plaintiff's wife gave evidence that the plaintiff is no longer competent to change washers in taps and the like. The plaintiff and his wife gave evidence that two hours per week for outside work and eight hours every three months for general maintenance was reasonable. However the plaintiff is capable ie., mowing some of the lawns in the flatter areas. He can do some gardening. The rates were not disputed. I allow $46,250.

House It is Dr Buckley's view that due to the plaintiff's poor balance he should have a house which could essentially be described as "wheelchair accessible", that is without steps and stairs and certainly not two storeys. The plaintiff's bathroom would required modification with handrails near the shower and toilet and in the shower recess itself. The plaintiff has had some alterations to the bathroom carried out. In 1993 he fell down the front stairs due to his problems with balance. He did not injure himself. Prior to 1998, the plaintiff had difficulties with his balance and difficulties negotiating the stairs in his house. The house is on a sloping block and while it affords panoramic views over the local historic buildings in town, it has a lot of stairs both internally and externally. The plaintiff claimed $9,000 for the costs of buying land next door in order to put a garage and bedroom on the ground floor or alternatively selling the current house and buying one in town on flat land. In any event the plaintiff would have been entitled to the costs remodelling the bathroom as suggested by Bathurst Rehabilitation Service. It is my view that this claim is necessary and reasonable and I allow it.

SCHEDULE $

General damages 182,000.00 
Interest on general damages 14,760.00 
Agreed out-of-pocket expenses 39,510.00 
Past loss of earnings 28,518.80 
Interest on past loss of earnings 2,700.00 
Future loss of earnings 234,437.88 
Loss of promotion - past and future 37,500.00 
Loss of superannuation 16,410.65 
House 9,000.00 
Past and future care 345,823.20 
Future handyman 46,250.00 
Future medical treatment and expenses 45,838.00 
TOTAL 1,002,749.00 I propose to enter judgment that the defendant pay to the plaintiff the sum of $1,002,749.00 once the calculations have been checked by the parties. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs as agreed or assessed.
 
LAST UPDATED: 26/04/2000 * * * 
