

Walker versus Jones Matter No 20647/97 [1997] NSWSC 326 (22 August 1997) 
Robert Neville WALKER versus Bradley Peter JONES /97 August 1997 
Michael Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - ROBERT NEVILLE WALKER versus BRADLEY PETER JONES 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this action the plaintiff seeks damages in respect of injuries which he claims to have sustained in an accident on 13 November 1994. Breach of duty is admitted by the defendant and the action is before the Court for the assessment of damages only. 
The plaintiff was born on 23 February 1977 and was therefore 17 years of age when the accident occurred. He had completed education to Year 10 level at
Wauchope High School and at the time of the accident was close to the completion of a year at an agricultural college named TOCAL at Maitland. He was riding in a motor car driven by the defendant. There were four young men occupying the car and the plaintiff was in the rear seat with his seatbelt properly fastened. What happened was that in an overtaking manoeuvre the car in which the plaintiff was riding struck the car being overtaken and progressed out of control into collision with a telegraph pole.

The plaintiff was observed by other passengers to be slumped in his seatbelt and I am satisfied that he was unconscious. I am satisfied also that he had not regained consciousness in the true sense when he egressed from the damaged motor vehicle. Unsurprisingly there is some confusion about exactly how he emerged from the vehicle. I accept the evidence of the two other passengers, both of whom were called to testify.

I also accept the evidence that whilst in the ambulance the plaintiff was muttering incoherently and I infer from that that he had not regained consciousness. Later on, nursing notes suggested that he was conscious although the nurses did observe and record the phenomenon that the plaintiff was repeating questions to which he had apparently already given the answers.

The plaintiff claims that he has both anterograde and retrograde amnesia surrounding the accident, the event itself being erased from any memory of his. I accept his evidence in this regard.

The central issue in this case is whether the plaintiff sustained a closed head injury with consequent brain damage which in turn has been productive of symptoms of loss, principally disturbance to his powers of concentration and memory.

As I regret to observe is so frequently the case, I have been favoured with some 61 medical, psychological and other reports and I have no oral evidence.
There is dispute between experts and it is my task therefore to resolve any relevant dispute by reference only to the considerable volume of paper which comprises the relevant exhibit or exhibits.

I do not propose to recapitulate or summarize all of that material but it is appropriate, I consider, to make some reference to observations made by some of those examiners.

Dr Campbell, a general practitioner consulted by the plaintiff noted symptoms complained of by the plaintiff including his being transiently unaware of his surroundings. On the basis of information available to him which is referred to in his report of 10 July 1995, he made an observation that in short, in his opinion the plaintiff's life had been devastated by his head injury. He thought that the plaintiff was currently unemployable.

I have a series of reports signed by Miss Katrina Falconer who is described as a Rehabilitation Worker/Clinical Psychologist. I shall make reference to some of her views later in this judgment. But, on 15 December 1994 which was of course very shortly after the accident, she wrote that the plaintiff had been in a serious motor vehicle accident and that although he had retained his intelligence, his memory and ability to concentrate had been considerably affected.

It would be surprising if such a conclusion were available so soon after the injury although, as events have turned out, in my opinion that summation correctly describes the situation.

The plaintiff's solicitors referred him to a psychologist, Mr Fox. As can be seen by examination of other material, including particularly commentary by Dr
Bell, the methods adopted by Mr Fox are generally found unacceptable by other practitioners. His pattern of tests were described as idiosyncratic and the general impression of psychiatrists who examined them was that they were incapable of being professionally understood and therefore their significance unable to be evaluated.

Rejection of Mr Fox's methods was common to examiners retained both on behalf of the plaintiff and the defendant and in those circumstances I do not propose to rely upon what is contained in his reports, save one matter.

On 15 July 1995 Mr Fox noted that the plaintiff did not appear to be following his instructions and then suddenly began to respond. Mr Fox asserted that it was his clinical observation that this could have been a brief petit mal seizure.

Mr Fox is a psychologist, not a medical practitioner, and no doubt in recognition of his he used the provisional words that I have mentioned.
Nevertheless he was in a position to make an observation. That observation was not part of what has been described as his idiosyncratic procedures and I am satisfied that he saw what he said he saw, and in the light of the overall material, I conclude that that more probably than not what he saw was accurately described as a petit mal seizure.

That conclusion has some support in the light of findings by Dr Watson, a neurologist, to whom the plaintiff was referred. I express a preference for the opinions expressed by Dr Watson. He opined that, "There is no doubt that
Mr Walker (that is to say the plaintiff) has had a significant closed head injury".

Dr Watson was not at that stage convinced that the plaintiff had absence seizures but other material persuades me that he was probably having such seizures.

Dr Watson referred the plaintiff to the Neuropsychology Unit attached to
Prince Alfred Hospital where he was there seen by a Ms Caine. There has been some criticism of the sparseness of the tests which she applied but on the basis of those which she did administer, she concluded that the plaintiff as at October 1995 appeared to be suffering substantial sequelae from "a closed head injury sustained a year ago".

She thought that there was no question that the young man's future in terms of both training and work had been profoundly and detrimentally affected by the accident.

The plaintiff was also seen on a number of occasions by Dr Parsonage, a psychiatrist. Dr Parsonage, if I may epitomize his reports, seemed to favour the conclusion that a lot of the plaintiff's difficulties were psychiatric in nature. Given his specialty, that is probably not altogether surprising.

As I have indicated, I am satisfied on the overall evidence that the plaintiff had in fact sustained a significant closed head injury.

The next series of reports to which I make reference are those of Dr Bell.
They are very lengthy reports. I do not propose to go through them in detail.
The conclusion that I reached upon reading them is that Dr Bell has approached the questions he was asked and the issue of diagnosis of the plaintiff in an objective and thorough fashion. I express a preference for his evidence. In particular I express a preference for his evidence over that of Dr Sydney-
Smith, a psychiatrist retained to examine and report on behalf of the defendant.

In October 1995 Dr Bell observed that the plaintiff appeared to have sustained severe brain damage at the time of the accident. He thought that post traumatic amnesia provided a reliable guide and that its duration in this case indicates that he would be left with serious mental handicap. He thought that had been the case. In his opinion what the plaintiff presented to him then amounted to the classical range of mental effects brought about by blunt head injury.

In another report in December 1996, in the light of the further material available to Dr Bell, he analyzed amongst other things the plaintiff's preaccident performance at school. This preaccident performance at school is a matter to which examiners retained by the defendant have accorded great weight. I regard Dr Bell's assessment as the more balanced and acceptable. He recognized that the plaintiff had had difficulty with language, mathematics and theory but that he was a young man of considerable practical skills. He theorized that and indeed opined that the preaccident underachievements were probably the consequence of a prenatal injury to the left side of the brain.
He had established from his examinations and analyses that the traumatic injury in this accident was to the right side of the brain. He described the concatenation of events as a "double whammy".

Finally, in May 1997, Dr Bell was asked to make an examination of a considerable amount of material which had been served in support of the defendant's case. I do not regard it as necessary to recapitulate what can be read in his report of 23 May 1997. It suffices for present purposes for me to say that I regard his critique of the defendant's material described in that report as acceptable.

Finally, amongst the material tendered on behalf of the plaintiff I refer to the psychometric testing by Mr Rawling was which was requested specifically by
Dr Bell.

Mr Rawling concluded, for the reasons which are set out in his report, that he thought the plaintiff was seriously handicapped by the effects of brain damage. He thought there was compelling evidence from several sources suggesting the traumatic brain injury.

The material that I have referred to, to this point, was part of the bundle tendered on behalf of the plaintiff. I turn to some of the material tendered on behalf of the defendant. It is convenient to interpolate that the submission of counsel for the defendant was that I should prefer the evidence of Dr O'Neill and Dr Sydney-Smith and, to an extent, that of the psychologist,
Dr Wendy Roberts, and therefore conclude that any injury the plaintiff sustained was either minor or transient. As I have indicated, I reject that approach, having regard to my assessment of all the material tendered.

It should be observed that the initial reports of Dr Wendy Roberts were simply academic analyses conducted by her, as she had not seen the plaintiff at all, or administered any tests to him. When she finally did see him, she administered tests which she claimed substantiated her previous theorizing. As
I have indicated, I prefer other opinion.

The plaintiff was also seen on a couple of occasions by Mr Belzycki, who is apparently in the same practice as Dr Roberts, at Mentor Psychological
Consultants. His opinion is not entirely coordinate with that of Dr Roberts. I observe that in his report of 4 June 1997 he observed that in relation to Mr
Rawling's report he thought that the plaintiff may require assistance in securing and maintaining employment. He said the plaintiff was likely to have difficulty securing employment on the open labour market. While that opinion is not as gloomy as that expressed by some of the reporters whose material was tendered by the plaintiff, it is in some contrast to the optimistic views of
Dr Roberts.

I turn to Dr O'Neill, who is a consultant neurologist at St. Vincent's Clinic.
As I say, he is one opinion which counsel for the defendant specifically invited me to adopt.

There is a threshold difficulty with Dr O'Neill's opinion, a difficulty which of course does not reflect upon him. For reasons which are not entirely illuminated, when he actually saw the plaintiff he had derived a history from somewhere that there was no loss of consciousness at all at the time of the accident. A history of complete absence of a lack of consciousness is contradicted by the evidence of the people who were present at the time. It is further contradicted by the material to which I have already made reference.
It is true that Dr O'Neill was later asked to revise his opinion on the basis that that part of his assumed history was incorrect. But his adherence to the earlier view becomes somewhat less than compelling when one observes that it amounts to a restatement of a view formed upon a manifestly incorrect history.
As I have said, I prefer other opinion.

There is a lengthy report from the psychiatrist, Dr J Sydney Smith, extending over some 26 pages. As I have already stated, I would adopt the criticism of
Dr Smith's views advanced by Dr Bell in his analysis, although perhaps I would not go so far as to assert that Dr Smith was raising what Dr Bell calls the dog bite defence. This defence, it can be recalled, runs along the lines of, first, "My dog didn't bite you"; second, "Well, anyway, you didn't suffer very much"; and, third, "Come to think of it, it wasn't my dog anyway." Alternative defences are well known to the law; but alternatives within expert opinion on occasions are less than helpful. As I have said, gauging the medical, psychological and other material overall, I come to the conclusion that the plaintiff has shown to the requisite standard of proof that he sustained a significant closed head injury.

The next matter which must be addressed, however, is the extent of disability which is consequent upon that injury.

The plaintiff formally completed the year at Tocal after the accident. I accept the evidence that he was assisted in returning the final assignment by his mother and by a young man who had attended the same institution previously. I draw no relevant inference from the circumstance that he actually finished the year.

The plaintiff had been interviewed and accepted for a job as a jackaroo on a cattle property near Normanton in Queensland. That interview had taken place just ten days before the accident.

He departed to take up this position in either late January or early February of 1995, as I understand it. He stayed at the job until June of 1995. The manager of the station has been asked to answer a series of interrogatories concerning the plaintiff's progress. The defendant relies upon this material as showing, in effect, that he was coping with what was required of him adequately.

While I do not conclude that the responses of the manager are other than genuine, I do not believe that his answers demonstrate that he had the insight into the plaintiff's difficulties. The superficial observations that he did make included some observations that the plaintiff was unbalanced when riding a horse. If I add to the plaintiff's descriptions somewhat abnormal conduct in contacting his family at what, I believe, were rare occasions followed by constant contact by telephone, then I come to the conclusion that the plaintiff was really unfit for the work he was doing.

As Miss Faulkner observed, his difficulty was with memory and concentration.
Lack of concentration and the occasional staring and absences which have been observed by other people would be in my view extremely dangerous to one who was working with the penning of cattle and the like. Indeed, as I understand it, on the plaintiff's own evidence, it was a near miss when penning cattle that made him conclude he should get away from that work situation.

The material and some evidence given mentions physical injuries other than the closed head injury. I should observe that I am not satisfied that the plaintiff sustained any physical injury of any consequence other than the injury to his head. There is some mention in the evidence of back symptoms but
I am unpersuaded that these are causally connected with the accident.

One submission made on behalf of the defendant, with which I should deal is that Dr Bell's opinion was dependent to an extent upon history obtained from the plaintiff's mother. It was said that the plaintiff's mother was an unreliable historian. Implicitly, if one assumes that the plaintiff is brain damaged then any history emanating from him would need to be treated guardedly.

I did gain the impression that Mrs Walker had become, to an extent, overwrought by her son's situation. I observe that there is mention that she at some stage in the past had some psychiatric treatment, but this is not a matter which I regard as necessary to investigate. It is hardly surprising that a mother would be overwrought when she observed the change in her son of which she spoke. The relevant part of the history given to Dr Bell related to the period of unconsciousness; and I would treat unconsciousness as distinct from coma. For example, while the plaintiff was being taken in the ambulance it might be said that he was not in a coma in the sense that he was mumbling and articulating, but I would not then describe him as conscious. I consider that the historical basis upon which Dr Bell relied was adequate and accurate to the extent that it does not derogate from the validity of his opinion. It will be convenient to deal with the various items of damage which are sought and make further observations about any necessary facts I should find as I deal with those ingredients.

The out-of-pocket expenses are agreed in the sum of $10,370. Claims are made for what are described as future out-of-pocket expenses. The plaintiff advances a claim based upon a tort induced requirement to visit a general practitioner once per month at the rate of $35 per visit. The defendant contends there is no evidence to support this requirement. Having regard to the observations of the many examiners of the requirements of the plaintiff, it seems to me that this is a demonstrated need of the plaintiff and it would be reasonable to fulfill that cost. There is evidence that the plaintiff takes medication. First, Panadol, and second, Epilim, which is prescribed for him in order to suppress the epileptiform manifestations that I have described. The cost has been calculated at $8.40 per week over the remainder of the plaintiff's life and I think that amount should be allowed. Similarly an annual review by a neurologist at a cost of $128 per visit seems to me to be reasonable in all the circumstances.

The reports of Miss Faulkner suggest that the plaintiff should have thirty visits every five years for the remainder of his working life for vocational rehabilitation. I am unable to perceive the reasonableness of extending that pattern of visits over the entirety of the plaintiff's working life. It seems to me it would be reasonable for that pattern to be adopted for the first five years of his rehabilitation. The cost of such visits reduced to a weekly basis is $12.07 per week. Thirty visits over five years would capitalize on the authorized rate at $2,940 and would allow that amount in lieu of the $12,070 claimed by the plaintiff.

A claim is made for what is described by Miss Faulkner as additional leisure costs. The plaintiff will receive an award for non-economic loss, formerly known as general damages. These are available for the plaintiff to indulge himself in leisure as he chooses. I reject the submission that some $13,457 should be awarded on this account.

A written submission setting out how the plaintiff's claims are made out was submitted. Beyond what I have already done, I do not regard it as necessary to detail all the ingredients. The total of the claims for future out-of-pocket expenses made by the plaintiff is $44,454. After rejecting the items as I have indicated, the total of the amounts which I do allow is $21,866 and that amount will be included in the damages.

The next item of damage claimed by the plaintiff is economic loss between the date of the tort and the present. Of course, he received income during the time that he was at the property in Queensland. He was paid as a second year jackaroo and it was suggested he was about to be promoted to third year rates.
A calculation has been made on the basis that making allowance for what he has earned, he has lost $29,895 to the present time. I am satisfied that during that period the plaintiff has not had any effective residual earning capacity which he ought to have exercised. I am satisfied that his loss is a consequence of the tort and I propose to include that amount in the damages.

The next item relates to future economic loss. As has been observed, the plaintiff retains his intelligence. One factor which I found fortifying in coming to the conclusion that the plaintiff generally suffers from the results of head injury was his presentation in court, which to my non-medical professional observation was typical of a person suffering a degree of brain damage. He showed considerable disinterest in these proceedings, or in their outcome. Indeed, at the end of his testimony, he sought to be excused to go back to his motel to sleep. This is entirely consistent with the description of his activities given by others. Nevertheless, he has, as I have said, residual intelligence.

The principal consequences of the injuries he has sustained, seem to be in memory and concentration. This was manifested in an attempt to train him for doing some bar work. He could, I gather, draw the beer and serve the drinks, but he had difficulty remembering people's orders and he became completely confused with the till. Counsel for the plaintiff conceded that I must take into account some residual earning capacity and he did not put the plaintiff's case on the basis that he was totally and permanently incapacitated for any productive work. This is a matter which does involve a great deal of estimation, bearing in mind that the plaintiff was but seventeen years of age when injured. His background was that he had been brought up on a cattle stud farm, essentially, but his father sustained a heart attack and the farm had to be sold. It was his ambition to become a farmer or a farm manager in due course. But for the accident I believe he had the capacity to pursue such an ambition. I believe that a consequence of the accident is to remove any realistic chance of his achieving that goal or anything like it.

There are, however, no real guidelines as to the plaintiff's pre-accident earnings. He was being paid reduced rates as a jackaroo - effectively, an apprentice or a trainee - at the only time that he worked.

Published statistics show that average male weekly earnings in New South Wales are just under $587 per week after tax. It was contended that I should allow the plaintiff a loss of capacity as against that figure, estimated at $400 per week. I have come to the conclusion that that rate does not sufficiently take into account the residual abilities that the plaintiff has, although I am acutely conscious that the exercise of his abilities is likely to be intermittent over the long ensuing years of his lifetime. Doing the best I can, I have come to the conclusion that a more appropriate figure for the purpose of estimating future loss would be $300 per week, taken at the appropriate multiplier in order to capitalize, and reducing the calculated sum for 15 per cent to allow for adverse vicissitudes, arithmetic produces a figure of $242,352. I propose to include such a sum in the damages for the plaintiff's interference with future earnings.

A specific claim is made for loss of superannuation benefit. This is based upon legislation which requires an employer to make contribution to the superannuation guarantee fund at the current rate of 6 per cent, increasing over ensuing years to 7 per cent, 8 per cent and 9 per cent by July 2002.
Counsel for the plaintiff in the written submission to which I have made reference, has performed a calculation based upon an estimated gross weekly earning of $500 per week. That sum is less by a significant margin than average weekly earnings, although of course, it is known that average weekly earnings represent a figure, the derivative factors of which include the circumstance that more people actually earn less than the average than earn more. This apparently results from the existence in the community of a smaller number of very high income earners.

It is not necessary nor appropriate for me to conduct an investigation into the statistical methods of the appropriate publishing department. The result of the arithmetical calculation based upon the factors I have indicated, and allowing for the increase in contribution as the years progress, produces a capital sum of $40,673. I have to observe that if the plaintiff exercises his earning capacity in the future, it ought to be hypothesized that he will, through the new employer replace some of the lost superannuation benefit. What
I am required to do is to estimate as an ingredient of damage the value of the loss of employer contribution to ultimate superannuation to be drawn by the plaintiff at the end of his working life. Using the calculation submitted by the plaintiff as a rough guide, I have come to the conclusion that between the parties it would be appropriate if the plaintiff were to receive approximately three quarters of that sum for the purpose that I have specified and I will include $30,000 in the damages for the loss of the employer superannuation contribution.

The next items of damage relate to what might be described broadly as care for the plaintiff. There is evidence that he needs to be reminded to take his medication. He needs to be told to attend to personal requirements from time to time, such as bathing and putting on his shoes and socks.

The plaintiff submits that to the present time, recognizing that the Motor
Accidents Act, and specifically <case>, applies, I should allow him a claim for gratuitous care based upon the hypothesis of two hours per day up to the present time. What needs not to be lost sight of is the requirement of authority that it be reasonable to acquire at cost the services which are otherwise gratuitously provided. It was submitted on behalf of the defendant that having regard to ss. 6 of <case>, I should come to the conclusion that any services provided to the plaintiff up to the present would have been provided in any event; or alternatively, it was argued, it was not necessary to provide such care for the plaintiff because he could do these things for himself.

There are many imponderables in this area of claim but I am satisfied that the plaintiff has made out a case for the provision at cost of some care but I think that the rate of 14 hours per week considerably over estimates what it would be reasonable to obtain at cost. I think about half that amount would be more appropriate. Accordingly, for the 113 weeks since the plaintiff returned from Queensland, I would allow at the rate appropriate to <case>, that of $15 per hour, one hour per day, or seven hours per week, which would involve an ingredient in the damages of $11,865.

I turn next to claims for future care. The plaintiff's claims in this regard are based broadly upon some opinions by Miss Faulkner, to whom I have already made reference on several occasions. Her hypothesis is that the plaintiff should be provided with a case manager and support workers from time to time.
I do not accept that the limitations upon the plaintiff's abilities consequent upon the tort give rise to the reasonable provision of what she has suggested.
I regard the plaintiff as having demonstrated a likely need in the future, coordinate with that over the past 113 weeks. It seems to me therefore that the appropriate way of approaching this matter is to allow for the plaintiff seven hours per week at the rate of $15 per hour during his life expectancy.
Performing the requisite calculations and using the appropriate tables a capital sum of $104,979 is produced. I propose to include that sum in the damages.

I turn to the penultimate item of non-economic loss. It is agreed that the applicable figure for a most extreme case is $247,000. It was specifically submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that I should allow a proportion of 70 per cent of that sum for the plaintiff's disabilities. I have concluded that that figure is an overestimate of the appropriate proportion. My reason for that conclusion is that while I do not ignore the comparative youth of the plaintiff and the long period during which he will be afflicted by his handicaps, it must nevertheless be taken into account that he retains his intelligence and, subject to the problems about balance and the like, he is mobile and he is not afflicted by pain which is consequent upon the tort. He has suffered, of course, considerable interference with his likely ability to earn his living, but this has been compensated for separately. Taking all matters into account I think a more appropriate proportion is 55 per cent and as against the figure that I have mentioned, $135,850 should be included in the damages.

Before turning to the final item I should recapitulate the ingredients I have found. They are as follows: 
Out of pocket expenses $ 10,370 
Future out of pockets $ 21,866 
Past economic loss $ 29,895 
Future economic loss $242,352 
Loss of superannuation contribution from employer $ 30,000 
Past gratuitous care $ 11,865 
Future gratuitous care $104,979 
Non economic loss $135,850 
The total of those ingredients is $587,177 
That leads me to the final element of damage.

The plaintiff has had a tutor appointed and it will be a consequence of orders that I propose to make that the damages will be invested pursuant to the
Damages (Infants and Persons of Unsound Mind) Act. The plaintiff is therefore entitled to recover against the defendant the cost of the administration of his investment by the Public Trustee. In order to calculate this sum, I should however withdraw, from the total that I have mentioned, the out-of-pocket expenses and a figure representing the subvention against economic loss which the plaintiff has received by way of the pension he is now receiving. It was agreed between counsel that this was an appropriate approach to the matter.

The plaintiff has been receiving $254 a fortnight since mid-1995. That would in round figures seem to result in my being able to observe that he has received $14,351 in the 113 weeks that I selected for past economic loss. If one adds the out-of-pocket expenses one reaches a figure of $24,721. I propose to subtract that from the calculated total of other ingredients and select a round $560,000, for the purpose of using that figure as the notional investment of the Public Trustee upon which charges will be levied.

The rates charged by the Public Trustee are set out in the written submission to which I have referred. There is a once only capital charge of 4 per cent on the first $100,000, 3 per cent on the second, 2 per cent on the third, 1 per cent on the fourth and 1 per cent on every $100,000 thereafter. There is an annual management fee of 5.25 per cent on income derived. For the purpose of estimating the damages, I have assumed that the return on the investment will be at the rate of 5 per cent. The calculations then produce a capital charge on the sum of $560,000 of $11,000. Assuming a return on investment of 5 per cent, there will be an income of $28,000 per annum. That management fee at .25 per cent will amount to a charge of $1,470, or $28.27 per week. Extended over the plaintiff's statistical life expectancy at the appropriate rate, a capital sum resultant is $28,264. I therefore include the amounts of $11,000 and $28,264 for the purpose of my projected judgment, which will therefore have the ingredients totalling $587,177 plus those amounts just mentioned, the total of which is $626,441. I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $626,441. I direct that the amount of judgment be paid into court and that it be paid out to the Public Trustee to be dealt with by him for the benefit of the plaintiff pursuant to the [Damages (Infants and Persons of Unsound Mind)
Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/dapouma1929411/). I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 (Mr Watt referred to medical expenses paid by the defendant) 
Pursuant to the slip rule, I should amend those orders. I vacate those that I have just made and in lieu thereof I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $626,441. I note that the defendant is entitled to claim protanto satisfaction of that judgment to the extent of $10,054.07 for medical expenses already paid on behalf of the plaintiff. The resultant nett sum of $616,386.93 is to be paid into court and to be paid out to the Public Trustee to be dealt with for the benefit of the plaintiff pursuant to the [Damages (Infants and Persons of Unsound Mind) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/dapouma1929411/). I confirm my order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of action.
 * * * 
