

Baugh versus George Weston Foods Ltd t/as Weston Milling [1997] NSWSC 80 (13
March 1997) 
Baugh versus George Weston Foods Limited t/as Weston Milling /95 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff brought proceedings in the Compensation Court for the recovery of permanent loss compensation. The respondent in those proceedings was George Weston Foods Limited (the defendant in these proceedings). Settlement was reached between the parties and Short Minutes were signed by Counsel. Subsequently, Orders and Awards were made by the Compensation Court for the purposes of implementing the Short Minutes. The amount payable under the Award by way of permanent loss compensation was in the sum of $101,583.65.

Firths have acted as the solicitors for the plaintiff both in the proceedings brought in the Compensation Court and in the Common Law proceedings. Michell
Sillar acted for George Weston Foods Limited in the proceedings before the
Compensation Court and in these proceedings for some time. Hickson Lakeman & Holcombe now act for that company in the Common Law proceedings.

By letter dated 5 October 1994, Firths wrote to the insurer (MMI) of George
Weston Foods Limited requesting payment pursuant to the Award by cheque. By letter dated 13 October 1994, Michell Sillar "sent" a cheque in the sum of $101,583.65 to Firths in payment of the Award. The cheque was drawn by MMI in favour of the plaintiff. Receipt of the cheque was acknowledged in writing by a receptionist employed by Firths. The acknowledgment appears at the bottom of a copy of the letter dated 13 October 1994.

Between 4 October 1994 and 23 February 1995, Mr Firth gave advice to his client concerning the election provisions contained in section 151A(3) of the
Workers Compensation Act, 1987 (the Act). Subsequently, he received instructions not to accept the payment of permanent loss compensation which had been made.

The cheque had not been presented for payment to the drawee bank. It seems that it may have remained with Firths. By letter dated 7 February 1995, Firths wrote to MMI in the following disingenuous terms:- "We refer to previous correspondence in this matter and it has come to our attention that there is on our file a cheque in this matter which we believe rightfully belongs to you. Please find same enclosed herewith." 
The cheque returned with that letter was the cheque which had been drawn by
MMI in the sum of $101,583.65.

These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 7 March 1995.
In these proceedings, the plaintiff makes a claim for Common Law damages in respect of an injury that was suffered in the course of his employment and which was the subject of the proceedings brought in the Compensation Court.

The defendant has filed a Defence and Cross-Claim. The Defence, inter alia, pleads the making of an election to claim permanent loss compensation. The
Defence was amended in November 1996.

By Notice of Motion filed on 22 January 1997, the defendant has moved the
Court for summary relief. The evidence offered on the hearing of this application falls within short compass. There are three affidavits relied on by the defendant. The deponents are Vivienne Gail Jones, Robert Geoffrey
Horton and Nardean Mareea Parsons. The plaintiff relies on one affidavit. The deponent is Stephen P. Firth.

I have already recited much of the relevant material to be found in those affidavits. For present purposes, it is not necessary to reproduce other material which may be found in them.

The application for summary relief turns on a question of statutory instruction. The relevant statutory provision is section 151A of the Act.
During the hearing, it was not suggested that other provisions to be found in the Act threw any light on the point to be decided in this case. After the hearing had been concluded, correspondence was forwarded to my Associate which contained comment concerning section 83 of the Act.

Section 83 appears in Division 7 (Payment of benefits) of Part 3 (Compensation - Benefits). It prescribes the manner of payment of compensation (which includes payment by cash or cheque). Subsection (4) contains a deeming provision ("A payment of compensation by post shall be deemed to have been made when the letter is posted").

Subsection (1) of 151A appears in Division 2 of Part 5 (Common Law Remedies).
It provides definitions of "damages" and "permanent loss compensation".
Subsection (2) is in the following terms:- 
A person to whom compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury is not entitled to both: permanent loss compensation in respect of the injury; and damages in respect of the injury from the employer liable to pay that compensation, but is required to elect whether to claim that permanent loss compensation or those damages.

Subsection (3) specifies the manner in which such an election is made. It is in the following terms:- 
The person makes that election: by commencing proceedings in a court to recover those damages or by accepting payment of those damages (in which case the person ceases to be entitled to permanent loss compensation in respect of the injury); or by accepting payment of that permanent loss compensation (in which case the person ceases to be entitled to recover damages in respect of the injury).

The crucial question in this case is whether or not there has been an acceptance of payment of permanent loss compensation within the meaning of subsection (3)(b). Ultimately, this was the only issue argued on the Motion.
On the question, Counsel have made various submissions. The Court has been referred to a number of authorities. The defendant has taken the Court to
Hoover (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Combatti [(1989) 18 NSWLR 235], White v
Elmdene Estates Ltd (1959) 2 All ER 605, Norman & Anor versus Ricketts [1886] 3 Times LR 182, Thairlwall versus The Great Northern Railway Company [(1910) 2 KB 509] and Rhokana Corporation Limited versus Inland Revenue
Commissioners [(1938) AC 380.] The plaintiff has referred the Court to various passages appearing in Mills - Workers Compensation Act, 1987 and to the decision of Davidson J in Vrankic versus Fidax Foundry Pty Limited (14 December ).

The facts themselves are not in dispute. There is dispute as to the conclusions to be drawn from the material placed before the Court.

In response to a written request from the solicitors for the plaintiff, there has been a tender of a cheque in payment of the Award made for permanent loss compensation. The solicitors for the plaintiff have acknowledged receipt of that cheque. Although it was retained for some months, the cheque was not presented for payment. It was subsequently returned to the insurer.

Subsection (2) contains the provision which requires the making of an election to claim one of the two prescribed alternatives ("permanent loss compensation" or "damages"). Subsection (3) enumerates the events, the happening of which constitute the making of such an election.

For present purposes, the making of an election requires both a payment of compensation and an acceptance of that payment (subsection (3)(b)).

What I am asked to decide involves, inter alia, questions of fact. It is trite to say that these are questions which will turn on the particular circumstances of the case before me.

These are not questions that I am asked to decide pursuant to Part 31 of the
Supreme Court Rules. The defendant relies on Part 15 rule 26 and Part 13 rule
During the hearing, it was mentioned to the parties that it may have been more advantageous to them if the questions were dealt with under Part 31.

The summary relief which a Court may grant is a discretionary remedy. There is abundant authority for the proposition that summary relief should only be granted in what has been described as clear cases (Webster versus Lampard <case>; [116 ALR 545).]
The onus rests on the applicant seeking relief.

I am not satisfied that this is one of those clear cases. For that reason alone, I consider that the claim for summary relief fails.

However, in deference to the arguments that have been put, it may be of assistance to the parties if I express my view on the questions that have been argued. In my view, there has not been an acceptance of payment within the meaning of subsection (3)(b).

The manner of payment of benefits adopted in this case was payment by cheque.
At the very least, payment in that manner was nominated by the solicitors for the plaintiff. It was the manner used by the insurer.

The manner in which it was forwarded by the insurer to the plaintiff's solicitors is not established by the evidence. The Court is merely told by Mr
Horton that it was "sent" under cover of a letter.

I am not satisfied that it was "sent" by post. In the circumstances, the deeming provisions of section 83 do not apply.

A cheque is a negotiable instrument. It has a statutory definition. The term "cheque" is defined in section 10 of the Cheques and Payment Orders Act,
The section defines "cheque" as an unconditional order in writing that, inter alia, requires the bank to pay on demand a sum certain in money.

In the circumstances of this case, it seems to me that the defendant will fail to establish the requisite acceptance of payment in the absence of a presentation of the cheque to the bank and a payment by the bank pursuant to the unconditional order.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The defendant is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
