

Filmpot P/L versus Community Services Television Services [1996] NSWSC 301 (26
July 1996) 
FILMPOT PTY LTD versus COMMUNITY SERVICES TELEVISION SERVICES /96 May 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for, inter alia, an injunction calculated to enable the plaintiffs to exercise some contractual rights which they say they have. It may well be that the Australian Broadcasting Authority will wish to make its attitude clear either by appearing when the matter comes on later or by communicating its views to the parties so that either of them can put those views before the court when the matter comes back.

It seems however, at the moment, that the plaintiffs have shown that there is serious question to be determined and that the balance of convenience lies in granting the injunctions sought for a short time. The Courts are sometimes asked to grant injunctions on very short notice, in situations where the evidence is quite incomplete, and this seems to be just such a case.

However, unless the injunctions sought are granted now it may be that the plaintiffs will suffer irreparable harm. I propose therefore, generally speaking, to grant the injunctions sought but invite the Australian
Broadcasting Authority to let its views be known so that the matter can be properly considered by the Court when the case is next before it. It may be that the judge hearing the matter then will consider those views to be significant, perhaps even crucial, to the determination of the dispute.

I note the usual undertakings as to damages given by the plaintiffs by their
Counsel. I note that the plaintiffs are aware that damages may be suffered may involve a loss by Mr Starr, the administrator of Community TV, to procure the implementation of a scheme to enable the unsecured creditors to be paid.

I make orders in terms of paragraph 1 of the notice of motion that I have dated today, I make orders in terms of paragraphs 2 and 3, those orders to remain in force until and including 23 May 1996.

I stand the proceedings over to 23 May before the Duty Judge.

Filmpot Pty Ltd & Anor versus Zelinka & Ors /96 
Friday, 24 May 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs seek an interlocutory injunction, the effect of which would be to enforce the provisions of an agreement dated 28 February 1996, to which the plaintiffs and the defendant Community Television Sydney Limited ("CTS") were parties, by requiring CTS to permit the first plaintiff to transmit television programs of the first plaintiff by means of transmitting equipment of CTS, in respect of which it holds a licence under the [Radiocommunications Act 1992](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ra1992218/).

On 6 May 1996 CTS purported, by letter from its solicitors, to exercise an option "to make the agreement null and void and of no further effect." The plaintiffs assert that CTS had no unilateral right to take that course. This question turns on the true construction of clause 6.1 of the agreement, which is in the following terms: "6.1 The parties acknowledge that CTS holds a licence to transmit on Channel and its repeaters which can be used to provide open narrowcasting for community, educational and non-profit purposes (The "Licence"). At both party's option this broadcast agreement shall become null and void and of no further effect, if the licence is not renewed by the Australian Broadcasting
Authority or the Spectrum Management Agency on or before February 28, 1996 for a period of not less than 12 calendar months." 
It is common ground that the licence in question was not renewed on or before February 1996 for a period of not less than 12 calendar months. The evidence suggests that, in fact, on 28 February 1996 the licence was renewed for the period 29 February 1996 to 1 April 1996, on 1 April 1996, again renewed for the period 2 April 1996 to 7 May 1996, and on 7 May 1996, again renewed for the period 8 May 1996 to 26 July 1996.

In my opinion on the true construction of the agreement, the option referred to in clause 6.1 was exercisable by one party (in the case of the plaintiffs, a group of entities treated as a single party to the agreement) without the concurrence of the other. Although in the abstract the word "both" suggests action by two parties in combination, it is used in this clause, in my view, in a loose sense which contemplates action by either party independently of the other. There are several indications of such usage. One is that otherwise the clause would have no evident purpose. Associated with this is the incongruity of creating a contractual "option" exercisable only by all the parties acting together. A second is the use of the singular "party's" immediately after the word "both". A third is the use elsewhere in the agreement of the word "both" in a context where independent action by each or either party is clearly contemplated, in particular clause 45.1 (and see also clauses 16.1 and 17.1).

Accordingly, on the case as it presently stands, the plaintiffs have not shown that there is a serious question to be tried.

Apart from this, it would appear from the evidence that the use of CTS's television transmitting equipment for the purpose of broadcasting the first plaintiff's programs would be a breach of the conditions of CTS's licence - the relevant condition being in the following terms: "This licence can only be used to provide an open narrowcasting television service for community and educational, non-profit purposes." 
The first plaintiff's broadcasting activities do not appear to be either for community and educational purposes or for non-profit purposes. Furthermore, such use would appear to be in breach of [ss.114](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ra1992218/s114.html) and [115](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ra1992218/s115.html) of the [Radiocommunications Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ra1992218/), read with a determination made under [s.115](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ra1992218/s115.html) entitled "Radiocommunications (Limitation of Authorisation of Third Party
Users) Determination No 1 of 1995".

It is to be inferred from correspondence from the Australian Broadcasting
Authority that CTS's licence may be liable to be cancelled or at least not renewed after 26 July 1996, if its equipment continues to be used for transmitting the first plaintiff's programs at least in their present form.
Notwithstanding the seriously adverse effect which an inability to continue to use CTS's transmitting equipment will have on the plaintiffs' business, and problems which may arise from the actual or potential insolvency of CTS, I would regard the jeopardy to the licence and the apparent illegality arising from the matters last mentioned, as independently justifying refusal of the interlocutory relief sought. Therefore, the application for interlocutory relief is dismissed.

The orders of the Court are as follows: The application for interlocutory injunctions is dismissed.
 Order that the costs of the defendant Community Television Sydney Limited of that application be costs in the cause.
 Order that the proceedings continue on pleadings and that the plaintiffs file and serve a statement of claim within 28 days.
 * * * 
