

Ampolex Ltd versus Perpetual Trustee Co (Canberra) Ltd and Ors [1996] NSWSC 148 (23 May 1996) 
AMPOLEX LTD versus PERPETUAL TRUSTEE COMPANY (CANBERRA) LTD & ORS /95 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Applications to strike out part of the plaintiff's claim pursuant to Part 13 rule 5 and Part 15 rule 26 refused.
 
Consideration of the applicable principles: 
Cox versus Journeaux & Ors <case>; [(1935) 52 CLR 713]; Dey versus Victorian Railway Commissioners <case>; [(1948-1949 78 CLR 62]; General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner of Railways & Ors <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125]; Wickstead & Ors versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR 1] and
Webster & Anor versus Lampard <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598] considered.

Cri de coeur of Rogers CJCommD in AWA versus Daniels & Anor (8 October 1992 - unreported) in relation to the continued operation of the stringent General
Steel test noted.

Requirement to decide factual issues at the conclusion of all the evidence: 
Menzies versus Australian Iron and Steel Limited & Anor <case>; [(1981) 37 ALR 225] applied.

Problems with the construction of the relevant portions of the Corporations
Law relating to insider trading and claims for damages noted: need for a re-consideration of the provisions suggested: p.17.

Causation: Commonsense approach 
March versus E & M.H. Stramare Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1990-1991) 171 CLR 506];
Alexander versus Cambridge Credit Corporation Limited [(1987) 9 NSWLR 310]; Galoo
Limited (in liquidation) & Ors versus Bright Grahame Murray (a firm) &
Anor <case>; [[1994] 1 WLR 1360] and The
Nominal Defendant versus Gandikiotis (High Court of Australia - 24 April 1996 - as yet unreported) applied.

As the commonsense approach demands a determination of a question of fact inappropriate to decide it prior to the conclusion of the evidence.

JUDGMENT ON APPLICATION BY FOURTH, FIFTH AND SIXTH DEFENDANTS TO HAVE THE INSIDER TRADER PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THEM DISMISSED 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By a Notice of Motion filed on 18 April 1996 the fifth defendants, Sir Ronald
Brierley, Dr Weiss and Messrs Loomes and Cureton, for whom Mr J.L. Sher of
Queen's Counsel and Mr L.A. Babb of Counsel appear, sought, relevantly for present purposes, the following orders:- "2. An order pursuant to Part 13 rule 5 that the plaintiff's claim against the fifth defendants based upon paragraphs 19 to 25 (inclusive) of the plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Sixth Amended Further Re-Amended Summons be stayed or dismissed generally as against the fifth defendants on the grounds that those paragraphs disclose no cause of action and/or are frivolous or vexatious and/or are an abuse of the process of the Court.
 . In the alternative to Order 2, an order pursuant to Part 15 rule 26 that paragraphs 19 to 25 (inclusive) of the plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Sixth Amended Further Re-Amended Summons be struck out against the fifth defendants on the grounds that they disclose no reasonable cause of action and/or have a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment and delay in the proceedings and/or are an abuse of the process of the Court.
 . In the further alternative, that judgment be entered for the fifth defendants in respect of the plaintiff's claim against them on the basis that there is no case for them to answer.
 . Costs on an indemnity basis." 
By a Notice of Motion filed on 24 April 1996 County NatWest Securities
Australia Limited and Messrs Thomas and Clayhills, the fourth and sixth defendants respectively, and Calex Nominees Pty Limited, ("Calex"), for which and whom Mr R.V. Gyles of Queen's Counsel, Mr J.L.B. Allsop of Senior Counsel and Mr P.R. Whitford of Counsel appear, sought, relevantly for present purposes, the following orders:- "2. An order pursuant to Part 13 rule 5 that the claims based upon paragraphs 19 to 25 (inclusive) of the plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Summons (as amended) be stayed or dismissed generally as against the sixth defendants on the grounds that those paragraphs disclose no cause of action or are frivolous.
 . In the alternative to Order 1, an order pursuant to Part 15 rule 26 that paragraphs 19 to 25 of the plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Summons (as amended) be struck out as against the sixth defendants on the grounds that they disclose no reasonable cause of action and have a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment and delay in the proceedings.
 . An order pursuant to Part 13 rule 5 that the claims based upon paragraphs 19 to 25 (inclusive) of the plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Summons (as amended) be stayed or dismissed generally as against the fourth defendant on the grounds that those paragraphs disclose no cause of action or are frivolous.
 . In the alternative to Order 3, an order pursuant to Part 15 rule 26 that paragraphs 19 to 25 of the plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Summons (as amended) be struck out as against the fourth defendant on the grounds that they disclose no reasonable cause of action and have a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment and delay in the proceedings.
 . Costs." 
Mr T.F. Bathurst of Queen's Counsel, who appears with Mr D.J. Hammerschlag of
Counsel, for GPG Nominees Pty Limited, ("GPG"), and Allied Mutual Holdings Pty
Limited, ("Allied"), the second and third defendants respectively seeks, relevantly for present purposes, the following orders:- "2. An order pursuant to Part 13 Rule 5 that the Plaintiff's claim against the Second and Third Defendants based upon paragraphs 19 to 21 (inclusive) of the Plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Sixth Amended Further Reamended Summons be stayed or dismissed generally as against the Second and Third Defendants on the grounds that those paragraphs disclose no cause of action and/or are frivolous or vexatious and/or are an abuse of the process of the Court.
 . In the alternative to Order 2, an order pursuant to Part 15 Rule 26 that paragraphs 19 to 21 (inclusive) of the Plaintiff's Contentions in Part C of the Sixth Amended Further Reamended Summons be struck out as against the Second and Third Defendants on the grounds that they disclose no reasonable cause of action and/or have a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment and delay in the proceedings and/or are an abuse of the process of the Court.
 . In the further alternative, that judgment be entered for the Second and Third Defendants in respect of the Plaintiff's claim against them on the basis that there is no case for them to answer.
 . Costs on an indemnity basis." 
The making of these orders was opposed by the plaintiff, Ampolex Limited, ("Ampolex"), for which Mr A.H. Goldberg of Queen's Counsel, Mr F.M. Douglas of
Queen's Counsel, Mr L.S. Einstein of Counsel and Dr I.J. Hardingham of Counsel appear.

Part 13 rule 5 provides:- "5. (1) Where in any proceedings it appears to the Court that in relation to the proceedings generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceedings:- no reasonable cause of action is disclosed; the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious; or the proceedings are an abuse of the process of the Court, the Court may order that the proceedings be stayed or dismissed generally or in relation to any claim for relief in the proceedings.
 
The Court may receive evidence on the hearing of an application for an order under sub-rule (1)." 
Part 15 rule 26 provides:- "26. (1) Where a pleading:- discloses no reasonable cause of action or defence or other case appropriate to the nature of the pleading; has a tendency to cause prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the proceedings; or is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court, the Court may at any stage of the proceedings, on terms, order that the whole or any part of the pleading be struck out.
 
The Court may receive evidence on the hearing of an application for an order under sub-rule (1)." 
The Applicable Principles 
For the purposes of the submissions Part 15 rule 26 has been referred to as "the pleading summons rule", whilst Part 13 rule 5 has been considered as providing a more liberal approach to applications to stay or dismiss. However, the circumstances in which a Court may exercise the powers conferred by these rules and their predecessors and counterparts have been held, over a long period, to be quite restricted: Cox versus Journeaux & Ors <case>; [(1935) 52 CLR 713]; Dey versus Victorian Railway Commissioners <case>; [(1948-1949) 78 CLR 62]; General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner of
Railways & Ors <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125]; Wickstead & Ors versus Browne [(1992) 30 NSWLR 1] and
Webster & Anor versus Lampard <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598.] This is not intended as an exhaustive reference to the authorities. The various descriptions of the type of case that will attract the Court's intervention at a summary stage, as they existed in 1964, were gathered together by Barwick CJ at pp.128-130 of General Steel. His Honour also quoted with approval the summing up of the authorities gathered by Dixon
J in Dey:- "A case must be very clear indeed to justify the summary intervention of the court to prevent a plaintiff submitting his case for determination in the appointed manner by a court with or without a jury. The fact that a transaction is intricate may not disentitle the court to examine a cause of action alleged to grow out of it for the purpose of seeing whether the proceeding amounts to an abuse of process or is vexatious. But once it appears that there is a real question to be determined whether of fact or law and that the rights of the parties depend upon it, then it is not competent for the court to dismiss the action as frivolous and vexatious and an abuse of process." 
Barwick CJ made clear in General Steel that such a conclusion may, in an appropriate case, be reached after argument "perhaps even of an extensive kind ... to demonstrate that the case of the plaintiff is so clearly untenable that it cannot possibly succeed": p.130.

These principles were laid down many years ago although they have been recently repeated. However one may be forgiven for thinking that they did not have their genesis in cases where there were multiple parties with numerous cross-claims and in proceedings estimated to last for many months. One may also be forgiven for thinking that the principles were not formulated against the background of the discrepancy between solicitor/client and party/party costs, which exists to-day.

The generally stated principles have been repeated in cases where, for example, there are issues other than the one the subject of the strike out application to go forward between the parties, e.g. Wickstead, or where there are clearly factual issues to be decided, e.g. Webster versus Lampard.
For present purposes the parties are agreed, and in the face of authorities binding on me the contrary could scarcely have been argued, that the restrictive approach laid down for the application of Rules, which were apparently intended to have a beneficial effect, should be applied. Any thought that the time has come when a relaxation of that approach should be considered, particularly in a case where there may be grave doubt, but not the requisite certainty, about the ability of the party resisting the strike out application to succeed ultimately, and it is clear that that issue will only be resolved after months of very expensive litigation, has been put to rest by recent decisions re-affirming the restrictive approach, e.g. Wickstead and
Webster versus Lampard. If, at some time in the future, it is thought appropriate that there should be a review of this approach, it may be considered in the light of the pressures to which Courts are now subjected to determine cases, as expeditiously and inexpensively as possible in the interests of litigants in the instant case and those waiting to have their cases heard, and the cost burden on parties called on to meet a barely arguable case.

In AWA Limited versus Daniels & Ors (Rogers CJCommD - 8 October 1992 - unreported) it was said:- "It may be as well that there is to-day a need for the Courts to look again at the principle in the General Steel case, an exercise which of course would require the intervention of the High Court. As well the principles on which applications for summary judgments should be approached may require review. The costs of litigation to-day are such that for Courts to expose parties to a barely arguable case may be a worse injustice than to terminate such a case without full examination." 
The decision in Webster versus Lampard, which was given subsequently, re- inforced that the General Steel approach represents the law.

I must also have regard to the principle that, generally speaking, an action will probably not be struck out summarily where there are other matters in dispute between the parties, which must go forward: Wickstead; or where there are disputes between other parties, which will be the subject of evidence, which evidence may inculpate a party, against whom or which there is no evidence when the application is made: Menzies versus Australia Iron and Steel
Limited & Anor [(1952) 52 SR 62], which was approved in Wickstead, and Trade Practices Commission versus Allied
Mills Industries Pty Limited <case>; [(1981) 37 ALR 225.] At p.231 Sheppard J said:- "The usual practice is not to dismiss a case against any respondent at that stage," (i.e. where a case against some but not all respondents has been found) "but only to do that if there is still no case to answer against a respondent at the close of any evidence which may be led by the respondents against whom there is a case ...." 
In the present case the applicants have submitted that the issues raised in paragraphs 19 - 25 are discrete and, for all essential purposes, can be disposed of without affecting the principal issues of construction, amendment of the Trust Deed, rectification and the effect, if any, of rectification on third party rights.

The Pleadings 
To understand the nature of the allegations against the applicants, which they seek to have dismissed, it is necessary to have regard to the pleadings which are attacked and also to the pleadings of the applicants, which seek equitable and discretionary relief the granting of which could, arguably, be affected by the conduct alleged against the applicants.

The current originating process seeks the following relief, which is relevant for present purposes:- "8. A declaration that the: agreement by the Fourth Defendant ('County NatWest') to sell Convertible Notes to GPG or alternatively to GPG and Allied; purchase on 12 April 1995 by Allied of 20,000 Convertible Notes and the purchase by GPG on 24 May 1995 of six million Convertible Notes; agreement by County NatWest to purchase the Convertible Notes so purchased by GPG or alternatively GPG and Allied: was a contravention of s.1002G(2)(a) of the Corporations Law.
 . A declaration that, in contravention of s.1002G(2)(b) of the Corporations Law, County NatWest procured the purchase by GPG and Allied referred to in 8(b).
 . A declaration that, in contravention of s.1002G(2)(b) of the Corporations Law: the fifth defendants (Brierley, Weiss, Loomes and Cureton); and the sixth defendants (Thomas and Clayhills); procured the contraventions of s.1002G(2)(a) referred to in 8.
 . Damages as against GPG, Allied, County NatWest, Brierley, Weiss, Loomes, Cureton, Thomas and Clayhills and each of them:- pursuant to section 1005(1) of the Corporations Law; pursuant to section 1013(5) of the Corporations Law.
 . Orders pursuant to section 1002U of the Corporations Law:- restraining GPG and/or Allied from exercising, accepting or retaining their claimed entitlements to conversions of the Convertible Notes; vesting the Convertible Notes in the Commission.
 
A. A declaration that the arrangement referred to in and particularised under paragraph 23(c) of Ampolex's Contentions was entered into in contravention of section 998(1) of the Corporations Law." 
Paragraph 12B seeks a declaration against, amongst others, County NatWest that it engaged in conduct in contravention of [ss.42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) and 52 of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), and paragraph 12C seeks damages against, inter alia, County NatWest pursuant to [ss.82](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and 58 of the [Fair Trading Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

The allegation of insider trading, which led to the alleged contravention of s.1002G(2)(a), appears in paragraphs 19 to 25 of Ampolex's Contentions. In paragraph 19 it is alleged that GPG, Allied, County NatWest, Sir Ronald
Brierley, Dr Weiss and Messrs Loomes, Cureton, Thomas and Clayhills possessed information that was not generally available within the meaning of s.1002G(1)(a), which is defined, for the purpose of the pleading, as "the
Insider Information", being that:- " (i) clause 3(c) of Schedule Two of the Trust Deed provided for a conversion ratio of the Convertible Notes on a 6.6:1 basis; 
Ampolex was under a serious mistake or misapprehension as to the conversion ratio of the Convertible Notes provided for in clause 3(c) of Schedule Two of the Trust Deed; the perception and understanding in the market and of persons who commonly invested in securities as to the conversion ratio applicable to the Convertible Notes was incorrect; 
GPG and Allied intended: to apply for conversion of their Convertible Notes shortly after their acquisition or alternatively on 25 May 1995 as alleged in paragraph 14 claiming an entitlement to be allotted 6.6 ordinary shares of $0.50 in the capital of Ampolex for each Convertible Note, the subject of their Conversion Notices; and upon lodgment of their Conversion Notices, to inform the ASX and thereby persons who commonly invested in securities that the Convertible Notes were convertible on a 6.6:1 basis; had the Insider Information been generally available a reasonable person would have expected it to have a material effect on the price or value of 'securities' in Ampolex as that term is defined in s.1002A(1) of the Corporations Law, which securities included shares issued by Ampolex and the Convertible Notes; and 
GPG, Allied and County NatWest knew or ought reasonably to have known of the matters alleged in paragraph 19(a) and (b)." 
In paragraph 20 it is pleaded that "in the premises and by virtue of s.1002G(2)(a)" GPG and Allied were prohibited from purchasing or entering into an agreement for the purchase of the Convertible Notes, and, in paragraph 21, that in contravention of that section GPG and Allied purchased them on 24 May 1995 and 12 April 1995 respectively. It is pleaded in paragraph 22 that in the premises and by virtue of s.1002G(2)(a) County NatWest, whether as principal or agent, was prohibited from purchasing or selling or entering into an agreement for the purchase or sale of the Convertible Notes and, in paragraph 23, that prior to the acquisition by GPG and Allied of Convertible Notes County NatWest was aware of the Insider Information; became desirous of taking advantage of it but did not wish to act or do so in its own name in so doing; and accordingly entered into an agreement with GPG or alternatively GPG and Allied to the effect that GPG would become the holder of six million Convertible Notes, that Allied would become the holder of 20,000 Convertible Notes and that:- "immediately following the acquisition of the Convertible Notes by GPG or alternatively GPG and Allied, GPG and Allied would apply for conversion of their Convertible Notes claiming an entitlement to be allotted 6.6 ordinary shares of $0.50 cents in the capital of Ampolex for each Convertible Note and would, at the same time, inform the ASX and thereby persons who commonly invest in securities that the Convertible Notes were convertible on the 6.6:1 basis." 
It is pleaded that the arrangement was that GPG would grant County NatWest an option to purchase the Convertible Notes; that County NatWest would grant GPG a call option to purchase the Convertible Notes; and that any profits arising from the arrangement would be shared between GPG and County NatWest. This arrangement, which is referred to as "the County Arrangement", is pleaded as having been made between January and May 1995 and as evidenced by a written agreement, dated 25 May 1995, signed for and on behalf of County NatWest and GPG; a letter dated 25 May 1995 from Dr Weiss on behalf of Guinness Peat Group plc to Mr Thomas of Calex; a letter dated 25 May 1995 from GPG to the ASX; and a letter dated 25 May 1995 from County NatWest to GPG.

It is pleaded in paragraph 24 that by reason of the foregoing County NatWest agreed to sell Convertible Notes to GPG or alternatively GPG and Allied in contravention of s.1002G(2)(a); and that County NatWest in contravention of s.1002G(2)(b) procured the said contravention by GPG and Allied of s.1002G(2)(a) and agreed to purchase Convertible Notes so purchased by GPG or alternatively GPG and Allied in contravention of s.1002G(2)(a). The particulars furnished under paragraph 23 are repeated.

It is pleaded in paragraph 25 that prior to the acquisition by GPG and Allied of Convertible Notes each of Sir Ronald Brierley, Dr Weiss, and Messrs Loomes,
Cureton, Thomas and Clayhills knew or ought reasonably to have known of the matters alleged in paragraphs 19(a) and (b), and that in contravention of s.1002G(2)(b) they procured the contraventions of s.1002G(2)(a) by County
NatWest alleged in paragraphs 24(a) and 24(c) and the contravention of that section by GPG and Allied alleged in paragraph 21.

County NatWest's Points of Defence, in answer to paragraph 19(a)(iii), state that County NatWest knew the price at which Ampolex shares, Convertible Notes and other securities were traded through ASX or the Options Clearing House at all material times; admit that the prices at which Ampolex shares, Convertible
Notes and other securities were trading in the market were not consistent with an understanding in the market of the conversion ratio being 6.6:1; and otherwise deny the allegations contained in paragraph 19. Thus, inter alia, the making of the agreement and its terms are put in issue. County NatWest also denies the allegations contained in paragraphs 20 to 25 inclusive.

The applicants for whom Mr Sher appears submit that they are entitled to have the insider trading allegations dismissed against them because, so far as they are concerned, it is a separate issue, which is not capable of affecting any other issue between the other parties. A problem with this is the directorships of the second and third defendants held by the fifth defendants.
The problem manifested itself before those defendants brought an application to strike out the subject claims also.

Mr Bathurst's submissions, generally speaking, adopt those of Mr Sher and Mr
Gyles, which rely on the inability of Ampolex to establish that there was insider trading. He expressly conceded:- "It is accepted that the alternative causation argument advanced (by) Mr Sher QC and Mr Gyles QC does not provide an answer to the defence of unconscionability raised by the Plaintiff in its defence to the cross claim brought by GPG and Allied." 
To seek to overcome any such problem so far as his clients are concerned, Mr Gyles filed in Court on 16 May 1996 a Fourth Amended Third Cross Claim and there was no objection raised to this being done. In his written submissions he stated:- "4. The proposed Fourth Amended Third Cross Claim drops all claims for damages or compensation based on the entry into the transaction with GPG and Allied: see paragraphs 21 and 22, now deleted. All causes of action based on the consequences of entering into the May 1995 transaction are abandoned.
 . The only remaining cause of action in which damages are claimed against the plaintiff is a cause of action by County based on misleading and deceptive conduct in 1992: see paragraphs 47 - 55A. No equitable relief sounding in compensation or damages is sought against the plaintiff.
 ...........
 . The insider trading is irrelevant to any claim against the plaintiff by the County interests.
 ..........
 . Thus it cannot be said that County raises the very transaction sought to be impugned by the illegitimate pleading of the insider trading provisions. There is nothing remaining on the pleading of County, Thomas and Clayhills which raises for investigation the facts said to found the insider trading claims." 
In his written response Mr Goldberg drew the distinction between the relief sought against the corporate parties to the May 1995 transactions, and that sought against the individuals. Mr Goldberg relied on the contraventions supporting the claim of lack of clean hands and profiting from one's own wrong; and referred to in his earlier submissions, and to the specific relief claimed under s.1002U for a vesting of the Convertible Notes in the Australian Securities Commission. In this context he referred to the wide discretionary considerations to which the Court may have regard in deciding whether to make such an order.

Although Mr Goldberg relied on paragraph 32L and the claim for relief by way of equitable compensation in paragraph 5 of page 36 in the Fourth Amended
Third Cross Claim, this, so Mr Gyles submitted, arose out of the 1992 events and not the 1995 transaction. None-the-less Mr Goldberg submitted that what occurred in 1995 may be an answer to these claims.

The Issues Raised 
The applicants raise two fundamental reasons for submitting that the "insider trading" claim should be summarily dismissed. Firstly, they assert that on a proper construction of the Corporations Law, ("the Law"), they were not "insiders" or, if they were, they did not engage in insider trading. Secondly, they submit that damages are claimed against them pursuant to ss.1005(1) and (5) but that now, as is the case, Ampolex has abandoned the claim for damages under the latter section. The basal submissions on damages are, firstly, that s.1005(1) does not give a cause of action for loss or damage independent of the other sections in Division 4, but rather that s.1005 gives such a cause of action in combination with other sections, e.g. s.1013(5), which latter section provides the constituent elements of the cause of action and, by reference to other sub-sections of s.1013, the availability of defences and the measure of the loss which may be claimed. Hence, so the submission ran, once it is conceded, as it had to be, that Ampolex could not recover loss or damage for insider trading pursuant to the very section of the
Law which states the circumstances in which damages are recoverable and the measure of them, s.1005(1) has no part to play. Secondly, it was submitted that if s.1005(1) does create a separate cause of action, the loss or damage claimed for contravention of the insider trading provisions is not causally related to any such contravention.

On behalf of Ampolex it was submitted that on a proper construction of the Law the applicants were "insiders" and that once they became insiders they were prohibited from engaging in the pleaded transactions in relation to the
Convertible Notes. Their having done so constituted the contravention, which gives rise to an independent cause of action for loss or damage, which contravention was causative of the loss or damage claimed. These submissions were put in the context of the stringent test applicable to applications of this type and of the fact that the application has been made after the hearing has commenced in circumstances where there will be other claims to be determined against other parties and also County NatWest. However, it must be borne in mind that the applications were on foot and/or foreshadowed before the commencement of the hearing; that they give rise to discrete questions somewhat removed from the central issues for determination; that a claim for relief pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/index.html#p15) [rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s26.html) may be made "at any stage of the proceedings"; and that arguably no further evidence will impact upon their resolution.

I have had the benefit of detailed written and oral submissions, which have been updated from time to time, as I have described. The present estimate of the hearing is from four to six months. If, consistently with the principles to which I have referred and by which I am bound, I can decide these issues now, it seems to me I should do so. I should say that much of the argument has arisen from the drafting of this part of the Law. The problems of construction and interpretation, which it presents, were readily acknowledged by all counsel and it is a matter of concern that legislative provisions, which create serious criminal offences, inter alia, should provide not only difficulties of interpretation because of the language used, but because of apparent internal inconsistencies. I would respectfully suggest that re- consideration be given to these provisions. They are intended to have a beneficial commercial effect. It is unfortunate that they should be couched in language, which is difficult of understanding and application. This may well have the consequence that the intended beneficial effect will not be forthcoming.

The views, which I am about to express, are tentative and based on the submissions made thus far and the evidence presently before me. I express them for the sole purpose of considering the submissions made and for the purpose only of deciding the applications before me. I am not satisfied, for reasons I shall give, that the applications should succeed. Hence, in the fullness of time it will be necessary for me to revisit all these arguments, which I shall then do in the light of all the evidence and the submissions made upon it.

Ampolex's case, on the first aspect, is that the intention to advise the
Australian Stock Exchange, ("ASX"), that an application had been made by GPG to Ampolex to convert certain Convertible Notes at the ratio of 6.6:1 was "information", within the meaning of the Law, which was not generally available, and that had it been generally available a reasonable person would expect that it would or might have a material effect on the price or value of the Convertible Notes. To understand how this submission is put it will be necessary to have regard to the terms of the Law. Before doing so, however, I would observe that the Law does not now require, as I construe it, that an "insider" should have some connection with the company in the sense of being an officer or contractor or employee of it.
 "Information" is defined, inter alia, as a matter relating to "intentions" and "likely intentions" of a person: s.1002A(1). I have stated the intention on which reliance is placed. It was not in issue that this information was not generally available, nor that had it been a possible consequence was that persons, who invest in the market, may be influenced in deciding whether or not to buy and/or sell. On this basis the applicants, arguably, fall within s.1002G(1)(a) in that: they possessed information, i.e. they knew of the intention; the information was not generally available; and had it been, a reasonable person would expect that it would or might have a material effect on the price or value of the securities.

Once it is reasonably arguable, as I consider it is, that the applicants come within s.1002G(1)(a), they become, by force of that section, "insiders".
However, they submitted this was not enough and that s.1002C defines price sensitivity objectively. It states:- "For the purposes of this Division and s.1013, a reasonable person would be taken to expect information to have a material effect on the price or value of securities of a body corporate if the information would, or would be likely to, influence persons who commonly invest in securities in deciding whether or not to subscribe for, buy or sell the first-mentioned securities." 
One must ask whether such a reasonable person would expect that the intention, being an intention of persons who hold a parcel of Convertible Notes, to so advise ASX could or would be likely to influence the designated persons in the way suggested. It was submitted for the applicants that the holding of the intention was not sufficient and that to make them insiders the information of which they were possessed had to affect the market, which could only occur when the intention had been carried into effect by ASX making an announcement to the market. My present view is that that is not the correct analysis and that a person becomes an insider once the terms of s.1002G(1)(a) are met. The section proceeds on the assumption that the information is not known, but had it been it would have had the effect. Section 1002C underscores the requirement that the information must have a certain relevant quality, i.e. be price sensitive, in the manner therein stated. 
I consider that for the purpose of deciding whether a person is an insider three questions must be asked: 
Was there information? 
Was it generally available? 
If it had been generally available would a reasonable person have expected it to have the effect specified? 
As matters presently stand and on the submissions so far made, my prima facie view is that these questions should be answered "Yes", "No" and "Yes" respectively. If that is my ultimate conclusion it would preclude a finding that the applicants are not "insiders". Accordingly, the claims based on their having that character should not be dismissed summarily.

Ampolex submits that once it is established that the applicants are "insiders" the conduct alleged against them in relation to the Convertible Notes constitutes a contravention of s.1002G(2)(a). In my opinion, as matters stand at present, that is arguably correct, subject to the existence of defences.
Subject to such defences, the next question is the loss or damage suffered in consequence of the alleged contravention, it being clear that the contravention is not the conduct, which constitutes one an insider, but the further conduct specified in s.1002G(2) once one is an insider.

Consideration must be given, firstly, to whether s.1002T(2)(b) provides an absolute defence to civil proceedings. It states:- "In a prosecution brought against a person for an offence against sub-section 1002G(2) because the person entered into, or procured another person to enter into, a transaction or agreement at a time when certain information was in the first-mentioned person's possession: .....
 it is a defence if the Court is satisfied that the other party to the transaction or agreement knew, or ought reasonably to have known, of the information before entering into the transaction or agreement." 
The section throws up much of the conceptual difficulty, which the applicants submit is involved in the case of insider trading propounded by Ampolex. The rationale behind the insider trading provisions is said to be that the parties should enter into transactions on a "level playing field" so far, at least, as information is concerned, such that one party should not be disadvantaged in a commercial transaction because he or she was not aware of information which, had it been known, would have influenced the price or value of the security. In the instant case all the parties to the "County Arrangement" had the information, i.e. they knew of the intention. For reasons on which I shall expand this made it impossible for Ampolex to pursue its claim for damages under s.1013(5). But that is not the present point, which is that the knowledge is a defence to a prosecution and, therefore, it is submitted, it must also be a defence to a civil action. 
My prima facie view, at this stage, is that there may be two answers to this submission. Firstly, the right of action under s.1005(1) exists whether or not the person involved in the contravention has been convicted of an offence in respect of it. Accordingly a person may be sued civilly even though he or she has not been tried, or if tried, has not been convicted of an offence to which s.1002T(2)(b) would be, or would have been, a defence. It would be strange, in these circumstances, that if tried the person could avail himself or herself of this defence and could then, in the face of the words of s.1005(1), rely on that defence in civil proceedings. In other words it matters not, for the purposes of proceedings under s.1005(1) whether the person has or has not been convicted of an offence. What I have sought to say is that the reason for the failure to convict may be that the defence under s.1002T(2)(b) may have been utilised successfully in the prosecution. But, as I have sought to say, this would not seem to preclude the bringing of the action pursuant to s.1005(1).

Secondly, s.1013(7) provides a defence to an action brought "in accordance with" s.1013 if the Court is satisfied that the information came into the possession of the person bringing the action "solely as a result of the information having been made known as mentioned in sub-paragraph
B(2)(b)(ii)", i.e.:- "Information is generally available if:- ............
 without limiting the generality of paragraph (a) both the following sub-paragraphs apply: it has been made known in a manner that would, or would be likely to, bring it to the attention of persons who commonly invest in securities of bodies corporate of a kind whose price or value might be affected by the information; and ...." 
This poses a different test from that provided by s.1002T(2)(b). I think the reason probably is that the s.1002T(2)(b) "defence" is already written into sub-ss.(3) and (4), and therefore sub-s.(5) of s.1013, by the words in the first two sub-sections, namely "who did not possess the information". Thus, under those sub-sections, if the seller or buyer respectively did possess the information there is no right of action either under those sub-sections or under the derivative provision of sub-s.(5). This would seem to explain how, in the insider trading context, the "level playing field" concept is held. It would be ridiculous for a person to have a right of action if that person knew what the other party to the transaction knew.

However, that all having been said, it does not, in my opinion, avail the applicants in their submission that s.1002T(2)(b) provides a defence to the civil action. In my opinion the defences to the civil action, certainly of this kind, are provided elsewhere, as I have sought to show, irrespective of the bringing of a prosecution for an offence.

The applicants also placed reliance on ss.1002Q and R. The first provides:- "(1) A body corporate does not contravene sub-section 1002G(2) by entering into a transaction or agreement in relation to securities of another body corporate merely because the first-mentioned body corporate is aware that it proposes to enter into or has previously entered into, one or more transactions or agreements in relation to securities of the other body corporate." 
Section 1002R(1) states:- "Subject to sub-section (2), a person does not contravene sub-section 1002G(2) by entering into a transaction or agreement on behalf of a body corporate in relation to securities of another body corporate merely because the person is aware that the first-mentioned body corporate proposes to enter into, or has previously entered into, one or more transactions or agreements in relation to the securities of the other body corporate." 
I do not consider, as presently advised, that these sections assist the applicants. I have identified the conduct which, in my opinion, arguably makes the applicants insiders. It was the formation of the intention. These sections are speaking about transactions or agreements in relation to securities and, in my view, relate to the intention to acquire or deal in further securities. Basically that would mean the transaction was one of acquisition and disposition of securities and the intention would relate to that. I do not regard the sections, prima facie, as constituting a complete defence to the allegations of insider trading.
 
Do Sections 1005(1) And 1013 Provide For Two Separate Causes Of Action? 
Ampolex submits that each of the sections provides a separate cause or right of action. The applicants submit that s.1005(1) makes clear that there is a right to sue by way of a civil action for loss or damage sustained in contravention of the Law, thus removing any doubt as to the right to sue civilly for breach of the statute; but that the content of the action is to be found in the very express provisions of s.1013, which provides in sub-s.(1) the requirements for insider trading, and, in the event of their being established, the circumstances in which proceedings may be brought "by action under s.1005 against the insider". Prima facie, it seems reasonably clear that an action under s.1005 for breaches of the insider provisions is dependent upon the applicability of s.1013, i.e. upon its providing the constituent elements of the right of action and also the available defences. Of course, if this be so the necessary abandonment of a cause of action under s.1013(5), no doubt for the reason that it could not be established because the provisions of sub-ss.(3) and (4) could not be met, is fatal to the claim for damages under s.1005(1). There is obviously a great degree of incongruity in saying that an action for damages in respect of insider trading cannot go forward because the specifics of that cause of action laid down in the section of the Law dealing with that very matter cannot be established, but that under a very general section that can be done. Of course inherent in saying that is a recognition that the general action may go forward notwithstanding that both parties to the transaction had the knowledge, which in criminal proceedings would be a complete defence, and which, in civil proceedings for damages under the specific section dealing with insider trading, would provide a defence.

The submission demands a close consideration of s.1005(1). Firstly, it is stated to be subject to the following sections of Division 4 in which s.1013 finds itself. Thus, the right to bring the action is made subject, inter alia, to s.1013. It must also be subject to s.1015(1), which provides the amount that a person may recover by action against another person "in the circumstances mentioned in" s.1013. Sections 1013(2), (3), (4) and (5) all provide that proceedings shall be by action under s.1005. Similarly where proceedings may be brought for loss or damage arising from a contravention of the provisions relating to prospectuses they are brought by an action under s.1005 although, as with s.1013, there are sections which lay down the constituent elements and defences to an action in relation to the issue of a prospectus.

My prima facie view is that the meaning to be attributed to the words "subject to the following sections of the Division" is that provided the following sections provide for the recovery of loss or damage by virtue of a contravention, such loss or damage may be recovered by an action, which is sanctioned by s.1005(1). But absent an applicable following section, there is no content or basis for such an action. Similarly the availability of defences provided by s.1013, i.e. one of the "following sections", and also the measure of loss is dictated by reference to those sections.

Secondly, s.1005(1) gives a right of action to "a person". [Section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s85a.html) provides that expressions used to denote a person generally shall include a body corporate. But the sections which follow s.1005(1) draw a clear distinction between a person, who allegedly suffers loss or damage, and the body corporate. Thus s.1013(2) gives a direct right of action to the body corporate and sub-s.(5) gives it a derivative right of action. Although a distinction is drawn in each case between the person and the body corporate in those provisions, it is not to be found in s.1005(1). That may be because it is necessary to delineate by whom the action may be brought and the use of the word "person" to cover both the body corporate and any other person may cause confusion. However, it does show the necessity to distinguish, for the purposes of the right of action, between the body corporate and a person.

I appreciate that the body corporate may bring the action under s.1005, but that is by the authority of s.1013(2) and (5). The distinction is given some point when it is noted that s.1006(2) found it necessary to define the body corporate as a person for the purposes of that section and in relation to its being involved in the contravention there being considered. My present view is that the failure to designate the body corporate as a person, which can bring action under s.1005 save in circumstances where the action is authorised by s.1013, may well militate against the submission for which Ampolex contends.

Thirdly, and to a substantial extent this repeats the matters to which I have referred firstly, it would seem, prima facie, to be very strange if the body corporate could bring an action based on a contravention of the insider provisions, but the party against whom the action was brought could not rely on defences provided by s.1013 or the limitation of liability provided by the measure of loss specified in s.1013 and s.1015.

Fourthly, it is clear that one can only bring an action under s.1013 via s.1005(1), which supports the view that that section is the procedural vehicle, rather than the provider of substantive rights.

Ampolex responds that on a proper construction of the Law the right of action in s.1005(1) is truly separate from that in s.1013. Firstly, Mr Goldberg points to s.1005(2), which provides for an action under ss.1005(1) or 1013(5), (but strangely not under the other sub-sections), to be brought within six years of its arising. This points, he submits, to each giving rise to a separate cause of action. I do not think one can say that s.1005(1) may not be capable of providing a cause of action in certain circumstances and, if it does, then the action is to be brought within the time specified. However, it may not be that that means "any cause of action" whether sanctioned by subsequent sections of Division 4 or not.

Secondly, Ampolex places reliance on s.1013(9):- "Any right of action that a person has by virtue of this section is in addition to any right that any other person has under Section 1005." 
It submits that this is drawing a distinction between a right of action conferred upon a person by s.1013, e.g. a person or the body corporate, on the one hand, and a right of action under s.1005 that any other person may have, on the other. The potential problem with this submission is, and Mr Sher relied on this, that it presupposes that "any other person" has a right of action, i.e. any person other than the person or body corporate mentioned in s.1013, and it makes the right of action thereby given additional to a general right of action under s.1005. The meaning as to what the second mentioned right of action is is obscure. What is not obscure is that it is one which any other person has and, as I have said, that must mean any person other than one having a right of action under s.1013, which includes the body corporate. 
If a firm conclusion is reached that ss.1005(1) and 1013 must be read together, in the sense that before an action can be brought under s.1005 for contravention of the insider trading provisions it must be established that the requirements of s.1013 for the bringing of such an action have been established, that would entail bringing into an action brought by way of s.1005 the constituent elements of the claim, the defences and the measure of loss or damage, which s.1013 make available. If that is correct Ampolex's abandonment of its claim for damages under s.1013(5) would be fatal to its claim for damages under s.1005(1). A question I will have to answer at the end of the case is whether that is the correct approach.

Causation 
A consideration of causation is assisted by remembering the ways in which
Ampolex puts its case. Firstly, it submits that on a proper construction of
Clause 3(c) of Schedule Two, as it appeared originally, and viewed against the matrix of mutually known facts, the clause provides for a conversion ratio of :1 rather than 6.6:1. If that be correct Ampolex will be essentially successfully in the litigation. Secondly, it submits that when the potential problems with the interpretation of Clause 3(c) were drawn to its attention, it had the matter corrected by Supplemental Deed No 2, which was entered into in November 1992. There can be no doubt that the amendment effected by that
Deed provides for a conversion ratio of 1:1. The issue, in essence, is whether the amendment arose from a valid exercise of power to amend the Trust Deed, or whether the amendment was such as required the approval of Noteholders, which was never sought. If that issue is answered favourably to Ampolex it will be essentially successful in the litigation. Thirdly, it submits that if the first two points are decided adversely to it, it is entitled to have the original Trust Deed rectified to give effect to the common intention of the original contracting parties, which it asserts was that there should be a conversion ratio of 1:1. This issue involves issues of fact, a principal one being whether there was a common intention of the type for which Ampolex contends, and, also, many issues of discretion. Further there is a separate issue as to whether, if rectification is granted, the Trust Deed as rectified will bind the Noteholders, who and which bought on the market after the
Convertible Notes were listed in October 1991. This raises additional questions as to the meaning to be attributed to Clauses 3(d) and 4(a) of
Schedule Three which, prima facie, suggest that Noteholders take free from any equity, set-off or cross-claim of Ampolex against the transferor, and that
Ampolex will treat the registered holders of Notes as absolute owners thereof and, save in the circumstances stated, not to be obliged to take with notice of any trust or equity affecting the ownership of the Notes or the rights incidental thereto.

Once the issues are appreciated it would seem, at this stage, that if Ampolex is obliged to convert each Convertible Note into 6.6 shares that will be because: on a proper construction of Clause 3(c) that was the contractual obligation into which it entered; or if the first question is answered adversely to it, when it learned of the interpretation difficulties it did not take the necessary steps to correct the situation; or if both these questions are answered adversely to it, it is not entitled to rectification or, if it is, rectification is not available against subsequent Noteholders.

If this analysis be correct it accommodates the circumstances in which Ampolex may suffer damage. When one asks what, as a matter of commonsense, was causative of any damage Ampolex may sustain it seems to me, as matters presently stand, that the answers are, firstly, its failure to provide a clause which on its proper construction provided for a 1:1 conversion ratio; secondly, its failure to correct the clause properly to provide for a 1:1 conversion ratio when it was able to do so after the difficulty was drawn to its intention; thirdly, its disentitlement to rectification, which may flow from the absence of the common intention, or from the available equitable defences; and, fourthly, from the inability to bind the subsequent Noteholders by any such rectification.

I repeat that in looking at the matter, for the moment, to seek to determine the possible reasons why Ampolex may fail in the litigation and thus suffer damage, I am not expressing or to be taken as expressing any view as to whether Ampolex will be successful or not on any of these points. The important point, on that analysis, is that it will be arguable that if Ampolex does fail, in the end, it will be because the conversion ratio is not 1:1, but .6:1. At one stage Mr Goldberg suggested the conversion clause may have no meaning, but he has abandoned this submission, and the competing interpretation arguments are whether that clause provides for a conversion on the basis of 1:1 or of 6.6:1.

In these circumstances the applicants submit that at the most the purchase of the Convertible Notes provided the occasion to enable them to assert the conversion ratio for which they contend, and that if they are correct the obligation of Ampolex to convert at that rate, and any loss Ampolex may suffer in consequence thereof, will be caused not by any wrongful act of theirs, but by the provision by Ampolex of a conversion ratio of 6.6:1 and by the failures on the part of Ampolex, which has placed and left in circulation the
Convertible Notes, to provide a conversion ratio of 1:1 or to establish an entitlement to convert at that ratio. In these circumstances the applicants submit that there is no causal connection between the acquisition of the
Convertible Notes, which is the conduct constituting the contravention, and the loss or damages claimed when one has regard to the principles determining causation.

The loss or damage for which Ampolex sues is identified as:- the contingent liabilities for which it is sued in the proceedings pursuant to the first cross-claim (as amended), the third cross-claim (as amended), the seventh cross-claim (as amended), the eighth cross-claim and any consequential claims; legal fees incurred by it in the proceedings as a plaintiff and cross- defendant; if it is obliged to convert the Convertible Notes at a conversion ratio of .6:1, the sum representing the value Ampolex would have received for 5.6 shares in respect of each Note converted; and the amount for which Ampolex is obliged to indemnify Perpetual in connection with the subject matter of the proceedings in accordance with
Clause 17 of the Trust Deed.

The contingent liabilities are stated, in the written submissions, to be many and various, and to depend on a number of permutations and combinations. They are said to include liability for damages for breach of covenant contained in
General Condition 3(d) of Schedule Three; for knowingly participating in and procuring breaches of duty by Perpetual; for misleading and deceptive conduct in representing and holding out that the Notes were convertible on the basis of Special Condition 3(c) as originally drawn and in relation to Supplemental
Deed No 2 for breach of Listing Rule 3A(1); and for liability to contribute in respect of claims made against ASX by GPG/Allied, County NatWest and
Perpetual.

The essential question, on the assumption that s.1005(1) gives a right of action more extensive than that provided in s.1013(5), is, as I have said, whether there is any causal connection between the contravention of the insider trading provisions and the loss which is alleged. The applicants argue that if there was a contravention of the insider trading provisions that did not cause any of the loss alleged, on the ground that such loss was sustained solely by virtue of a failure to be able to convert at the rate of 1:1, rather than 6.6:1. Prima facie there is force in this submission.

Ampolex's submission is cast thus:- "36. Whichever test is adopted the relevant causal link can be established in the present case. But for County NatWest's and the fifth and sixth defendants' conduct in breach of s.1002G(2), the loss and damage referred to above - the loss and expense and potential for liability and loss associated with the proceedings - would never have been suffered. As a matter of commonsense and experience this is clearly so. If GPG/Allied had not purchased the Notes from County NatWest and the individuals not procured that sale and purchase then GPG/Allied would not have sought conversion of the Notes from Ampolex. This current issue involving GPG/Allied would never have arisen." 
The tests to which reference is made are the "but for" and the "commonsense" tests. The submission says nothing about what other Noteholders may have done on becoming aware of the potential submission that the correct conversion ratio was 6.6:1, whether they became aware of that before or after the transaction into which GPG and Allied entered. There is evidence before me that quite apart from the view taken by GPG and Allied questions were being raised by other people in the market as to whether the correct conversion ratio was 6.6:1 rather than 1:1. It also overlooks the position if GPG and/or Allied had abandoned the intention to give notice to ASX and it does not address the obligation which, in any event, was imposed on Ampolex to advise ASX. Finally, the concluding sentence implies that whilst the current issue involving GPG and Allied "would never have arisen" or, perhaps more accurately, "might never have arisen", a problem may have arisen with other Noteholders. 
These considerations simply point up the fact that at some stage, having regard to the questions which were being raised in the market, Ampolex may have been forced to confront this present problem in any event. That is relevant from the point of view of determining what, looked at from a commonsense point of view, is the cause of the difficulties, if there be difficulties, which Ampolex may confront. It is not the fact that GPG and
Allied and County NatWest purchased Convertible Notes with a certain intention, assuming for the moment as I think I must on the evidence presently available that such a finding may be made, but that as a matter of law the conversion ratio, which was created by the contractual provisions into which
Ampolex entered, and which was not amended when Ampolex had the opportunity to do so, was 6.6:1 rather than 1:1.

The applicants submit that none of the losses for which Ampolex sues "could possibly have been caused by the insider trading information". The central submission is that applying the commonsense test of causation none of the losses are causally related to the acquisition of the Convertible Notes and that it is only by resort to an extreme manifestation of the "but for" test, which is not permissible, that it can be said that that conduct caused the loss.

In March versus E. & M.H. Stramare Pty Limited & Anor <case>; [(1990-1991) 171 CLR 506] the
High Court considered in detail the principles applicable to causation. Their
Honours recognised that a person may be responsible for damage when his or her wrongful conduct is one of a number of conditions sufficient to produce the damage. However, that having been accepted, the Court held that a decision as to what is the cause of a particular occurrence requires a determination of a question of fact, "which 'must be determined by applying commonsense to the facts of each particular case'": per Mason CJ at p.515.

At pp.516-517 his Honour, in considering the "but for" test, said:- "The cases demonstrate the lesson of experience, namely, that the test, applied as an exclusive criterion of causation, yields unacceptable results and that the results which it yields must be tempered by the making of value judgments and the infusion of policy considerations. That in itself is something of an irony because the proponents of the "but for" test have seen it as a criterion which would exclude the making of value judgments and evaluating considerations from causation analysis ..." 
At p.523 Deane J said:- "Thirdly, the mere fact that something constitutes an essential condition (in the 'but for' sense) of an occurrence does not mean that, for the purposes of ascribing responsibility or fault, it is properly to be seen as a 'cause' of that occurrence as a matter of either ordinary language or commonsense. Thus, it could not, as a matter of ordinary language, be said that the fact that a person had a head was a 'cause' of his being decapitated by a negligently wielded sword notwithstanding that possession of a head is the essential pre-condition of decapitation. Again, the mere fact that a person makes a gift of money to another is not, in any real sense, a 'cause' of the damage sustained by that other person when his agent negligently loses the money notwithstanding that the loss would not have occurred 'but for' the original gift." 
At p.524 his Honour continued:- "It is true that, in the context of apportionment legislation which gives the latitude necessary to enable the relief to be fairly adjusted to fit the circumstances, the courts will be unlikely to deny causation in any case where the fault of a defendant contributed to an accident. Nonetheless, the question whether conduct is a 'cause' of injury remains to be determined by a value judgment involving ordinary notions of language and commonsense." 
At p.524 Toohey J said:- "In particular, I share the Chief Justice's view that the 'but for' or 'causa sine qua non' test is not and should not be a definitive test of causation where negligence is alleged. The limitations of the test, particularly where there are two or more acts or events, each of which would be sufficient to bring about the plaintiff's injury, or where a defendant seeks to rely upon a 'supervening cause' or 'novus actus interveniens', are apparent. 
Where negligence is in issue, causation is essentially a question of fact, in the sense explained by the Chief Justice, into which considerations of policy and value judgments necessarily enter." 
Gaudron J agreed with the judgments of Mason CJ and Deane J.

McHugh J said, at pp.530-531:- "But when the damage suffered by a plaintiff would not have occurred but for negligence on the part of both the plaintiff and the defendant, a conclusion that the defendant's negligence was not a cause of the damage cannot be based on logic or be the product of the application of a scientific or philosophical theory of causation. It has to be based upon a rule that enables the tribunal of fact to make a value judgment that in the circumstances legal responsibility did not attach to the defendant even though his or her act or omission was a necessary pre-condition of the occurrence of the damage.
 
Whatever label is given to such a rule - 'commonsense principles', 'foreseeability', 'novus actus interveniens', 'effective cause', 'real and efficient cause', 'direct cause', 'proximate cause' and so on - the reality is that such a limiting rule is the product of a policy choice that legal liability is not to attach to an act or omission which is outside the scope of that rule even though the act or omission was a necessary pre-condition of the occurrence of damage to the plaintiff. That is to say, such a rule is concerned only with the question whether a person should be held responsible for an act or omission which ex hypothesi was necessarily one of the sum of conditions or relations which produced the damage." 
His Honour referred to the way in which the "but for" test was applied in Alexander versus Cambridge Credit Corporation Limited [(1987) 9 NSWLR 310.] The Court of Appeal held that even though the company could not have continued to trade "but for" the auditor's certificate, none-the-less the trading losses were not caused by the issue of that certificate but by the fact that trading continued and losses were suffered. In so doing "the commonsense approach" was applied.

The circumstances in the case before me seem, at this stage and prima facie, stronger than those suggested in March. One has to find conduct, which contributed to the loss. In the present case GPG and Allied purchased
Convertible Notes and then applied to have them converted at a rate, which they assert is the contractual rate of conversion. The only way in which it is suggested those companies engaged in a wrongful act was by the route to which
I have referred. But, having acquired the Convertible Notes they could hardly be said to be engaging in a wrongful act by seeking to have them converted at the rate which may, on a final analysis of the case, be held to be the appropriate rate. In making these assumptions I am not, and I am not to be taken to be, expressing any view as to how the question of construction will be resolved. I am dealing with the matter on one of a number of possible hypotheses.

March was expressly followed by the English Court of Appeal in Galoo Limited (In Liquidation) & Ors versus Bright Grahame Murray (a Firm) & Anor <case>; [[1994] 1 WLR 1360.] That was a claim by the liquidator of a company against its former auditors. Glidewell LJ, who delivered the principal judgment, referred to the English decisions on causation and to the decisions in Alexander and March. His Lordship noted that in Alexander all of the members of the Court of Appeal considered the "but for" test was not enough: p.1373. At p.1374 he posed for himself the question:- "How does the Court decide whether the breach of duty was the cause of the loss or merely the occasion for the loss?", which he answered at pp.1374-1375 thus:- "The answer in my judgment is supplied by the Australian decisions to which I have referred, which I hold to represent the law of England as well as of Australia, in relation to a breach of duty imposed on a defendant either by contract or in tort in a situation analogous to breach of contract. The answer in the end is 'By the application of the Court's commonsense'.
 
Doing my best to apply this test, I have no doubt that the Deputy Judge arrived at a correct conclusion on this issue. The breach of duty by the defendants gave the opportunity to Galoo and Gamine to incur and to continue to incur trading losses; it did not cause those trading losses, in the sense in which the word 'cause' is used in law." 
Evans and Waite LJJ agreed with his Lordship.

If I may return to the passage I have just quoted from his Lordship's judgment it seems to me, as matters presently stand, that the most the purchase of the
Convertible Notes, in circumstances which for present purposes I assume constituted a contravention, achieved was to give the opportunity or present the occasion to convert at the ratio of 6.6:1. But if there is an entitlement to have conversion at that ratio it is arguable that it will flow not from anything the applicants did, other than to seek to exercise legal rights as they perceived them, but from the provision by Ampolex of such a conversion ratio and the inability of Ampolex to establish a conversion ratio of 1:1. The ascendancy and application of the commonsense approach was reinforced by the
High Court's decision in The Nominal Defendant versus Gandikiotis (unreported: April 1996).

Once this is understood it is, prima facie, arguable that all the damages and loss for which Ampolex seeks to make the applicants responsible is not causally related to any conduct on the part of the applicants. However, it is desirable to look at the claims made.

The first cross-claims of GPG and Allied seek to propound an entitlement to have the shares converted at 6.6:1 and do not rely in any way on insider trading. The same applies in relation to County NatWest's cross-claim.
Perpetual's cross-claim is one for relief based on s.85 of the [Trustee
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta122/) and the cross- claim of Mallesons Stephen Jaques seeks declaratory relief as to the ability of Perpetual to amend the Trust Deed as was purportedly done by Supplemental
Deed No 2. These cross-claims, on analysis, stem not from the contravention of the Law, but from the terms of Clause 3(c), the uncertainty surrounding its construction and the desire to ascertain its true meaning and whether, if the meaning is other than 1:1, that can be corrected by amendment or rectification.

In my opinion all the cross-claims arise from the uncertainty surrounding the conversion ratio and, accordingly, any contingent liabilities pursuant to those cross-claims are, arguably, not causally related to the allegations of insider trading.

The submission of the applicants that the claim for legal fees is misconceived is, prima facie, convincing, in that the legal fees cannot, as a matter of commonsense, be said to be loss or damage flowing from insider trading, but rather from the necessity on the part of Ampolex to have a determination as to the conversion ratio. Ampolex is now the only party alleging insider trading and if it is successful in those assertions and the consequences said to flow therefrom it will receive its costs. If it fails it will be obliged to pay the costs, at least for that part of the proceedings.

The third claim seeks to recover the amount Ampolex would have received for .6 shares if it is not required to transfer them for each Note converted.
However, the obligation to provide 6.6 shares for every one Note will flow, so the submission ran, not from any insider trading, but from the contractual obligation binding upon Ampolex.

Finally there is a claim based upon the obligation to indemnify Perpetual pursuant to Clause 17. That indemnification extends:- ".. against all liabilities and expenses properly incurred in the execution or purported execution of the trusts hereof or the exercise or attempted exercise of any of the powers authorities or discretions conferred by this Deed on the Trustee and against all actions proceedings costs (including solicitor and own client as well as party and party costs) claims demands in respect of any act matter or thing done or omitted in any way relating to the powers authorities and discretions conferred by this Deed on the Trustee ..." 
Once again it seems to me arguable that any indemnification of Perpetual pursuant to that clause arises not from any allegation of insider trading, but from the problems concerning the conversion ratio.

In these circumstances there are available, on the present state of the evidence, quite cogent arguments that there is no causal relationship between the allegations of insider trading and the contravention of the insider trading provisions and the losses claimed. However, it is clear that the commonsense approach demands a factual finding and the authorities support the view that that should be made at the conclusion of all the evidence.

Should The Orders Sought By The Applicants Be Made? 
In Ampolex Limited versus Perpetual Trustee Company (Canberra) Limited & Ors [(1995) 18 ACSR 218] at pp.222-3, Giles CJCommD was considering the amendment to the Summons to raise the insider trading allegations. His Honour was not persuaded that the case as outlined could be put aside as a "weak case" and he noted that none of GPG, Allied or County NatWest and its officers, suggested "that the case outlined was demonstrably untenable", but that "it was a weak case, and that as a weak case should command less foundation for amendment". He continued:- "I am unable to agree. It seems to me that if there is a case, even assuming that it is a weak case, it is a case which ought to be permitted to go to trial, and ought to be permitted to go to trial together with the questions already raised in the proceedings so that all matters bearing on the status of the Notes held by GPG and Allied are determined together and finally." 
I was also referred to what I said on 23 April 1996, namely that the question whether the conduct constituted insider trading was a "very serious issue in this case".

The views I have expressed in these reasons are prima facie ones based on the material presently before me. They have been stated solely for the purpose of considering the applicants' application. I have come to the conclusion that it cannot be said, with the certainty required by the authorities, that the insider trading claims will not, at the end of the long litigious day, be successful and have significance to the final result as between Ampolex, on the one hand, and the second, third, fourth and sixth defendants, on the other. Whether this is so will depend on the issues remaining for decision, an evaluation of all the evidence and final submissions.

Irrespective of the outcome of the arguments about whether there was insider trading and whether section 1005(1) gives a separate cause of action, Ampolex may have difficulty in establishing a causal connection between the breach of the insider trading provisions alleged and the damages sought to be recovered.
However, the causal relationship is dependent on a factual finding and, as I have said, that should await the conclusion of the evidence. In the light of all the evidence the correct finding may be that there is such a relationship.
But if I were to give effect to the view that the difficulty justifies making the orders the applicants seek, so far as the second, third, fourth and sixth defendants are concerned, I would dismiss the claims against them based on insider trading, which would mean, as I understand it, that Ampolex could not rely on those breaches in the way for which it contends. I do not think that result should, conformably with authority, be reached at this stage.

The position of the fifth defendants may be thought to be somewhat different.
The only relief sought against them is damages, and it is not suggested that the allegation that they have engaged in insider trading will reflect on any other claim or defence made against or by them. I must decide, therefore, whether it is appropriate to form a concluded view on causation at this stage.
If I were to do that I would dismiss the insider trading claims against them.
There are two related matters which lead me to the conclusion that I should not. Firstly, I must have regard to the principle in Menzies versus Australian
Iron and Steel. It may be, and I cannot rule out the possibility with the certainty which is required, that further evidence will establish a causal link. In those circumstances I consider I should leave this claim on foot until the conclusion of all the evidence. Secondly, whether there is a causal link depends on a finding of fact and Ampolex should not be precluded from having all the facts decided before a conclusion on this point is reached. As
I have said on numerous occasions the prima facie views I have formed for the purpose of resolving these applications may require substantial reconsideration in the light of all the evidence and the final submissions thereon.

Orders 
I order that the Notices of Motion brought by the fifth defendants on 18 April , the fourth and sixth defendants on 24 April 1996 and the second and third defendants on 7 May 1996 be dismissed.

I reserve the question of the costs of the applications.
 * * * 
