

Phillips versus Newcastle Permanent Custodians Pty Limited Matter No 2943/98 [1998] NSWSC 519 (9 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 November 1998 
PHILLIPS versus NEWCASTLE PERMANENT CUSTODIANS PTY LIMITED /98 July 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
FILE NO: 2943/98 
DELIVERED: 9 July 1998 (Ex tempore) 
HEARING DATE: 9 July 1998 
PARTIES: Phillips versus Newcastle Permanent Custodians Pty Limited 
JUDGMENT OF: Hodgson CJ in Eq 
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: Ms Holt nd and 3rd Defendants: Mr Thangaraj 
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: Brian Arkell, Swansea 
First Defendant: Mr D Maxwell (Submitting Appearance), Solomon Garland Partners, Sydney nd and 3rd Defendants: Aubrey Brown Partners, Toukley 
CATCHWORDS: 
Social Security - Superannuation 
Trust deed of superannuation scheme defines "dependant" to exclude member's children by marriage unless they are financially dependant, and authorised trustee to comply with requirements of the Superannuation Law, including the
Superannuation Industries Supervision Act 1993 - Section 10 of that Act defines "dependant" to include any child, and s.62 requires fund to be maintained solely for one or more of a number of purposes, one of which was provision of benefits to dependants - Held that in providing benefits for dependants, trustee could provide for the member's children by marriage who were not financially dependent.

Superannuation Industries Supervision Act 1993, ss.10, 62.

PHILLIPS versus NEWCASTLE PERMANENT CUSTODIANS PTY LIMITED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I am dealing with an application by Gregory Phillips and Karen Hoffman to be joined as defendants in these proceedings. They are the adult children of the late Steven Phillips, who died intestate on 13th November 1996. The plaintiff in these proceedings is the widow of the deceased, who married him in 1990. The deceased was a member of a superannuation scheme administered by the defendant Newcastle Permanent Custodians Pty. Limited. At the time of his death, there were funds held for the deceased in that scheme in an amount of a little over $100,000.00. The defendant has made a decision that those funds should be distributed as to 60% to the plaintiff and as to 20% each to the two applicants. 
In these proceedings, the plaintiff seeks a declaration that that distribution is void, and an order that the whole amount of the funds be paid to the plaintiff.

The plaintiff has resisted this application by the adult children of the deceased to be joined in these proceedings, on two grounds. The first ground is that it is submitted that they are not dependants within the meaning of the trust deed that governs the administration of the fund, and that therefore their participation in the proceedings could not have any utility; and the second ground is that it will be for the trustee to put up what submissions should be put up against the plaintiff's case, and that the involvement of the applicants would only increase the costs to no good purpose.

The first point has been fully argued before me between the plaintiff and the applicants, and I have come to a view of it favourable to the applicants. The defendant was not in a position to argue the matter today; but has indicated that since my decision is favourable to the applicants, it will not seek an adjournment to argue this matter. I should add that both the applicants and the defendant say also that, if my decision concerning the interpretation of the deed was unfavourable to the applicants, they would seek alternative relief by way of rectification of the deed.

The point which has been argued arises from the definition of "dependant" in the trust deed, which is in the following terms:- "Dependant" in respect of any person means: any adopted or step-child or ex-nuptial child of the person; any other person who, whether or not legally married to the person, lives with the person on a genuine domestic basis as the husband or wife of the person; and any person who in the opinion of the Trustee is or was at the relevant time wholly or partially financially dependent upon the person.

The plaintiff's contention is that, since the applicants are the children of a marriage of the deceased, they do not fall within par.(a) of that definition; and since they were not, at the time of the death or now, wholly or partially financially dependent upon the deceased, neither do they fall within par.(c) of that definition.

The relevant power in the trustee to distribute benefits is contained in cl.4.11.1 of the deed, which is in the following terms:- 
If a Participant or Member entitled to a Benefit other than an allocated pension dies before receiving the whole of the Benefit the Trustee must pay the balance of any Benefit to one or more of their: 
Dependants; and legal personal representative, in proportions which the Trustee decides. The Trustee may determine that a Benefit be paid as a lump sum, pension or in any other form, as it considers appropriate.

It is then submitted for the plaintiff that, since the adult children are neither the dependants nor the legal personal representatives of the deceased, they do not fall within that provision. Since the plaintiff does fall within par.(b) of the definition of "dependant", she does qualify under cl.4.11.1; and therefore there is no room for the operation of any other provision under which the trustee could distribute benefits.

For the applicants, in addition to submissions on interpretation to which I will return, reliance has been placed on cl.1.3.1 of the deed, which is in the following terms: 
The Trustee may comply with any requirement of Superannuation Law notwithstanding that: compliance with the requirement conflicts with an express provision of this Deed; and the requirement is not required to be included in this Deed.

Combined with this, the applicants have relied on the definition of "dependant" in s.10 of the Superannuation Industries Supervision Act 1993, and the definition of "child" in that section. The applicants also rely on s.62 of that Act. Those provisions are as follows: "child", in relation to a person, includes an adopted child, a step-child or an ex-nuptial child of the person "dependant", in relation to a person, includes the spouse and any child of the person (1) The trustee of a regulated superannuation fund must ensure that the fund is maintained solely: for one or more of the following purposes (the "core purposes"): the provision of benefits for each member of the fund on or after the member's retirement from any business, trade, profession, vocation, calling, occupation or employment in which the member is engaged (whether the member's retirement occurred before, or occurred after, the member joined the fund); the provision of benefits for each member of the fund on or after the member's attainment of an age not less than the age specified in the regulations; the provision of benefits for each member of the fund on or after whichever is the earlier of: the member's retirement from any business, trade, profession, vocation, calling, occupation or employment in which the member was engaged; or the member's attainment of an age not less than the age prescribed for the purposes of subparagraph (ii); the provision of benefits in respect of each member of the fund on or after the member's death, if: the death occurred before the member's retirement from any business, trade profession, vocation, calling, occupation or employment in which the member was engaged; and the benefits are provided to the member's legal personal representative, to any or all of the member's dependants, or to both: the provision of benefits in respect of each member of the fund on or after the member's death, if: the death occurred before the member attained the age prescribed for the purposes of subparagraph (ii); and the benefits are provided to the member's legal personal representative, to any or all of the member's dependants, or to both; or for one or more of the core purpose and for one or more of the following purposes (the "ancillary purposes"): the provision of benefits for each member of the fund on or after the termination of the member's employment with an employer who had, or any of whose associates had, at any time, contributed to the fund in relation to the member; the provision of benefits for each member of the fund on or after the member's cessation of work, if the work was for gain or reward in any business, trade, profession, vocation, calling, occupation or employment in which the member was engaged and the cessation is on account of ill-health (whether physical or mental); the provision of benefits in respect of each member of the fund on or after the member's death, if: the death occurred after the member's retirement from any business, trade, profession, vocation, calling, occupation or employment in which the member was engaged (whether the member's retirement occurred before, or occurred after, the member joined the fund); and the benefits are provided to the member's legal personal representative, to any or all of the member's dependants, or to both; the provision of benefits in respect of each member of the fund on or after the member's death, if: the death occurred after the member attained the age prescribed for the purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii); and the benefits are provided to the member's legal personal representative, to any or all of the member's dependants, or to both; the provision of such other benefits as the Commissioner approves in writing.

Subsection (1) does not imply that the trustee of a regulated superannuation fund is required to maintain the fund so that the same kind of benefits will be provided: to each member of the fund; or in respect of each member of the fund.

Subsection (1) is a civil penalty provision as defined by section 193, and Part 21 therefore provides for civil and criminal consequences of contravening, or of being involved in a contravention of, that subsection.

An approval given by the Commissioner for the purposes of subsection (1) may be expressed to relate to: a specified fund; or a specified class of funds.

Mr. Thangaraj for the applicants has provided a written outline of submissions, which I will leave with the papers. He pointed out that it did not make any sense at all that the deed should include, as "dependants", adopted children, step-children and ex-nuptial children, yet not include children of the deceased of a marriage of the deceased. He submitted that to avoid an absurd result, the Court, if possible, should construe the definition so that it did not disadvantage the children of the marriage as against those other classes of children. He submitted that this result was achieved, because par.(c) of the definition on its correct construction meant that there was included within that paragraph any person who, at any time, was wholly or partially financially dependant upon the deceased; and that would in almost all cases include the children of a marriage. He submitted that the words in that paragraph "at the relevant time" related to the time when the opinion of the trustee had been formed, so that the only words which fixed the time at which there needed to be dependants were the words "is" or "was".

He submitted that this was confirmed because of the plain intention of the deed that it should be in conformity with the Superannuation Law, which words are defined in the Act to include the Superannuation Industries Supervision
Act. The definition in that Act made it clear that "dependants" included children of the deceased, whether they be children of a marriage or any other of the classes of children.

In my opinion, the grammar in par.3 too strongly suggests that the words "at the relevant time" qualify the word "was", to allow for that interpretation.
In its application to the provision of benefits after death to dependants of a member of the scheme, it seems to me that the relevant time must be the time of death; so that the dependency to which the opinion of the trustee must relate is, in my opinion, dependency which can be seen to exist in some way at the time of the opinion, or else at the time of death.

As submitted by Ms. Holt for the plaintiff, it seems to me that that view is to some extent confirmed by provision of the Income Tax Assessment Act s.27A and s.27AAA, which provide certain tax concessions to dependants in relation to superannuation payments, making it clear that the dependency must be at the date of death.

I should note also that Mr. Thangaraj relied on an application form signed by the deceased, which referred to the trustee's option of paying a benefit to dependants after death of the member, and which also noted that dependant "means the spouse and any child of a participant or member and any person who in the opinion of the Trustee is or was at the relevant time wholly or partially financially dependent upon the participant or member". It seems to me that that document cannot affect the interpretation of the deed; although it could be a factor if it did become necessary to consider any application to rectify it.

The other main submission for the applicants relied on the combination of cl.1.3.1 of the deed, the definition of "dependant" in the Superannuation
Industries Supervision Act, and the provisions of s.62 of the Act. It seems to me that in this case, s.62 does require the defendant trustee to ensure that the fund in this case is maintained for the purpose of provision of benefits, in respect of this deceased, so that such benefits are provided to the deceased's legal personal representative or to "any or all of the member's dependants", or to both. Since there is provision in this deed in favour of dependants, it seems to me that, relevantly, the trustee is required to ensure that the fund is maintained, so far as it is maintained for the benefit of dependants, for the benefit of "any or all of the member's dependants". The applicants fall within that class, because they are plainly within the definition of dependant in the Act.

Turning to cl.1.3.1, the relevant requirement of the Superannuation Law is that the funds be for the benefit of "any or all of the member's dependants", including as I have said, the applicants. Under cl.1.3.1, the trustee can comply with that requirement, even if it conflicts with the express provision of the deed. That means, I think, that the limited construction I have given to the definition of "dependants" in the deed is in effect overriden by the
Act.

For those reasons, in my opinion, the applicants are possible beneficiaries in whose favour the trustee might in a proper case exercise its discretion.

Turning to the question of whether the applicants should be made parties to this case, I should note that there are on foot [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) proceedings in this Court brought by the applicants, that is the adult children of the deceased, as well as [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) proceedings in the District Court brought by the plaintiff. The estate, apart from superannuation moneys, is around $215,000.00 The defendant in these proceedings is prepared to submit now to any order the Court makes in these proceedings, and leave any participation to the applicants. In those circumstances, it seems to me that the desirable course is to allow the applicants to become parties to these proceedings, so that steps can be taken to have all the proceedings heard together so that there will be just one contest concerning what should happen to the totality of the moneys. There are no other parties to either of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) proceedings.

For those reasons, I propose to make Order 1 in the Notice of Motion, and order that the costs of the motion be costs in the proceedings.

The [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) proceedings are not before me, so I do not believe I can now make any order in relation to that; but I do understand from what the parties have said that they will now co-operate to make sure that all matters are heard together.

The existing defendant can now be excused from further attendance, subject to questions of costs.

I make Orders 1 and 2 in the Notice of Motion filed 7th July 1998.
 * * * 
