

Cox versus Conrent (Operations) Pty Limited [1997] NSWSC 79 (11 March 1997) 
Cox versus Conrent (Operations) Pty Limited /95 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff suffered personal injury in a work incident that took place on 18 October 1990. He alleges problems with his left and right legs, his lower back and psychiatric illness.

The plaintiff is desirous of prosecuting a claim for the recovery of common law damages. The relevant limitation period for the commencement of proceedings for the prosecution of such a claim expired on 26 March 1994. He now seeks leave pursuant to section 151D(2) of the Workers Compensation Act, (the Act).

In support of the application, the plaintiff relies on five affidavits. Two have been sworn by the plaintiff himself. One has been sworn by his wife. The remaining two have been sworn by his solicitor (Mr Cahill). The plaintiff has been cross-examined. The defendant relies on an affidavit sworn by his solicitor (Mr Hensley). Certain correspondence has been tendered (Exhibits A and B).

Following the incident, the plaintiff was taken to hospital and underwent surgery. He came under the care of various practitioners (including Dr
Viglione). He underwent physiotherapy. He continued to take medication.

He returned to light duties with the defendant in or about January/February
He was retrenched from that employment on 14 March 1991. Since June , he has continued in other employment (see paragraph 66 of his first affidavit). He says that he has a capacity to work 25 hours per week. He has been working as a telemarketer.

The plaintiff's present solicitors received instructions on 7 February 1991.
The plaintiff continues to receive workers' compensation payments and other benefits. In December 1992, advice was obtained from Mr Perry of Counsel (a copy of the written advice is annexure `C' to the first affidavit sworn by Mr
Cahill). It advises, inter alia, that the plaintiff was not certain of getting over "the threshold". In February 1993, the plaintiff commenced proceedings in the Compensation Court for relief pursuant to sections 66 and 67 of the Act.
These proceedings came before the Court on two occasions. On 1 June 1994, the proceedings were adjourned following an application made by the plaintiff to amend his claim. Dr Viglione provided a report dated 6 March 1995 (a copy of that report is annexure `G' to the said affidavit of Mr Cahill). Whilst it expressed conclusions similar to those contained in an earlier report, it added the view that the plaintiff had considerable soft tissue injury to the discs, the ligaments and muscles supporting his lumbo-sacral spine. On 14 June , the plaintiff was assessed by a medical panel of the Compensation Court.
A copy of the Certificate pertaining to that assessment is annexure `A' to the affidavit sworn by Mr Hensley. In August 1995, a decision was made to prosecute a claim at common law. On 15 August 1995, the Compensation proceedings were struck out.

These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 28 November
On 15 December 1995, the present application for leave was brought by the filing of a Notice of Motion.

The application was referred to a Master for hearing on 14 February 1996. The hearing proceeded to the stage of the making of submissions by Counsel. In the course of submissions, the plaintiff applied for and was granted an adjournment. The adjournment was granted so as to give the plaintiff a further opportunity to remedy deficiencies in the material being relied on to explain delay. The application was referred for hearing again on 9 December 1996.
Because the Court did not have time to hear it on that day, the application was given a special fixture and directions were given for the filing of any further affidavits, inter alia, by the plaintiff. The hearing was completed on the date of the special fixture (17 February 1997).

The approach adopted in dealing with applications of this nature is well established. The Court has a discretion which is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before it. The jurisdiction is exercised so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus rests on the applicant (Brisbane South Regional Health Authority versus Taylor <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 866).] 
In applications of this nature, the Court bears in mind that an extension of a limitation period will deprive a defendant of the statutory defence to the plaintiff's claim. It also bears in mind that, if relief is refused, the plaintiff will be barred from prosecuting his claim.

The question of whether or not the plaintiff has prospects of exceeding the statutory threshold has been described by his Counsel as being "controversial". There is conflicting material from the experts.

This application is resisted on three grounds. Firstly, there is the plaintiff's lack of diligence and/or delay. Secondly, there is a lack of satisfactory explanation for the delay. Thirdly, there is presumptive prejudice.

The fact of delay is not in dispute. On any view, there has been a significant lack of diligence on the part of the plaintiff and he has been guilty of delay that is substantial.

On behalf of the plaintiff, it is said that there is material which explains the delay. This should be the case when regard is had to the fact that the plaintiff relies on five affidavits and has had more than ample opportunity to rectify evidentiary deficiencies which had been brought to his attention in the past.

Unfortunately for the plaintiff, the affidavits and other material do not seek to provide the detail which may have been of great assistance to him in the performance of the explanatory task. Both the plaintiff and his solicitor have chosen to remain silent on many matters. As a consequence, there is much unexplained delay.

In seeking to explain delay, the plaintiff has had recourse to a number of matters. I shall make express mention of certain of them. There is the advice given by Mr Perry. Great stress is placed on the report provided by Dr
Viglione in March 1995 and the results of the CT Scan. These matters are related to the question of whether or not the plaintiff had prospects of exceeding the statutory threshold. There are his personal problems (including psychiatric problems).

Whilst these matters provide explanation for some of the delay, it seems to me that the material relied on by the plaintiff falls well short of an explanation that can be regarded as satisfactory. It is trite to observe that the authorities make it clear that explanation for delay is a relevant circumstance in applications of this nature.

The plaintiff's submissions may be said to over-emphasise the effect of the report provided by Dr Viglione. The plaintiff has had knowledge of his back problem since shortly after the incident. Largely, the report had the effect of confirming what he already knew. He gave oral evidence which, in substance, corrected what was said in paragraph 69 of his affidavit. The material does not adequately explain why such a report was not sought at an earlier time.
Following receipt of the report, many months elapsed before a decision was made to pursue the common law remedy. This lapse of time itself was not explained. Whilst I have borne in mind the fact that he has had personal problems, I note also that he has been able to maintain continuous employment as a telemarketer since 1992.

The plaintiff's solicitors have been acting for him since February 1991 (at least three years before the limitation period expired). There seems to be many periods of inactivity. There are many deficiencies in the material that is offered by way of explanation. I should add that, save for a copy of a letter dated 8 November 1995 (part of Exhibit B), the material is silent as to the plaintiff's knowledge of the limitation provisions. If he received any advice on this matter, the Court has not been told about it.

It may be that the lack of detail in the information reflects a situation of there being aspects of delay which simply cannot be explained. It may be that there is other material available to the plaintiff which could have been placed before the Court. If the latter be the case, then the plaintiff and his advisers have chosen not to rely on such material. It may be one of those cases that has the problems which were discussed in Morrison & Anor v
Judd (Court of Appeal, unreported, 10 October 1995). Whatever be the situation, the position remains that the Court can only do its best on the material that is made available to it.

There is no evidence of actual prejudice. It is not disputed that the insurer had early notice of the incident. Even so, the considerable delay in the prosecution of the claim in this case does give rise to a general presumption of prejudice (see Taylor at p 873).

In my view, on the material that has been placed before the Court, the plaintiff has not discharged the onus of satisfying the Court that the discretion should be exercised in his favour.

If the plaintiff does have other material, he can always bring a fresh application.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the
Notice of Motion. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
