

Dion versus Rieser (No 2) [2010] NSWSC 113 (24 February 2010) 
Last Updated: 25 February 2010 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
Dion versus Rieser (No 2) <case>  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /291431  
HEARING DATE(S): 
In Chambers  
JUDGMENT DATE:  February 2010  
PARTIES: 
Margaret Anne DION (plaintiff) 
Nancy Cimarron RIESER (first defendant) 
Steven Robert RIESER (second defendant) 
Estate of Richard Davis Rieser  
JUDGMENT OF: 
Bryson AJ  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
M B EVANS/ A KETAS (plaintiff) 
A SCOTTING (defendants)  
SOLICITORS: 
Hungerford Lehmann & Andrews (plaintiff) 
Teece, Hodgson & Ward (defendants)  
CATCHWORDS: 
COSTS - Probate litigation - Issue in application for Letters of
Administration - Whether plaintiff was de facto spouse of intestate - Lengthy hearing including overseas witnesses led to finding that she was <case> -
Plaintiff sought costs order against defendants (relatives of intestate), defendants sought costs out of estate - Consideration of discretionary factors including contribution of intestate's conduct to difficulties of resolving the issue - Consideration of UCPR 42.1 - Costs order departed from ordinary course in UCPR.  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Property (Relationships) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/) [s4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/s4.html) 
UCPR 42.1  
CATEGORY: 
Consequential orders  
CASES CITED: 
Dion versus Rieser <case>  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
The costs of the plaintiff of and incidental to proceedings on the statement of claim relating to the declaratory order may be paid or retained by her out of the assets of the intestate situated in New South Wales. 
I make no order as to the costs of the defendants with the intent that they pay their own costs.  
JUDGMENT:  - 1 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT  
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
PROBATE LIST  
BRYSON AJ  
WEDNESDAY, 24 FEBRUARY, 2010  /291431 Margaret Anne DION versus Nancy Cimarron RIESER & Ors -
Estate of Richard Davis RIESER 
JUDGMENT When I gave judgment on 12 February 2010 <case> I reserved costs.
 The ordinary rule is that an award of costs in favour of the successful party against the unsuccessful party follows the event. UCPR 42.1 is: 
Subject to this Part, if the court makes any order as to costs, the court is to order that the costs follow the event unless it appears to the court that some other order should be made as to the whole or any part of the costs.
 Unless there is some sufficient ground displacing the ordinary outcome, I should order that the defendants pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings relating to the declaratory order. I gave the parties an opportunity to make written submissions because the facts in the present case were unusual.
 The facts brought under attention two kinds of exceptions which sometimes arise in probate litigation; where the proceedings are attributable to the conduct of the deceased, and where the circumstances reasonably required investigation of the document put forward as a will. This case raises generally similar considerations to the second of these.
 The plaintiff's written submissions proceed on the basis that the plaintiff had a strong and clear case and it was not reasonable of the defendants to oppose her case. The plaintiff succeeded: I gave judgment after several months of consideration and with analysis in detail, and upheld her claim. However it was not a foregone conclusion that she would succeed. The test for the existence of the de facto relationship, which I considered in my principal judgment at pars [7] to [16], is not simple and cannot be answered without detailed address to the facts of the relationship. As [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/s4.html) of the [Property (Relationships) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1984298/) says, "in determining whether two persons are in a de facto relationship, all the circumstances of the relationship are to be taken into account ..." and while nine highly general classes of circumstances are mentioned, the relevant circumstances are not stated exhaustively.
 The facts were elaborate, involving events over a period of almost twenty- five years during which the parties were separate many times. One element of the definition is that it is a relationship between persons "who live together as a couple" and there were significant times during the last years of Mr
Rieser's life when they were physically apart, and they were apart for about eight months immediately preceding his death. It is correct as the plaintiff's counsel has shown, that the plaintiff knew much more and was in a much better position to prove facts and circumstances relating to Mr Rieser's life and conduct than his relatives were; on the other hand Mr Rieser did not ever sever his family relationships, and his relatives put forward evidence which I had to consider carefully when coming to decision on all the circumstances of the relationship.
 It was contended on behalf of the plaintiff to the effect that the defendants had acted unreasonably in requiring the attendance of witnesses from overseas. I do not accept this. Having regard to the nature of the issue it was well within the range of reasonable choices to decide that the witnesses should attend and be cross-examined. The issue before the Court was not a simple one which the defendants could readily inform themselves about and decide to admit or deny.
 I do not accept submissions by the plaintiff's counsel the tenor of which was that the plaintiff's case was overwhelmingly clear and it was unreasonable of the defendants not to admit it. In my opinion it was appropriate for the defendants, notwithstanding they were unable to present a particularly strong factual case themselves, to take part in the hearing, and to test and analyse the evidence offered by the plaintiff. Their case was well conducted, in a manner which assisted the attainment of justice, on elaborate facts which were not easy to interpret.
 This is not a case where the plaintiff was so clearly right that it was unreasonable of Mr Rieser's relatives not to concede her success, but to ask the Court to consider all the circumstances and come to a conclusion; not a simple task. The main source of doubt and difficulty was the strange course of life followed by Mr Rieser, whose behaviour in a number of significant ways was not easy to understand or to interpret. In significant aspects of life he did not take reasonably clear positions; it seems that he deliberately avoided clear positions. He contemplated marrying the plaintiff but there was no marriage; he made a will which conferred benefits on the plaintiff but he revoked it without making another effective will; he made oral declarations to many persons about the closeness of his relationship with the plaintiff but his statements were not completely uniform; he presented a somewhat different picture to his relatives and he left nothing in writing which established the position clearly.
 In my judgment this is not an appropriate case for applying the ordinary rule and ordering the defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs. The plaintiff's costs of establishing her relationship and her entitlement should be seen as costs which it was necessary to incur in order to establish entitlement to Mr
Rieser's assets in New South Wales, and should be paid out of those assets.
The assets in New South Wales include moveable property which is available to satisfy the costs order, no matter who ultimately proves to be entitled under the law of domicile, which has not yet been established. Mr Rieser also owned real estate in New South Wales, a claim to the property at Byron Head, although the evidence which I reviewed in my judgment shows that the strength of that is little more than nominal. His relatives should be left to pay their own costs.
 In my judgment the appropriate costs orders are these: 
The costs of the plaintiff of and incidental to proceedings on the statement of claim relating to the declaratory order may be paid or retained by her out of the assets of the intestate situated in New South Wales.
 
I make no order as to the costs of the defendants with the intent that they pay their own costs.
 
LAST UPDATED:  February 2010 * * * 
