

Regina versus Valerie Lola Grimm No. 60220 of 1995 Criminal law and procedure [1995] NSWSC 118 (31 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
ALLEN(1), NEWMAN(2) AND SIMPSON(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30 June #DATE 9:10:1995 #ADD 31:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant         P Byrne 
Solicitors for the Appellant   
TA Murphy 
Counsel for the Respondent        GA Farmer 
Solicitors for the Respondent       Commonwealth
DPP
ORDER
Appeal allowed.
JUDGE1
ALLEN J I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of
Simpson J. Her comprehensive treatment enables me to be relatively brief notwithstanding that I have come to a different conclusion.
[S 20AB](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s20ab.html) of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Commonwealth) makes available to a State court sentencing for a Federal offence various sentencing alternatives, specified in the section, which would be available under the law of the State.
In New South Wales a community service order under the [Community Service
Orders Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/csoa1979292/) is one such sentencing alternative made available.
S 20AC makes provision as to the consequences of the breach. It is a difficult section to interpret. Its complexities may well be due, in large measure, to the need to accommodate the array of relevant State and Territory legislation.
I set out hereunder the substance of the principal provisions of <case> which are pertinent to the relevant matters of interpretation. In doing so, however, I substitute, for the sake of clarity, the expression "community service order" for the more comprehensive language which is used in the section to embrace the whole array of sentencing alternatives made available by <case>. The provisions are: "(6) Where .. a person in respect of whom a community service order has been ..
made .. appears .. before the court by which the .. order was made, the court .. if it is satisfied that the person has, without reasonable cause or excuse, failed to comply with the .. order may: without prejudice to the continuance of the .. order, impose a pecuniary penalty ..; revoke the .. order and, subject to sub-section (7), deal with the person, for the offence in respect of which the .. order was made, in any manner in which he could have been dealt with for that offence if the .. order had not been made and he was before the court for sentence in respect of the offence; or take no action.

Where a person in respect of whom .. a community service order has been made .. is dealt with under sub-section (6) for the offence in respect of which the .. order was made, the court in so dealing with the person, shall, in addition to any other matters that the court considers should be taken into account, take into account: the fact that .. the order was made; anything done under the .. order ..

Where a person in respect of whom a community service order has been made is dealt with under sub-section (6) for the offence in respect of which the .. order was made, there shall be such rights of appeal in respect of the manner in which the person is dealt with for that offence as there would have been if: the court had, immediately before so dealing with him, convicted him of the offence; and the manner in which he is dealt with had been a sentence passed upon that conviction."
The difficulties in interpretation of the section, so far as relevant to the present appeal, have their origin in sub-section (6). Paragraph (a) of that sub-section suggests that the proceedings for which that sub-section provides are proceedings for the offence of breach of the community service order and the imposition of an appropriate penalty for that offence. Paragraph on the other hand suggests that the proceedings are not directed to the punishment of the offender for breach of the community service order but to re-sentencing the offender for the offence in respect of which the community service order was imposed. I refer hereafter to that offence as "the original offence". on the other hand it cannot be gainsaid that revocation of the community service order has, in its practical effect, an element of punishment in it in respect of the breach in that, but for the order made pursuant to paragraph (b), the offender would have continued to have the benefit of the leniency inherent in the making of a community service order as distinct from suffering more onerous punishment. How then are proceedings under sub-section to be categorised? Are they proceedings for conviction for an offence of committing a breach of a community service order and for punishment for that offence? Or are they sentencing proceedings in respect of the original offence? or are they some novel hybrid?
Sub-section (8) resolves the difficulty, at least in respect of paragraph of sub-section (6), by deeming provisions. The sentence passed pursuant to that paragraph is deemed to be a sentence passed upon the conviction, immediately before the sentencing, of the offender for the original offence.
The statutory scheme, as
I understand it, is that proceedings under paragraph are treated, for the purpose of rights of appeal, as if they were part of the sentencing proceedings for. the original offence. It follows that proof of the breach without reasonable cause or excuse of the community service order is part of the sentencing proceedings. Further the decision of the Court, once it has been satisfied that the breach was so committed, to re-sentence under paragraph (b), rather than to fine under paragraph (a) or to order that no action be taken under paragraph (c), is a decision made as incident of the sentencing proceedings. So understood, what paragraph (8) provides becomes clear. The widest of language is used in respect of an appeal - namely "rights of appeal in respect of the manner" in which the appellant has been dealt with. The word used is the plural, "rights", not the singular, "right". The words "in respect of" are expansive rather than restrictive. It follows, as I see it, that any error made by the Court in determining that there was a breach committed without reasonable cause or excuse, or in choosing to proceed under paragraph (b) rather than under one of the other two paragraphs would be an error made in the sentencing proceedings which may require the sentence to be quashed on appeal to this Court under the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) and another sentence to be substituted therefor [(s 5(l)(c):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5.html) [s 6).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) [S 6(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) provides that on an appeal against sentence the Court may quash the sentence and substitute for it another "sentence". As Simpson
J has pointed out the word "sentence" is broadly defined in [s 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s2.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). Whilst the matter is far from clear
I would agree that the imposition of a pecuniary penalty (as provided by paragraph (a) of sub-section of the Commonwealth Act) or the making of an order that no action be taken (as provided by paragraph (c)) would be a sentence within the ambit of the definition and hence available to this Court under [s 6(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/).
It is unnecessary for the purposes of this appeal to consider questions as to appeal which would arise where the Court below has proceeded under paragraph (a) or paragraph (c) rather than paragraph (b). Consideration of those questions should be left to an appeal directly raising them.
I do not agree with Simpson J that his Honour's reasons do not disclose that he was satisfied that the breaches charged had been committed by the appellant without reasonable cause or excuse. I consider it implicit in the reasons that he was so satisfied. He did not have to say so explicitly. I do agree with Simpson J that the Crown bore the ultimate burden of establishing, in respect of each of the breaches charged, that it was committed without reasonable cause or excuse. Proof beyond reasonable doubt was required. But it was open to Twigg DCJ totally to reject, in respect of each of the breaches charged, the explanation advanced by the appellant in her evidence. The rejection by his Honour of those explanations was not incompatible with the medical certificates which were in evidence. Assessment of the credit worthiness of the appellant was a matter for his Honour and I am unpersuaded that it was not open to him to take the highly adverse view which he did of the appellant's credit worthiness. His Honour having taken that view it was open to him to be satisfied that the Crown had discharged the burden which lay upon it. There was nothing before him to point to any reasonable cause or excuse other than the explanations which had been advanced by the appellant: but those explanations he had wholly rejected as convenient fabrications. His
Honour did not err in finding that the breaches had been committed without reasonable cause or excuse. That finding made it necessary for him then to proceed to act under paragraph (a) or paragraph or paragraph (c) of sub-section (6).
In my opinion, however, his Honour did fall into error in what he did consequent upon being satisfied that the breaches as charged were committed without reasonable cause or excuse. The error was in the finding, implicit in his reasons, of the facts relevant to the gravity of the breaches. In her evidence before his Honour the appellant made it clear that she did not accept that the circumstances of the breaches accorded with the documentary material which had been put before his Honour by the Crown, documentary material which was not verified on oath and in respect of which there was no opportunity for cross-examination. On the appellant's sworn evidence the last two of the breaches charged were relatively trivial matters. It is apparent, however, that his Honour's approach was that, as he wholly disbelieved the appellant, it was open to him to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the truth of the detail of the offences as stated in the Crown's unsworn documentary material.
It was not reasonably open to him to take that approach. In the absence of sworn material to the contrary his Honour erred, in my judgment, in not proceeding on the basis that although the breaches had been committed without reasonable cause or excuse, the nature of them was no more than the minimum necessary for the establishing of the breaches as charged - save to the extent that the appellant, in her evidence, admitted more (R versus O'Neill [(1979) 2 NSWLR ).] The unsworn documentary matter did not afford any reasonable basis for satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt that any of the breaches was any more serious than that.
His Honour having made that error, I am of the opinion that leave to appeal should be granted, and that the sentence imposed should be reconsidered by this Court. it would be open to this Court, as I have indicated, to quash in respect of each offence the sentence imposed and to direct that no action be taken in respect of the breach. I do not consider, however, that this Court should adopt that course. The failure of the appellant, on two separate days, to turn up at all for her community service, without having any reasonable cause or excuse for that failure, was a matter of some seriousness. The offences for which she had been sentenced by Phelan DCJ were serious offences of dishonesty. The total overpayment to her of Commonwealth benefits which she procured by criminal misrepresentations was over $32,000. She had previous offences of dishonesty relating to cheques not met on presentation. On the first occasion she came before a court in respect of a number of such offences she was given the benefit of 556A of the Crimes Act 1901. On a later occasion she was given for further such offences a recognisance to be of good behaviour for 12 months. Not surprisingly Phelan DCJ was minded to impose for the present offences concurrent sentences of imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention. He imposed the more lenient punishment of concurrent community service orders solely because periodic detention facilities were not available.
In R versus Morris (unreported, 14 July 1995) this Court (constituted by Kirby
ACJ, Badgery-Parker and Bruce JJ) emphasised the seriousness of the breach of non-custodial orders. In its joint judgment the Court said: "There is a very real risk that the whole regimen of non-custodial sentencing options will be discredited in the eyes of those members of the community who might otherwise have continued to support them and in the eyes of magistrates and judges ...
It is therefore extremely important that breaches of non-custodial sentencing orders be brought promptly to the notice of the sentencing court and there be dealt with swiftly and, generally speaking, in a manner which will demonstrate how seriously breaches are regarded and must be regarded in the community interest" (emphasis supplied).
What was called for, in my judgment, was a short sentence of full-time custody. The sentence imposed, however, clearly was excessive. His Honour either failed to take into account or inadequately took into account the large amount of community service which had been performed.
The sentences should be quashed. In respect of each of the offences for which she was convicted I would re-sentence the appellant to imprisonment for one month commencing on 21
April 1995 and expiring on 20 May 1995. I would order that time served count. She was in fact in custody pursuant to the sentences imposed by his Honour from 21 April 1995 until 30 June 1995 when this Court released her to bail.
Accordingly if she is re-sentenced as I have indicated, she will have served the whole of the sentence.
JUDGE2
NEWMAN J In this matter I agree with the reasons given and orders proposed by
Allen J.
JUDGE3
SIMPSON J On 23 August 1993 the applicant pleaded guilty in the District
Court at Wagga Wagga to seven counts of imposition upon the Commonwealth, charges brought pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) (Cth)("The Act"). On September 1993 pursuant to <case> of the Act Judge P J Phelan, on the first six counts, made orders that she perform Community Service work for five hundred hours, and made the necessary consequential orders in relation to supervision.
On the seventh count His Honour released the applicant on a recognisance to be of good behaviour for a period of three years upon giving security in the sum of $500. Conditions were imposed in relation to the recognisance. His Honour also ordered that the applicant make reparation to the Commonwealth in the total sum of $31,601.46.
On 14 February 1995 six informations were laid and six summonses issued alleging that on four separate occasions, without reasonable cause or excuse, the applicant had failed to comply with the Community Service Orders. The breaches were particularised as follows: "On 8 December 1994 (the applicant) Jailed to perform work at the Wendy
Hucker Nursing Home as instructed; 
On 20 December 1994 (the applicant) ... failed to perform work at the
Wendy Hucker Nursing Home as instructed; 
On 1 February 1995 (the applicant) ... failed to perform work in a satisfactory manner at the Wendy Hucker Nursing Home as instructed; 
On 2 February 1994 (the applicant) ... failed to work for the assigned eight hours at the Wendy Hucker Nursing Home."
The procedure thus far followed was that prescribed by <case> of the Act.
Sub <case> of <case> relevantly provides as follows: "6. Where, in accordance with this section, a person in respect of whom ... an order has been made, under sub <case> AB(1) appears or is brought before the Court by which .... the order was made, the Court...., if it is satisfied that the person has, without reasonable cause or excuse, failed to comply with the sentence or order or with any requirements made in relation to the ...
order by or under the applied provisions, may; without prejudice to the continuance of the ... order, impose a pecuniary penalty not exceeding ten penalty units on the person; revoke the ... order and, subject to sub section (7), deal with the person, for the offence in respect of which ... the order was made, in any manner in which he could have been dealt with for that offence if the ...
order had not been made and he was before the court for sentence in respect of that offence; or take no action. (emphasis added)
The sub section envisages that the procedure to be followed in cases where an allegation under sub <case> is made is the same, with any necessary adaptations, as in any criminal case. That is a two-stage procedure, involving, firstly, the ascertainment of whether any one or more of the allegations is or are proven (the liability issue); and, secondly, and only where one allegation is, or more than one allegations are, proven, the determination of the appropriate action as provided by sub <case> (the penalty issue).
The liability issue is determined by the Court's satisfaction (or otherwise) that the person has, without reasonable cause or excuse, failed to comply with the order. There are two elements to that issue; failure to comply and reasonable cause or excuse. Unless those two elements are demonstrated to the satisfaction of the court, there exists no basis for its proceeding to take any of the courses set out in the three sub paragraphs of the section.
On 13 April 1995 the applicant appeared before Judge P A Twigg QC in the
District Court at Wagga Wagga to answer the summonses. She was represented by a Ms Joanne Carter. After a hearing to which more detailed reference will be made, his Honour stood the matter over for one week, to 20 April, when he heard further evidence, and the following day, 21 April, he pronounced sentence. He revoked the original orders made by Judge Phelan and, on the first six counts in the indictment, sentenced the applicant to four months imprisonment. On the seventh count he purported to impose a recognisance in terms different from that imposed by Judge Phelan. It is these sentences, imposed pursuant to sub <case>, which give rise to the present proceedings which, in my view, and for reasons which will appear below, are properly characterised as an application for leave to appeal against sentence.
Before his Honour was a file which had been exhibit A in the sentencing proceedings, the information and summons, and a report of the applicant's supervising parole officer, a Ms Sue Kendall, dated 21 March 1995 "with attachment". The attachment included letters of complaint about the applicant's performance of the work she was required to do pursuant to the
Community Service
Order from two establishments to which she had been assigned. At the close of the Crown case Ms Carter said: "Your Honour, I'll briefly call Mrs Grimm in relation to the initial factor of your Honour determining whether there has been a breach and that you're satisfied that there is no reasonable cause or excuse for the (failure)."
His Honour ascertained that what was in issue was not the applicant's failure to perform work, or to perform work satisfactorily, but whether the applicant had had reasonable cause or excuse for those failures which were expressly admitted. The applicant was called and gave detailed explanations for the breaches alleged.
As part of her case that she had had reasonable cause or excuse for failure to comply with the orders, the applicant also sought to demonstrate that she had been having difficulties in her relationship with her supervising parole officer,
Ms Kendall. Exhibit 1 is a copy of a letter dated 26 October written by her to the NSW Probation Service in which she set out her complaints. As at 13 April 1995 she had had no written response to that letter, but she had been interviewed at the office.
She sought to mount a serious defence in relation to each breach alleged on the issue of reasonable cause or excuse. The first question for his Honour, therefore, was whether reasonable cause or excuse had been made out. And, since four separate breaches on four separate occasions were alleged and the applicant gave a detailed explanation in relation to each occasion, that question had to be separately determined in relation to each alleged breach.
What had to be established by the Crown, before any orders could be made, was that the applicant, without reasonable cause or excuse, had failed to comply with the orders. Whether reasonable cause or excuse had been made out was integral to the process. Although, in his remarks on sentence, he said: "As I understand that evidence, it is submitted that the prisoner's explanation shows that she has given a reasonable excuse for her breaches which are not denied, and in addition it is submitted to the court that the court should take her explanation into account in regard to sentence if I reject the first submission, namely that there has been reasonable cause shown for her failure to comply with the directions as part of his Honour's directions", his Honour did not at any time, prior to moving to sentence, determine those issues.
On behalf of the Crown it was submitted that the onus lay upon the applicant to establish reasonable cause or excuse..
In support of this submission the Crown relied on <case> of the Act which provides as follows: "Where under any law of the Commonwealth any act, if done without lawful authority, or without lawful authority or excuse, or without permission is an offence against that law, the burden of proving that the act was done with lawful authority, or with lawful authority or excuse, or with permission (as the case may be), shall be on the person accused." (emphasis added)
I do not think <case> has the effect contended by the Crown. Section 20
AC(6) is not a law of the Commonwealth pursuant to which an act if done without lawful authority, lawful authority or excuse or permission, is an offence against- that law. The effect of <case> is to enable a court dealing with a proven breach of an order, to take appropriate action by increasing or varying the penalty previously imposed. But, as I conclude below, no separate offence is created. Additionally, there is a marked difference in the language used in the two sections. Section
D refers to "lawful authority"; "lawful authority or excuse" and "permission", <case> refers to "reasonable cause or excuse.
The concepts are different. In my opinion, the onus remained upon the Crown to establish that any proven failure to comply with the
Community Service Orders was without reasonable cause or excuse. What has to be proved is a single matter, composed of two elements.
There is no warrant in the legislation for treating one element differently from the other so far as the onus of proof is concerned.
This view is consistent with that which Hunt J (as he then was) expressed in relation to the corresponding provisions of the [Community Service Orders Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/csoa1979292/), ("The C. S.O. Act"), which provides two separate avenues by which a Community
Service Order may be revoked. The first is s , which permits a "supervising court", where it appears to that court, having regard to circumstances that have arisen since the order was made, to be in the interests of justice to do so, to revoke the order, or make other orders unnecessary here to detail.
The second avenue is <case>, which empowers the supervising court to impose a fine, or make certain other orders; but this section comes into operation only where the person has been convicted of an offence, provided for by <case>, of failing, without reasonable cause or excuse, to comply with the order, or with any requirements of the Act or Regulations. In R versus Gaudry [(1987) 8 NSWLR 503] Hunt
J described "without reasonable cause or excuse" as a necessary ingredient of the offence created by <case>. And in relation to s 18 which, by contrast with s and <case>, does not create or depend upon any separate offence, his Honour referred to the circumstances proposed to be proved by the party (in that case, the Corrective Services Commission) making the allegation or seeking the order.
In each case, Hunt J appears clearly to have taken the view that the onus of proving absence of reasonable cause or excuse lay upon the prosecution.
I think the same approach must be taken in the present case.
At the end of the applicant's evidence his Honour expressed an opinion strongly adverse to her. To Ms Carter he said: "And what he (referring to Judge Phelan) did in effect was, give your client a more lenient sentence than he otherwise would have done, and what's your lady done in answer to that, breached it.
In other words, the trust that his Honour put in her has been breached. That's a concern that I have.
She's been given an opportunity and doesn't take it.

I mean whats more - I'd better speak this openly to you so that you can address me on it either to-day or some other day. Your lady does not impress me as a person who handles the truth very well.
She's a person who is continuing, in my view, to do courses with no intention of getting job. She's making no effort at all. What she's doing, I can say openly to you as I see it, is still deceiving the tax payer through the Commonwealth.
She's doing all of these courses, did a course with no intention of getting work from the chef <case>. She continues to get Austudy doing yet another course because Ws a desire she's had. She's made no attempt to look for part-time work in ceramics and she's got some vague idea that she might earn some money from it. That's the impression your client has made on me and
I've given her every opportunity to dispel those thoughts or bring any further evidence if you want."
His Honour could not have made it more plain that he disbelieved the applicant.
But except for the views then expressed there was no finding in relation to the issues raised as to reasonable cause or excuse. On 21 April his Honour dealt with the applicant, making the orders to which I have already referred.
He had no power so to deal with her unless and until he had been satisfied of the two elements that create liability. Before proceeding to a sentence determination it was necessary that he properly consider the defence advanced on behalf of the applicant, and do that in the context of the evidence advanced by the Crown, and that adduced by the applicant.
Although in his remarks on sentence, his Honour left no doubt that he rejected the applicant's evidence, that was insufficient, in my view, to permit a conclusion that he properly considered the matters relevant to liability. His generally unfavourable view of the applicant's credibility was an insufficient basis for his wholesale rejection of her accounts, and acceptance of the prosecution evidence which was given wholly in documentary form.
There was, therefore, no determination made on the liability issue. That being the case, there was no basis for proceeding to the penalty issue, and the sentences imposed by his Honour must be quashed.
It was further submitted on behalf of the applicant that even if the failure to comply had been properly made out that his
Honour fell into error in the sentences he imposed. The options open to his Honour, following a finding of a relevant failure to comply were those provided in the sub paragraphs to <case> AC(6) numbered (a) to (c). Sub <case> requires the court to take into account, in addition to any other matters the court considers should be taken into account, three matters: 
The fact that the sentence was passed or the order was made; 
Anything done under the sentence or order; 
Any fine or other pecuniary penalty imposed, and any other order made, for or in respect of the offence.
Sub para (b) is of present importance. The judge had been informed that the applicant had performed 423.3/4 of the 500 hours ordered. He was correctly told that this amounted to about 85 percent of the total ordered. On behalf of the applicant it was submitted that his Honour misdirected himself, or misunderstood the evidence, because in his remarks on sentence he referred to a submission that he should take no action "by taking into account that the prisoner has completed 76.3/4 hours of the community service order and that it will take something less than two weeks to perform the balance".
As was pointed out by the Crown, he had, only four pages earlier in his remarks, correctly stated the hours that had been completed.
It should, therefore, it was argued by the Crown, be inferred that the passage in which the number of hours was misstated should be seen as a dictation or typographical error. I think this is probably so. But that does not mean that no error has been demonstrated.
His Honour said: "Because of the breach (in) the performance of the Community Service
Orders in my view they are rendered nugatory." "They" is a reference to the hours of Community Service actually performed.
But his Honour was bound by <case>(b) not only not to regard them as nugatory, but to take them into account.
In arriving at his sentence, his Honour referred to the applicant's letter of complaint about her supervising officer to which reference has already been made, and made the following finding: "That complaint was properly investigated. I reject the prisoner's allegations. They are to me without foundation and yet another attempt by the prisoner to justify her actions and to manipulate her circumstances to avoid the consequences of her wrong-doing."
Counsel for the Crown was unable to point to any evidence to support the findings of fact contained in this passage.
The applicant's evidence about her letter of complaint has already been recounted. At the opening of proceedings on 20 April Counsel for the Crown stated from the Bar table: "Your Honour you will recall on the last occasion I indicated firstly that I would advise as to the complaint made in October by
Mrs Grimm concerning the conduct of her probation officer.
I advised that at a meeting on 23 November 1994 the District Manager of the
Wagga Wagga District Office of the New South
Wales Probation
Service, Erica Taig, had a meeting with the accused and indicated to her that no action would be taken in relation to her complaints."
In answer to a question from the judge counsel said that that decision had been conveyed to the applicant on 23 November 1994. When the applicant gave evidence on 20 April she was asked by Ms Carter about that meeting; she recalled the meeting and said: "I was told by Erica in an aggressive manner that Sue - Mrs Kendall - went out on a limb for me to get me my job back at the Golden
Valley and that she went out on a limb for my placements and that I should be grateful that she did it, and there's no reason of complaint." 
She said she heard nothing further about her letter after that. No other evidence was called about any 'investigation of her complaints. The factual findings made, that is, that the complaint was properly investigated and without foundation, and was made by her in an attempt to justify her actions and manipulate her circumstances to avoid the consequences of her wrong-doing, were therefore not open. Yet those findings played a significant part in the ultimate decision to impose a full time custodial sentence. This, alone, would be sufficient, in my view, to warrant quashing the sentences.
His Honour purported, in relation to the seventh charge in the indictment, to revoke the recognisance and the conditions granted and unposed by Judge Phelan, and to grant a fresh recognisance with different, more onerous conditions. But as the Crown correctly pointed out in the present application, there was nothing before his Honour in relation to the seventh count, or the recognisance. All that was before his Honour were the six informations and summonses in relation to counts 1 to 6 in the indictment before Judge Phelan. There was therefore no basis for Judge Twigg to deal with the seventh matter. That order was beyond power.
That raises the question of what orders should be made. There having been no proper determination of what I have termed the liability issue, one available course is to return the informations and summonses to the District
Court for hearing in accordance with law.
I have earlier expressed the view that the present proceedings are properly characterised as an application for leave to appeal sentence. In my opinion on its proper construction <case> AC(6) does not create a separate offence but permits a court to re-sentence an offender on the original offence when failure to comply with a community service order is proven.
The manner in which the Commonwealth legislature has chosen to deal with such failures is to be contrasted with that of the State legislature in comparable leglislation (the CSO Act). In that
Act a clear distinction is drawn between a failure without reasonable cause or excuse to comply with a
Community Service Order, which is specifically made an offence in <case>, for which specific penalties are provided by <case>, and circumstances which otherwise persuade a court that it is in the interests of justice to revoke the order, and resentence the person subject to the order (s 18). The courses available under the State Act for an offence under <case> are virtually identical to those provided by <case>. The State has also provided a non-criminal avenue which may lead to the revocation of the Community Service
Order. This is done via <case> which permits an order to be revoked, and/or permits the court to deal with the person for the offence in respect of which the order was made in any manner in which he or she could have been dealt with for that offence by the original court, where "it appears to the supervising court that it would, having regard to circumstances that have arisen since the order was made, be in the interests of justice to do so." These circumstances may include failure to comply (at least without reasonable cause or excuse): R v Gaudry [(1987) 8 NSWLR 503]; but they may also include circumstances favourable to the person the subject of the order or compassionate circumstances relating to that person. The point is that a clear distinction is drawn between the criminal sanction and the non criminal orders available to the court. It is tempting to conclude, because of the parallels between s25 of the CSO Act 1979 and <case>(a)-(c) of the Act that the latter was intended to be a reflection of the former and thus to create a criminal offence. But, since the enacting Parliaments were not identical, I do not think this inference can or should be drawn.
The availability of a pecuniary penalty is suggestive that the legislature intended to create an offence. That inference is strengthened by sub <case> of <case>, which, it appears, was intended to incorporate <case> of the CSO Act in, but exclude ss 23 and 25 from, the federal scheme. But sub para (b), which effectively provides for re-sentencing on the original offence, is supportive of the opposite conclusion. And sub <case>(10) deems a pecuniary penalty to be "a fine imposed upon the person upon his conviction for a federal offence" for the purposes of enforcement and recovery. A deeming provision may not invariably have the effect of declaring something to be with that which it is not (Hunter Douglas Australia
Pty Limited versus Perma Blinds <case>; [(1970) 122 CLR 49], per Griffith
CJ; Bullock versus Kennedy [(1988) 12 NSWLR 200] at 205 per Hope JA. I think in the present case the use of the word "deemed", and the context in which it is used favour the construction that a statutory fiction is created. It follows that the federal legislature did not intend to create a separate offence in the opening paragraph of <case> AC(6). I conclude, therefore, that the applicant was not convicted of any offence under <case> AC, and there is no appeal against conviction.
Given the conclusions I have reached, I would propose that leave to appeal be granted and the appeal allowed. The powers of this Court in relation to an appeal against sentence under <case> are set out in <case>, which is in the following terms: "On an appeal under <case> against a sentence, the court, if it is of opinion that some other sentence, whether more or less severe is warranted in law and should have been passed, shall quash the sentence and pass such other sentence in substitution therefor, and in any other case shall dismiss the appeal."
Since I have formed the view that the liability issue, so far as it was determined, was erroneously determined against the applicant, I am also of the view that no sentence should have been imposed by Judge Twigg. Nor can this court determine what sentences were warranted in law and should have been passed, until the liability question is properly determined A literal reading of <case> would have the result that this Court would have no power either to quash the sentences or pass any other sentences in substitution therefor. But "sentence" is defined to include "any order made by the court of trial on conviction with reference to the person convicted...."; "Court of Trial" is defined to mean any court from whose finding, sentence, order, or other determination, a person is by this Act entitled to appeal or to apply for leave to appeal. (s 2)
The Court of trial was the District Court, constituted initially by Judge
Phelan, and secondly by Judge Twigg.
"Sentence" is wide enough to include both the orders made by Judge Phelan and those made by Judge Twigg on the original convictions, that is on the <case> charges. The applicant therefore remains a person convicted on indictment (before Judge Phelan) with the rights of appeal provided by <case>; those rights are specifically preserved where a Community
Service Order has been revoked, and re-sentencing on the original charges has taken place, by <case> of the Act. This Court then has the power to pass whatever sentence should have been passed, and this includes the "sentence" made available by <case>(c). I have considered whether this Court's power under [s 12(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s12.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) should be invoked and the matter remitted to the District Court for determination. But having regard to the term of imprisonment already served, and my view of the proper construction of s 20AC(6), I am of the view that course would be inappropriate.

The orders I propose are:
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed. Each sentence imposed by Judge Twigg quashed.
 .
In respect of the six informations and summonses, no action be taken.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/118.html  
