

Regina versus Bowhay (No. 2) Matter No 70074/97 [1998] NSWSC 659 (11 November )

Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
REGINA versus ADAM JOHN BOWHAY (NO. 2) /97 November 1998 
Dunford J and a Jury of Twelve 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
JUDGMENT - On admissibility of evidence; see p152.

HIS HONOUR: Objection has been taken to the admission of recorded interviews given by the accused, the first with Detectives Merkel and Hunt at Tallangatta at about 6.40pm on Thursday, 20 March 1997, the second with Detectives Hunt and Merkel at Wodonga Police Station sometime after 9.20pm the same day, and the third and main one between 7.15 and 8.44pm on Friday 21 March 1997 at Wangaratta Police Centre. 
There has been extensive evidence led and submissions made. It would be desirable in a perfect world for me to reserve overnight to formulate my reasons with more felicity, but the jury have been away from the Court for the greater part of three days since being sworn in, and it is desirable that the
Court be in a position to proceed with the trial proper first thing tomorrow morning; and for that reason it is desirable that I give my reasons this evening so that the legal representatives, both the Crown and the accused, will have some idea what evidence is to be admitted and what evidence is not to be admitted.

It is convenient to deal firstly with the third recorded interview.

The objections to the third recorded interview are based, firstly, on [s.84](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s84.html) and s.[85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). I am satisfied that the onus of proving that the interviews are admissible lies on the Crown as the party seeking their admission, but that the standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities: [s.132.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s132.html) 
Evidence has been given on behalf of the Crown by Detective Senior Constable
Campbell, Plain Clothes Senior Constable Berryman and Detective Senior
Sergeant Fursdon, the last named of the Victorian Police, and I have witnessed the playing of the video recording of the interview.

On behalf of the accused evidence has been given by the accused himself, and also by his step grandmother.

The accused's case on this aspect is that in the period of about an hour prior to the commencement of the interview Campbell and Berryman came to his holding cell three times, and after indicating on the two previous occasions that he would not take part in an interview, on the third occasion one of them said, "If you don't give us an interview we'll hang you from the rafters and make it look like suicide". As a result of that threat he says he was terrified and replied "Yeah, I'll give you an interview".

He also says that he was terrified and frightened of the police because of past experiences he had had with them, and he had been on drugs for a number of days, a number of the answers in the recorded interview were not true, he had only had one meal, and that is not a very large meal, in the 24 hours since his arrest, and that he had not had sufficient sleep, although he does not deny he was given the opportunity to rest.

The threats of physical violence were denied by Detectives Campbell and
Berryman, who appeared to me to be impressive witnesses. I appreciate they are police officers experienced in giving evidence, and also I appreciate that there was no non-policeman present in the holding cells to corroborate the accused's version if it were, in fact, true: see MC Kinney and Judge versus The
Queen <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468.] But even taking those factors into account I still find their version the more credible and the more likely.

It makes sense to me that having just completed a lengthy interview with the co-accused, RF, they would first ascertain whether the accused would agree to answering questions and then, if he did, go and have something to eat before they started what might be a long and tedious interview, whereas, if he indicated he would not answer questions, they might immediately or within a very short time, set up and turn on the video and have his declining to answer questions recorded, and then go and have their meal. They said that, Det
Campbell told him that they wished to ask him questions, cautioned him, said they would be back shortly to ask those questions, and went on, "Before we do that can you indicate to us whether you wish to answer any of those questions", and the accused replied "It depends on what you ask me. I'll answer your questions, yeah".

The response, "Depends on what you ask me", is the sort of answer which, I believe, would have stuck in their minds.

Their evidence as to that first conversation is corroborated by Senior
Sergeant Fursdon, although he cannot say they did not return to the accused after that. All he can say is he did not return with them.

Although alleging that the police threatened to hang him if he did not give them an interview, he now concedes that the police did not tell him what to say in the interview.

The accused's version, on the other hand, has to my way of thinking three major problems. He not only says that he was threatened but he also says that some of his answers were wrong. Whereas in the interview he suggested that he acted in self defence, that his co-accused was some distance away, and he described the stabbing motions in detail, in his evidence yesterday he said that the deceased at no time pulled out a knife, that the co-accused was much closer and actually handed him the knife with which he did the stabbing with the blade out, and although he can remember everything up to that point he now claims he cannot remember doing the stabbing himself, and his next memory is of seeing the deceased, covered with blood. He says he now wants to tell the truth.

It is difficult, therefore, to see why he would raise self defence if the deceased did not produce a knife, why he would virtually exonerate the co- accused as a principal, or give the vivid and descriptive detail contained in some of his answers, if he was only giving the interview because of threats that had been made to him.

I find his explanation in his evidence yesterday and today for those changes, namely, that he now wants to be honest and to tell the truth, simply not credible, and the change in his story seems to be motivated by a realisation that self defence has no prospect of success in the circumstances. He now also says for the first time that he did not mean to kill the deceased.

Which version, if either, is correct will be a matter for the jury, but for the purposes of this exercise, the version he gave at the time, namely, that he acted in self defence, strongly suggests that he was at the time thinking clearly and speaking voluntarily.

He says, further, that he had not been properly or adequately fed, but the entries in the records of the Victorian Police, particularly the various
Registers of Prisoners, record a number of meals given to the accused as well as him being checked on a number of occasions. And I note that a lot of these entries appear to be made in different hands, and some of them in different coloured ink. This strongly suggests that the entries were made at the time and have not been recently made up.

At another stage in his evidence, p 129, he was asked why he said in the interview that the deceased first pulled a knife on him if it was not true, and his answer was, "It was the first thing that came into my head and I wanted to make myself look in a way innocent, but now I'd rather tell the truth". However, the vivid detail that he describes and some of what he now says is not true is, in my view, inconsistent with him saying the first thing that came into his head.

It is also significant that he had freely answered the questions in the first and second recorded interviews, and that also tends to suggest that he voluntarily answered the questions in the third interview without any threat being made.

He also says that he had not had sufficient rest or sufficient sleep although, as I say, he does not suggest that was because the police had not allowed him any opportunity to rest; and he quite obviously had a lot of time to rest and think of what he was going to say throughout the day and the evening of 21st
March.

But the best evidence, in my view, is the video of the interview itself. In it he displays no sign of fear or apprehension, but his answers are frank, forthright, and spontaneous throughout, and at times he appears almost cocky.

I note the evidence of Mrs Bowhay who said "He appeared very lethargic, very low in his manner of speaking which was not like Adam". I appreciate that she has observed him over a number of years and, therefore, should be better able to assess his appearance, mood, and demeanour than myself, but making due allowances for such advantages enjoyed by her, the impression I formed was exactly the opposite, as I have described above.

His answers were not only frank, forthright, and spontaneous, but also clear, articulate and lengthy. They displayed appropriate thought processes. He appeared quite anxious to give details and demonstrated an excellent recall of events. As I say, there is just nothing in the video of the interview which suggests fear, apprehension, tiredness, hunger or the influence of drugs, or any other distress.

Moreover, it is significant that the manner in which he spoke in the interview as shown on the video was precisely the same frank, forthright, spontaneous manner as he displayed yesterday in the witness box, and there is no suggestion that he had been threatened before going into the witness box.

At the conclusion of the interview the usual New South Wales adoption procedure was carried out by Detective Senior Sergeant Fursdon of the
Victorian Police. He asked him had any threats been made, and he said, no. He asked him did he have any complaints, and he did complain but it was a complaint about being held in a holding cell. There was no suggestion of any complaint about being tired, hungry, distressed, frightened, or anything else.

One also wonders if he had been threatened and had been fearful and was only giving the interview because of a threat that had been made why he would say any more than that he did it, and try to excuse himself by way of self defence, and it is difficult to see why in those circumstances he would add all the additional detail, whether such additional detail is true or false.

I am satisfied that he was not threatened with death or any other form of physical violence. I am satisfied that he was not hungry, overtired, under the influence of drugs, or in any other sense not in a fit state to give an interview. And I am also satisfied that he participated in the interview quite voluntarily and without any reservations.

Accordingly, for these reasons, the challenge to the third recorded interview under [s.84](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s84.html) and s.[85](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s85.html) fails.

This also covers the discretion to exclude the third recorded interview under [s.90](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s90.html) because that section deals with unfairness having regard to the circumstances in which the admissions were made, and for the reasons I have given I am satisfied there was no unfairness in regard to the circumstances in which the admissions were made.

Next, it was submitted that the record of interview should be excluded pursuant to [s.138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) on the ground that the evidence was obtained improperly or in contravention of an Australian law, and particularly in contravention of ss.464A and 484V of the Crimes Act, 1968 of Victoria.

The applicability of s.464 and the following sections relating to custody and investigation may at times cause some problem in dealing with a person being investigated in Victoria for an offence committed in New South Wales and where the evidence is intended to be tendered in New South Wales.

I am satisfied that as he was held in custody in Victoria that custody could only be justified in accordance with the laws of Victoria and, accordingly, that s.464A applied.

Sections 464A and 464C for that matter were discussed in R versus Heaney &
Ors <case>; [[1992] 2 VR 531.] 
I am satisfied that s.464A, which requires a person in custody to be brought before a bail Justice or the Magistrate's Court within a reasonable time of being taken into custody does permit and authorise questioning of the person before he is brought before the bail Justice etc. This is expressly authorised by subs (2)(b) which provides that the investigating official may within such "reasonable time" referred to in subs (1) question the person or carry out investigations, and in determining the "reasonable time'' a number of matters are referred to in subs (4) and some of them refer particularly to the interruptions to the time necessary to complete the questioning of the person in custody. Accordingly, I am satisfied that, having regard to the necessity for someone such as Detectives Campbell and Berryman to travel from Casino to
Wangaratta, they being persons with some knowledge of the alleged offence, and the fact that they had another suspect, RF, to interview as well, at the time he was questioned he had not been detained for longer than a "reasonable time" within the meaning of s.464A, and at the time he was interviewed, his detention in custody was not illegal.

Next, objection was taken to the fact that before questioning or investigation, an investigating official must inform the person in custody that he may communicate with a friend, relative, and/or a legal practitioner: s.464C. This was not done and it should have been done. In my view s.464C did apply to the questioning, because such questioning was taking place in
Victoria and, as I say, it was certainly not done.

It seems that most likely the reason it was not done was because the questioning was being carried out by New South Wales police and it is not a requirement in New South Wales and they were not familiar with the Victorian requirements. Unfortunately, none of the Victorian police bothered to tell them what the Victorian requirements were in this regard. That is the extent of the evidence, in any event.

That does not necessarily make the evidence of the questioning inadmissible.

Even under the Victorian legislation a contrast is to be drawn between s.464C and s.464H, relating to the recording of interviews. Whereas s.464C provides that the requirements of that section "must" be observed, s.464H provides that the evidence of any confession, or admission, made in breach of that section is "inadmissible as evidence". (Compare [Crimes Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) s.424A.) It follows that there having been a breach of s.464C, s.[138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) ,  applies, and the evidence is not to be admitted unless the desirability of admitting the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting the evidence having been obtained in the way the evidence had been obtained.

There is another closely related factor, in that there is evidence from Mrs
Bowhay, which I accept, that Detective Sergeant Carney told her that if the accused was arrested he would not question him without first notifying her, but she was not notified until after the interview had started, and it was too late for her to do anything about it. However, there is no evidence that
Detective Sergeant Carney communicated this promise of his to Detective
Campbell, and as Detective Campbell was not aware of the promise I fail to see any impropriety on his part in failing to adhere to the promise to which he was not aware.

I considered [s.138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) in the recent case of R versus Bartman (Criminal Division - unreported - 19
October 1998) and referred there to a number of authorities. I will not repeat what I said then, but the effect is that the discretion under [s.138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) involves the same principles as the discretion that existed at common law and which is described in detail in Bunning versus Cross <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54], subject to one exception; instead of the onus as at common law being on the accused to have the evidence excluded, the onus is now on the
Crown to have it admitted.

The factors which were relevant at common law have been recently discussed in 
R versus Swaffield & Pavic versus R <case>; [(1998) 151 ALR 98.] 
I have had regard to the matters in [s.137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) . The evidence is of the highest possible probative value. As far as I am aware, it is the only evidence where the accused admits killing the deceased, and there were apparently no eye witnesses. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance in the proceedings. The nature of the offence is the most serious in the criminal calendar, but on the other hand, the impropriety was in my view neither deliberate or reckless.

In these circumstances, having regard to the seriousness of the offence and the matters I have already referred to from subs (3), and the community interest in having the perpetrators of serious crimes brought to justice, and also that it was a technical breach, in the sense that it is not a requirement in New South Wales, and was not deliberate, I do not consider that the admission of the evidence would involve the possibility of a conviction at too high a price, and in the exercise of my discretion I consider the evidence should be admitted, and I will do so.

It was also sought to have the recorded interview excluded under [ss.135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) and [137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html).
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) does not entail a discretion because if the terms of the section are fulfilled, the evidence must be excluded. Here the probative value is extremely high; it is also highly prejudicial to the defendant but in my view it is not "unfair" prejudice to the defendant. Therefore, [s.137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) does not apply.

It is difficult to see how [s.135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) could apply in a criminal trial if the evidence was not excluded under [s.137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html), but lest it be thought I have overlooked it, I have not; and I am not satisfied that to admit the evidence would be unfairly prejudicial to the accused, nor would be misleading, nor confusing, nor result in undue waste of time.

Mr Conditsis has submitted that evidence of the interview should be excluded because there is evidence that parts of it are untrue and therefore the evidence may be misleading or confusing within [s.135(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html)
But the fact that an accused person says that what he said in a recorded interview is not true is not a reason for excluding what he has said, provided the interview is not otherwise unfair. In many cases suspects, when questioned, give a version which can be proved to be untrue, or it is later admitted to be untrue. In those cases often it is part of the Crown case to rely on the untrue version given in the recorded interview as evidencing a consciousness of guilt and, therefore, constitutes an important part of the
Crown case.

In any event, the accused, having given two versions, it is for the jury to determine which, if either version, is correct. The fact that he now says that the deceased did not pull a knife may make it probable that he will give that evidence in trial. But he may not give any evidence in the trial. I just do not know, and there is no way I can force him, or do a deal with him, or with his solicitor, to ensure that he does. What has been foreshadowed is that there will be a defence raised of diminished responsibility.

In that situation what he said, including the vivid detail that he supplied, may be relevant to an assessment of his personality and his responsibility, and whether what he said was truthful or untruthful may be a matter that will need to be taken into account by the tribunal of fact in determining the defence of diminished responsibility. Therefore, I will not exclude the evidence under [s.135.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s135.html) 
One matter I did overlook. It was claimed by the accused that he was told by
Campbell and Berryman before the interview started and before the threat was made, or at the time the threat of hanging him was made, that the co-accused,
RF, had been already interviewed and that, in effect, "dobbed him in". It was true that she had been interviewed, but Campbell and Berryman denied telling the accused this. It was not true that she had "dobbed him in". As far as I am aware it was not true. I am satisfied for the reasons I have given in relation to whether the threat of hanging was made that this representation also was not made.

Then it was submitted that a number of questions and answers should be excluded from the recorded interview for three main reasons. They were questions and answers that flowed from the proposition that the deceased had produced a knife, and it was submitted that, as the accused now says that was untrue, these questions and answers should be excluded on the ground of fairness. For reasons I have already given I am satisfied they should not be excluded on that ground.

Another reason advanced was that, because of the accused's mental state, his fatigue and drug use, a number of the questions and answers were unfair. I am not satisfied that he was fatigued or still so affected by drugs as not to be fully in command of the answers he was giving, and I will not exclude the answers on those grounds.

Finally, it was submitted that I should exclude evidence of any reference to other offences such as stealing a car at Byron Bay before the death of the deceased, stealing a car at Wauchope after the death of the deceased, doing some break, enter and stealing offences, including stealing knives, one of which was probably used in the killing of the deceased, at Macksville.

Normally evidence of other offences is excluded because it raises questions of character which are not relevant unless raised by the accused. However, where diminished responsibility is raised as a defence it is necessary to have regard to all the surrounding circumstances, and the surrounding circumstances so far as it appears from the voir dire is that the accused and the co- accused, and apparently another friend, embarked on a tour of criminality and drug taking over the two weeks or so prior to the death of the deceased.

The conduct of an accused person before, during and after the killing is, it seems to me, and most psychiatrists in my experience would agree, relevant to assessing the extent of responsibility at the time of the killing. Not only that. This was a particularly vicious killing on any view of it, and I fail to see how the jury could be prejudiced against the accused in any way by being informed of much lesser offences, such as car stealing and break enter and stealing, serious and all as they are in themselves.

Not only that, if the accused gives evidence and admits to the killing the only relevance of these other matters will be going to the defence of diminished responsibility.

This period of conduct involved, from what has been suggested, not only the larceny type offences but also a period of sustained and excessive drug and alcohol taking. How the defence case will be conducted by including some but not all of those matters, I find difficult to see, and how the Crown could cross-examine on some but not all of those matters, I would see as impossible.

In those circumstances I do not see that the evidence of the other offences are such that they do not have high probative value. Although they may be prejudicial in a nominal and theoretical way, I am not satisfied their probative value is outweighed by their prejudicial effect and I will therefore admit the whole of the recorded interview.

Two matters I omitted to refer to. One is the request to give blood. This refers to questions and answers 485 to 489. The response given may also be relevant to the diminished responsibility defence, and in any event it is now a requirement of law both in New South Wales as well as Victoria that the accused may be required to give blood.

In relation to the failure to inform the accused that he was entitled to contact, or attempt to contact, a lawyer, I am satisfied from the evidence that he gave yesterday, although he attempted to resile from it in cross- examination this morning, that he knew at the time that he was entitled to ask for a lawyer.

I will, accordingly, admit the whole of the third recorded interview.

In relation to the first and second recorded interviews, they refer to the car and other stealing matters, but for the reasons I have already given I will not exclude those references on that basis.

Furthermore, there is no suggestion that they were induced by any threats. On my view they are relevant to show the fairness with which the accused was treated by the police on and immediately following his arrest, and that is important in a case where it is apparently going to be alleged he was unfairly treated. And, furthermore, it appears that from those interviews on at least two and possibly three occasions he was informed he was not obliged to answer questions unless he wished.

For these reasons I will admit each of the three recorded interviews.
 * * * 
