

Regina versus Stratton Matter No Cca 60039/98 [1998] NSWSC 400 (14 September )

Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
REGINA versus MATTHEW STRATTON 
CCA 60039/98 September 1998 
Grove J, Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentences imposed by his Honour Judge Moore in the Campbelltown District Court on 12 December 1997. On that occasion, the applicant appeared for sentence in respect of twelve counts together with two forms under the Criminal Procedure Act containing fifty-two and two further offences respectively. 
For reasons given by the sentencing Judge he came to the conclusion that an overall sentence of ten years penal servitude was appropriate. The applicant is a young man but twenty-one years of age although, as his Honour observed, the whole of the circumstances both objective and subjective bound him to impose a sentence of significant length. Nevertheless he found that there were special circumstances justifying the extension of the minimum term component of the ten years which he had assessed and ultimately he imposed an enveloping sentence divided into minimum and additional terms of five years each.

The applicant has appeared for himself this morning. Although he originally made complaint of matter such as the technical imposition of a maximum penalty in respect of some counts, he has recognised that the sentence was structured in order to take into account the totality. With considerable frankness and candour he told the Court what he is really seeking is a sentence comprising a minimum term of five years which he feels bound to accept and an additional term of something less than a further five years.

The Crown in written submissions which he had received made reference to cases which it contended offered some analogy. In the course of exchange with the applicant, the method of the division pursuant to <case>.2 of the Sentence Act and the consequences of the finding of special circumstances were explained.

The applicant has stated that having had those matters explained to him he acknowledges that the appeal would not succeed and he informed the court that he wished to abandon his appeal. For my part I am minded to allow him so to do but before making the formal order I should observe that this Court has had the opportunity and I have had the opportunity to read the matters that were before the District Court Judge.

In my view no matter of error appears on the record nor could any complaint be sustained against the overall imposition of sentence and its division.

Accordingly on the application of the applicant the appeal is abandoned and dismissed and the orders and sentences in the District Court are confirmed.

KIRBY J: I agree. 
GROVE J: The orders of the court are as I proposed. * * * 
