

Kriticos versus State of New South Wales and Anor Nos Ca 40802/94; Ct 1223/94
Administrative Law - Prerogative Writs - Crown [1996] NSWSC 331 (5 August )
 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), PRIESTLEY(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
Summons to the Industrial
Court of New South Wales (Schmidt J) and the State of New South Wales.
HRNG
SYDNEY, 26 May 1995 #DATE 2:2:1996 #ADD 5:8:1996 
Counsel for the Claimant       B D Hodgkinson 
Counsel for the 1st Opponent (Industrial Court)           Submitting appearance 
Solicitors for the 1st Opponent (Industrial Court)           Submitting 
Counsel for the 2nd Opponent
M J Sweeney SC 
Solicitors for the 2nd Opponent   I V Knight (State Crown Solicitor)
ORDER
Summons dismissed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P It falls to me to resolve the differences between the opinions expressed by Priestley JA and Powell JA, whose reasons I have had the privilege of reading.
 
Matters of agreement within the Court
The entire Court agrees that <case> of the Industrial Relations Act 1991 (the Act) is the privative provision relevant to determining the scope of any statutory ouster of the jurisdiction of this Court in relation to the challenged order made by Schmidt
J of the Industrial Court of New South Wales.
Similarly, the entire Court would conclude that the provisions of <case> do not have the effect of precluding the exercise by this Court of the supervisory jurisdiction provided since ancient times by orders in the nature of certiorari.
I would agree with the reasoning of Priestley JA (with which Powell JA is disposed to agree) that, as disclosed in her reasons for judgment, Schmidt J reached an order which is flawed by an error of law. However, conforming to the narrow approach which has been taken in the High Court of Australia (see
Craig versus State of South Australia <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 873], 600) and earlier in a number of recent decisions of this Court (see eg Walker v
Industrial Court of New South Wales [(1994) 53 IR 121 (CA)]; Rothmans
Distribution Services Limited versus Full Court of the Industrial Court of New
South Wales [(1994) 53 IR 157 (CA))], it seems clear enough that any such revealed error of law does not amount to "jurisdictional error" such as would permit this Court, for that reason, to send to the Industrial Court an order in the nature of certiorari.
 
Meaning of "record" - pre-Craig decisions
This conclusion presents the question for decision, upon which the other members of the Court are divided. It is the relatively narrow question of whether Mr Kriticos, as the claimant for relief, has shown an "error of law on the face of the record". That question, in turn, poses the technical question of what, for the purpose of this application, the "record" is in this case.
After the decision in this summons was ordered to stand for judgment, and before Craig was delivered, I was firmly of the opinion that Mr Kriticos had succeeded in demonstrating the qualifying "error of law on the face of the record" so as to be entitled to an order from us.
My process of reasoning is much the same as that of Priestley JA who had completed his exposition of the then understanding of the law to the seventeenth (manuscript) page of his opinion when the decision of the High Court of Australia in Craig was published.
I had expressed the hope, before Craig, that this Court would not be further troubled with tedious attempts to revive the historically dubious and greatly inconvenient notion that the "record", for the purpose of relief in the nature of certiorari, excluded the published reasons of the court or tribunal under supervision. See Commissioner of Police versus District Court of New
South Wales and Anor (1993) NSWLR 606 (CA), 617.
I say that the narrow view of the "record", which has now again gained ascendancy in Australia, is unhistorical because the ancient form of the writ in England by which the superior court, in the name of the Sovereign, commanded the respondent to transmit to the court the impugned record in terms required the delivery of the: "... orders with all things touching the same ... that may cause further to be done thereon what of right and according to the law and custom of England we shall see fit to be done. " 
See R versus Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal; Ex parte Sham, <case>; [(1952) 1
KB 338 (CA)] 688f. According to Professor Aronson and Ms
Franklin, Review of Administrative Action, Law Book Co, Sydney, 1987, 561f the narrow view of the "record" (being confined basically to pleadings and the court file excluding reasons) was only adopted in the 19th century: " ... for the functional reason of reducing doubt as to the accuracy of the documents returned "
The growth of judicial review in the past two decades has been described by Lord Ackner as "judicial creativity at its best" (see [(1987) 61 ALJ 442).]
It may be seen as an outgrowth of the law's response to the rapid growth of the public service and courts and tribunals of limited jurisdiction. In such circumstances, and in the context of the expanded legal requirement and practice to provide reasons for judicial and quasi-judicial decisions, it was a wholly natural development of our law to expand the scope of the understanding of the "record".
Indeed, so universal and repeated were the instances by which courts of this country, England and elsewhere adopted the broad approach to (or the "modern concept" of) what the "record" was for certiorari review that a point was reached before Craig when the only vocal opponents of this beneficial legal development were those few who yearned nostalgically for a return to nineteenth century "history"; feared excessive "intermeddling" by courts, without appellate authority, for legal errors (cf R v Gray; Ex parte Marsh <case>; [(1985) 62 ALR 17], 43); or placed an undue store on finality of litigation, although the result would be a confirmation of legal error and injustice allowed to stand as a rebuke to a legal system incapable of adapting itself to the modern needs of upholding the rule of law.
 .
It is pointless to trace at length the way in which the "modern approach" came to be accepted in this Court. But it is worth recalling that an important early step was the decision of the Court in Adams versus Kennick Trading
Limited [(1986) 4 NSWLR 503 (CA)] where Hope JA (with the concurrence of Glass JA) accepted that reasons would form part of the record if the tribunal under supervision chose to incorporate them. In this, their
Honours did no more than to accept developments which had earlier occurred in
England.
See eg R versus Knightsbridge Crown Courts; Ex parte International
Sporting Club (London) Limited [(1982) QB 304 (CA)], 315.
By 1987, it had increasingly been accepted in this Court that to insist upon the use of the final decision-maker of the magic words "and for these reasons", without which the reasons would not be incorporated, was unduly technical, artificial and unnecessary.
Cf Coles and Ors versus Bourke and Anor [(1987) 10 NSWLR 429 (CA)], 433. The law in this Court, as expressed by Hope JA and me in Coles, was further expounded and clarified by Priestley JA in
Commissioner of Motor Transport versus Kirkpatrick [(1988) 13 NSWLR 368 (CA)], 388ff with numerous references to decisions in Australia and England. The only difference which persisted in the holdings of this
Court concerned whether (as
I favoured) the notion of what the "record" was in law had advanced or (as
Priestley JA favoured) whether the mingling of orders and conclusions with the reasons (now required of judicial and like decision-makers in this State) authorised access to those reasons. See Kirkpatrick, ibid, 395.
For nearly a decade this understanding of the "record" for the purpose of relief in the nature of certiorari in this State proved beneficial. It disclosed no significant problems of judicial over-reach.
It was regularly invoked to uphold a lawful and just conclusion where otherwise unlawfulness would prevail and injustice would remain unrepaired. Particularly significant, was the fact that the Crown, in its many manifestations, regularly appeared before this Court, adopting the "modern" notion of the record of inferior courts and tribunals, to secure relief where it was claimed that the court or tribunal under supervision had displayed error on the face on the record as revealed in its reasons. Indeed, Craig was such a case in South Australia. Far from seeking to procure amendment by statute to restore the "historical" definition of the record, to confine it so as to exclude the reasons of courts and tribunals, the Crown, and its various manifestations, accepted the holdings of this Court, frequently invoking them in support of its own claims for relief.
Doubtless there were some who dreamed of a return to the narrow 19th century notions of the "record", motivated by the kinds of "functional reasoning" which had sustained the narrowing of the notion in the last century. But most text-writers welcomed the broadening approach of this and other courts, endorsing Lord Denning's advice that to uphold the purposes of judicial review the "record is generously interpreted". See R versus Preston
Supplementary Benefits Appeal Tribunal; Ex parte Moore [(1975) 1 WLR 624 (CA)],
Certainly, the approach was endorsed by Aronson and Franklin. See ibid, ff.
 
Obedience to the holding in Craig
It was into these placid waters that the High Court of Australia cast its decision in Craig. The decision works something of a legal revolution in judicial review in this State, putting the clock back to the position probably prior to Adams and certainly before
Kirkpatrick. In the place of a settled, modern understanding of the "record", involving the rational scrutiny of the reasons of the court or tribunal under consideration, supervisory courts are cast back (at least in most cases) to an artificial confinement to orders and court documents without the illumination of the decision or reasoning which supports and explains them. True it is, as
Priestley JA points out, a close analysis of Craig reserves to the supervisory court the determination of what are the precise documents constituting the "record". But that determination must, conformably with the reasoning in Craig, be confined to the formal record of the court or tribunal in question. Most importantly: "... Reasons do not form part of the record for the purposes of certiorari unless the tribunal chooses to incorporate them." 
This means that it is principally left to the decision-maker, against whom legal error on the face of the reasons is alleged, to determine whether such error will be available to the complainant or not.
Where the proof of it lies in the reasons which display the error, the magic formula "for these reasons" is once again restored to critical importance.
I would like to embrace the analysis of Craig which Priestley JA has advanced. Doing so would closely confine what I most respectfully regard as the unfortunate consequences of Craig for judicial review in this State, arising unexpectedly out of a decision from South Australia where it may be doubted that judicial review in the form of certiorari is as frequent or as necessary. Supporting Priestley JA's approach would then facilitate the achievement of a result which would be both lawful and just in this case.
Rejecting such an approach will result in the Court's ignoring a patent legal error and condoning an injustice. This is the kind of conduct on the part of courts that causes citizens to despair about legal process.
However, with Powell JA,
I have regretfully come to the conclusion that the approach which Priestley JA favours is not compatible with the holding of the
High Court in Craig. This Court is entitled to call to notice its most respectful disagreement with the suggested policy justifications for the return to the narrower, older view of what the "record" is in this context. It is entitled to record that the concern that the discretionary remedies of judicial review might merge, unless checked, into a general appellate jurisdiction, not conferred by
Parliament, has not proved a difficulty in this
State. See eg Anderson versus Judges of the District Court of New South Wales [(1992) 27 NSWLR 701 (CA)], 717f. It is permitted to hope for a reconsideration of the definition of "record", either by the High Court of Australia itself or by the legislature. But it is not entitled to depart from a deliberate holding of the High Court because it considers that holding to be wrong and seriously inconvenient. With Powell JA, I have concluded that the necessary result of the holding in Craig is that, in this case, the "record" of the Industrial
Court did not incorporate the reasons of Schmidt J. Deprived of those reasons, there is simply no basis upon which Mr Kriticos can establish the "error on the face of the record" necessary for him to secure relief in the nature of certiorari.
 
Conclusion: need to review Craig
The result is manifestly unsatisfactory. Mr Kriticos, this Court, the
State and the public will be told that a majority of this Court considered that a legal error occasioning injustice to Mr Kriticos has occurred. We simply cannot do anything about it. We must, for legal purposes, ignore it.
Small comfort to Mr Kriticos or to the community which puts its faith in the achievement of justice and the role of this Court in ensuring that courts, subject to its jurisdiction, keep within their powers and do not manifest legal errors.
It is always a matter of controversy as to whether judges should develop an area of the law or leave it to the legislature. Against the background of other recent, much more radical developments of substantive law, and remembering the remarkable developments of administrative law and judicial review which Lord Diplock described as the greatest legal development in the
English law of his lifetime, it is surprising that the modest and beneficial development of the notion of the "record" in the law of judicial review in
Australia has been set back. Whatever may be the proper limits upon judicial development of the law, the judges are usually in a better position to fashion procedural reform. This is within their area of daily experience. Cf Nguyen v
Nguyen <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 245], 269; Commissioner of Police (above), 617. However that may be, the High Court of Australia has clearly reversed what had become the established jurisprudence in this State. Until the High Court has second thoughts or the legislature restores the position that formerly obtained, this
Court must obediently give effect to the High Court's ruling. It might be timely for Parliament to reconsider this area of the State's law. Perhaps it will do so in conjunction with a more general reconsideration of the law of judicial review which, by comparison to Federal jurisdiction in Australia, remains partly undeveloped in this State. It will be set back further by the application of the holding in Craig.
In parting from this case I record that the Court has not heard argument on whether any significance derives from the statutory abolition of the writ of certiorari, as such, in New South Wales. See [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), [s (1)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s69.html) The actual holding in Craig concerns the law of South Australia. I note that the Supreme Court Rules 1987 (SA) reproduced in Craig would seem to afford little hope for a point of distinction upon that ground.
 
Orders
In consequence, the summons must be dismissed.
If the State seeks costs,
I can see no proper basis to refuse them.
JUDGE2
The proceedings
PRIESTLEY JA Mr Kriticos commenced proceedings by summons in this court against the Industrial Court of New South Wales and the State of New South
Wales (the State). The Industrial
Court is a submitting party. Mr Kriticos's dealings with the State government were through the Property and Development
Branch (the
Branch) of the Department of Planning (the Department).
By his summons Mr Kriticos in substance asks this court to quash a judgment of her Honour Judge Schmidt of the Industrial Court. That judgment upheld an appeal from a decision of the Chief Industrial
Magistrate (the CIM) in favour of Mr Kriticos.
The issues in the proceedings were whether the State owed Mr Kriticos moneys representing wages and annual holiday pay. The wages claim was made pursuant to <case> of the Industrial Relations Act 1991 (the IR
Act) and the annual leave claim pursuant to <case> of the Annual Holidays Act (1944).
A basic matter Mr Kriticos had to establish was that there had existed at relevant times a relationship of employment between himself and the State. The
CIM found for Mr Kriticos on this point. Schmidt J reversed the finding on the basis that although she would have agreed that the relationship between Mr
Kriticos and the State was one of employment of Mr Kriticos by the State if the relationship had been entered into under the authority of the State, the evidence showed the relationship bad not been authorised, and there was no basis on which it could be assumed; therefore there was no valid relationship of employment.
Section 297(2)(d) of the IR Act precludes any right of appeal to the Full
Industrial
Court from a single judge decision, where such judge has exercised the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court on an appeal, as Schmidt
J had done.
Mr Kriticos therefore sought to bring the matter to this court pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s69.html) of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), primarily seeking relief in the nature of certiorari. The State asserts that because of the privative provisions in ss and 741(4) of the IR Act, this court has no jurisdiction to entertain Mr
Kriticos's application.
In this court the parties argued both the jurisdiction issue and the substantive issues raised in the proceedings below.
 
Background facts
In 1987 Rose Bay Lodge (the Lodge), a heritage building owned by the State for which the Department was responsible was in very dilapidated condition.
The
Department was anxious to prevent any further structural deterioration and to ensure that all necessary maintenance work was carried out. It was considered imperative by the Department that a caretaker live at the Lodge to help it carry out its responsibility as custodian of an important heritage building and also with a view to its eventual sale or disposal.
With these ends in mind,
Mr Hayes, an officer of the Branch, spoke to Mr
Kriticos by telephone on 12 December 1986. In their conversation Mr Hayes told
Mr
Kriticos he could move into the building as caretaker on the basis of a lease for a minimum period of six months. Mr Hayes' intention was that Mr
Kriticos be a lessee or a licensee and not an employee. Mr Sweeney QC, counsel for the State in this court, said in oral argument that if, as submitted, the relationship is not characterised as one of employment then nothing turns on whether it is said to be a contractual relationship of lessor and lessee or one of license or licensee - it would simply have to be one or the other.
The question of characterisation seems to me to be one of the important matters for the decision of this case. In regard to it, the State drew particular attention to the following matters.
From Mr Kriticos's oral evidence before the CIM it appears that during the day Mr Kriticos was not required to be on the premises if no prior arrangement had been made for him to be available to provide access for the various people referred to above. He said he was free during this time to attend to his personal affairs such as doing the shopping or getting a haircut. Mr Kriticos was not paid any money by way of wages. On two occasions he was paid money in reimbursement of the cost of emergency electrical work, but no other sums. The Department was consistently of the view that he was only entitled to free accommodation, telephone, electricity and gas. When Mr
Kriticos first moved into the Lodge this included all telephone calls. Later it was restricted to only domestic calls, and subsequently further restricted to only 80 per cent of domestic calls. Mr Kriticos was in receipt of an age pension throughout the period in question. He vacated the Lodge after it was sold in
The Department also relied on the fact that when, soon after Mr
Kriticos became caretaker, and at later times, he claimed to be entitled to wages, the Department always said the arrangement did not entitle him to such payment.
The Department argued that the relationship between the State and Mr
Kriticos was no more than that of tenant or licensee, and that the things Mr
Kriticos did in and about the premises were incidents of that relationship, and should not be seen as part of an employer/employee relationship.
The CIM did not agree. He examined the facts in detail, discussed the relevant case law and concluded: "The evidence in this matter overwhelmingly established that the Department had control over the complainant and exercised that control. The Department and its officers directed the complainant in the performance of his duties. The complainant was required to be in attendance at appointed times. It seems to me that all the normal criteria of an employer and employee relationship were present except for the payment of remuneration."
On the appeal to her, after examining the record of the evidence before the CIM, Schmidt
J reached a similar view. The principal part of her summary of the facts was as follows: "The respondent followed up matters which the tenants raised with him and was involved in the service of an eviction order upon one of the tenants - the appellant taking steps to obtain vacant possession of the building. He was obliged to be on the premises seven nights per week. He was required to notify the police and the appellant in the event of any vandalism. He was given keys to all parts of the
Lodge, including the gates and may required to open the gates to give access to a variety of people so as to allow regular gardening, repairs to electrical breakdowns, cleaning of the building and grounds, and to give access to people inspecting the Lodge in order to give quotations in respect of such work The respondent advised the appellant by telephone when work had been completed or things arose which in his view required attention. The Lodge was put up for sale over several years.
The respondent had to give access to real estate agents and interested purchasers and persons associated with them (for instance architect and to open the premises when they were generally open for inspections over several periods on Wednesdays and Saturdays.
The respondent also had to open the Lodge for inspection arranged by the local historical society. There was also clearly contact by the respondent by various officers of the appellant, who conducted regular visits to the Lodge, as well as by telephone and by visits from the respondent to the appellant's offices."
Then, after considering the case law and the importance to the Department of having the Lodge properly protected both from the point of view of maintenance and against vandalism, she said: "It seems to me that (Mr Kriticos) was the vehicle chosen by the appellant to put into effect its obligations in relation to the presentation and security of the Lodge. It required the services of a responsible caretaker as Mr Hayes recognised at the outset. When the relationship came to an end the appellant thanked the respondent for his co-operation and assistance over the time he had been caretaker and advised that: '...your services as a caretaker will no longer be required once the sale is completed'.

That advice, using the language of employment, shows that the focus of the relationship was clearly to obtain the services of a responsible person as caretaker of the Lodge and not simply to obtain a tenant for vacant premises.

In terms of the traditional indicia, as I have said, it was agreed that the respondent was subject to the appellant's control, but it was argued that this was an incidence of the lease arrangement and not relevant to the question of whether there was an employment relationship. I cannot accept that approach. The level and degree of control exercised over the respondent suggests to me that the real focus of the arrangement was the performance of the work, rather than the provision of accommodation.

Other indicia also point to the same conclusion. For instance the appellant's right to have the various work performed and in accordance with its direction given from time to time, the right to dictate when that work would be performed and the right to require the respondent to be at the premises at particular times.

The fact that the respondent sought payment for his work, both early in the relationship and on later occasions, which was rejected by the appellant, points in my view not to a simple acceptance that the appellants view of the relationship was correct, but that it was a view not shared by the respondent and a view with which he persisted and ultimately brought before the Court."
Schmidt J then added that but for the conclusion she had reached on the authority argument, she would have agreed with the
CIM's opinion that the relationship between the parties was one of employment.
 
The arguments
This court has decided that s of the IR Act makes a decision of the
Industrial Court immune from challenge or review in this court for non-jurisdictional, but not jurisdictional error: Walker versus Industrial Court of
NSW [(1994) 53 IR 121]
For the State it was submitted that <case> governed the situation. It was then submitted that Schmidt J's decision that the
Department had had no authority to enter into a contract of employment with Mr Kriticos was within jurisdiction, and that therefore this court could not consider whether or not the decision was in error. Alternatively, it was submitted that <case>, if it alone were the relevant privative provision, similarly ousted the jurisdiction of this court, with the same result.
Mr Kriticos did not challenge the correctness of Walker or Rothmans, but submitted: 1.(a), the applicable privative provision was <case> which operates to the exclusion of <case>; (b), <case> does not exclude relief in the nature of certiorari; (c), Schmidt J made an error on the face of the record; or 2. in the alternative, if the court were of the view that <case> did apply, that Schmidt J made a jurisdictional error.
 
The applicable privative provision
The question in this case which seems to me to require the most detailed consideration is whether this court can entertain Mr Kriticos's application for an order to quash, and determine for itself the legal issues raised in the proceedings below. The answer to this question depends on whether the court's general supervisory jurisdiction is ousted by the privative provisions of s or <case> of the IR Act.
Section 301 says: "(1) Subject to the exercise of a right of appeal to the Full
Industrial Court conferred by this Act or any other Act, a decision of the Industrial Court (however constituted) is final and may not be appealed against, reviewed, quashed or called in question by any court or tribunal.

A judgment or order that, but for this section, might be given or made in order to grant a relief or remedy in the nature of prohibition or certiorari may not be given or made in relation to a decision of the Industrial Court (however constituted).

This section does not affect the operation of [section 48](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s48.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).
 s 741 says: "(1) An appeal lies to the Industrial Court against: any order made under this Act by the Local Court for the payment of money or the dismissal by the Local Court of an application for such an order; or any conviction or penalty imposed by the Local Court for an offence against this Act or the regulations.

On the application of a party to any proceedings authorised by this Act to be brought before it, a Local Court may state a case for the opinion of the Industrial
Court.

The provisions of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) that relate to appeals to the District Court and to the slating of cases by
Justices for the opinion of the Supreme Court, the decisions of those Courts on those mailers and the carrying out of any such decision apply, subject to the regulations under this Act, to appeals to, and cases stated for the opinion of the Industrial
Court.

No other proceedings in the nature of an appeal or for prohibition may be taken in respect of proceedings to which this section applies." 
Section 736(2) has the effect that the CIM constitutes a Local Court when exercising the jurisdiction he did in the present case.
Section 736(3) provides that the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) and other Acts regulating the procedure before Local Courts (but not the Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act) apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction except as provided by regulation under the section. The critical part of <case> is sub-s (4).
Mr Kriticos's submission 1.(a) seems to me to be correct, that is, that s and not <case> is the relevant provision in the present case. I think this is clear when the whole arrangement of the Industrial Relations Act is considered.
The IR Act has eight chapters: 1.
Preliminary, ss 1-6; 2. Conditions of
Employment, ss 7-183; 3. Disputes, Industrial Action and Other Matters, ss -286; 4. The
Industrial Court, Industrial Relations Commission and Other
Bodies, ss 287-404; 5. Organisations of Employees and Employers, ss 405-659;
Public Vehicles and carriers, ss 660-700; 7. Private Employment Agents, ss -726; and 8. Miscellaneous Provisions, ss 727-752.
Chapter 4 has five Parts.
Part 1 creates the Industrial Court. Division 2 of Part 1, <case>, confers on the Industrial
Court "the jurisdiction conferred on it by this Act and any other Act". Later sections in this Division distinguish between the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court, which is generally exercisable by a single judge unless there has been a specific conferral of jurisdiction on the
Full Industrial Court (s 296(1)) and that of the Full Industrial Court which is conferred by <case>. This reads: "The
Full Industrial Court has jurisdiction to hear and determine: an appeal from a decision of the Commission, or a reference by the Commission, that may be made to the Full Industrial Court under Part 4; and an appeal to it allowed by special leave of the Full
Industrial Court granted to an aggrievied party, or to the
Crown, from a decision of a Judge sitting alone on a question of law arising in proceedings before the Commission; and a question of law that arises in the exercise of the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court by a Judge sitting alone and that is referred to the Full Industrial Court by the Judge; and an appeal to it from a decision of a Judge sitting alone in the exercise of the jurisdiction of the
Industrial Court otherwise than on an appeal; and any matter in respect of which this Act or another Act confers jurisdiction on the Full Industrial Court."
Part 1, Division 3 consists of "Provisions relating to proceedings before
Industrial
Court" and includes <case> (set out at p 7 above).
Part 2 creates the Industrial Relations Commission.
Part 3 provides for the Industrial Registrar and Registry.
Part 4, in Division 1 provides for appeals from the Commission to the
Full Commission.
Division 2 provides for appeals and references to the
Industrial Court from the Commission.
It seems to me that the (relatively) obvious way to read <case> is as follows: a decision of the Industrial Court however constituted (that is whether by single judge or Full Industrial Court) exercising jurisdiction under <case>, <case> and <case>, is final etc, subject only to the exception that where an appeal is available to the Full Industrial Court from a single Industrial Court judge, then the decision the subject of that appeal is not final; it cannot be, by definition, so presumably the opening words of exception in <case> were inserted to make that even clearer, and to prevent any argument to the contrary.
The feature of the foregoing way of reading the relevant sections that is important for the purposes of the present case is that the privative effect of s 301(1) applies, and applies only, to attempts to attack decisions of the
Industrial Court made in exercise of jurisdiction flowing from sections (3), 296 and 297(2).
Chapter 8, Miscellaneous Provisions, in Part 2, provides for the appointment of the CIM (s 735(1)) and confers on him the jurisdiction conferred on a Local Court by a number of Acts (s 736). These include the IR
Act itself and the Annual Holidays Act.
Chapter 2 of the IR Act contains <case> (in Part 4, Enforcement of Conditions of Employment) which gives jurisdiction to the Local
Court or Industrial Court to make orders directing employers to pay the full amount of any balance of wages due to an employee. The
Annual
Holidays Act, <case>, gives jurisdiction to a Local Court for the recovery of claims under that Act.
Thus the jurisdiction exercised by the CIM in this case was not jurisdiction under ss 288 and 296 or 297 of Chapter 4 of the IR Act. The jurisdiction came from Chapter 2 (s 151) and Chapter 8 (s 736) of the IR Act, and the Annual Holidays Act. I do not think <case> is directed to this jurisdiction. In my opinion the (relatively) clear meaning of Chapter 8 Parts and 3, when read against the provisions of preceding relevant chapters and sections, is that the operative privative provision when the CIM has been sitting as a Local Court, and an appeal has been taken to a single judge of the Industrial Court, who has then exercised appellate jurisdiction not dealt with in
Chapter 4, is that contained in <case>. Further, the single judge of the Industrial Court is then put in a position analogous, so far as challenges to decisions are concerned, to that of the District Court on an appeal to it, pursuant to the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), from a magistrate.
Mr Kriticos further argues from the difference between <case> and <case> that the latter provision must be meant to have a narrower effect than the former and also to be a self-contained code in respect of decisions of the
Industrial
Court determining appeals from the CIM. It is then said that its effect is that although it prevents this Court from entertaining an appeal or an application for an order in the nature of prohibition in respect of such decisions, it does not preclude, and elsewhere there can be found no provision which precludes, remedies such as those in the nature of certiorari and mandamus.
Simply looking at the text of the legislation I have so far considered,
Mr Kriticos's argument seems to me to be correct. The State however submits that the construction of the relevant sections for which it contends is supported by the history of the provisions in question and the interpretation put upon them by the High Court when considering earlier Acts in which predecessor provisions appeared, and that this court should follow those High
Court decisions, the two most relevant being Baxter versus NSW Clickers'
Association <case>; [(1909) 10 CLR 114]
In Baxter the Industrial Court ordered an employer to pay penalties under the Industrial Disputes Act 1908. The employer moved the New South Wales
Supreme Court for a rule nisi for a writ of prohibition. The rule was discharged. The High Court granted special leave to appeal, but after later hearing argument, because of materially changed circumstances in the case since the granting of special leave, rescinded the special leave. Argument had centred on <case> of the Industrial Disputes Act, which said: "Any decision of the Industrial Court shall be final, and shall not be removable to any other Court by certiorari or otherwise; and no award, order, or proceeding of the Court shall be vitiated by reason only of any informality or want of form or be liable to be challenged, appealed against, reviewed quashed, or called in question by any Court of judicature on any account whatsoever and the validity of any decision shall not be challenged by prohibition or otherwise. "
Griffith CJ said he had great difficulty in accepting that every order purporting to be a decision of the Judge of the Industrial Court was unchallengeable for want of jurisdiction (at 131). He was of the view that an order made by the Judge with respect to a matter outside jurisdiction would be void, and that it could not be inferred from <case> that the jurisdiction of the
Court had no limits except those which the Court itself imposed upon itself (at 132). He added however that he thought it clear that the parliamentary intention had been that the
Court "should have jurisdiction to decide without appeal or challenge any question of law arising incidentally in the course of a case which on the face of the proceedings appears to relate to an industrial matter, and that if a question so arising was one that could ordinarily be raised by proceedings in prohibition, that remedy should not be open." (at 132)
Barton
J said something similar on the point (at 140, 149). So did
O'Connor J, who (at 148, 149) echoed the Chief Justice's language about proceedings of the Industrial Court which showed on their face a relation to an industrial matter.
The Industrial Arbitration
Act 1912 repealed the Industrial Disputes Act
The section corresponding to <case> of the repealed Act was <case>, as follows: "58. (1) Any decision of the court shall be final; and no award, and no order, or proceeding of the court, shall be vitiated by reason only of any informality or want of form or be liable to be challenged, appealed against, reviewed, quashed, or called in question by any court of judicature on any account whatsoever.

No writ of prohibition or certiorari shall lie in respect of any award, order, proceeding, or direction of the court relating to any industrial mailer or any other matter which on the face of the proceedings appears to be or to relate to an industrial matter.

The validity of any proceeding or decision of the board or of a chairman of a board shall not be challenged except as provided by this Act."
For the State it was submitted that the language of <case> was the deliberate adoption of the words used by Griffith CJ and
O'Connor J in Baxter.
The section appears clearly to be an earlier form of <case> of the present
Act, although the words inserted based on the dicta in Baxter have now disappeared.
The next steps in the argument were that when Baxter was decided the
Industrial
Arbitration Act 1912 included <case>, which is the predecessor of s of the present Act and included sub-s (3) and (4) to the same effect as s (3) and (4); that in the MLC case the two sections 55 and 58 were construed together; and that Knox CJ and Isaacs,
Gavin Duffy and Starke JJ in joint reasons said of the Act: "It is apparent that the Legislature has with great solicitude provided a complete scheme of judicial action for the determination of questions arising under this Act, and that the scheme so adopted shuts our (inter alia) the prohibition known to the common law in respect to all orders, etc, made 'under this Act' The Legislature has on the whole thought it advisable in the interests of industrial peace to place entire confidence in the final judgment and opinion of the court expressly constituted for the purposes of the Act. Reverting now to sec 55
Sub-section 3 adopts, by way of machinery for the appeal and the case slated, the provisions mutantis mutandis of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), but only with reference to the appeal and case stated to the Industrial Court. The comes the crucial provision in sub-sec , namely, 'No other proceedings in the nature of an appeal from any such order or by prohibition shall be allowed.' Arranging that important provision so as the better to understand its meaning, it reads thus:- No other proceedings in the nature of an appeal from such order of (b) by way of prohibition shall be allowed. The words 'no other proceedings' refer to the 'appeal' and the 'case stated,' and mean no proceedings other than those. Then (a) includes everything in the 'nature of an appeal,' which includes statutory prohibition (under the incorporated provisions taken from the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) and adapted), and that is itself a recognized method of 'appeal'.
Consequently (b), which specifically mentioned 'prohibition,' without qualification, not only includes common law prohibition, but must on sound principles of construction be confined to it, leaving statutory prohibition within (a). ...
 "It is plain, then, that if the order of the Industrial
Magistrate was 'under this Act' (s 55(1)), the only way of impeaching it was by the statutory methods provided by that section. The complaint was in fact made under the Act; it complained of a breach of a regulation which the Governor in
Council had made, as, under the Act, Parliament had not disallowed it, and unless 'repugnant to this Act'(s 73) it had the force of law. The subject matter of the regulation was wages for employees; the alleged relation of the respondent to the person named in the complaint as entitled to the wages was that of employer and employee, it is impossible to say that the Magistrate did not bona fide act as under the authority of the Act, and, therefore, his order was an order 'under the Act' subject to the appeal and case slated as provided by the Act, but not open to prohibition by the Supreme Court. The provision negativing prohibition connotes that an 'order made under the
Act' may be an order exceeding the jurisdiction conferred by the Act." (at 494 - 496)
The concluding step in the argument for the State was that the MLC case showed that <case> of the 1912 Act excluded any interference by the ordinary courts with the decision of an Industrial Magistrate, and the language of s (4) of the present Act is so similar to the language of <case> that this court should reach the same conclusion as to the limitations on this court's jurisdiction.
The MLC case was one in which a common law writ of prohibition had been sought against a conviction by an Industrial Magistrate.
Section 55(3) and (4) of the 1912 Act applied directly to that decision in the same way as <case> and (4) applied to the CIM's decision in the present case. Neither <case> of the Act nor <case> of the present Act made any direct provision providing for restricting or regulating challenges to the Industrial Court's decision upon appeal from the Industrial Magistrate. Both sections however seem to me to have made it clear that the Industrial Court, for the purpose of such appeals, was being put in the same position as the
District Court after deciding an appeal brought to it, pursuant to the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), from a magistrate.
The question in the MLC case was whether common law prohibition could be brought against the conviction by the magistrate; the question in the present case is whether relief in the nature of certiorari is available against the decision of a single judge of the Industrial Court exercising jurisdiction under <case> of the Act. I do not think this latter question was touched upon at all in the MLC case and the broad statements from it which I have set out above were not directed to the question which has arisen in the present case.
As I have already indicated, for purposes of the present case it seems to me that the decision of Schmidt J is in a position analogous to that of a judgment or order of the District Court on appeal from a magistrate pursuant to the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/). It is established that such orders are subject to relief in the nature of certiorari for error on the face of the record: see
Commissioner for Motor Transport versus Kirkpatrick [(1988) 13 NSWLR 368] and the earlier cases referred to in those two decisions, in which also the modern extensive meaning given to "on the face of the record" is discussed. I do not see anything in <case> preventing the exercise of this jurisdiction by this court.
 
The remaining questions in this application
The questions which the court has to decide, upon the basis it has jurisdiction to do so are whether the arrangements made between the Department and Mr Kriticos brought into being a contract which should be characterised as a contract of employment or of lease or licence, and whether the Department in making such arrangements was acting within or without authority.
The court had the benefit of detailed submissions on both these matters, but for the reasons I will indicate, it does not seem to me to be necessary to do more than state shortly the court's conclusions on the two matters.
 
Contract of employment? .
I have earlier set out the basis upon which both the CIM and Schmidt J concluded, that if the Department had authority to employ
Mr Kriticos, then the arrangement made with him constituted the relationship of employer and employee. I am not persuaded by the submissions made for the State in this court that the CIM and Schmidt J were wrong in their opinions on this matter.
For the reasons given by them, I come to the same conclusion.
 
The authority point
Very detailed submissions were made on a number of rather abstruse points of constitutional and statutory law in regard to this question.
With due deference to the full submissions we received on the matter, it does not seem to me to be necessary to express any opinions on them in this case. This is because there seems to me to be a short and conclusive answer to the State's submission concerning authority.
The State's case was conducted at all stages on the footing that the
Department had authority to do what it claimed resulted in nothing more than the granting of a lease or licence to Mr Kriticos. That is, the case has been conducted throughout on the footing that the Departmental officials did what they did with proper authority. It does not seem to me to matter that the intention of the Department was to grant a lease or licence and not to create a contract of employment. Once there is no dispute but that what the officials did in making the arrangement with Mr Kriticos was within their authority, the question simply becomes, what was the legal effect of what they arranged? In my opinion the effect was to create a contract of employment.
On this footing the orders sought by Mr Kriticos should be made.
 
Post Craig
The above was written before the High Court delivered judgment in Craig v
State of South Australia <case>; [(1995) 131 ALR 595.] On the law as I previously understood it, it was not necessary to consider Mr Kriticos's assertion that there had been jurisdictional error, since I had concluded there was error of law on the face of the record, in the modern extensive sense (p 15 above). In this regard, the case had been argued before this court on the basis of the evidence before the magistrate (which was before Schmidt J) and of her reasons. The court was also freely referred to the reasons of the magistrate.
In light of Craig, I should now make plain that I do not think Schmidt J's error of law goes to jurisdiction in the relevant sense. This makes it necessary to consider the application of Craig to the present case.
In Craig what I have been calling the modern, extensive approach to the meaning of "on the face of the record" was considered by Brennan CJ and Deane,
Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ. In joint reasons they said that the "expansive approach to certiorari which would include both the reasons for decision and the complete transcript of proceedings in the 'modern record' of an inferior court ... should ... be rejected" (at 603).
Because of the possible effect of this statement on the way in which this court was considering dealing with the present case, the parties were invited to make written submissions concerning it.
The State then submitted that: Craig was directly in point; the
Industrial Court was subject to supervisory orders of the Court of Appeal on matters of jurisdiction and errors of law on the face of the record; no jurisdictional errors had been made; the record in the present case consisted of the notice of appeal to the Industrial Court and the orders made by that court; and there are no demonstrable errors in that record.
For Mr Kriticos it was argued that the record consisted of (i) the notice of appeal filed in the Industrial Court; (ii) the conclusion of Schmidt J at p of her reasons; (iii) the complaints and summonses under the Industrial
Relations Act and the Annual Holidays Act; and (iv) the four last paragraphs of the magistrate's reasons, or alternatively at least (i) and (ii).
In deciding what should be taken as the record in the present case, this court must first ascertain and then obey what the High Court, in Craig, laid down as binding authority. The relevant passage in Craig is at pp 603-5 of 131
ALR under the heading "The face of the record".
When this passage is read straight through, it gives the impression that what comprises the record in any particular case must be arrived at on a very restricted basis indeed. But, it seems to me, the passage is susceptible to analysis, in order to see what propositions of binding authority may be derived from it. In my opinion, an effort to see what the passage means for lower courts, yields at least ten propositions (there may be more). Some I think must be regarded as binding rules. Others give advice about the way courts should approach questions of construing documents argued to be part of the record. In setting out the propositions, I have used the words of the High
Court, but have found it helpful to my own understanding of the relevant passage as a whole to put them in a different order. "... an expansive approach to certiorari which would include both the reasons for decision and the complete transcript of proceedings in the 'modern record' of an inferior court ...
should, on balance, be rejected." (603, lines 19-24) "The determination of the precise documents which constitute 'the record' of the inferior court for the purposes of a particular application for certiorari is ultimately a matter for the court hearing the application." (605, lines 6-8) . "Where the inferior court or tribunal has prepared a formal record, the court hearing the application may amend it by discarding material which should not have been included (605, lines 12-14) " Where the inferior court or tribunal has not prepared a formal record of the formal record prepared is incomplete, the court hearing the application can, if the material placed before it is adequate for the purpose, construct or complete the record." (605, lines 14-17) "... reasons do not form part of the record for the purposes of certiorari unless the tribunal chooses to incorporate them".
(604, lines 18-20) ("Tribunal" here describes the tribunal subject to the certiorari procedure.
In propositions 7 and 8 following, the High Court referred to the words "unless the tribunal chooses to incorporate them" as the "qualification".) "The fact that the transcript of proceedings and reasons for decision do not, of themselves, constitute part of "the record" does not preclude incorporation of them by reference." (604, lines 14-16) "(the qualification) should not be understood as having the effect that a merely introductory or incidental reference to the reasons for decision produces the consequence that the whole or part of the reasons somehow become part of both the formal order and "the record" of the particular court. " (604, lines 23-27) "The qualification should be understood as referring only to so much of the reasons or transcript of proceedings as is referred to in the formal order in a way which brings about its incorporation as an integral part of that order and 'the record'." (604, lines 30-33) "...a merely introductory or incidental reference will not suffice to incorporate, in either the formal order or the record, reasons given for making the formal order which do not in fact constitute part of it." (604, line 39 - 605, line 2) "if, for example, the formal order incorporates undertakings given by a party 'as set out in' a particular designated document or is said to be made 'in terms of proposed orders set out in the reasons for judgment', the order and the record will incorporate only those parts of the particular document or the reasons for judgment which set out, quality or otherwise affect the content of those undertakings or proposed orders." (604, lines 33-38)
Leaving aside proposition 2 for the moment, propositions 5, 6 and 8 make it clear that notwithstanding proposition 1, the record may, in some circumstances, include the reasons of the tribunal whose orders are being challenged. If proposition is intended to operate as a rule, it would seem to follow that it authoritatively prohibits the use of transcript as part of the record, and no more.
There must be some doubt whether proposition 1 is intended to operate as a rule, however, in view of proposition 2 and its unambiguously stated corollaries, propositions 3 and 4. Proposition 2 must, in my opinion, be right. It is the foundation of certiorari in its various manifestations. These were all based on the simple idea of the exercise by the sovereign, and later by the sovereign's court, the Kings Bench, of the power to command a lower court, a tribunal or an official, to supply the sovereign or the court with information so that the sovereign or the court could decide what to do next in the particular matter.
This power was a prerogative power which could only be extinguished or restricted by statute. It is one of the powers which this court exercises in what is now called its supervisory jurisdiction. The variety of ways in which the prerogative power of the sovereign and the Kings
Bench to be better informed was used is briefly discussed in Kirkpatrick at [(1988) 13 NSWLR 390-393.] In England in the 19th century the exercise of the power in regard to orders of magistrates was checked by statutory prescription of what was to comprise the record of the magistrates' courts. As Lord Sumner said in R versus Nat Bell Liquors Ltd [(1922) 2 AC 128] at 159, the prescription of new statutory forms of record "did not stint the jurisdiction of the Queens
Bench or alter the actual law of certiorari".
In the present case I am not aware of any statutory limitation upon the prerogative power of certiorari in regard to the "record" of the proceedings before Schmidt J. There are only two ways I can see in which the power could be said to be more limited than at common law: one is that notwithstanding the nature of the power, the course of authority and practice has limited it; the other that by implication from or analogy with the statutes dealing with magistrates and appeals from them to the District Court, it should be limited.
However, possibilities such as these seem to be denied by proposition 2.
Despite the attractiveness of the position described in the preceding paragraph, there can be little doubt that the High Court intended lower courts to act on proposition 1. I will therefore proceed on the footing earlier indicated that propositions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 should be read together as laying it down that the court with the certiorari power may decide what the record of the lower tribunal or body comprises, but that that record cannot include a transcript of the evidence before the lower tribunal or body.
Propositions 7 to must then be regarded as directions concerning the construction of documents and not as rules of law.
Looking at the two documents which, according to the State, comprise the record, some questions immediately arise. One involves the State's notice of appeal, another the orders made by Schmidt J.
The notice of appeal begins as follows: "A. The appellant appeals pursuant to section 741 of the
Industrial Relations Act 1991 ("the Act") 
B. From a judgment 
C. Of the Chief Industrial Magistrate in Matter Nos 94/1144 and /1145 
D. On 22 September 1994.

The Matter Appealed Against is: 
The Chief Industrial
Magistrate's decision that the respondent was an employee of the appellant covered by an award pursuant to <case> of the Act and further that the respondent was entitled to the benefits of the [Annual Holidays Act 1944](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aha1944163/).

E. GROUNDS OF THE APPEAL ARE: ..."
The notice then sets out the grounds of appeal.
The notice of appeal accurately adopts form 17 of the Industrial Court
Rules 1992. Part 7 Div 1 r 1 requires that an appeal "shall be made" in that form. Part of the form says: "6. Matters appealed against are: (set out brief description of matter(s) complained of, including whether the appeal is against the whole or a part, and if a part, which part or parts, of any decision, etc.)"
The eleven grounds in the notice of appeal are unintelligible without recourse to the "judgment" of the CIM. Amongst the materials before this court is a twenty page document entitled "Judgment" published by the CIM on 22
September 1994. It ends with the CIM saying he found Mr Kriticos's complaints established and pronouncing an order that the State pay certain amounts to Mr
Kriticos. It does not seem that any formal order embodying what the magistrate said at the conclusion of his "judgment" was ever made.
The word "judgment" has at least two meanings in legal usage. The more formal one is the actual order or orders of a court. "Judgment" has been more commonly used in recent times to refer to the reasons for decision given by a judge sitting without a jury, combined with the orders, usually stated at the end of the reasons, resulting from them.
I would think the draftsman of the notice of appeal was using the word in this broader sense. However, <case> (see p 7 above) only gives a right of appeal against an order, so it seems necessary to read "judgment" in the notice of appeal in the older, technical, sense. Thus I do not think I can say that par B of the notice of appeal justifies the incorporation of the CIM's reasons into the record; however, what appears in the paragraph headed "The
Matter Appealed Against" may furnish a stronger reason for doing so. The State described the matter appealed against (see previous page) in a way I understand as being against parts of the CIM's decision (that Mr Kriticos "was an employee ..." etc), as permitted by form 17.
If, as the State submits, the State's notice of appeal to the Industrial
Court is part of the record, then it seems to me arguable, as a matter of construction, that the way in which that notice of appeal is structured brought about the incorporation of at least parts of the CIM's reasons into the notice of appeal and thus the record of the Industrial Court. That part would at least include sufficient of the CIM's "decision" (which cannot, in context, be confined to his order, but must refer to his reasons, or "judgment" in the broad sense, or part of it) to show how the CIM thought (inter alia) that Mr Kriticos was an employee.
 .
Although I doubt whether it is material and it is certainly not necessary for the formation of the opinion I have just expressed, it may be useful nevertheless to note that some such view must have been implicit in the course taken before Schmidt J, who seems to have had the magistrate's reasons before her (as appears in various places in her reasons) although they were not made an exhibit.
On the basis that relevant parts of the CIM's judgment in the broad sense were part of the record of the Industrial Court, then there would be sufficient material before this court by way of the record to enable the court to come to the conclusion I had indicated earlier, namely that the CIM's conclusion in the case as a matter of law was correct and that the orders of
Schmidt J must therefore involve an error of law on the face of the record.
The other question arising from the State's submission as to the documents available to this court as the record concerns the orders made by
Schmidt J as appearing on p 23 of the document in this court's materials entitled "Judgment" and published on 7 December 1994. Those orders were as follows: "The appeal is upheld and the decision and orders made by the
Magistrate are set aside."
If those orders are looked at in the absence of the
CIM's judgment (assuming in the State's favour for the purposes of this aspect of the argument that the State's grounds of appeal do not incorporate the magistrate's judgment by reference) and the words of the orders are looked at simply in isolation both from the reasons of the magistrate and of Schmidt J, the orders only partly dispose of the case. The orders as stated do not disclose the fate of Mr Kriticos's two summonses. The orders as stated by
Schmidt J and looked at divorced from the context given to them by her own reasons for judgment, although consistent with dismissal of the summonses do not necessarily entail that result; equally consistent with the orders as stated are orders, different from those of the CIM, perhaps equally favourable to Mr Kriticos or perhaps less favourable to him, but still in his favour. The only way of giving content to Schmidt J's orders in a way disposing of Mr
Kriticos's summonses is by looking at the document published by Schmidt J entitled "Judgment". It is only with knowledge from that judgment that the full effect of Schmidt J's orders can be ascertained. If anyone had sought to put her orders into the formal shape of freestanding orders, that person could only have done so by looking at material in the pages preceding p 23 on which page her Honour's conclusion was stated in the terms I have set out.
So far as the materials before this court disclose no such formal order was ever entered.
Of course, everyone in this court, litigants, legal representatives and judges, knows that Schmidt J intended that Mr Kriticos's claims should be dismissed, but only because we all have access, as does the public in general, to her reasons. I do not see how any implication can be drawn, from her orders alone, about her intention as to the final disposition of Mr Kriticos's claims. Even to get a basis for implication would, in my opinion, mean looking at part of her reasons. If the court can look at part what is the criterion distinguishing the part that can be looked at from the rest? If the answer to this question is that the court should look at only so much of the reasons as will enable it to see what order Schmidt J would have made had she made a complete order finally disposing of Mr Kriticos's claims, then it seems to me that the record this court is entitled to look at contains sufficient information for the court to see that there is an error on the face of that record. This answer seems to me the most reasonable one to the question stated above.
This is a technical way of dealing with the problem posed by Craig, but it seems to me that Craig forces highly technical questions of construction upon supervisory courts, which will be unable to avoid giving answers in many cases either artificial or anachronistic.
Having reached my conclusion about the consequences of Schmidt J's technically incomplete orders, it is not necessary to investigate the further questions which would have arisen pursuant to the submissions made on behalf of Mr Kriticos concerning the content of the record. Those submissions would have made it necessary for this court to consider whether the record as contended for on behalf of Mr Kriticos would enable the court to say there was error on the face of the record; perhaps also to consider for itself whether the record might not be wider than Mr Kriticos submitted; and whether there might not be other reasons for this court concluding that the reasons of the
CIM or the reasons of Schmidt J or both, in part or whole, should be regarded as part of the record for purposes of the summons before this court. My conclusions also make it unnecessary to consider whether, if the court felt that the State's submissions were correct in regard to the content of the record, there might still not be jurisdiction in the court to make a declaration that Mr Kriticos had been an employee of the State, with consequential declarations. The position that this court's declaratory jurisdiction was not excluded by <case> was mentioned briefly in argument in this court, although by far the greater part of the submissions were directed to relief in the nature of certiorari.
I should also mention that after reviewing in the light of Craig what I had earlier written, I have left untouched the description of the facts as I had set them out, although some of these may have come from the transcript of evidence rather than one of the two sets of reasons for judgment.
This is permissible for the purpose of considering the jurisdictional question, but not, since Craig, for the question whether there was error on the face of the record. However, the reasons alone either of the CIM or Schmidt J contain sufficient material for the court to see whether or not there was error on the face of the record.
This situation incidentally shows an anomaly disclosed by Craig. It frequently happens that a privative provision in a statute brings about the result that a supervising court can only determine whether or not there has been jurisdictional error. The court has full materials available to it from the court below in making this determination. It sometimes happens (as in
Walker p 6 above) that the court sees a non jurisdictional error of law in the materials, but no jurisdictional error, so that no relief is available. This must be quite perplexing to many litigants.
 .
More perplexing still must be the situation where the privative provision, as here, would permit relief for either jurisdictional error, or error on the face of the record, and the court is required to look at different sets of materials for deciding the different questions, and is prevented from granting relief which it has power to grant, because the second set of materials, although "ultimately a matter for (that) court" (p 19 above), is more restricted than the first. Fortunately (as I see it) Craig does not produce that result in the present case.
 
Summary
In my opinion the difficult question in these proceedings was that concerning the relationship between ss 301 and 741 of the IR Act. It seemed to me that the discussion of that question made it necessary to set out the relevant materials at some length. Once the conclusion was reached that <case> operated in regard to the present proceedings to the exclusion of <case> then the remaining two questions seemed to me to require very short treatment in this court.
Of these, that concerning the nature of the relationship between Mr
Kriticos and the State had been thoroughly explored by both the CIM and
Schmidt J, who had each reached the conclusion that it involved employment. In my opinion their conclusion was correct, substantially for the reasons they gave.
The other question could be dealt with very shortly for a different reason. A re-reading of all the State's submissions in this matter, both written and oral as recorded, makes it (in my opinion) abundantly clear that all three courts were asked to deal with the issues of both employment and authority on the footing that the State's engagement of Mr Kriticos as caretaker was both lawful and authorised. Once this is realised and accepted the question for the court simply becomes whether the nature of the engagement should be categorised as embracing that of employment. Once that conclusion is reached, then in the circumstances of the way the case has been presented by the State at all stages, the question of authority disappears.
The High Court's decision in Craig coming as it did before this court had delivered its own judgment in this case made further delay necessary in order to get the submissions of the parties on the possible application of Craig. In my opinion, in light of the circumstances and submissions in the present case, application of the High Court's decision in Craig permits this court to state its opinions on the questions of law appearing on the face of the record in the manner I have set out.
In my opinion the third order claimed in Mr Kriticos's summons of 23
December 1994 should be made, that is, this court should make an order in the nature of certiorari setting aside and quashing the judgment of Schmidt J of 7
December 1994.
The State should bear Mr Kriticos's costs of the proceedings in this court.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I have had the opportunity of reading in draft the Judgment which has been prepared by Priestley JA in this matter. As will be apparent from what his Honour has written, the present application raises for consideration the following questions: which of s.301 and s. 741(4) of the Industrial Relations Act 1991 ("the
Act") is the privative provision which is relevant for the purposes of the present application; whichever be the relevant privative provision, whether that provision, on its proper construction, excludes the exercise by this Court of what would otherwise be its supervisory jurisdiction to make an order in the nature of certiorari; in the event that it be held that the exercise of that supervisory jurisdiction is not excluded, whether it would be proper, in the present case, to make an order in the nature of certiorari upon the ground of either: - a. jurisdictional error; or b. "error of law on the face of the record"
The relevant privative clause
Substantially for the reasons given by Priestley JA in his Judgment, I agree with his Honour that that privative clause which is relevant to the present application is, not s.301 of the Act, but, s.741(4) of the Act. A consideration of the context in which each of those provisions appears makes it, in my view, clear that the two provisions are directed toward two quite disparate situations: - s.301 of the Act is directed toward those situations in which the Full
Industrial Court has exercised appellate jurisdiction in respect of one or other of the matters contained in s.297(2)(a)-(e), and situations in which a single judge has exercised the original, as opposed to any appellate, jurisdiction of the Court; s.741(4) of the Act is directed to those situations in which a single judge has exercised the appellate jurisdiction of the Court in relation to: - orders for the payment of money, or orders dismissing an application for such an order, made by the Local Court -constituted by either the Chief
Industrial Magistrate or any other Industrial Magistrate; and any conviction or penalty imposed by the Local Court - as so constituted - for any offence.
It being clear that, in the present case, the jurisdiction which was exercised by Schmidt J was appellate in nature, it follows that the relevant privative clause is, as Priestley JA has suggested - and I agree - that contained in s.741(4) of the Act.
Does s.741(4) on its proper construction preclude judicial review by this
Court?
One approaches this question with two basic propositions in mind, they being: - part of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court as a superior court of record of general jurisdiction is the jurisdiction to require courts and tribunals of limited jurisdiction to keep within the limits of that jurisdiction, and to require them to act, and to act only, according to law; and a citizen's right to seek to have the Supreme Court exercise its supervisory jurisdiction in relation to such a court or tribunal will not be held to have been limited, and still less to have been ousted, unless the language of the statutory provision relied upon clearly demonstrates that it was the intention of the legislature that that should be so.
Far from it being the case that the provisions of s.741(4) of the Act make it clear that it was the intention of the legislature totally to oust the citizen's right to seek to have the Supreme Court exercise its supervisory jurisdiction in relation to a decision of a single judge of the Industrial
Court given on an appeal from a decision of an Industrial Magistrate, the provisions of that sub-section -particularly when one bears in mind the extremely limited nature of the appellate jurisdiction of the Full Industrial
Court - in my view make it clear that it was the intention of the legislature only to preclude applications directed towards having another form of decision substituted for the decision of the single judge - appeals - or toward obtaining an order in the nature of prohibition, and that it was not the intention of the legislature to oust the citizen's right to seek to have the
Supreme Court exercise its supervisory jurisdiction in relation to the decision of the single judge by making orders in the nature of certiorari whether for jurisdictional error, failure to observe some applicable requirement of procedural fairness, fraud or "error or law on the face of the record".
Has any ground for intervention by the Supreme Court been demonstrated?
As will be apparent from what Priestley JA has written in his Judgment, only two grounds for intervention have been advanced by Mr. Kriticos, they being: - jurisdictional error; and "error or law on the fact of the record". 
As each of those suggested grounds involves separate considerations, they should be dealt with separately.
 
Jurisdictional error
As the High Court has most recently reaffirmed (Craig v. State of South
Australia ("Craig") ((1) [(1994-1995) 131 CLR 595], 600) when a challenge of "jurisdictional error" is made to a decision of a court of tribunal of limited jurisdiction, the principles to be applied vary according as the decision which is challenged is that of a court or of a tribunal.
In the course of its joint Judgment in Craig, the Court (Brennan, Deane,
Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ) said ((2) supra at 600-603): - "An inferior court falls into jurisdictional error if it mistakenly asserts or denies the existence of jurisdiction or if it misapprehends or disregards the nature or limits of its functions or powers in a case where it correctly recognises that jurisdiction does exist. Such jurisdictional error can infect either a positive act or a refusal or failure to act.
Since certiorari goes only to quash a decision or order, an inferior court will fall into jurisdictional error for the purposes of the writ where it makes an order or decision (including an order or decision to the effect that it lacks, or refuses to exercise, jurisdiction) which is based upon a mistaken assumption or denial of jurisdiction or a misconception or disregard of the nature or limits of jurisdiction.

Jurisdictional error is at its most obvious where the inferior court purports to act wholly or partly outside the general area of its jurisdiction in the sense of entertaining a matter or making a decision or order of a kind which wholly or partly lies outside the theoretical limits of its functions and powers.
An inferior court would, for example, act wholly outside the general area of its jurisdiction in that sense if, having jurisdiction strictly limited to civil matters, it purported to hear and determine a criminal charge. Such a court would act partly outside the general area of its jurisdiction if, in a matter coming within the categories of civil cases which it had authority to hear and determine, it purported to make an order of a kind which it lacked power to make, such as an order for specific performance of a contract when its remedial powers were strictly limited to awarding damages for breach. Less obviously, an inferior court can, while acting wholly within the general area of its jurisdiction, fall into jurisdictional error by doing something which it lacks authority to do. If, for example, it is an essential condition of the existence of jurisdiction with respect to a particular matter that a certain event or requirement has in fact occurred or been satisfied, as distinct from the inferior court's own conclusion that it has, there will be jurisdictional error if the court or tribunal purports to act in circumstances where that event has not in fact occurred or that requirement has not in fact been satisfied even though the matter is the kind of matter which the court has jurisdiction to entertain. Similarly, jurisdictional error will occur where an inferior court disregards or takes account of some matter in circumstances where the statute or other instrument establishing it and conferring its jurisdiction requires that that particular matter be taken into account or ignored as a pre-condition of the existence of any authority to make an order or decision in the circumstances of the particular case. Again, an inferior court will exceed its authority and fall into jurisdictional error if it misconstrues that statute or other instrument and thereby misconceives the nature of the function which it is performing or the extent of its powers in the circumstances of the particular case.
In the last-mentioned category of case, the line between jurisdictional error and mere error in the exercise of jurisdiction may be particularly difficult to discern.
 ..., the ordinary jurisdiction of a court of law encompasses authority to decide questions of law, as well as questions of fact, involved in matters which it has jurisdiction to determine.
The identification of relevant issues, the formulation of questions and the determination of what is and what is not relevant evidence am all routine steps in the discharge of that ordinary jurisdiction. Demonstrable mistakes in the identification of such issues or the formulation of such questions will commonly involve error of law which may, if an appeal is available and is pursued, be corrected by an appellate court and, depending on the circumstances, found an order setting aside the order or decision of the inferior court. Such a mistake on the part of an inferior court entrusted with authority to identify, formulate and determine such issues and questions will not, however, ordinarily constitute jurisdictional error. Similarly, a failure by an inferior court to take into account some matter which it was, as a matter of law, required to take into account in determining a question within jurisdiction or reliance by such a court upon some irrelevant matter upon which it was, as a matter of law, not entitled to rely in determining such a question will not ordinarily involve jurisdictional error."
It follows that, although, in common with Priestley JA, I am disposed to think that the basis upon which Schmidt J founded her decision on the appeal from the Chief Industrial Magistrate involved an error of law on her part, it was not such an error as would constitute "jurisdictional error' within the meaning expounded by the High Court in the passage from its Judgment in Craig to which I have just referred.
"Error of law on the face of the record"
Although what I have earlier written makes it clear that, up to this point, I agree with what Priestley JA has written in his Judgment, I regret that I am unable to join with his Honour in the views which he has expressed as to the effect of the Judgment of the High Court in Craig insofar as that
Judgment deals with "error of law on the fact of the record".
With great respect to Priestley JA, it seems to me that the burden of the views of the High Court on this question may readily be found in two passages in the Judgment, which passages ought to be quoted in full rather than made the subject of both a selection of but part, and the rearrangement of the language used in the several parts which have been selected. The passages to which I would draw attention are as follows ((3) supra at 603-605): - "One finds in some recent cases in this country support for the adoption of an expansive approach to certiorari which would include both the reasons for decision and the complete transcript of proceedings in the 'modern record' of an inferior court. As Priestley JA pointed out in Commissioner for Motor
Transport v. Kirkpatrick, that approach is not precluded by any direct decision of this court. None the less, it should, on balance, be rejected. For one thing, it is inconsistent with the weight of authority in this court which supports the conclusion that, in the absence of some statutory provision to the contrary, the record of an inferior court for the purposes of certiorari does not ordinarily include the transcript, the exhibits or the reasons for decision. More importantly, the approach that the transcript of proceedings and the reasons for decision constitute part of 'the record' would, if accepted, go a long way towards transforming certiorari into a discretionary general appeal for error of law upon which the transcript of proceedings and the reasons for decision could be scoured and analysed in a search for some internal error. It is far from clear that policy considerations favour such an increase in the availability of certiorari to correct non-jurisdictional error of law. In particular, a situation in which any proceeding in an inferior court which involved a disputed question of law could be transformed into superior court proceedings notwithstanding immunity from ordinary appellate procedures would represent a significant increase in the financial hazards to which those involved in even minor litigation in this country are already exposed. On balance, it appears to us that the question whether there should be such an increase in the availability of certiorari, or of orders in the nature of certiorari, is one that is best left to the responsible legislature.
 ...
The determination of the precise documents which constitute 'the record' of the inferior court for the purposes of a particular application for certiorari is ultimately a matter for the court hearing the application. The effect of the foregoing is that '(o)rdinarily, in the absence of statutory prescription, the record will comprise no more than the documentation which initiates the proceedings and thereby grounds the jurisdiction of the tribunal, the pleadings (if any) and the adjudication'. Where the inferior court or tribunal has prepared a formal record, the court hearing the application may amend it by discarding material which should not have been included. Where the inferior court or tribunal has not prepared a formal record or the formal record prepared is incomplete, the court hearing the application can, if the material placed before it is adequate for the purpose, construct or complete the record."
In his Judgment, Priestley JA appears to justify his view that "the record" in the present case ought to be regarded as including (inter alia) both the Reasons for Decision given by the Chief Industrial
Magistrate delivered by Schmidt J by reference to the following matters: possibly, the use in Item B in the Notice of Appeal of the words "a judgment" and the use, under the title "The Matter Appealed Against is" of the words "The Chief Industrial Magistrate's decision", the latter, at least, of which his Honour suggests leads to the Chief Industrial Magistrate's Reasons for Decision being incorporated into "the record"; the fact that, as his Honour would have it, the Notice of Appeal is unintelligible without recourse to the reasons for decision of the Chief
Industrial Magistrate; the fact that - so his Honour would have it - unless the court is able to have recourse to the Reasons for Decision of the Chief Industrial
Magistrate and the Reasons for Judgment delivered by Schmidt J, then -it is not possible to know whether the orders made by Schmidt J completely disposed of the applications which
Mr. Kriticos had made to the Local Court.
I regret that I am unable to share what appears to be Priestley JA's view that the use by the solicitor, or clerk, or whoever it might have been who drafted the Notice of appeal of the words "judgment" and "the ...
decision", in the case of the former, might possibly, and, in the case of the latter, does, permit, or even dictate, the incorporation into "the record" of the
Reasons for Decision of the Chief Industrial Magistrate. On the contrary such an approach seems to me not only to be little more than an exercise in semantics but also to involve the court in yielding the unknown draftsman - who seems to have little knowledge or understanding of the scheme of the Act or the Rules - the task of determining what is to constitute "the record".
The suggestion that the words "a judgment" where appearing in the Notice of Appeal might permit the incorporation in 'the record' of the Reasons for
Decision of the Chief Industrial Magistrate appears to overlook the following: - the relevant right of appeal which was invoked by the filing of the
Notice of Appeal was, not an appeal against a Judgment, but "an appeal ...
against ... any order made ... by the Local Court for the payment of money ..."; the Industrial Court (interim) Rules 1992, provide (Part 7 - Appeals,
Division 1 - General): - "Appeal to Court (1) An appeal to the court under the Act or any other Act shall be made in Form 17 (where leave is not required)..." 
So far as is relevant for present purposes, Form , is as follows: - "FORM 17 (Appeal where Leave not Necessary - ICR PT. 7 RR 1,2) 
A. The appellant appeals pursuant to (section and title of Act, etc., under which appeal is brought) 
B. From a (state whether a decision, determination, order, refusal, etc., as the case may be) 
C. Of (name of person or tribunal appealed against) 
D. On (date of decision, etc., appealed against)
Matters appealed against are: (set out brief description of matter(s) complained of, including whether the appeal is against the whole or a part; and if a part, which part or parts, of any decision, etc.) 
E. Grounds of the appeal are: (set out briefly but specifically the grounds of appeal in numbered paragraphs) 
F. Relief claimed: (set out the orders sought on appeal, or in which way it is claimed the matter appealed against should be varied) 
G.
(Where a stay of the order or decision under appeal is sought). A stay is sought because: (set out briefly but specifically the reason why the Court should grant a stay of proceedings)." for, while, if one is to take the words "a judgment" appearing in paragraph B of the Notice of Appeal in isolation, one might be able to construct a facile argument to the effect that those words refer to the Reasons for Decision of the Chief Industrial Magistrate, the fact that the relief claimed in paragraph
F of the Notice of Appeal included "an order quashing or setting aside the
Judgment" in my view make it clear that the subject matter of the appeals was, in each case, the order for payment of money made by the Chief Industrial
Magistrate.
The suggestion that the words "the ... decision", where appearing in the
Notice of Appeal would, or at least, might, permit the incorporation into the
Notice of Appeal, and, thus, into "the record" of the Reasons for Decision of the Chief Industrial Magistrate appear to be to overlook the following: - as I have previously noted, Form 17 is a form prescribed for the purposes of the Industrial Court (Interim) Rules 1992;
Form 17 is prescribed in relation to appeals to the Full Industrial
Court as well as to appeals to the Industrial Court constituted by a single judge; the jurisdiction of the Full Industrial Court includes (s.297) jurisdiction to hear and determine (inter alia) appeals from a decision of the
Industrial Commission (s.297(a)) appeals from a decision of a single judge (s.397(d)); as I have previously noted, the relevant right of appeal which was invoked by the filing of the Notice of Appeal was, not an appeal against a judgment - or, for that matter, a decision - but "an appeal against ... any order made ... by the Local Court for the payment of money..."; for the purposes of the Industrial Court (Interim Rules) "'decision' includes an order direction or ruling" (Part - Preliminary r.4).
Nor am I able to accept that the second and third of the matters to which
Priestley JA then referred - and upon which he still relies - permit - and still less that they dictate - the incorporation into "the record" of the
Reasons for Decision of the Chief Industrial Magistrate and the Reasons for
Judgment of Schmidt J.
If as the High Court in its Judgment in Craig suggested ((4) supra at ) the "record' of a court of limited jurisdiction for the purposes of certiorari is to be limited, or confined, to "the documents initiating and defining the matter in the inferior court and the impugned order or determination' then, so it seems to me, the "record" to which, in the present case, the court is permitted to have regard, is limited to the following documents: - the two forms of Complaint and Summons filed on behalf of Mr. Kriticos in the Local Court, the first of which (Application Book pp. 1- 3) related to
Mr. Kriticos' application for an order for payment to him of a sum said to represent unpaid annual holiday pay, and the second of which (Application Book pp. 4-6) related to Mr. Kriticos' application for an order for payment to him of a sum said to represent the amount which he was entitled to be paid by way of wages; there having been no formal order or orders taken out in the Local
Court, that part of the Reasons for Decision of the Chief Industrial
Magistrate which evidenced the orders which he made, which part of those
Reasons for Decision, in my view, would include no more than the following: "I find both complaints established.

The defendant is ordered to pay the complainant the amounts claimed plus interest to be calculated from the date of termination to today's date in accordance with s.157 of the
Act plus costs to be agreed between the parties. If costs cannot be agreed the matter may be relisted for assessment of costs." the Notice of Appeal to the Industrial Court, which Notice of Appeal in my view indicated that the subject matter of the appeal was the orders made by the
Chief Industrial Magistrate, and that the relief sought in respect of those orders included an order quashing, or setting aside, the orders made by the Chief Industrial Magistrate; and there having been no formal order taken out in the Industrial Court, that part of the reasons for judgment delivered by Schmidt J which evidenced the orders made on the disposition of the appeal, which part should be limited to the following: - "The appeal is upheld and the decision and orders made by the
Magistrate are set aside."
Contrary to the view of expressed by Priestley JA, it seems to me that those documents are sufficient to disclose the nature of the proceedings which had been brought on behalf of Mr. Kriticos, the fate of those proceedings at first instance, the nature of the proceedings in the Industrial Court and the fate of those proceedings - Schmidt J not having made any order, either, remitting the applications for the Local Court for rehearing, or, substituting for the sums ordered to be paid by the Chief Industrial
Magistrate, some other sum or sums, it is, in my view, necessarily implicit in the orders made by her
Honour that the Complaints laid by Mr. Kriticos were found not to have been made out and that, accordingly, the Summonses were to be dismissed. 5.
Conclusion
What I have written above will indicate that it is my view that no ground upon which an order in the nature of certiorari could properly be made has been established, it following that the orders which I would propose are: 
ORDER that the proceedings be dismissed. 
ORDER that the Claimant pay the costs of the Second Opponent of the proceedings.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/331.html  
