

Westpac Banking Corporation versus Vamoti P/L and Anor [1996] NSWSC 353 (15
August 1996) 
Westpac Banking Corporation v. Vamoti Pty Limited & Anor /92; CD 50602/91 August 1996 
Handley JA, Sheller JA, Powell JA 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CATCHWORDS: Damages - Breach of contract - Assignment of debts and securities - Warranty as to interest payable - Measure of damages - Remoteness.

Interpretation of Instruments - Admissibility of extrinsic evidence - Pre- contract negotiations - Ambiguity.

Ex Tempore/Reserved:Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Powell JA.
 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Powell JA.
 
POWELL JA: In these proceedings, which were commenced by Summons filed in the Commercial Division of the Court on 15 October 1991, the Respondents, Vamoti Pty. Limited ("Vamoti") and C.A. & L. Bell Commodities Corporation Pty. Limited ("Bell") which appears to be the holding company of Vamoti sued the Appellant ("Westpac") to recover damages for what were alleged to be breaches of warranties given by Westpac in an Agreement to Assign, and a Deed of Assignment of, certain debts owing to Westpac and certain securities held by Westpac in respect of those debts. On 8 May 1992, Rolfe J delivered a Judgment in which he held that Vamoti was entitled to recover from Westpac the sum of $282, 226.36 by way of damages for breach of warranty, and interest thereon - in the sum of $99,281.79 - pursuant to the provisions of s.94 of the [Supreme Court Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), and ordered that Judgment be entered for Vamoti in the sum of $381,508.15, Westpac to pay Vamoti's costs of the proceedings. 
In its written submissions, Westpac has identified as the issues to be determined on the Appeal, the following: whether, in assigning its rights, title and interest in the debts and securities, Westpac gave a warranty to the effect that it had an entitlement to future interest at a penalty rate of 2.5% above its indicator lending rate? whether if the answer to question 1 be in the affirmative, Westpac gave a warranty to the effect that such future interest entitlement was to simple interest? whether, if the answer to question 1 be in the affirmative, and the answer to question 2 be in the negative, has Vamoti suffered any recoverable loss or damage? 
Although not identified therein as a specific issue to be determined,
Westpac's submissions (paragraph 20), when dealing with the meaning to be attributed to the warranties in question, contained (inter alia) the following: - "To the extent that there is any ambiguity in the meaning of the warranties then the Court should have regard to extrinsic evidence as to their genesis (Codelfa Construction Pty. Limited v. SRA <case>; [(1981-82) 149 CLR 337], 352-3)." 
It is common ground between the parties that if the answer to question 1 which I have recorded above be in the negative, or the answer to question 2 be in the affirmative, Vamoti would not be entitled to damages (Appeal Book p.51).

Despite Westpac's submissions as to the Court's right, in the event of there being held to be any ambiguity as to the warranties relied upon, to resort to extrinsic evidence as to the genesis of the warranties in question, the material which is before the Court as to the background which led ultimately to the Agreement to Assign, and, later, the Deed of Assignment, is rather less clear than, in the circumstances, one might have expected. The history which I record below is, thus, the best which I have been able to derive from some rather unclear and unsatisfactory materials.

The debts the subject of the Agreement to Assign and of the Deed of Assignment appear to have represented loans made by Westpac to a Mr. Kelly and a Mr.
Amor, who were, at all relevant times, equal partners in a business of farming and grazing which was known as "Keralan Pastoral Company" ("Keralan"). The partnership business appears at all relevant times to have been conducted on five properties known respectively as "Quiamong", "Lavistock", "Melness", "St.
Elmo" and "Sandridge Park", the titles to which properties, or to discrete portions of which properties, appear at all relevant times to have been held by the Messrs. Kelly and Amor as tenants in common in equal shares, or by various companies - of which one need only note one called "Denilkikoon
Nominees Pty. Limited " ("Denilkikoon") - which were controlled by one or other or both of them, or in which one or other or both was or were interested.

Although the detail of what occurred is less than clear, it would seem that, in the period from the beginning of 1984 until early 1985, Westpac made available to the Messrs. Kelly and Amor various forms of financial accommodation one of which - or one group of which - appears later to have come to be known as "the Australian Dollar loan", the terms of which appear to have been recorded in a letter dated 19 March 1984 from Westpac to the Messrs.
Kelly and Amor (see Appeal Book pp. 155-156) and the other of which appears to have come to be known as "the offshore facility" (see Appeal Book p. 85) or "the Swiss Franc debt" (see Appeal Book p.69) the terms of which were contained in a letter dated 28 March 1984 from Westpac to the Messrs. Kelly and Amor (see Appeal Book pp. 96-110) which letter later came to be known as "the offshore facility letter".

The terms, as to interest, upon which the Australian Dollar loan was to be made were, in the letter of 19 March 1984, stated to be "Interest rate ILR (Indicator Lending Rate + 1.125 p.a. Presently 14.65 (13.5 + 1.125)" (see
Appeal Book p.156).

It would further seem that between the beginning of 1984 and February 1985,
Westpac acquired a variety of securities in respect of the Australian dollar loan and the loans made pursuant to the offshore facility, those securities including a form of guarantee given by Mrs. Kelly and Mrs. Amor on 19 June and mortgages over "Quiamong", "Lavistock", "Melness", "St. Elmo" and "Sandridge Park". Although the material in the appeal papers does not contain a copy of each of the mortgages in question, it seems (see Appeal Book p. 156) that each of the mortgages contained a provision (Appeal Book pp. 171-173) which, so far as is relevant, was as follows: - "The moneys secured by the Mortgage in which this memorandum is deemed to be incorporated are described in paragraphs (a) to (g), inclusive, below and all such moneys are herein and in the said Mortgage referred to as `the moneys hereby secured'.
 ..........
 
Also interest upon all such moneys as aforesaid or on so much thereof as shall for the time being be owing or payable or remain unpaid without (unless the Bank otherwise in writing agrees) allowing credit for any credit balance in any account or accounts of the Mortgagor and the Debtor or either of them with the Bank at the rate or respective rates agreed upon in writing if any and in the absence of any such agreement then without prior or other notice to the Mortgagor or to the Debtor at such rates or rates as the Bank from time to time determines: except as otherwise provided by the terms of any agreement in writing relating to the whole or part of such moneys such interest shall accrue from day to day and shall be computed from the day or respective days of such moneys being paid or disbursed or becoming owing and at the end of every period of such duration as the Bank may from time to time determine and ending at the end of such day as the Bank may from time to time determine (with power in the Bank to vary from time to time the length of such period or the day or days on which such period ends), or, in the absence of any such effective determination, at the end of each period of one calendar month ending at the end of the last day thereof the interest accrued due up to and including such day upon any such moneys in respect of such period or any part thereof shall (if or to the extent to which it has not already been paid) commence and thereafter so long as the whole or any part thereof shall remain unpaid shall continue to carry interest at the rate aforesaid and such accrued but unpaid interest may at the option of the Bank be debited against the Debtor or in the case of interest upon moneys lent paid or advanced for the payment of which the Mortgagor is liable to the Bank as hereinbefore stated then against the Mortgagor PROVIDED ALWAYS that such unpaid interest upon which interest shall have become so payable shall not be deemed thereby or by reason of any such debiting as aforesaid or by the inclusion of interest with principal in any balance carried forward or account stated or otherwise than as hereinafter provided to have become capitalised or added to principal but the Bank by express entry to that effect in its books and without the necessity of giving notice to the Debtor or the Mortgagor may at any time and from time to time and as from such date as the Bank shall determine capitalise and add to the principal all or any such unpaid interest upon which interest shall have become so payable and whether such unpaid interest shall have been debited as aforesaid or not and such debiting of interest and additions to principal may be continued and made and the provisions herein contained as to the moneys on which interest is payable shall continue to be applicable so long as any of such moneys remain unpaid notwithstanding that as between the Bank and the Debtor or as between the Bank and the Mortgagor the relationship of banker and customer may have ceased and notwithstanding the death or bankruptcy of the Mortgagor and notwithstanding any composition or compromise entered into or assented to by the Bank with or in respect of the Debtor of the Mortgagor and notwithstanding any judgment obtained against the Debtor or the Mortgagor and notwithstanding any other matter or thing whatsoever; in interpreting the foregoing provisions money shall be deemed to remain unpaid notwithstanding any compromise compounding or release made or assented to by the Bank with or in respect of the Debtor or the Mortgagor until the Bank shall have received the full amount to which it would have been entitled if it had not entered into such compromise compounding or release PROVIDED that the amount of moneys deemed to have remained unpaid shall not include such sums as the Bank shall have received in respect thereof." 
The form of guarantee to which I have earlier referred contained a similar provision (see Appeal Book pp.75-76).

Although the material in the appeal papers does not contain a copy of the letter in question, that material does indicate that on 10 April 1985 Westpac wrote to the Messrs. Kelly and Amor a letter confirming Westpac's consent to further borrowings, which letter contained (inter alia) the following: - "The Bank has reviewed the interest rate structure and from 1/4/85, a margin of 2.25% over the indicator lending rate will apply." which letter concluded by asking "for record purposes, we would appreciate Messrs. Kelly and Amor signing, and returning the duplicate of this letter to this office" - it is not possible to know whether the Messrs. Kelly and Amor complied with that request (see Appeal Book pp. 156-157), and, in a Judgment to which it is necessary later to refer, Bryson J appears (see Appeal Book p.159) to have proceeded upon the basis that they did not.

Notwithstanding the financial accommodation which Westpac had provided to them and the securities which had been granted to Westpac, Messrs. Kelly and Amor, so it would seem, had also incurred liabilities to Elders Rural Finance
Limited ("Elders"), which liabilities, so it would seem, were also secured by (inter alia) mortgages over the various properties to which I have earlier referred.

As Westpac and Elders - no doubt for good commercial reasons - were concerned to continue to provide financial accommodation to the Messrs. Kelly and Amor, and as, if they were to do so, there might, in the absence of any agreement between them, the Messrs. Kelly and Amor and the various persons and companies which had provided security, be considerable difficulties in determining the priority to be accorded to any further advances which might be made by either
Westpac or Elders, on 21 May 1985 Westpac, Elders, the Messrs. Kelly and Amor and those persons and companies who and which had provided security for the loans, executed a Deed of Priority, which Deed, so far as is relevant, provided as follows (Appeal Book pp. 88-90): - " It is agreed between the parties hereto that the order of priorities shall be: 
First - the Bank 
The Elder's Securities shall be subject to and take priority after the Bank's Securities and the moneys thereby secured to the intent that the Bank's Securities shall rank as a prior charge and mortgage over the property therein charged: - to the extent of Four million five hundred thousand dollars ($4,500,000.00) in respect of all liabilities direct or contingent of the Debtors or either of them to the Bank (other than those referred to in (b) below) TOGETHER WITH interest as provided in the Bank's Securities AND TOGETHER ALSO WITH all other moneys, costs, charges and expense which the Bank may incur or pay in or incidental to taking or enforcing or maintaining or protecting the Bank's Securities or any part of the property charged by the Bank's Securities; and to the extent of Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in respect of any liability of the Debtors to the Bank under Clause 10 of the Offshore Facility Letter and in respect of the liability of the Debtors for any excess of the Principal Sum due under the Offshore Facility on the date of final repayment converted to Australian Dollars on the date of final repayment over Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) Australian less any amounts previously received by the Bank in reduction of the Principal Sum converted to Australian dollars on the date of actual payment and all conversions to Australian dollars shall be carried out in the manner provided in the Offshore Facility Letter.
 
Second - Elders 
After satisfaction of the first priority to the extent hereinbefore provided the Bank's securities shall be subject to and take priority after the Elder's Securities and the moneys thereby secured to the intent that the Elder's Securities shall rank as a prior charge and mortgage on the property therein charged to the extent of one million one hundred thousand dollars ($1,100,000.00) TOGETHER WITH interest as provided in the Elder's Securities AND TOGETHER ALSO WITH all other moneys, costs, charges and expenses which Elders may incur or pay in or incidental to taking or enforcing or maintaining or protecting Elder's Securities or any part of the property charged by the Elder's Securities.
 
Third - the Bank: 
After satisfaction of the second priority to the extent hereinbefore provided the Elder's Securities shall be subject to and take priority after the Bank's Securities and the moneys thereby secured to the intent that the Bank's Securities shall rank as a prior charge and mortgage on the property therein charged until the moneys thereby secured shall have been fully paid and satisfied.
 . Each of the Bank and Elders has entered into this Deed for itself and its respective transferees and assignees of any of the securities in its favour mentioned herein and each of the Bank and Elders hereby further agrees with the other of them that it will not assign or transfer the benefit of any of such said securities enjoyed by it or its rights thereunder without having first notified all such intended assignees and transferees of the contents of this Deed." 
In about June 1985, the Messrs. Kelly & Amor and the companies which they controlled or in which they were interested, entered into a number of transactions with Bell and companies which appear to have been associated with it ("the Bell interests"), which transactions involved the preparation of the properties used by Keralan for the purposes of its business, the planting of crops on them, the taking of those crops by Keralan on behalf of and under the supervision of one of the companies which were owned by or associated with Bell (see Appeal Book pp. 111-115; see also Kelly v. C.A. & L. Bell Commodities Corporation Pty. Limited 1).

It would appear that, by about March 1987, the Messrs. Kelly and Amor were in significant financial difficulties - as best as one can judge it from such material as is contained in the appeal papers, their total liabilities were of the order of some $A10,000,000.00 of which about $A2,000,000.00 represented the Australian dollar loans, about $A6,000,000.00 represented liabilities incurred pursuant to the offshore facility - which appears, at some stage, to have been converted into Swiss francs, which then moved heavily against the
Australian dollar - and the balance representing debts owed to Elders, while the then market value of the properties the subject of the various mortgages appears to have been of the order of $5,000,000.00. Because of their financial position, the Messrs. Kelly and Amor were unable to carry out the obligations which had been cast on Keralan by the various transactions to which I have earlier referred - for a time the carrying out of those obligations was arranged by the Bell interests but, in June 1987, the Bell interests terminated the Management Agreement.

Meantime, so it seems, the Messrs. Kelly and Amor had approached Elders with a view to having Elders acquire the debt owed to Westpac at a discount - that approach, however, seems to have come to nothing (Appeal Book pp. 123-124, ).

It would appear (Appeal Book p.15) that, at about the time when Bell terminated the Management Agreement, it sought to acquire from the Messrs.
Kelly and Amor the five properties on which Keralan carried on its business, but that, although Mr. Amor was prepared to accept the offer made by Bell, Mr.
Kelly declined to enter into any negotiations with Bell. It would further appear (Appeal Book p.16) that Bell then approached Westpac with a view to ascertaining whether it would be prepared to assign to Bell the debts which were owed to it (Westpac) by the Messrs. Kelly and Amor, and the mortgages securing them, following which approach Westpac indicated that, in principle, it was prepared to do so. In the course of the period of about 3 months from mid-July to mid-October 1987 discussions were had and correspondence passed between Westpac, Bell and Bell's solicitors as to the basis upon which such an assignment might take place.

Finally, on 28 October 1987, Bell's solicitors ("MSB") forwarded to Westpac a letter (Appeal Book pp. 66-68) which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: - "Re: The Five Rural Properties of Keralan Pastoral Co. known as Quiamond Lavistock Melness St. Elmo and Sandridge Park ("the properties") 
We refer to our meeting on 26th October 1987 and confirm our client's offer, as amended, in full substitution for the forms of offer set forth in our letters to the Bank of 1st October 1987 and 14th October 1987, is as follows: - 
It being the case that the Bank has represented to Bell: that the debts owing to the Bank and secured by the mortgages are as set forth in the copy of the facsimile from the Bank to Messrs. Allen Allen & Hemsley dated 28th October 1987, a copy of which is annexed hereto; that by virtue of the debtors' default, the debts are presently due and owing; that no claims, demands, actions, suits or proceedings of any nature whatsoever to the effect that the liability of the debtors in relation to the debts is disputed or denied, have been made or brought against the Bank, or to the best of the Bank's knowledge have been threatened to be made or brought against the Bank AND THAT to the best of the Bank's knowledge it is not estopped from claiming and instituting proceedings to recover the debts, 
Bell makes the following offer to the Bank: . That the Bank assign the whole of the debts owing to it and secured by the mortgages being the amounts set forth in the Bank's said letter of even date to Allen Allen & Hemsley for a price calculated as THE GREATER OF: 
EITHER 
A. The aggregate market values of the five properties determined by a suitably qualified independent licenced valuer mutually agreed upon and jointly instructed by the Bank and Bell Commodities who shall provide sworn valuations, 
LESS (i) an amount equal to the amount which, as the date of assignment would be required to be paid to the 1st mortgagee of Sandridge Park to procure the transfer of the 1st mortgage to the 2nd mortgagee pursuant to Section 95 of the Conveyancing Act (and being the same as the mortgagor would be obliged to pay if the mortgagor was to redeem Sandridge Park - the mortgaged property, pursuant to Section 93 of that Act), the aggregate of unpaid statutory rates, taxes, fees and charges in respect of all properties (proportionately calculated) as at and up to the date of assignment and, the sum (`the discount') which reflects the cost and inconvenience which the Bank would incur and suffer if the Bank was to proceed to recover by exercising its powers as mortgagee, comprising allowances for the following: - agents commission and advertising costs $95,000 - legal fees $20,000 - costs of administration, sundries and general inconvenience $75,000 - an amount equal to interest for a period of months at the rate of 13% p.a. on the aggregate market values of the properties as determined by the sworn valuations to be obtained.
 
OR 
B. $3,300,000.
 . The cost of obtaining the sworn valuations be borne equally by Bell Commodities and the Bank.
 . The Bank's title to the mortgages be to the satisfaction of Bell Commodities' solicitors.
 . That the assignments be effected as soon as reasonably possible.
 . The documentation to effect the assignments be prepared by Bell Commodities' solicitors and be to the satisfaction of the Bank's solicitors (each party to bear its own costs), and contain covenants and warranties in the terms of paragraphs (i), (ii) and (iii) first appearing in this letter.
 . Upon the Bank's acceptance of Bell Commodities offer as herein set forth, Bell Commodities to pay a deposit of $100,000 which deposit shall vest in the Bank upon the assignments being effected or be refunded to Bell Commodities in the event of the assignments not taking place and which meanwhile shall be lodged in an interest bearing account with the Bank with interest being shared equally upon the assignments being effected or paid to Bell Commodities in the event of the assignment not taking place.
 . Subject to the Bank's obligations to its customers, the debtors, this offer and all transactions which flow from it be kept strictly confidential by the Bank and its advisers and not be disclosed to any third party.
 
Should you wish to discuss any aspect of this letter or our clients offer please have not the least hesitation contacting the writer. We look forward to your early reply." 
The copy of the facsimile (Appeal Book pp. 69-70) which the Bank had forwarded to its solicitors ("AA & H"), which facsimile is referred to in this letter omitting formal parts, was as follows: - "Re: Keralan Pastoral Co.
 
AUD Accounts were place on no Further Drawing on July 22, 1986 and both Mr. Kelly and Mr. Amor were advised by letter on that date and were asked to acknowledge, although neither did. By separate letter dated Sept 5, 1986, they were advised that we would not debit their account for interest until further notice, effective July 1, 1986.
 
A schedule showing the principal debt and interest calculations is attached. Had interest been charged it would have been at the Bank's Indicator Lending Rate plus the interest margin of 2.5%.
 
Although we had the Bank's approval to cease charging interest from 10/12/86, for technical reasons Singapore Branch could not put this into effect until 10/3/87.
 
The Swiss Franc Debt as at 27/10/87 is: - . Principal Debt CHF 6,084,900.00 . Unpaid Interest to 10/3/87 CHF 96,027.23 . Interest calculated but not charged 11/3/87 to 27/10/87 CHF 243,351.17 
Further interest is accruing daily at the rate of CHF 1,092.29 
When Bell's Solicitors need to express the debt in exact Australian equivalent, they will have to multiply the daily accrual rate by the number of days expired since 27/10/87, add to this items 1, 2 & 3 and convert the sum at their Bank's spot selling rate for CHF on that day.
 ..........
 
SCHEDULE `A' 
AUD Principal debt 27/10/87 AUD 2,346,420.37 * Interest not charged 1/7/86 to 30/9/87 AUD 313,466.39 
Interest not charged on 
AUD 2,346,420.57 for period /10/87 to 13/10/87 13 days @ 17% AUD 14,207.09 /10/87 to 27/10/87 14 days @ 16.5% AUD 14,849.94 
Interest is accruing daily at .5% on principal debt of 
AUD 2,346,420.37 AUD 1,060.71 but will alter if our I.L.R. changes * Does not seem to be a correct figure. Any revision will be upward.
 
Indication lending rates 1/7/86 to date.
 /7/86 17.25% /7/86 16.75% /8/86 17.5% /8/86 18.0% /9/86 18.75% /12/86 18.00% /1/87 17.5% /2/87 18.0% /2/87 18.25% /4/87 17.5% /5/87 16.75% /6/87 16.25% /7/87 15.75% /8/87 15.25% /9/87 14.5% /10/87 14.0%" (As will be apparent from Schedule "A" to that facsimile the interest calculations for the period from 1/10/87 to 27/10/87, and the interest said to be accruing thereafter, represented Westpac's indication lending rate for the relevant periods plus a margin of 2.5%.) 
On 29 October 1987 Westpac forwarded to MSB a letter (Appeal Book p. 71) which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: - "Re: Keralan Pastoral Co.
 
We refer to your letter of October 28, 1987, and advise that the offer as outlined in your letter and the conditions stated are accepted by the Bank. However, the amount of debts owing to the Bank as set forth in the copy of the facsimile from the Bank to Messrs. Allen Allen & Hemsley dated 28th October 1987 may need to be varied as the amount shown as interest not charged 1/7/86 to 30/9/87 AUD313,466.39 does not appear to be correct and may need to be revised upward, following manual calculations." 
On 29 October 1987, AA & H forwarded to MSB by facsimile, a letter (Appeal
Book p. 72) which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: - "RE: WESTPAC/KERALAN 
I refer to Bill Gough's discussion with Ivan Haege this morning and attach copy Letter of Acceptance from Westpac. Original will follow. Please confirm receipt of that matter referred to in lines 5 - 8 of the letter is acceptable." to which letter MSB replied (Appeal Book p.73) as follows: - "Re: Keralan and Westpac 
Thank you for your facsimile to us this morning.
 
We confirm the Bank's advice in lines 3-8 in its letter of acceptance is accepted by our client." 
Thereafter, on 3 November 1987, Westpac wrote to MSB a letter (Appeal Book p.74) which, omitting formal parts, was as follows: - "Re: Keralan Pastoral Co.
 
I refer to my letter of October 29, 1987 wherein mention was made that the figure of AUD 313,466.39 shown as interest not charged 1/7/86 to 30/9/87 did not appear to be correct.
 
Following manual calculations and taking into account the interest on interest effect total interest not charged from 1/7/86 to 30/9/87 was AUD 623,508.85." 
It is clear that, at about the time when these letters were passing between Westpac, MSB and AA & H, Mr. Kelly became aware of the substance - albeit not of the ultimate detail - of what had occurred, for on, 30 November 1987, in proceedings No. CD28470 of 1987, there was filed in the Commercial Division of the Court a Summons in which Mr. Kelly and the companies which he controlled, or with which he was associated, sought as against Westpac, the Bell interests, Mr. Amor and the companies which he controlled, or with which he was associated, (inter alia) a declaration that Bell as assignee from Westpac of the Swiss bank loan, held the loan "on a constructive trust for (Mr. Kelly) and (Mr. Amor)". Later, so it would seem, the Summons was amended so as to claim a declaration that the Bell interests held the relevant mortgages as trustee for the Messrs. Kelly and Amor subject to the payment by them to the Bell interests of $4,000,000.00 [2]. Those proceedings later came before Brownie J at first instance, an appeal from his dismissal of the proceedings (Kelly v. C.A. & L. Bell Commodities Corporation Pty. Limited 3) being, in its turn, dismissed and an application for special leave to appeal to the High Court refused.

It would appear that, meantime, Westpac had forwarded to MSB a copy of the
Deed of Priority, of which Deed neither Bell nor MSB had previously been aware. Thereafter, on 16 November 1987, MSB wrote to Westpac a letter (Appeal
Book p. 29), which, omitting formal parts, was as follows; - "Re: Keralan Pastoral Co.
 
Thank you for your letter of the 3rd November, 1987.
 
We acknowledge receipt of the copy Priority Agreement, the existance (sic) of which we and our client became aware for the first time on 6th November, 1987.
 
Would you kindly calculate for our client and advise us as soon as possible of the amount for which the Bank has first priority pursuant to that Priority Agreement." 
It would appear (see Appeal Book pp. 31-32) that, following the commencement by Mr. Kelly and the companies which he controlled, or with which he was associated, of the proceedings to which I have earlier referred, consideration was given by the Bell interests to varying the manner in which those interests would acquire from Westpac the debts owed by Messrs. Kelly and Amor and the various securities held by Westpac in relation to those debts. Accordingly, over the period of the months which followed prior to the execution of the Deed of Assignment to which I will later refer, correspondence would seem to have passed, and discussions would seem to have been had, between Westpac, Bell, AA & H and MSB in relation to the manner in which any assignment should be structured and the ultimate purchase price calculated. 
On 12 April 1988 Westpac, Bell and Vamoti (in the Deed described as" the
Assignee") executed the Deed of Assignment to which I have earlier referred.
So far as is relevant to the issues to be determined in this appeal, the Deed (Appeal Book pp. 54-65) contained the following: - "WHEREAS: ..........
 
B. The Debtors are in default of the conditions pursuant to which the moneys were lent to them by Westpac and such moneys together with outstanding interest thereon (`the debts') are by virtue of such default, presently due and owing. The amount of the Debts including outstanding interest thereon as at 27th October 1987 is set forth in the letters from Westpac to Allen Allen & Hemsley dated 28th October, 1987 (a copy of which was annexed to the Offer - hereinafter defined) and from Westpac to Michell Sillar & Brown dated 3rd November 1987, a copy of which is annexed hereto marked "C".
 
C. Annexed hereto and marked `A' is a copy of a letter from Michell, Sillar & Brown to Westpac dated 28th October, 1987 (`the Offer') whereby Bell offered to take an assignment of the Debts and the Mortgages from Westpac on the conditions and for the consideration set forth therein.
 
D. Annexed hereto and marked `B' is a copy of a letter from Westpac to Michell, Sillar & Brown dated 29th October 1987 (`the Acceptance') whereby Westpac accepted the Offer (with Bells (sic) acceptance of lines 3-8 of the Acceptance being confirmed by exchange of facsimiles between the parties (sic) respective solicitors on 29th October, 1987 copies of which are also annexed hereto marked `B1" and `B2').
 .........
 
NOW THIS DEED WITNESSES: . Westpac hereby covenants with and warrants to the Assignee as follows: that its rights title and interest in and to the Debts and the Mortgages are not themselves subject to any mortgage charge pledge or other encumbrance of any nature whatsoever; that the Recitals hereto are true, accurate and correct; that as at the time the Agreement was made the representations and each of them set forth in sub-paragraphs numbered (1) (sic), (ii), and (iii) appearing on the first page of the Offer were true, accurate and correct; and that subject to Westpac's obligations to the Debtors as its customers, the Agreement, this Deed and all information and matters of and incidental to or which flow from the Agreement and this Deed shall be kept strictly confidential by Westpac and its advisers and shall not be disclosed to the Mortgagors, the Guarantors, Elders or any other third parties, the express written consent of the Assignee first having been obtained. (sic) . (i) Pursuant to the Agreement and in consideration of payment of the sum of $4,000,000 by the Assignee to the Westpac payable as to $1,700,000 on the date hereof (receipt whereof Westpac hereby acknowledges) with the balance of the consideration amounting to $2,300,000 together with interest in accordance with sub-paragraph (ii) of this Clause being payable by the Assignee to Westpac on the Withdrawal registration date, Westpac as beneficial owner does hereby convey and assign to the Assignee all of its rights, title and interests in and to the Debts, together with the full benefits of all powers, rights and remedies Westpac has to recover the Debts, including without limitation, all powers rights and remedies contained in the Mortgages.
 
Westpac and the Assignee agree that from the expiration of thirty (30) days from execution of this Deed up to and including the Withdrawal registration date interest shall accrue daily on the balance of consideration outstanding under this Clause 2 at a rate determined by Westpac to be the aggregate of 1% per annum and the Westpac Indicator Lending Rate for the time being and shall be payable by the Assignee quarterly in arrears.
 ..........
 . Upon production of evidence satisfactory to Westpac that the Land Titles Office will register Withdrawals of the Caveats AND payment of the balance of the consideration in accordance with sub-paragraph (i) of Clause 2, Westpac will deliver to the Assignee all proper and exclusive muniments of its title to the debts and the Mortgages which are in Westpac's possession or control including without limitation all original loan approvals and agreements including `the offshore Facility Letter' referred to in and being an annexure to the Deed of Priority, allow (sic) documents of title to the Lands, and Westpac's copies of the Mortgages AND shall provide to the Assignee calculations of the amounts of the Debts and outstanding interest thereon as at the date of execution or as at a later date if so required by the Assignee, in a form suitable to enable the Assignee to issue notices of demand therefor. Pending such delivery Westpac will produce the titles to the Lands for any reasonable purpose.
 . Pursuant to the Agreement and in consideration of payment aforesaid by the Assignee to Westpac, Westpac beneficially and absolutely hereby assigns to the Assignee all of its rights title and interests in and to the Guarantee to the Assignee together with the full benefits of all powers, rights and remedies of Westpac contained therein.
 . In further consideration of payment aforesaid by the Assignee to Westpac, Westpac beneficially and absolutely hereby assigns to the Assignee all of its rights title and interests in and to the Deed of Priority together with the full benefits of all powers, rights and remedies of Westpac contained therein AND to all agreements made between Westpac and the Debtors in relation to the loans made by Westpac to the Debtors.
 ..........
 . It is hereby expressly agreed and declared as follows: - that if for any reason whatsoever, and no matter how, including without limitation as a result of a judgment being obtained against Westpac or Bell or the Assignee OR by virtue of a compromise of any proceedings being agreed by Westpac or Bell or the Assignee, the Debts are reduced to less than Westpac's Priority amount as at the date of this Deed, or extinguished, no matter when, the Westpac shall pay to the Assignee within fourteen (14) days after demand, compensation calculated as follows: - either: if the debts are reduced as aforesaid but not extinguished, a sum equal to Westpac's Priority amount as at the date of this Deed LESS the amount to which the Debts may be reduced if they are reduced to less than Westpac's Priority amount as at the date of this Deed, or if the Debts are extinguished, a sum equal to Westpac's Priority Amount as at the date of this Deed, the compensation referred to above shall be paid by Westpac and accepted by the Assignee in full satisfaction release and discharge of any liability of Westpac to the Assignee arising out of any breach by Westpac of its covenant and warranty contained in Clause (1)(b) above (sic) the effect that Recital B hereof is true, accurate and correct, BUT shall in no way affect or limit any other liability or obligation imposed on Westpac hereunder and in particular but without limitation the remaining covenants and warranties contained in Clause 1 and the indemnities given by Westpac as set forth in Clause 7 hereof, and 
Westpac shall properly calculate Westpac's Priority amount as at the date of this Deed as soon as reasonably possible hereafter and advise the Assignee thereof in writing and at such time provide to the Assignee also in writing, details of its calculations. Such amount shall thereafter be accepted by the parties for the purpose of this Clause 8 as being Westpac's Priority amount as at the date of this Deed." 
Although the material in the Appeal Books does not expressly demonstrate that this was so, there appears to be no doubt that, after the execution of the Deed of Assignment, there were executed, and delivered to MSB on behalf of Bell and Vamoti, a form of Transfer to Vamoti of the registered Mortgages over the lands which were registered pursuant to the provisions of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) and a form of Conveyance - described as a "Deed of Assignment" - to Vamoti, subject to the proviso for redemption contained in the relevant Mortgage, of the land the subject of the Old System Mortgage to which I have earlier referred.

Quite what happened in the course of the 18 months which followed is anything but clear, although it appears that, at some time which is not revealed, but which appears to have been before November 1989, Vamoti appointed Mr.
Alexander Macintosh as receiver of at least some of the real estate over which it had mortgages (see Appeal Book pp. 135, 154) and that, at some time between
March and June 1988, Elders, which held a stock mortgage, dated 30 April 1988, over sheep owned by Keralan appointed Mr. Geoffrey. James as receiver of the sheep, and agisted the sheep on the property the subject of the various mortgages.

It is likely that it was not long after Elders had appointed Mr. James as receiver of the sheep the subject of the stock mortgage, that there were commenced proceedings ED No. 2119 of 1988 to which I next refer. In those proceedings, (see Appeal Book pp. 135-136) Elders appears to have sought against Westpac and the Bell interests, including Vamoti, an injunction restraining the removal of the sheep the subject of the stock mortgage from the properties upon which they were being agisted, which injunction, as it would appear, was granted upon terms that Elders Mr. James, should pay agistment fees to Mr. Macintosh - it should be noted that whereas Mr.
Macintosh when appointed as receiver was the agent of the Messrs. Kelly and
Amor (see Appeal Book p.135), Mr. James when appointed was by virtue of the terms of the stock mortgage the agent, or representative, of Elders and not of the Messrs. Kelly and Amor.

Whether or not it was originally part of the relief sought in proceedings ED
No. 2119 of 1988, it would seem (see Appeal Book pp. 47, 132-133) that, at some time prior to November 1989, Elders applied to the Court to have four of the properties - "Quiamong", "Melness", "St. Elmo" and "Lavistock" sold -
Vamoti had only a Second Mortgage over the fifth property "Sandridge Park".
That application appears to have come before Bryson J whose Judgment on the application appears to have been delivered on 6 November 1989, formal orders giving effect to the Judgment apparently being made on 10 November 1989.
Although the appeal papers do not contain a copy of the formal orders, it is said (Appeal Book p.47) that Bryson J ordered the properties sold at prices not less than certain reserves which were set by him in consultation with Mr.
James, who was appointed to sell the properties, the total of the reserves apparently being not less than the amount of the first priority, which was estimated by Bryson J to be of the order of $8.5 million.

It is further said (Appeal Book p.47) that the properties were submitted to public auction in December 1989 but not then sold. However, it would appear that, in February 1990, Mr. James found a purchaser for "Quiamong", "Melness" and "St. Elmo", but not for "Lavistock", which remained unsold. Thereafter, on April 1990, the sales of "Quiamong", "Melness" and "St. Elmo" were completed and a sum of $6,782,980.00 was paid to Vamoti. On the same day, in order to stop interest on the debt owed by the Messrs. Kelly and Amor to
Vamoti from continuing to run, Elders paid into an Interest Bearing Account in the names of the representatives of Elders and Vamoti, an amount of $2,522,773.09, that sum being calculated by reference to the maximum amount claimed by Vamoti still to be outstanding under the first priority - it was agreed that interest accruing on that joint account would be shared equally between Elders and Vamoti.

After the exchange of contracts for the sale of "Quiamong", "Melness" and "St.
Elmo", but before those contracts had been completed, Elders indicated that it wished to redeem the mortgage held by Vamoti in respect of "Lavistock", and, on 15 March 1990, there was filed a Notice of Motion in which Elders sought (inter alia) the taking of accounts so as to determine the amount of the first priority. That Notice of Motion came before Bryson J his Judgment being delivered on 15 June 1990.

Bryson J's Judgment (Appeal Book pp. 132-159A) would appear to indicate that on that application, two matters of principle were argued, they being: - whether the amount of $650,000.00 approximately which had been received by
Vamoti as representing the agistment fees payable for the period 13 July 1988 to November 1989, was to be applied in reduction of the principal owed by the
Messrs. Kelly and Amor - in which event, although the amount of outstanding principal would be reduced, the amount of $5,000,000.00 subject to the first priority would not be reduced - or was to be applied in reduction of that amount of $5,000,000.00; and whether the interest payable in respect of the Australian dollar loan was to be calculated at a rate representing Westpac's Indicator Lending Rate plus a margin of 1.125% - the submission advanced on behalf of Elders - or at a rate representing Westpac Indicator Lending Rate plus a margin of 2.5% - as was contended for on behalf of Vamoti.
 which matters of principle were resolved by Bryson J as follows: the amount received for agistment fees was to be applied in reduction of the $5,000,000.00 the subject of the first priority; and the interest was to be calculated on the basis of Westpac's Indicator
Lending Rate plus a margin of, 1.125%, the basis of that determination seemingly being that the terms of paragraph 1(g) of the various mortgages did not permit Westpac, once a rate had been agreed upon - as his Honour found had been the fact in March 1984 - thereafter unilaterally to increase the rate of interest.

Although the effect of Bryson J's determination of the first of these matters of principle is of no relevance to the present appeal, the effect of his
Honour's determination of the second of those matters is that, instead of interest as at 27 April 1990 being, as Vamoti contended, $2,544,283.99, interest as at that date was $2,262,057.61, that is an amount $282,226.36 less (see Appeal Book p.6). Since the amounts which, following the taking of the accounts, were paid to Elders out of moneys available for distribution pursuant to the Deed of Priority totalled $905,293.21, it is clear that, if the basis for the calculation of interest had been that for which Vamoti contended, it would have received out of the moneys available for distribution pursuant to the Deed of Priority a further sum of $282,226.36.

Although it would appear that, on the hearing before Rolfe J, counsel for
Vamoti submitted that Westpac had been guilty of a breach of each of the warranties contained in clause 1(b),(c) of the Deed of Assignment, Rolfe J - seemingly without rejecting the submission as to the alleged breach of the warranty contained in clause 1(c) - appears to have been content to find that
Westpac had been guilty of a breach of the warranty contained in clause 1(b).
His Honour's conclusion as to the question of construction of the Deed of
Assignment and as to the argument which had been raised on behalf of Westpac as to the alleged remoteness of the damage claimed are succinctly set out in the following passage (Appeal Book pp. 188-189) in his Judgment: - "Conclusions 
In my opinion the submissions on behalf of Vamoti on the question of construction should be accepted. Recital B incorporated the letter of 28 October 1987 from Westpac to Allen Allen & Hemsley. That letter sets forth the interest margin both in paragraph 2 and in Schedule A and, in speaking of interest in Schedule A it was speaking of a future situation. It seems to me to be ignoring the words of the documents to suggest that all that was being done was that an account was being struck as at 27 October 1987. What was being covenanted and warranted by Clause 1(b) was that Recital B was true, accurate and correct. That means, in my opinion, that the matters set forth in the letters incorporated in recital B were true, accurate and correct. That, in turn, means that the rate at which interest was chargeable was at 2.5% above the indicator lending rate. Such a construction, in my opinion, is consistent with all the documentation and, particularly, Clauses 6 and 8(ii) of the Deed, and is the only reasonable construction of the Deed. If that is not so there is no point, so far as I can see, in setting forth the interest rates in the future in the letter of 28 October 1987.
 
The decision of Bryson J established that the excess over the indicator lending rate for the time being was not 2.5% but 1.25% (sic). Hence, in my opinion, there was a breach of the covenant and warranty entitling Vamoti to recover damages, subject only to the assertion by Westpac that the damages were too remote.
 
Remoteness of Damage 
The final submission by Westpac was that the damages claimed were too remote. I do not agree. The assignment included an assignment of the right to interest at the rate covenanted or warranted. If that covenant could not be made good it must have been within the contemplation of the parties that damages would flow from the breach. I cannot see how, consistently with the approach in March v. E. & M.H. Stramore (sic) Pty. Ltd. <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 506], it can be said damages by way of loss of interest were too remote. In my view if this warranty was invalidated the damages resulted from that on any relevant contractual approach." (Although it appears (see Appeal Book p.51) that, on the hearing before Rolfe J, it had been submitted on behalf of Westpac that, even if, upon its proper construction, the Deed of Assignment contained a warranty, or warranties, on behalf of Westpac as to the rate of interest chargeable in respect of the Australian dollar loan, that warranty was not a warranty that interest accrued only on a simple interest basis, it is apparent from the passage in his Honour's Judgment, which I have just set out, that his Honour did not direct his attention to that question.) 
In the Notice of Appeal (Appeal Book pp. 192-193) which was filed on its behalf, Westpac sought to raise the following grounds of appeal: - "1. The Court erred in finding that there was a breach by the appellant of the warranty given by it in clause 1(b) of the Deed of Assignment between the appellant and the respondents, dated 12 April 1988 ("the Deed").
 . The Court erred in finding that by clause 1(b) of the Deed the appellant had warranted to the respondents that it was true, accurate and correct that the rate at which interest was chargeable on the debts the subject of the Deed was at 2.5% above the appellant's indicated lending rate.
 . The Court erred in finding that it was not necessary to have regard to the correspondence annexed to the Affidavit of Mr. Diethelm, dated 18 December 1991 as an aid to construction of the warranties in the Deed.
 . Alternatively, the Court erred in failing to find that on its proper construction the relevant warranty given by the appellant as to the interest rate chargeable on the debts subject of the Deed was a warranty that such interest be calculated on a simple interest basis, and not on a compound interest basis.
 . The Court erred in finding that the damages claimed by the respondents were not too remote." 
Thereafter, there was filed on behalf of Vamoti and Bell a Notice of Contention (Appeal Book p.194) in which Vamoti and Bell contended that Rolfe J's Judgment should be affirmed on the following additional or alternative ground: - "That the appellant is liable to pay damages to the first respondent by reason of a breach by the appellant of the warranty set out in sub-clause 1(c) of the Deed of Assignment dated 12 April 1988 between the appellant and the first respondent." 
When the appeal came on for hearing Mr. F.M. Douglas Q.C. appeared with Mr. J.P.A. Durack for Westpac, while Mr. P.G. Hely Q.C. appeared with Mr. J.E. Marshall for Vamoti and Bell. 
Reduced to their most simple form, the submissions which were advanced on behalf of Westpac on the hearing of the appeal were: - that no warranties were given by Westpac as to its contractual entitlement to any particular rate of future interest on the debts outstanding and that the warranties which were in fact given were simply warranties as to the quantum of the debts outstanding as at 27 October 1987; that no warranties were given as to the manner in which interest on the debts was to be calculated - in particular Westpac gave no warranty that interest on the debts could be compounded; that, the normal measure of damages for breach of warranty of the type in question being the difference between the value as warranted and the value in fact at the date of breach (reference was made to Barisa Pty. Limited v.
Varga Bros. Investments Pty. Limited 4; McGregor on Damages 5) Vamoti was not entitled to any damages as there was no relevant difference in value, since the amount of the debts owing to Westpac at the relevant time far exceeded the value of the properties the subject of the securities at the relevant time; that, in any event, it could not be said either at the date of the making of the Assignment Agreement, or at the date of the execution of the Deed of
Assignment, that there was a real possibility that in the event of breach of warranty, Vamoti or Bell, or both, would suffer the loss which they claimed (reference was made to Victoria Laundry v. Newman 6; Koufos v.
Czarnikow 7; Alexander v. Cambridge Credit Corporation 8).

I must say, at the outset, that I found some of these submissions rather difficult to follow. Thus: - even if, as Westpac would have it, the warranties were limited to warranties as to the quantum of the debts owing to it as at 28 October 1987, it is clear that what, in annexure "A" to the letter from Westpac to AA &
H of 28 October 1987 as amended in the letter from Westpac to MSB of 3
November 1987, was said to be the amount of principal and interest owing in respect of the Australian dollar loan was wrong, since the amount of interest had been calculated at a rate which Bryson J was later to hold to be inapplicable; .(a) in the letter of 3 November 1987 from Westpac to MSB, which letter is referred to in recital B of the Deed of Assignment, and is thus the subject of the warranty as to truth contained in clause 1(b) of the Deed of Assignment, the adjusted figure for total interest not charged is said to have been calculated (inter alia) "taking into account the interest on interest effect" which is a clear reference to compounding; and in any event, the subject matter of clause 6 of the Deed of Assignment was, inter alia, "all agreements made between Westpac and the debtors in relation to the loans made by Westpac to the debtors", which agreements included the right to compound interest; pursuant to clause 3 of the Deed of Assignment, Westpac executed and delivered to Vamoti a Memorandum of Transfer of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) Mortgages and the Deed of Conveyance subject to the right of redemption, of the land comprised in the Old System Mortgage, each of which mortgages contained a clause in the terms which I have set out earlier (see pp. 4-5 (above)) permitting compounding.

Leaving aside my difficulties in these respects however, it is still necessary to deal with the particular submissions which were advanced on behalf of
Westpac.

The warranty in clause 1(b) 
Westpac would have it that recital B was concerned with two matters only, they being: - the fact that the moneys advanced to the Messrs. Kelly and Amor, together with interest thereon, were then presently due and owing; and that the amount of the moneys which had been advanced together with the interest which had accrued thereon as at 27 October 1987 were as set out in the letter from Westpac to AA & H of 28 October 1987 as amended in the letter from Westpac to MSB dated 3 November 1987.

The specification of the amount due and owing being a specification at a fixed point of time, with no element of futurity about it, the warranty given by clause 1(b) was - so the submission ran - limited to matters at 27 October and did not extend to any other matters contained in the two letters - in particular, it did not extend to the manner of calculating interest, and more particularly, did not extend to the manner in which interest might in the future properly be calculated.

With respect, I am unable to accept so limited an approach to the warranty which, in this respect, was given by the interaction of recital B and clause (b) of the Deed of Assignment. As I have earlier observed, the subject matter of the Deed of Assignment was the moneys owing by the Messrs. Kelly and Amor to Westpac as at a the date of execution of the Deed of Assignment and not merely as at 28 October 1987, together with all the rights which Westpac had both against the Messrs. Kelly and Amor and the various persons and companies which had given security in respect of those moneys, those latter rights including rights to charge interest at the rates and in the manner agreed upon. This being so, it follows, in my view, that, as Schedule A to the letter from Westpac to AA & H of 28 October 1987 asserted, both, that an amount of interest was due and payable, and, that that amount had been calculated in a particular way, it was asserting, not merely that the interest in question was due and owing, but that the amount of that interest, and the manner in which it had been calculated, accorded with Westpac's rights in relation to the loans.

That this is not a fanciful approach to the question is, I suggest, demonstrated by the provisions of clause 8(iii) of the Deed of Assignment which required Westpac properly to calculate, as at the date of the Deed of
Assignment, the amount for which Westpac - and thus Vamoti - was entitled to claim priority pursuant to the provisions of clause 1(i) of the Deed of
Priority. As the amount for which Westpac was, pursuant to the provisions of the Deed of Priority, entitled to claim priority, although limited as to principal was unlimited as to (inter alia) interest, Westpac could only comply with the obligation cast on it by the provisions of clause 8(iii) of the Deed of Assignment if it were (inter alia) to calculate interest on the whole amount of the outstanding principal at the rate and in the manner provided for in the agreement between the Messrs. Kelly and Amor and itself and in the various securities which had been given up to and including 12 April 1988.

If this be the correct approach to be taken to the warranty which, in this respect, was given by clause 1(b) of the Deed of Assignment, then it follows that Westpac was guilty of a breach of that warranty in two respects, first, as to the rate of interest from time to time applied in the past, and from time to time to be applied in the future, and, second, as to the amount of interest accrued as at 27 October 1987.

The warranty in clause 1(c) 
In Westpac's submissions, the warranty given by clause 1(c) was directed to what were essentially the same matters to which the warranty given by clause (b) was directed but at an earlier point of time, that is, as at 27 October , it following that, as had been submitted in relation to the warranty under clause 1(b) no warranty as to future interest was given.

Quite apart from the fact that, as what I have earlier recorded will clearly demonstrate, even if the warranty is to be construed in the manner contended for by Westpac, it is clear that there has been a breach of that warranty in respect at least of the interest said to have accrued in the period from 1
October 1987 to 27 October 1987, for the reasons which I have given in respect of the warranty under clause 1(b) of the Deed of Assignment, I am of the view that the warranty which, in this respect, was given pursuant to the provisions of clause 1(c) of the Deed of Assignment was as to the rate at which and the manner in which interest was to be calculated in the future.

I therefore conclude that, in this respect as well, Westpac was guilty of a breach of warranty.

A warranty as to compound interest.
 
As I have earlier recorded, Westpac has submitted that neither of the warranties given pursuant to clauses 1(b) and 1(c) of the Deed of Assignment contained any warranty as to Westpac's - and thus Vamoti's - right to charge compound interest. Although it seems to me that, because of the reference, in the letter of 3 November 1987 from Westpac to MSB, to the "interest on interest effect", a more than respectable argument could be mounted in favour of such a warranty, I am prepared to proceed upon the basis that no such warranty was given. I do so, for it seems to me that the submission advanced in this respect is misconceived, for, as I have earlier pointed out, the rights which, whether pursuant to the provisions of clause 6 of the Deed of
Assignment, or the Memorandum of Transfer and Conveyance executed pursuant to the provisions of clause 4 of the Deed of Assignment, were assigned by Westpac to Vamoti included the right to compound interest. It follows that the calculation of the damage sustained by Vamoti does not depend upon Westpac having given a warranty as to a right to compound.

The measure of damages 
Remoteness of damage.
 
I am unable to accept as correct Westpac's submission that "the normal measure of damages for breach of warranty of the type in question is the difference between value as warranted and value in fact at the date of breach", which submission, I suggest, is not supported by the passage in
McGregor on Damages 9, nor by the decision of this Court in Barisa Pty.
Limited v. Varga Bros. Investments Pty. Limited 10, to which reference was made in the course of argument.

What Westpac has submitted is the normal measure of damages originated in the area of contracts for the sale of goods, although it is to be remembered that s.54 of the Sales of Goods Act 1923 - which section deals with the remedies of a buyer in the case of breach of warranty - so far as is relevant, provides: - "(2) The measure of damages for breach of warranty is the estimated loss directly and naturally resulting in the ordinary course of events from the breach of warranty. 
In the case of breach of warranty of quality such loss is prima facie the difference between the value of the goods at the time of delivery to the buyer and the value they would have had if they had answered to the warranty." 
It is true that, although originating in the area relating to contracts for the sale of goods, that measure has been applied, also, to contracts for hire and hire purchase (Brown v. Sheen & Richmond Car Sales 11; Shanklin Pier Limited v. Detel Products Limited 12; Andrews v. Hopkinson 13; F. Jones & Co. Pty. Limited v. C.G. Grais & Sons Pty. Limited 14) and to contracts for the sale of stocks and shares (Re Government Security Fire Insurance, Mudford's Claim 15; Great Australian Gold Mining Company. Ex parte Appleyard 16) the application of that principle to such cases having been done analogically, no doubt because, in such cases, there is an accepted market for the goods, or property, the subject of the contract in question, and an accepted manner of determining or ascertaining market value. 
Where, however, in a case such as this is, there is no accepted market, one must return to basic principles. The general rule of the common law, which forms the starting point of a consideration of the assessment of damages, is that "where a party sustains a loss by reason of a breach of contract, he is, so far as money can do it, to be placed in the same situation with respect to damages, as if the contract had been performed" (Robinson v. Harman 17; see also Koufos v. C. Czarnikow Limited 18 ; Wenham v. Ella 19; The
Commonwealth v. Amann Aviation Pty. Limited 20), which general rule is, however, limited by the rule in Hadley v. Baxendale 21 that "where two parties have made a contract which one of them has broken, the damages which the other ought to receive in respect of such breach of contract should be such as may fairly and reasonably be considered either arising naturally, i.e., according to the usual course of things, from such breach of contract itself, or such as may reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties, at the time they made the contract, as the probable result of the breach of it".

In the present case, what, relevantly, was warranted was that the Australian dollar loan bore interest at a rate representing Westpac's Indicator Lending
Rate from time to time plus 2.5% whereas what was relevantly assigned was a right to receive interest on the Australian dollar loan at the rate representing Westpac's Indicator Lending Rate from time to time plus 1.125%.
The necessary consequence of the breach of warranty was that Vamoti lost the opportunity to receive interest at the higher rate and it is that loss which must be valued. While, if it had been necessary for a court to value the loss of that opportunity at a time prior to the realisation of the properties which were the subject of the securities there may have been some difficulty in doing so, it seems to me that, in a case such as this, where the Court had evidence of what in fact occurred, the Court is not precluded from having regard to the actuality when it comes to assessing the amount of damages to which Vamoti was entitled.

This being so, I would reject the submissions which have been advanced on behalf of Westpac under these two headings.

Conclusion 
For the reasons which I have set out above, I propose that the appeal be dismissed. 
In the normal course I would also have proposed that the Appellant pay the
Respondents' costs of the appeal. However, after the Court reserved its decision, the Respondents' solicitors wrote to the members of the Court advising them that, in the event of the appeal being dismissed, the
Respondents would wish to make submissions as to the appropriate measure of costs to be allowed and to put relevant material before the Court in support of their submissions. This being so, I would, at this stage, propose that the costs of the appeal be reserved.
 [(1989) 18 NSWLR 248] [2] [(1989) 18 NSWLR 248], 250 supra [(1991) 4 ACSR 620] 15 Ed. para. 1050 [[1949] 2 KB 528], 539-540 [1969] 1 AC 350, 388, 406, 410-411, 414-415, 425 [(1987) 9 NSWLR 310], 363-366 15 Ed. 1988 p.651 para. 1050 supra  <case>; [(1848) 1 Exch. 850], 855; <case>; [154 ER 363](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=154%20ER%20363 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 365 per Parke B (as Lord Wensleydale then was) supra at 414 per Lord Pearce, 420 per Lord Upjohn  <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 454], 471 per
Gibbs J (as he then was)  <case>; [(1991) 174 CLR 64], 80 per
Mason CJ and Dawson J, 98 per Brennan J (as he then was), 134 per Toohey J, per Gaudron J [(1854) 9 Exch. 341], 354; 156 ER 145, 151 * * * 
