

Regina versus M J Rose [1996] NSWSC 44 (5 March 1996) 
REGINA v. Michael John ROSE /95 March 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SMART J, SULLY J 
CATCHWORDS: CROWN APPEAL AGAINST INADEQUACY OF SENTENCE FOR MALICIOUSLY INFLICTING GREIVIOUS BODILY HARM 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex Tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
HEADNOTE 
Rose pleaded guilty to maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. He was one of three men involved in an attack on a man believed by them to be a miscreant. The victim received serious injuries.

Rose and another assailant were dealt with at different times by different judges and the findings of fact were not easy to reconcile.

The judge sentencing Rose regarded the subjective factors as exceptional and powerful.

HELD: The sentence of 12 months periodic detention did not sufficiently reflect the objective gravity of the offence and a sentence of 3 years periodic detention should be substituted.

ORDERS
Crown appeal allowed.
In lieu of the sentence imposed, Michael John Rose be sentenced to imprisonment for three years to be served by way of periodic detention at
Grafton Periodic Detention Centre. Such sentence is to commence as from 22
September 1995. So far as may be necessary time served to date is to count.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Smart J to give the first judgment.

SMART J: The Crown has appealed against a sentence imposed by Judge Taylor on the ground that it was inadequate.

Michael John Rose had pleaded guilty to a charge of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. He received a sentence of twelve months' periodic detention.

The statement of facts, which is based on the police statement and the judge's remarks, is as follows.

Late on 6 January 1995 the victim went to the Fairway Terraces, Banora Point to visit his sister-in-law.

Rose was approached by another resident, Shane Ritchie, who stated that some person had been letting down tyres in the complex. Rose and Ritchie located the victim and challenged him as to why he was in the complex. Rose got the co-offender, David Marcus Paul Reid. Rose, Reid and Ritchie again confronted the victim about why he was in the complex. Reid grabbed hold of the victim, pulling him towards them.

The victim became scared and informed the group he lived up the street. The victim commenced to walk away from the unit complex and was followed by the group. The victim sat down about 130 metres from the unit complex. Reid commenced yelling at the victim and struck the victim a number of times to the temple section of his head. The blows by Reid were fast and consecutive. The victim collapsed onto the roadway. Reid picked the victim up, struck the victim with a closed fist to the left eye, nose and cheek area. The victim collapsed onto the roadway. Reid lifted the victim to a sitting position. He was bleeding heavily.

The victim moved towards Rose, who struck the victim to the left jaw with his right fist. The victim fell backwards onto the roadway. Reid moved the victim off the roadway and onto a grassed area. Reid and Rose placed the victim in a "coma" position. Reid spat upon the victim.

Reid, Rose and Ritchie returned to Ritchie's unit and Ritchie caused the police and ambulance to be informed. Reid left the premises. Ritchie and Rose went back to where the victim was and checked his condition.

The victim was ultimately taken to the Gold Coast Hospital, Southport. He suffered a fractured skull, nose and cheekbone, and had to be operated upon to reduce swelling in the brain. Had treatment not been received immediately he would have died or suffered serious permanent disability.

The victim is now suffering from temporal lobe epilepsy, which causes dizziness, and is on medication for that. He has lost some hearing capacity in his right ear and his eyesight has been impaired, so that he now requires glasses. The victim's head shape has changed because of the fractures. The likelihood of total recovery from these injuries was not known at sentencing but the prospects did not seem good.

On 10 January 1995 Rose was interviewed and made full admissions. He has co- operated with the police and aided with police enquiries. He has shown remorse for his participation in this incident.

The judge appreciated the gravity of the crime, including the unprovoked and wanton attack, the serious injuries inflicted, and the disabilities suffered by the victim. He recognised there had been a grave breach of the peace.

The judge, while taking the view that Reid was the main aggressor, recognised there was significant criminality in Rose being involved with Reid in the attack and that Rose had pleaded guilty to maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm.

The judge was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the single blow of
Rose caused the injuries. The judge found that the blow was a very hard one.
The judge acknowledged the element of deterrence. The judge stated that on the objective circumstances a full-time custodial sentence was warranted.

The judge held in balance, and was moved by: 
Rose's previous good character - he had no prior convictions; his age of nineteen; his genuine contrition, including his early plea of guilty and his assistance to the police; the good references as to his character, including his reliability, honesty, good work, consciousness and voluntary community service; and his excellent prospects of rehabilitation, which include strong family and community support.

The judge recorded that Rose had made a deep impression on the court. The judge felt it was an exceptional case. The judge noted that Rose was prepared to attend and give evidence against Reid.

Reid subsequently appeared before Judge Downs on 4 October 1995 on a charge of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. He pleaded guilty and was placed on a $500 bond to be of good behaviour for 6 months. An appeal against the adequacy of this sentence has been abandoned by the Crown.

Rose gave evidence at Reid's sentence hearing. There were factual disputes.
The judge, despite evidence from Rose and Ritchie, sentenced Reid on the basis of what he had admitted in his statement to the police. Judge Downs was not satisfied that Reid caused any of the victim's fractures or the haematoma, but instead found that the striking of the victim's head on the roadway following
Rose's punch would be the most likely cause of the fracture of the skull.
There were, of course, other injuries.

As earlier mentioned, Judge Taylor was not satisfied that Rose's punch caused the injuries. It appears it is not possible to determine who caused the serious injuries. It is perhaps relevant to point out that what was significant in this case was the joint involvement.

Judge Downs sentenced Reid on the basis that after he put his hand on the victim's shoulder and asked him where he lived the victim tensed and Reid became scared because of that movement. He struck the victim and whilst the victim was still standing he slapped him with his other hand across the top of his head. It was at this stage that Reid turned to walk away and then Rose hit the victim who fell to the roadway.

Ritchie's statement before Judge Taylor paints the picture of Reid being the main aggressor and as having hit the victim hard. He also speaks of the punch of Rose and the victim falling backwards onto the bitumen. It appears from the materials that Reid was a much bigger man than Rose and that the two men were about the same age.

Reid's evidence was not before Judge Taylor and this court must proceed on the basis of the materials before Judge Taylor and the findings which he made.
Those findings were open to him.

In retrospect, it would have been better if the one judge had dealt with both men at the same time so there could be consistent findings.

On Judge Taylor's findings it would be curious for Rose to receive a greater sentence than Reid. It seems that the police took a certain view about what had happened and who bore the major responsibility. It was desired to deal with Rose first so he could give evidence against Reid. However, it must be recalled that Reid pleaded guilty to assault occasioning actual bodily harm, whereas Rose pleaded guilty to maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm.

The Crown submitted that Judge Taylor had not sufficiently allowed for the gravity of the offence, nor had he sufficiently taken into account the element of malice and the resulting injuries. The Crown further submitted that the sentence imposed did not give sufficient weight to the element of deterrence.

I do not accept that the judge did not allow sufficiently for the intention nor that he did not appreciate the effect of the plea. I do not accept that the judge did not sufficiently allow for deterrence.

At the hearing before this court further favourable references were received.
They underline the general good character of Rose.

With all due respect to the judge, the sentence imposed does not adequately reflect the objective gravity of the offence. I see no sufficient discretionary ground for not intervening.

Bearing in mind all the circumstances, including that this is a Crown appeal, it would not be appropriate to sentence Rose to a full-time custodial sentence. The appropriate sentence is one of periodic detention for three years.

I propose that the Crown appeal be allowed and that in lieu of the sentence imposed Michael John Rose be sentenced to imprisonment for three years, to be served by way of periodic detention at Grafton Periodic Detention Centre. Such sentence is to commence as from 22 September 1995. So far as may be necessary time served to date is to count.

GLEESON: I agree.

SULLY J: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: The order of the court will be as proposed by Smart J.
 * * * 
