

Regina versus J F P [2004] NSWSC 1333 (5 September 2004) 
REGINA versus J F P /94 JULY 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, STUDDERT J, DUNFORD J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - sexual offences - joint trial involving several complainants - no application by counsel for separate trials - introduction of propensity evidence - no objection by counsel - application of r 4 [Criminal Appeal Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/).

Corroboration of complainant's evidence - nature of evidence available - no necessity for trial judge to warn jury of acting on complainant's evidence alone.

Sentencing - homosexual intercourse with two victims under ten years of age (s
H Crimes Act) - assault with act of indecency on child under ten years of age (s 61M(2) Crimes Act) - concurrent sentences for homosexual intercourse offences of ten years penal servitude with minimum terms of six years and additional terms of four years - not manifestly excessive and involved no of error principle.

Formal Orders:
Appeal against convictions dismissed.
Leave granted to appellant to appeal against sentences but such appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Studdert J. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour, and with his reasons for those orders.

I would add only one matter concerning the way in which ground 4(a) was argued. The court raised with senior counsel for the appellant the question whether any point was taken at the trial, or was being taken on appeal, as to form, as distinct from relevance, in relation to the evidence of the plea of guilty and convictions of R. The concern of the court was that there might have been an argument that, even it had been relevant to prove the conduct of
R towards her son, this was not a permissible way to do it. Direct evidence of such conduct could, of course, have been called from the son himself, assuming it to be otherwise relevant. However, the court was informed that no such point was taken at the trial, and no such argument would be advanced on the appeal. It therefore became unnecessary for the court to consider the question.

STUDDERT J: The appellant appeals against his conviction on three counts following a trial in the District Court before his Honour Judge Coleman QC and jury between 22 August and 6 September 1994. 
The indictment presented charged the appellant with twelve counts of alleged sexual offences upon three young brothers, to whom I shall refer simply as G,
S and C. At the conclusion of the Crown case the trial judge directed the jury to return a verdict of not guilty on counts 1, 2, 3, 4 and 6, each of which charged the appellant with assaults with acts of indecency upon G. The appellant was acquitted on counts 9-12, each of which charged him with homosexual intercourse with C, the eldest of the three children. However, on the remaining three counts, two of which charged homosexual intercourse and a third which charged an assault with act of indecency, the jury found the appellant guilty.

C was born on 29 December 1977 and his younger brothers, G and S, who were twins, were born on 30 October 1982. At the time the various offences charged were allegedly committed C was approximately thirteen years of age and the twins were approximately eight to nine years of age.

All of the offences charged were alleged to have been committed over a period from November 1990 until October 1991. During that period the children lived with their mother (to whom I shall refer as R) in self contained accommodation immediately behind the residence of R's parents. R was then separated from the father of the children and had been for several years.

The appellant met the children at a local swimming pool some time shortly before he went to live at their home. He lived under the same roof as them for a period of approximately six months from April 1991 until 14 October 1991.
The available accommodation included three bedrooms. Prior to the arrival of the appellant, R occupied one bedroom, C another and the third was shared by the twins but when the appellant arrived those arrangements were necessarily altered. The twins were provided with double bunks, and the appellant moved into their bedroom, using a mattress at first and later acquiring a double bed. There was evidence that G sometimes slept in the same bed as the appellant, as did C.

Each of the children gave evidence of a pattern of sexual abuse by the appellant. The offence charged against G in respect of which the jury found the appellant guilty was described by that witness as involving penile penetration by the appellant of the victim's anus after the child was dragged into the appellant's bedroom. The remaining counts upon which the appellant was found guilty concerned the twin brother S. They involved a similar act of sexual intercourse occurring in circumstances like those in G's case, and an act of attempted anal penetration. The appellant was acquitted on the four charges concerning C where again the substance of each charge was an allegation of anal penetration. According to C (but not his brothers), the pattern of sexual abuse began before the appellant began to live with them and when the children earlier visited a flat he occupied in a neighbouring suburb.

The police were not notified of the alleged criminal activity of the appellant until August 1992, some ten months after the appellant had left the premises where the behaviour the subject of the charges allegedly took place, but there was evidence that the twins spoke to an officer of the Department of Community
Services, Ms Jolanta Jenkinson, in June 1991, immediately before the appellant's departure from the house. The information provided by the twins which prompted Ms Jenkinson to interview the appellant did not include complaints of intercourse but, according to the departmental officer and an accompanying witness, Ms Joanne McLean, the appellant, when confronted concerning the twins' assertions, did not deny that he had touched them, and acknowledged that they could have been victims "from a psychological point of view", stating that he "preferred boys to girls". The prosecution case relied essentially upon the evidence of the alleged victims and the evidence of the departmental officers.

The appellant gave sworn evidence at the trial denying any sexual assault upon any one of the children and denying that he had made any form of admission to the departmental officers. It was his case that the twins fabricated their evidence, and that they first made specific complaint that the offences charged had been committed at a time when they were staying with their father in August 1992. The jury was invited to consider that the motive behind their allegations at that time was a desire to stay with their father (who was then applying for their custody) rather than to continue to reside in an unhappy environment with their mother. There was evidence that R had sexually abused S and, indeed, shortly before the trial of the appellant began, R pleaded guilty on three counts of indecent assault upon S. Further there was evidence that the children were physically abused by their maternal grandfather; the abuse was not of a sexual nature but the grandfather allegedly administered severe corporal punishment for any perceived wrongdoing.

Against that background I consider the various grounds of appeal.

Ground 1: 
The trial miscarried 
This ground requires no separate consideration since to support it the appellant relied upon the remaining grounds of appeal 2-5.

Ground 2: 
The trial judge erred in conducting a hearing of the charges involving the complainants by way of a joint trial.

No application was made by counsel who appeared for the appellant at his trial for separate trials. Mr Ramage of Queen's Counsel invited this Court to infer that the failure to make such an application resulted from either a lack of awareness of, or a failure to consider, the significance of the decision of the High Court in Hoch versus The Queen ((1988) <case>; [165 CLR 292).] I would draw no such inference. On the contrary, there would appear to have been a deliberate tactical decision to have all the charges heard together. This is further demonstrated upon a consideration of ground 3.

Something of the history concerning these charges is to be gleaned from the remarks on sentence of the trial judge following the convictions of the appellant. In June 1993 the appellant and R were both arraigned before Gibson
DCJ on an indictment containing the twelve charges against the appellant on which he ultimately stood trial and a further three charges against R in respect of the sexual offences allegedly committed by her against S. The trial began with all fifteen charges being heard together but the jury was discharged after several days because of a juror's possible association with a
Crown witness.

Then in August 1994 the appellant and R came to trial before Coleman DCJ and on the application of both accused and with the consent of the Crown they stood trial together. During the course of such trial R changed her pleas to pleas of guilty to alternative charges of indecent assaults and the Crown accepted those pleas in full satisfaction of the indictment against her. Then on the application of the appellant, the jury was discharged and his trial was adjourned.

It was against this background that the appellant's trial began on 22 August and at no stage did his counsel seek separate trials in respect of the individual children. As the trial was conducted fabrication by the children was a very real issue and it would seem that counsel for the appellant perceived that a single trial on all charges afforded the best opportunity to put the credibility of the complainants to the test. Each of the complainants asserted that he had seen the appellant offending sexually against his brothers, and, for instance, C claimed that he saw the act of penile penetration committed against G which was charged in the indictment.

Much of the evidence upon which the Crown relied would have been introduced in each of the cases concerning G and S. There was the evidence of Ms Jenkinson and Ms McLean relevant to both cases and there was evidence of police officers of a conversation allegedly held with the appellant in a police vehicle and before the ERISP interview upon which some reliance was placed by the Crown.

To my mind a decision by counsel that the appellant's interests would best be served by having a joint trial at which the credibility of the three complainants could very effectively be tested was understandable. In the circumstances I have outlined, therefore I do not consider that this Court should entertain this ground of appeal, not taken at first instance, and I would refuse the appellant leave pursuant to r 4 of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/) to rely upon this ground.

Ground 3: 
The trial judge erred in allowing the Crown to lead similar facts/"guilty passion" evidence in circumstances where there was a real possibility of collaboration or concoction between the complainants; in failing to satisfy himself that there was no real chance similar facts/"guilty passion" evidence was not the product of a cause common to the complainants; in failing to satisfy himself that there was no other rational explanation for the similar facts/"guilty passion" evidence other than the matter adverse to the accused.

This ground is closely related to ground two and again the decision to have all the charges heard together is relevant to it.

The Crown led evidence of alleged sexual activity between the appellant and each of the children apart from that which was the subject of specific counts in the indictment. The appellant submits that the learned judge was in error in permitting the introduction of this evidence, at least without satisfying himself that there was no "real chance" of conspiracy between the children in making these allegations. It was submitted that such inquiry was required of the judge consistently with the application of the principles to be found in
Hoch versus The Queen (supra).

It is, of course, well settled that evidence of sexual activity other than that charged in the indictment but occurring between an accused person and a complainant is admissible to show a guilty passion on the part of the accused and to rebut any suggestion or inference of innocent association: see R v
Ball ([1911] AC 47); R versus Shellaker ([1914] 1 KB 414); R versus Chamilos (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 24 October 1985); and B versus The Queen <case>; [(175 CLR 599).] The various sexual episodes between the appellant and G other than those the subject of specific charges but of which evidence was led were relevant to the case the appellant had to meet concerning the charges involving G; likewise evidence of the sexual activity between the appellant and S other than that the subject of the specific charges was relevant to the case against the appellant concerning S.

Ordinarily the Crown would be entitled to lead evidence of such relevant activity, not only from the complainant involved but from others who may have observed such activity: R versus L (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 6 April ). In that case Allen J (with whose judgment the other members of the court agreed) observed at p 6: "Commonly evidence of manifested passion comes from the person the object of it but it cannot make any difference to the admissibility of the evidence that it comes from someone else who was present when the manifestation occurred.
What matters to relevance is the existence of the passion, not the identity of the witness to it." 
However, evidence of the appellant's guilty passion for G was strictly inadmissible in the case concerning S and evidence of the appellant's guilty passion for S was strictly inadmissible in the case concerning G. Moreover, given that concoction between the children was being asserted, it would have been open to counsel for the appellant to object to the introduction through G of evidence going to show the appellant's guilty passion for S. Similarly objection could have been taken to S giving evidence that went to prove his observations of sexual activity between the appellant and G, which again went to prove the existence of a guilty passion for G.

Nevertheless no objection was taken at the trial to the introduction of any of the evidence of sexual activity by the appellant outside that which related to specific counts in the indictment, and the trial judge was not asked to give any directions to the jury as to any limitations upon the use it could make of such evidence as was introduced. The trial judge did give to the jury in the course of his summing up certain directions as to the manner in which it might consider evidence of "guilty passion" and his Honour was not asked to revise or supplement such directions.

Once again in this respect the course of conduct adopted by counsel for the appellant at the trial appears to have been quite deliberate. It is to be observed that before the Crown opened its case to the jury, the Crown
Prosecutor prepared a schedule referring to sexual activity involving the complainants outside the events charged and of which it was intended to introduce evidence. In contemplation of the requirements of <case> of the
Crimes Act, the Crown invited a ruling as to the introduction of such evidence. The transcript records the following exchange between the trial judge and counsel for the appellant on this topic: "HIS HONOUR: Do you concede that the matters in respect of which the Crown makes application are relevant and admissible for the purpose for which the
Crown seeks to lead the evidence? 
HARPER: Yes I do.

HIS HONOUR: That's then a matter for me as to whether you make any submission on discretion.

HARPER: I don't make a submission on discretion.

HIS HONOUR: You don't make a submission-- 
HARPER: I do not your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: You do not make any submission based on discretion that I should-- 
HARPER: No your Honour.

HIS HONOUR: --exclude any of the evidence on the basis that it's prejudicial? 
HARPER: That's correct your Honour. I do not--" 
Counsel for the appellant then identified material by reference to documents which he presented to the trial judge which reflected his concerns as to the matters he wished to address and which involved consideration of <case>. Then, pursuant to <case>, his Honour ruled on the applications of both counsel as to what evidence he considered ought be admissible under <case> and the trial proceeded accordingly. So it was that before any evidence was led at the trial, counsel appearing for the appellant was fully aware as to the evidence which the Crown was going to introduce which touched upon sexual activity other than that the subject of charges and had reflected upon how he was going to deal with such evidence.

I would refuse leave to the appellant pursuant to r 4 to rely upon ground three.

Ground 4(a) 
Ruling that evidence of the pleas and convictions of [R] was relevant and admissible 
Objection was taken at the trial to the introduction by the Crown of evidence that R had pleaded guilty to three offences of assault with acts of indecency upon S. Such evidence was introduced as a means of proving that R had committed such acts upon her son. Mr Ramage did not seek to argue that proof of the pleas and of the convictions was not evidence of the assaults to which such pleas and convictions related. His submission was that the evidence was not relevant to the question of whether or not there had been lack of complaint because the twins did complain to their mother. Mr Ramage submitted that the effect of the introduction of this evidence was to discredit R through whom the appellant might have hoped to introduce evidence inconsistent with the complainants' allegations against him.

The trial judge expressed his reasons for admitting evidence of the complaints and convictions of R as follows: "It was important in the Crown case for the Crown to be able to inform the jury that the mother had pleaded guilty to the three counts because the jury would then have an explanation, firstly of why the mother would allow the alleged sexual activity to happen in her presence and further why the mother had failed to report that alleged sexual activity to the authorities or to take any steps to prevent it." 
In my opinion the trial judge was correct to admit evidence of the mother's misconduct towards her son. Each of the children gave evidence of having told their mother about the appellant's misbehaviour on occasions. S said that in response to one complaint he made R replied: "Tell me next time." G said that in response to a complaint he made about the appellant, R said: "Don't worry about it." One of the episodes about which evidence was given at the trial was that the appellant committed sexual acts on two of the complainants in the loungeroom whilst R was present in that room. Bearing in mind that there was to be such evidence in the Crown case, it was relevant for the jury to have the evidence of R's sexual misbehaviour as affording a possible explanation as to why R did not intervene if she was aware of the appellant's misconduct.

Ground 4(b) 
The trial judge erred in admitting into evidence as complaint conversations alleged by J. Jenkinson to have taken place with the complainants.

I referred earlier to what the twins said to Ms Jenkinson. On 17 June 1991, according to the evidence of Ms Jenkinson, she spoke to the twins at school and they each told her the appellant kissed and cuddled them. When asked where, S pointed to his mouth and his genital area. Later in October 1991 when the children were again spoken to by Ms Jenkinson in the presence of their father, Ms Jenkinson said that G pointed to his mouth and genital area when asked where the appellant kissed and cuddled him.

Mr Ramage submitted that this evidence was not strictly evidence of complaint at all. The evidence of the children was not spontaneous and the children did not speak at the first available opportunity. It was submitted that for this reason the evidence ought to have been excluded. Reference was made to R v
Osborne ([1905] 1 KB 551).

Consideration of this submission requires reflection on the course of the trial. C was the first witness called and he gave evidence without objection that he had made complaint to his mother more than once about what had been occurring between himself and the appellant but that he did not complain to his maternal grandparents or his father or to the police or to community service officers until after he moved to Gloucester. That was after the twins made their complaints to the police in August 1992. The transcript records that in the course of the evidence in chief of C (T 42-43), the trial judge was informed by counsel for the accused that the defence case would include comment on the failure of the children to complain. Consistently with this, when C was cross examined it was put to him that his complaint was belatedly made in an endeavour to help his father secure custody of the twins.

When S was called, he gave evidence, again without objection, that he complained about the sexual activity of the appellant to his mother, but that he did not tell his grandparents or his uncles for reasons which he stated and he did not tell his father until August 1992, and again he stated a reason. He was cross examined about speaking with Ms Jenkinson at his father's place and it was put to him that he denied that the appellant had been interfering with him. The witness replied that he could not remember making such denial. He was further cross examined to suggest that he had made no complaint to social workers about what the appellant had been doing to him when he was seen in
November and December 1991. It was squarely put to the witness that his allegations against the appellant were a fabrication and that they were only expressed in August 1992 because the witness did not want to return to live with his mother and his grandparents.

When G gave evidence he asserted, without objection, that he had complained to
R about what the appellant was doing to him and that he did so more than once.
Evidence was led as to R's response. He also gave evidence, without objection, that he did not complain to his grandparents or to his uncles or to his father whilst living with the appellant for reasons which he gave. He was asked about his meeting with Ms Jenkinson at school in 1991 and in response to a question put without objection, he said he told her something of what the appellant was doing to him. It was suggested to him in cross examination that his reason for the complaints made in August 1992 were his unwillingness to remain with R and his grandparents; it was put that he made up the allegations against the appellant to avoid going back to them. He was also cross examined about what was said on the occasion of Ms Jenkinson coming to his father's home and, indeed, it was put to him that he was there specifically asked by Ms Jenkinson what had occurred between the appellant and himself at R's home.

It seems to me that against the background of the cross examination of the complainants it was proper for the jury to have before them the evidence as to the conversations which Ms Jenkinson had with the twins both at school and later at the home of their father in 1991. This was relevant to refute the assertion that the allegation of sexual abuse was fabricated pursuant to a scheme conceived in August 1992.

It has further been submitted that the evidence which the father of the boys gave concerning what the twins said in his presence in October 1991 ought to have been excluded. This witness gave evidence related to the occasion of Ms
Jenkinson's visit to his home as to what the twins had to say. It seems to me, once again, that this evidence was properly admissible for the jury's consideration for the very same reason as rendered admissible the content of the conversations that the twins had earlier had with Ms Jenkinson.
 
Ground 4(c) 
That his Honour erred in failing to adequately or properly direct the jury as to the law in respect of "complaint".

During the course of the trial on a number of occasions the trial judge gave to the jury instruction concerning evidence of complaint. In the course of the summing up, he said (summing up at p 37): "Evidence of complaint is not evidence that the event took place. But it is evidence of something said to somebody else shortly after or at the time that the offence takes place, and if it was something which you can take into account when you come to consider credibility of the person who brings the charge or make the complaint." 
The jury was later instructed (summing up at 106), referring to what was said to Ms Jenkinson: "The evidence of what they said to her on those was as you heard me say during the trial when I gave the directions, admitted as evidence of complaint. In other words it was not evidence of the truth of the facts. It was evidence to show that there had been a complaint, and it is not something that you can take into account as evidence of the truth of what was said." 
The trial judge addressed at length in the summing up the issue of fabrication and in the context of doing so instructed the jury (summing up at p 60): "Now, ladies and gentlemen, related to the question of the fabrication or concoction is that of the complaint or lack of complaint, and you will recall that, as the trial progressed, I gave you a direction concerning complaint, as
I am obliged to do. And I told you, and I remind you, that I am required to warn you that the absence of complaint, or delay in complaining, does not necessarily indicate that the allegation that the offence was committed was false. And I again inform you that there may be good reasons why a victim of a sexual assault may hesitate in making, or may refrain from making, a complaint about the assault.

Now, I said at a later stage I would give you further directions. I said that, ladies and gentlemen, because I knew it would be necessary in my summing up to take you to the evidence, and that is what I propose to do now, in relation to the question of complaint, bearing in mind the directions which I have given you." 
His Honour then went on to trace in considerable detail evidence given by each of the complainants concerning opportunities to complain, the reasons given for not complaining other than when they did, and the complaints actually made. In the setting of that review (summing up pp 60-74) the jury was reminded of the appellant's case that the reason why earlier complaint was not made was because the occurrences alleged did not happen.

It was submitted that the jury should have been directed that the words used were not evidence to prove what was said. Not only was this explained to the jury in instruction during the trial but the jury was given the specific instructions in the passages of the summing up above extracted (pp 37, 106).
In my opinion those directions were adequate to make the jury aware that the words spoken in the setting of a complaint did not prove the substance of the complaint.

It was further submitted that the jury should have been told that it was for them to determine whether the words spoken constituted complaint made at the first reasonable opportunity. No such direction was sought at the trial and indeed no further direction on the subject of complaint was sought at the conclusion of his Honour's summing up. Rule 4 applies to this ground and I do not consider that the appellant should be given leave to rely upon this ground. Having read the evidence given at the trial and the directions which the judge gave on complaint, I consider that such directions were adequate to address the issues which had been fought. The real issues about complaint at this trial were: (1) whether the complaints were false, and (2) whether they were concocted, as the appellant contended, in August 1992 with the aim of assisting the father's application for custody and avoiding the necessity for the children to return to their mother. Those issues I consider to have been thoroughly addressed in the summing up.

Ground 4(d) 
That his Honour erred in allowing the Crown to lead evidence explaining lack of complaint.

The evidence directed to explaining lack of complaint was elicited without objection during the course of the trial. In any event it seems to me having regard to the issues on complaint that the trial presented, it was proper that the jury have available such evidence. In my opinion there is no substance in this ground and here again I would refuse leave pursuant to Rule 4.
 
Ground 4(e) 
Giving an excessive number of directions excusing lack of or delay in complaint.

Ground 4(f) 
Failing to balance his directions as the evidence was admitted with a (sic) "Davis" type direction.

It is convenient to deal with these grounds together. I observe that ground (f) is repeated in ground 5(e) which I will not address separately.

His Honour did give the jury instruction on a number of occasions during the course of the trial concerning delay in complaint. His Honour also gave the jury instruction about this topic in the summing up.

The directions given addressed the provisions of <case> of the Crimes Act and did so in a manner consistent with the requirements of the subsection.

The complaint (in ground 4(e)) is made though that the repetition of the directions on this topic unduly favoured the prosecution case and rendered ineffective the appellant's reliance upon the complainants' delay. Considering the various references to the substance of the sub-section in the context in which such references appear in the course of the trial and in the summing up,
I do not consider that this ground is made good.

In ground 4(f) it is submitted that the trial judge should have directed the jury that it was open to the jury to take delay into account in assessing the credibility of the complainant and reference was made to R versus Davies ((1985) [3 NSWLR 276).]
The judge did direct the jury consistently with <case> that the absence of complaint or delay in complaint does not "necessarily" indicate that the allegations that the offence was committed was false. As Lee J observed in R v Murray [(1987) 11 NSWLR 12] at 16-17 "...the very words of the direction which the statute requires to be given, of themselves as a matter of ordinary English, raise for the jury's consideration the question of the weight to be given to the complaint made by the complainant: The expression '... does not necessarily indicate that the allegation that the offence was committed is false', makes that abundantly clear and that being the case the jury has before it even if counsel for the accused has not referred to it, which would be most unlikely, a direction from the trial judge in regard to the matter of complaint which requires them to come to a conclusion as to the weight which they will give to it." 
Having reflected upon the directions given and in the context of the totality of the summing up where the arguments affecting the credibility of the complaints were thoroughly addressed, I do not consider that the further direction which it is now contended ought to have been given was required.
Again, no such direction was sought at the trial and I would refuse leave to rely on ground 4(f) on this appeal.

Ground 4(g) 
In admitting into evidence the evidence of J. Jenkinson as to the appellant's alleged conduct and demeanour.

This ground was abandoned.
 
Ground 4(i) 
In failing to exercise his discretion to reject the evidence of J. Jenkinson of alleged admissions by the accused.

The evidence in point related to a meeting after Ms Jenkinson had spoken with the twins on 13 October 1991. She then went to see the appellant and I set out the context of the relevant conversation in full: "... 'You are aware of the reasons why I'm here. The information I have got isn't of a pleasant nature and I want to ask you some questions. I must warn you that anything you say and anything I say is documented and can be used in some future proceedings. Are you aware of this?'? 
A. I did.

Q. Did he say, 'Yes.'? 
A. Yes.

Q. Did he say, 'I want to start a new life and be on my own in the room and not have those feelings. It's awkward when they fight and come into the room.
They need me. I need help.'? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did you say, 'G and S have told me that you touch them. Is that true'? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did he say, 'I'm not denying it.'? 
A. That's right.

Q. Did you then say, 'How many times have you touched up G and S'? 
A. I did.

Q. Did he say, 'Offhand I can't think.'? 
A. That's right.

Q. Did you say, 'Do you know what a pedophile is?' 
A. I did.

Q. Did he say, 'Everyone knows, someone who likes children.'? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did you say, 'Are you one?' 
A. I did.

Q. Did he say, 'Not really, a victim of circumstances that had to happen.'? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did you say, 'S and G are victims, aren't they?'? 
A. I did.

Q. Did he say, 'If you say so from a psychological point view they could be but I don't see it that way.'? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did you say, 'Do you prefer boys?'? 
A. I did.

Q. Did he say, 'Yes, I like boys better than girls.'? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did you then say to him, after some further conversation, 'Now you've got that out, John, can you tell me to what extent have you been interfering with the boys? I need to know because of the boys' health. I may have to arrange blood tests for them.'? 
A. That's correct.

Q. Did [the appellant] say, 'Whatever happens to me I don't care. I promise I will sign myself in to Shortland Clinic tomorrow.'? 
A. He did.

Objection was taken to this evidence and the trial judge ruled it to be admissible following a voir dire hearing. The evidence was objected to at the trial on three grounds: that it should have been excluded as having been induced by an untrue representation; that it should have been rejected because of the provisions of <case>(d) of the [Children (Care and Protection) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/); that it should have been excluded in the exercise of the discretion of the trial judge.

Each of those grounds were considered by the trial judge in reasons which he expressed. It was contended before the trial judge that the statements: "G and
S have told me that you touched them", and the question "How many times have you touched up G and S?" involved untrue representations by Ms Jenkinson. His
Honour rejected that submission having regard to the evidence as to what the children had said to her. His Honour also rejected the submission that the evidence ought to have been rejected under the provision of the [Children (Care and Protection)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/capa1987250/). I do not perceive there to be any error in those conclusions reached by his Honour nor has it been argued in this Court that there were. It was submitted, however, that the evidence ought to have been excluded because there was no adequate caution given to the appellant. This ground for exclusion, as his
Honour's judgment reveals, was not taken at the trial. His Honour expressly says so. In any event, as his Honour observed there was a caution given.

It is further submitted that the evidence ought to have been excluded because some of what the appellant said was non-responsive. I am not attracted by that submission.

When the appellant gave evidence at his trial he denied making the admissions attributed to him by Ms Jenkinson. Mr Ramage submitted that the jury ought to have been instructed that they could not use the evidence of Ms Jenkinson against the appellant unless the jury viewed that evidence as amounting to admissions and were satisfied beyond doubt that such admissions were made.
This last submission does not address any specified ground of appeal, nor does it address any point taken by counsel at the trial at the conclusion of the summing up. In any event, the jury could have been under no misapprehension from the directions given in the summing up as to the circumstances in which they could act upon the evidence Ms Jenkinson gave, which evidence was supported by her companion Ms McLean.

In my opinion ground 4(i) fails.
 
Ground 5(a) 
Failing to direct the jury that they could not use the evidence admitted on one count on other counts.

Ground 5(b) 
Failing to warn the jury against using the evidence of one complainant towards proof of the guilt of the appellant of offences involving another complainant.

These grounds were argued together.

The jury was instructed that it must consider each count in the indictment separately, but the thrust of the submissions Mr Ramage made on these grounds is that since there was a real issue concerning concoction between the complainants the trial judge should have given more precise directions as to how the jury could use the evidence of the various complainants in relation to the individual counts in the indictment.

In the summing up (at pp 20-36) the trial judge reviewed the evidence directly led in support of each count in turn, and count by count reminded them of the appellant's denial that the events took place. The jury was then reminded of the appellant's case in response to all counts that "the evidence of each of the complainants was concocted and fabricated". The jury was also reminded that it was the appellant's case that he made none of the admissions which Ms
Jenkinson attributed to him. The jury was then directed to address the question "Did each of the charged offences actually occur?" His Honour gave the jury directions at pp 38-39 about how "guilty passion" evidence could be used and these directions were in terms to which counsel appearing at the trial took no exception. His Honour then reviewed the "guilty passion" evidence given by each complainant and reminded the jury in that context at pp -57 of the fabrication issue concerning each complainant.

Counsel at the trial did not ask the trial judge to give the directions about the absence of which the appellant now complains. That he did not do so was consistent with the decision taken at the outset to have all the charges dealt with together. The trial was conducted on the basis that these complainants put their heads together and that none of them was to be believed. The appellant denied all the specific charges and all the other incidents of "sexual passion". Trial counsel doubtless perceived, in my view correctly, that his client's cause would not have been advanced by seeking these further directions. As I read the transcript of evidence the summing up fairly and comprehensively addressed the issues raised during the trial and reflected the manner of its conduct. I would refuse the appellant leave to rely upon grounds (a) and (b).

Ground 5(c) 
Failing to give the jury a "Longman" type warning.

Ground 5(d) 
Failing to give the jury a "Kelleher" type direction.

Ground 5(f) 
Failing to give the jury a "Murray" type direction.

The trial judge was specifically requested at the end of the summing up to give to the jury a direction concerning corroboration and his Honour was referred to Longman versus The Queen ((1990) <case>; [64 ALJR 73)] Mr Ramage submitted in this Court that the trial judge was in error in refusing to give the direction sought.

The position since the passing of <case> of the Crimes Act in relation to the necessity to give a jury some warning where evidence is uncorroborated was addressed by this court in R versus L (unreported, 4 May 1990). In that case the court, constituted by Gleeson CJ, McInerney J and Capelin A-J, said: "It suffices to say that, whilst, in the light of the provisions of <case> of the Crimes Act it is no longer necessary, and is indeed inappropriate, to give the traditional warnings about the inherent danger of convicting on the uncorroborated evidence of a female, or child, alleging sexual assault, simply because of the fact of the nature of the allegation, or the gender or age of the complainant, nevertheless the circumstances of a given case may render it appropriate and necessary to warn a jury in a manner which, to paraphrase the words of Lee CJ at CL in Porter (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 7
April 1989) adequately brings home to the jury that it may be unsafe to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of the complainant whilst at the same time pointing out that a conviction is open if the jury is satisfied that the complainant's evidence is not suspect and that on the whole of the evidence the accused has been shown beyond reasonable doubt to be guilty. In Longman ((1990) <case>; [64
ALJR 73)] the majority in the High Court said that, in the circumstances of that case, the jury should have been told that, by reason of a certain difficulty, 'it would be dangerous to convict on [the uncorroborated evidence of the complainant] alone unless the jury, scrutinising the evidence with great care, considering the circumstances relevant to its evaluation and paying heed to the warning, was satisfied of its truth and accuracy." 
Mr Ramage submitted that there was no corroboration of the complainants in respect of any of the charges and that in the circumstances of this case none of the complainants could corroborate the other. Each complainant had a strong motive to lie because of the expressed wishes not to return to their mother's home. It was submitted that the allegations were being made against a background of family discord and a pending custody dispute.

Notwithstanding Mr Ramage's contrary submission, it seems to me that there was evidence which, if accepted by the jury, afforded corroboration of the evidence of each of the twins. This was the evidence of Ms Jenkinson and Ms
McLean. What the appellant was alleged to have said to Ms Jenkinson in the presence of Ms McLean did not amount to an admission of any one of the offences for which he was convicted but it was open to the jury to view the evidence as to what he said as amounting to an admission of sexual association with each of the twins. As such it corroborated their evidence because it rendered the evidence of each complainant on the offences charged more likely to be true: see R versus Hartley ([1941] 1 KB 5) and R versus BRS (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 5 March 1996).

Had the trial judge acceded to a request to give the jury a direction concerning corroboration, he would have been required to direct them as to the significance of the evidence of Ms Jenkinson and of Ms McLean in this connection, and this would have carried with it the hazard for the appellant that if the jury accepted this evidence it would be safe to convict. In my opinion the apellant's prospects of acquittal on the charges upon which he was convicted would not have been enhanced had some warning been given such as that for which Mr Ramage here contended.

In this case, I do not consider that his Honour was in error in declining to give the direction sought.

I would add that it is plain from the verdicts returned that the jury did scrutinise the evidence of each complainant with care. Their verdicts on the counts charging offences with C reflect this. They were not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by his evidence in relation to the offences charged concerning him. There was no corroboration afforded to his testimony by the evidence which Ms Jenkinson and Ms McLean gave. There was the further circumstance that when he was first interviewed by the police he denied any wrongdoing towards him by the appellant.

I would reject this ground of appeal.

Ground 5(g) 
Failing to direct the jury that before they could use incidents of "guilty passion" they would have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that such incidents occurred or that the accused did have such a "guilty passion" 
No such direction was sought at the trial. In any event in my opinion the trial judge was not required to give a direction in these terms. What the jury had to be satisfied of beyond reasonable doubt was the proof of the ingredients of each of the offences charged and the jury was so directed. The prosecution relied primarily upon the direct evidence of each complainant; that evidence was supported, at least in relation to the counts upon which the appellant was convicted, by the evidence given by Ms Jenkinson and Ms McLean, and by the "guilty passion" or propensity evidence of which many incidents were described by the complainants. In these circumstances it seems to me that the direction contended for in this ground of appeal was unnecessary: see Shepherd versus The Queen <case>; [(170 CLR 573).] 
Ground 5(h) 
Failing to direct the jury as to how the failure of the complainants to give evidence on the dismissed counts affected their evidence on the remaining counts.

The jury was directed to return a verdict in favour of the appellant on counts one to four and on count six. The first four counts each charged the appellant with an assault with an act of indecency upon G and the sixth count of a like offence against S. It was not made clear on the hearing of the appeal why verdicts were directed on those counts. It may have been because no evidence was elicited from the relevant complainant to support any one of these counts or it may have been because evidence given did not fit the time frame expressed in the relevant charges in the indictment. Whatever the reasons may have been trial counsel did not perceive the need for any such direction to have been given to the jury and no such need has been established on the hearing of this appeal. I would refuse leave to the appellant to rely upon this ground.
 
Ground 5(i) 
Failing to direct the jury that the alleged sexual acts other than those charged was denied by the accused.

The jury was reminded (at p 36 of the summing up): "The accused's case is that the evidence of each of [the] complainants was concocted and fabricated." Then (at p 37) his Honour directed the jury: "The accused, as I have said, has denied that these events took place." 
Viewing the summing up as a whole, I do not consider that there was any need to give the direction referred to in this ground. I would not perceive that the jury could have overlooked the fact that the appellant denied all the sexual acts asserted by each of the complainants. Trial counsel did not consider that it was necessary for the trial judge to give this direction since he did not ask him to give it.

In my assessment there is no substance in this ground and I would not now permit the appellant to rely upon it in any event.

For the above reasons I would dismiss the appeal against these convictions.

Sentence 
The appellant also seeks leave to appeal against the sentences imposed. On each of the counts of homosexual intercourse the appellant was sentenced to a minimum term of six years penal servitude commencing on 6 September 1994 and expiring on 5 September 2000 and an additional term of four years commencing on 6 September 2000 and expiring on 5 September 2004. On the third count on which he was convicted, that is the assault with act of indecency count, a fixed term of twelve months imprisonment commencing on 6 September 1994 was imposed.

The maximum penalty for the offence of homosexual intercourse with a male person under the age of ten years is twenty-five years penal servitude (s 78H of the Crimes Act). The maximum penalty for the offence of assault with act of indecency on a child under ten years of age is ten years imprisonment (s
M(2) of the Crimes Act).

It was submitted that the overall sentence was manifestly excessive and it was also submitted that the judge erred in his approach to the sentencing task in the following respects: taking into account other sexual offences as aggravating features; taking into account as adverse features the circumstances in which the twins lived, being circumstances for which he was not responsible; treating the appellant's denial of the commission of the offences as an aggravating circumstance; failing to give due weight to the positive subjective matters in the appellant's case; failing to appreciate the true medical condition of the appellant; attaching undue weight to the principle of general deterrence, and in this regard not making allowance for the appellant's mental disorder.

Dealing firstly with the identified matters (i) to (vi): and (ii) I do not read the remarks on sentence in such a way as to conclude that the sentencing judge used the evidence of other sexual activity outside the acts charged or the circumstances in which the twins lived in any impermissible way; 
I would not infer that the appellant was punished for denying his guilt.
Certainly his Honour referred to the absence of contrition and it was proper that he do so because it was necessary for him to consider whether the appellant's response to the charges warranted leniency. I would observe that in dealing with the lack of contrition the sentencing judge made specific reference to the psychological assessment reflected in the report of Ms
Manning which was tendered before him.
 and (v) A reading of the extensive remarks on sentence does not suggest that the judge gave inadequate weight to the subjective circumstances in this case. He dealt with these features in considerable detail at pp 10-12, referring to the appellant's age, his upbringing and his life history. He specifically addressed the appellant's ordeal since he had been in prison, including his mistreatment by other prisoners. The judge recognised that the full time custodial sentence that the appellant was to undergo would have a greater effect on him "than most others". He recognised that the appellant's psychological background would make imprisonment more onerous in his case, as would the need that he serve his sentence in protective custody. There was in my view no failure on the judge's part to address the evidence relevant by way of positive subjective features or the appellant's medical condition.

On the hearing of this appeal, this Court was asked to receive medical evidence. An affidavit was presented which annexed a report from Dr Lewin, a psychiatrist who visited the appellant at Long Bay prison hospital some eleven months after the sentences were imposed. The report recorded the appellant's recent history of an episode of acute depressive illness one month prior to Dr
Lewin's examination, and an earlier episode in the 1970s of which the sentencing judge was aware.

Dr Lewin diagnosed the appellant as suffering from "recurrent unipolar depression" and considered his prognosis to be "complex". Dr Lewin said: "He has experienced at least two and probably three episodes of severe depression and there is a real likelihood that he will have further episodes of depression in the future. It is likely that with proper treatment this man will enter a phase of remission and that phase of remission could last many years. Over the next three to six months he should gradually and steadily improve and it (sic) possible that he could be discharged from hospital within a period of months. Factors which will influence this decision include his underlying personality. It is very hard to assess personality functioning in someone who is as acutely ill as this man. Mr Hickson who knew [the appellant] well told me that he was generally a withdrawn, timid and unassertive man and these factors would need to be re-evaluated once his depressive state has resolved in terms of his capacity to cope with a prison regime. I have significant doubts about this man's capacity to cope with the ordinary day to day difficulties of living in prison given those factors and the nature of the charges against him. Even without considering factors relating to his illness one would expect that this man would suffer much more than the average from the various factors associated with imprisonment." 
Dr Lewin made a further report dated 27 May 1996, following a review of the appellant several days earlier. In that report it was recorded as a matter of history that there was no defined depressive episode between 1977 and the date of the appellant's trial.

Dr Lewin concluded his report: "[The appellant] has a history of recurring psychotic depression. There is absolutely no doubt that his symptoms are genuine. He remains very seriously mentally ill although there has been some degree of resolution in response to treatment of the most energetic kind. It is likely that [the appellant's] illness will gradually go into remission but I am unable to say with certainty that he will become symptom free. He remains significantly at risk of suicide and he continues to suffer enormously. I am unable to tell how long he will remain in this seriously mentally ill state but I expect that he will remain very unwell indeed for at least several months hence. Clearly, his case is different from that of the average fit young prisoner. This man is constantly in anguish. Even though he is in the somewhat protected environment of the prison hospital he still suffers more than a person would suffer in an ordinary psychiatric hospital with the same symptoms. Despite the best of our endeavours he does not have access to a range of treatment options that are routine and unremarkable in a well equipped hospital. He has little to occupy himself in terms of occupational therapy, group therapy and similar modes of treatment." 
Mr Ramage asked this Court to heed the report of Dr Lewin in considering what constituted an appropriate sentence. He submitted that it was proper for this
Court to have regard to the evidence relating to the events that had occurred after sentencing. In support of that submission he referred to R versus Scullion (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 15 July 1992). In that case Clarke JA referred to the general principle recognised in cases such as R versus Munday ((1981) [2 NSWLR 177)] and R versus Cartwright ((1989) [17 NSWLR 243)], and as expressed in
R versus Munday in the following passage at 178: "It has been made plain in this Court on many occasions that the Court is essentially charged with an appellate function involving the determination of whether a decision at first instance upon sentence was right or wrong, was excessive or inadequate, as things existed at the time when it was passed. The review of a sentence in the light of subsequent events is the province of the executive government and not of an appeal court." 
See also R versus Maslen and Shaw ((1995) [79 A Crim R 199] at 207).

However in R versus Scullion, Clarke JA referred to the approach of this Court reflected in the above passage as not being an inflexible one. His Honour said at p 2 of his judgment: "The rule is not, however, an absolute one for in exceptional circumstances the courts have had regard to events which have occurred since sentencing in considering the question whether an appeal against a sentencing order should be allowed. Nonetheless the courts which have taken post sentencing facts into account have been at pains to make it clear that it will only be in rare and exceptional cases that the court will be entitled to have regard to those facts." 
I do not consider that the present case is one in which this Court should take the reports of Dr Lewin into account unless first satisfied that the sentence imposed should be quashed by reason of error by the sentencing judge. His
Honour was aware of the earlier psychiatric condition, as, no doubt, was counsel appearing at the trial; the psychological report tendered on the sentencing hearing referred to it. His Honour referred to the appellant's nervous condition requiring him to take leave from work "on occasions", and as earlier observed the judge was alert to the particular hardship imprisonment and the circumstances of it would impose upon this appellant.

His Honour did refer to the importance of general deterrence but it seems to me that the remarks which he made were entirely appropriate notwithstanding such evidence as there was before him from Ms Manning, the psychologist, including the past history of treatment in a psychiatric clinic in Newcastle.
I do not infer that the judge attached undue weight to the consideration of general deterrence having regard to the circumstances of this case.

Generally, I detect no error of approach in his Honour's remarks on sentence and I do not consider that these sentences were outside the appropriate sentencing range. His Honour was in my opinion correct to regard these offences as grave offences warranting the sentences which were imposed.

In the result, whilst I would grant leave to appeal against sentence, I would propose that such appeal be dismissed.

Consequently, the formal orders which I would propose are as follows:
That the appellant's appeal against his convictions should be dismissed;
That the appellant should be given leave to appeal against his sentences but that such appeal be dismissed.

DUNFORD J: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgment of Studdert J. I agree with the orders he has proposed for the reasons which he has given.
 * * * 
