

Burgess versus Schneider-Cordero [1996] NSWSC 244 (2 July 1996) 
BURGESS V SCHNEIDER-CORDERO /94 DC 10716/90 JULY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, PRIESTLEY JA, SHELLER JA 
CATCHWORDS: PERSONAL INJURY - MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - QUANTUM 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DEFENTANT'S APPEAL DISMISSED 
PLAINTIFF'S CROSS-APPEAL UPHELD 
PERSONAL INJURY - MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - QUANTUM - INADEQUACY OF INTEREST
UPON NON-ECONOMIC LOSS - SECTION 79 MOTOR ACCIDENTS ACT - APPLICATION OF
ANDJELIC versus MARSLAND.

The respondent had been injured in a motor vehicle accident in 1989 sustaining injuries to her neck, shoulders and lower back. She had been injured in two other accidents in 1981 and 1982, injuring her neck in both of the accidents.
Before the accident in 1989, she had commenced art classes and was engaged in selling her artworks. She was also employed on occasions as a translator.
After the accident she was unable to perform her artwork and related tasks or her work as a translator, without considerable difficulty.

The trial judge held that the plaintiff had been incapacitated as a result of the accident in 1989. Damages for non-economic loss were awarded pursuant to s of the Motor Accidents Act.

The only ground pressed on appeal was the application of Andjelic versus Marsland ALJR, concerning the amount of interest awarded by the trial judge on economic loss. The plaintiff cross appealed in respect of the inadequacy of the amounts assessed for non-economic loss, past economic loss and future economic loss.

Priestley JA (Gleeson CJ and Sheller JA concurring) thought the defendant's appeal should be dismissed and the plaintiff's cross appeal upheld; the trial judge's assessment of 10% under <case> of the Motor Accidents Act was flawed; the proper proportion under the section was about 20%. In regard to the other elements of damage, the trial judge's assessment was correct.

ORDERS . Defendant's appeal dismissed; the plaintiff's cross-appeal upheld.
Judgment below set aside and in lieu of that judgment, judgment for $75,470.25 to take effect from today's date.
Plaintiff's costs of appeal and cross appeal to be dealt with as one set of costs and borne by the defendant.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: Before the court there is an appeal and a cross-appeal from a judgment of Herron DCJ. On 11 March 1994 Herron DCJ entered judgment in favour of Mrs Schneider-Cordero, the plaintiff, who had been injured in a car accident on 26 April 1989.

The defendant had admitted liability and the trial judge's task was to assess damages. The sum for which he gave judgment, $55,178.98, was arrived at as follows: non-economic loss $3,700, medical and out-of-pocket expenses $11,345.98, past loss of earning capacity $5,000, future loss of earning capacity $15,000, interest $20,133.

The defendant appealed raising in the appeal several points concerning the amount of interest awarded by the trial judge. The plaintiff cross-appealed on the grounds the amounts assessed for non-economic loss, past economic loss and future economic loss were all inadequate.

The matter of interest upon the non-economic loss involved questions concerning section 79 of the Motor Accidents Act (1988) which were subsequently dealt with by the High Court in Andjelic versus Marsland <case>; [(1996) 70 ALJR 435.] 
It was common ground before us that unless the cross appeal succeeded it would be necessary to uphold the appeal in order to recalculate interest both on non-economic loss in accordance with Andjelic and also on the other heads of damage.

In the event the only ground of appeal pressed was that concerning the
Andjelic point. The major ground of appeal going to the question whether interest should have been awarded at all was not pursued. This came about because the appeal papers were not complete. There was no indication in the papers, or in the reserved judgment delivered by the trial Judge, of any amount for interest or of how he had arrived at it.

The defendant apparently had not attended the delivery of judgment and was unaware of the details of what had happened upon delivery of judgment. In that state of unawareness the ground of appeal concerning the award of any interest had been included.

When the matter came on for hearing, however, we were told by counsel for the plaintiff the details of what had happened when the reserved judgment had been delivered. An affidavit was filed and read which gave the facts of the matter.
From those facts it was plain that the trial judge had been following appropriate procedures in his decision to award interest. That being so counsel for the defendant did not seek to take the matter any further.

It was agreed between the parties that if the cross-appeal failed the result of the appeal should be that the interest component of the judgment of Herron
DCJ should be reduced from $20,133 to $5,189.45 and the judgment figure adjusted accordingly. That reduced interest figure includes both the interest on the non economic loss worked out pursuant to the High Court's decision in
Andjelic and agreed adjustment of the interest figures of the other elements of the judgment.

The facts relevant to the plaintiff's cross appeal are carefully and quite fully set out in Herron DCJ's reasons for judgment. For present purposes I outline it as follows. When injured in April 1989 the plaintiff was 51. She had been injured in two previous accidents, one in 1981 and the other in 1982.
Those accidents involved injuries to her neck. She had been treated for them by Dr Fuller, an orthopaedic surgeon. He was called as a witness for the defendant before Herron DCJ.

The accident in 1989 affected the plaintiff's neck, shoulder and low back. At the time she was beginning a career as an artist. She was attending art classes and was engaged in the selling of art works. She was intending to expand her work by painting large canvases and she had just started to do so.
She was also working as an interpreter and translator.

Herron DCJ remarked that the dispute between the parties really revolved around the problem whether the plaintiff was suffering the effects of the two prior accidents rather than the effects of any injuries she received in the subject one. Having stated that as the primary issue he then analysed the evidence, both medical and lay, bearing on that issue. Having done so he said that the resolution of the issue depended upon the plaintiff's own evidence as to her condition after the 1989 accident, the evidence of her husband and the evidence of a tutor at the arts school she attended. He said that the plaintiff impressed him as a witness of truth and so did her husband and so did the witness from the art school. He then, a little later, expressed his conclusion as being that as a result of the 1989 accident the plaintiff became incapacitated in the way she stated. He said that although she had been having some difficulties prior to 1989, he did not think they had greatly interfered with her life, particularly with regard to her painting, but that after that date he accepted she had the problems mentioned in the various medical reports and about which she had complained before him.

Under section 79 of the Motor Accidents Act the trial judge had to decide whether the plaintiff's ability to lead a normal life was significantly impaired by the injuries she suffered in the accident. Herron DCJ found this in her favour. This finding entitled her to damages for non-economic loss under the section. There was a maximum amount for non-economic loss at the time of the judgment of Herron DCJ of $212,000. It is now greater. The amount
Herron DCJ awarded for non-economic loss was required by section 79 to be a proportion determined, according to the severity of the non-economic loss, of the maximum amount. Herron DCJ assessed the proportion as 10 per cent. It is this finding which seems to me to be vulnerable on appeal.

The factual findings by the trial judge, which I have already mentioned, entail his acceptance of a number of matters of fact concerning which evidence was given and I will list the more prominent of these in no particular order.

After the accident the plaintiff was unable to carry on her painting as she had before the accident. She became unable to paint at an easel. She had difficulties in her translating and interpretation work. Work at the art school became physically difficult.

Immediately after the collision she had been in a state of absolute shock. At that time she was experiencing pain in the joints of both shoulders and had a painful neck. Later she found it hard to sit or stand for prolonged periods of time, especially with her arms elevated. Due to her work posture she developed an acute low back pain on some occasions. She also found it difficult to sleep on her right shoulder. She suffered from time to time from cervical headache.

Shortly before the trial, as at 14 February 1994, the plaintiff was still experiencing pain in the right shoulder and finding it hard to work as an artist. A physiotherapist, whom the judge must have accepted in view of his other findings, said that the plaintiff's main problem occurred with her arms in abduction and internal rotation, a task performed often in her occupation when reaching for paint and doing various other tasks in relation to painting.
In that position she experienced pain radiating from deep in her shoulder joint and down into her arm. Her condition was still aggravated by prolonged sitting and standing. She had to stop work quite frequently to ease her pain with a hot water bottle.

Another report, also necessarily accepted by the trial judge, was that the accident had resulted in an aggravation of pre-existing problems in the plaintiff's cervical spine as well as some muscular ligamentous injuries of her left shoulder girdle. That doctor reported also that she may have suffered aggravation of early degenerative change in her lumbar spine giving rise to discomfort in her back and right thigh. Further, as the increase of her disability had proceeded for almost four years at the time of this particular report it seemed likely to be permanent thus bringing about a permanent alteration in the plaintiff's working capacity. Shortly before the trial she was still having problems with her neck and shoulders.

A doctor reported shortly before the trial his opinion that her condition was of considerable significance regarding her capacity to work long hours on a full time basis as an artist and to carry out the full range of tasks required in that pursuit.

Going back to the year of the accident, in the period following it, she had been unable to do any substantial physical activity for some two - three months. She had been unable to paint during that year and it was not until that she got back to painting. Once she did she was only able to manage smaller paintings. Throughout the period from the accident to the trial she was finding her household duties difficult to perform. She could no longer ride a bicycle as she had before the 1989 accident. She was unable to swim.
Her husband said, and the trial judge accepted his evidence, that since the accident she had been complaining of pain in the back and neck on a daily basis.

Some particular instances of what had happened to her were that, in the period soon after the accident, she had been unable to carry out the work of translating three articles for a medical magazine, doing the shortest of the three, but having to give back the other two. In that period she had had difficulty in using an etching press and had to enlist the aid of paid help.
By the date of trial, she had not been able to complete any large paintings.
In 1980 she had found it necessary to substitute a print making course for her painting. Prolonged sitting or standing tended to increase her pain. She found it hard to get comfortable during the night and had to stop work during the day owing to shoulder and neck pain. At the painting workshop she had to lie down and curtail her painting time from twelve - fourteen hours a day, which she had been doing before the 1989 accident, to six - seven hours a day, which was the most she could do after the immediate effects of the accident had settled down. She experienced difficulty when driving for long distances.

On first reading the trial judge's reasons and the written submissions in this matter I was inclined to agree with the plaintiff's submissions that the trial judge had sufficiently seriously under-estimated the significance of the impairment of the plaintiff's ability to lead a normal life as to warrant this
Court's intervention. Counsel for the defendant, however, raised the matter of the range of discretion available to the trial judge in circumstances such as these and drew the court's attention to some factual matters relied upon by the plaintiff to which he contributed some further details which, to some degree, would lessen the effect of the facts relied upon by the plaintiff. In deference to his arguments I have further considered the evidentiary materials available to the court in the appeal papers. Having gone over them again I have come firmly to the conclusion that Herron DCJ did under-estimate the relevant significance of the plaintiff's injuries to a degree where this Court should interfere.

I say that because, in my view, taking into account the relevant facts, bearing in mind that some of them are relevant to economic loss as well as to non economic loss, and keeping my assessment strictly to the effect of the materials on the plaintiff's non economic life, that a proper proportion under section 79 is that of 20 per cent. This is so significantly different from a per cent assessment that it warrants the court, in my opinion, acting on its own view rather than accepting what appears to be a flawed assessment by the trial judge.

The position is different, in my opinion, as regards economic loss. In regard to that the trial judge considered what was termed an economic loss schedule which had been tendered before him on behalf of the plaintiff. This document, as is apparent from his Honour's description and the matters he mentions in relation to it, was one in which a rosy view was taken of what the plaintiff might have earned from painting in the period between injury and trial, had she not been injured, and of what she would have earned in the period after trial. This document appears to have been essentially based on the plaintiff's own optimistic predictions concerning reception by art buyers of her works.
Art markets are notoriously changeable and values attributed to paintings equally notoriously extremely difficult to predict. The plaintiff's income tax returns showed that up to the time of the accident there was no sign of any sales by her on anything like the scale that the economic loss schedule took into account in its predictions. The trial judge concluded that the plaintiff had suffered a loss of income earning capacity as a result of the defendant's negligence but that, in assessing compensation, he was entering very much the realm of guesswork.

In view of the evidence to which I have briefly referred this seems to me to have been a very just comment and one with which I would agree. He then went on to say that the plaintiff's loss of income earning capacity should be assessed as being in the region of 25 per cent and, doing the best he could on the available materials, he made the assessment of the figures of $5,000 and $15,000 for the two aspects of economic loss which I mentioned at the beginning of these reasons. I would not differ from the trial judge in these conclusions.

Thus I come to the point that, in my opinion, the cross appeal succeeds on the point concerning non-economic loss. This means that the court should reassess the damages. As already mentioned I think the assessment for section 79 purposes should be a proportion of 20 per cent. In saying this I accept, of course, the trial judge's conclusion that the first requirement under section was made out by the plaintiff in her favour.

In regard to the other elements of damage I would reach the same conclusions as the trial judge. There is no issue about the figure for out-of-pockets being that mentioned earlier.

Against the possibility that the court might reach this result the parties were asked to see whether they could agree on what figures would emerge from findings of the kind which, in my opinion, should be made. They were asked to work out these figures on the maximum amount under <case> as it stands today, to work out the interest on the figure thus obtained in accordance with the majority High Court decision in Andjelic versus Marsland, and to work out the other items of interest.

The parties have now handed to the court a document setting out agreed figures on the footing of what I have said in my reasons and applying the appropriate methods of calculating interest both pursuant to the Andjelic method in regard to non-economic loss, and to their agreed approach in regard to other matters of interest. This saves me from going through any calculations on my own part and enables me simply to say, on the footing of the findings which I have earlier said I think the court should arrive at, the elements of damage would be as follows: non-economic loss $27,500, interest on that $13,458, out- of-pocket expenses $11,345.98, interest on that $1,353.66, past economic loss $5,000, interest on that $1,812.61, future loss of earning capacity $15,000, making a total for judgment of $75,470.25.

Looking at the appeal and cross-appeal overall the result, if my opinion is adopted, will be that, in place of the judgment of $55,178.98, which was the position before the hearing began, the plaintiff will depart with a judgment of $75,470.25. It would seem to me this means the appropriate way of expressing the result would be that the defendant's appeal should be dismissed, the plaintiff's cross-appeal upheld and in regard, then, to the cross-appeal the further orders would be: judgment below to be set aside and in lieu of that judgment there should be entered, as of today's date and to take effect from today's date, judgment for $75,470.25.

Subject to any argument the parties may wish to raise I would also be of opinion that the costs of the appeal and the cross appeal should be dealt with as one set of costs and that the plaintiff should have her costs on that footing borne by the defendant.

GLEESON CJ: I agree with the orders proposed by Priestley JA and with his Honour's reasons.

SHELLER JA: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Priestley JA.
 * * * 
