

Fai Workers Compensation versus Philkor Builders [1996] NSWSC 398 (3 September )

FAI WORKERS COMPENSATION LTD V PHILKOR BUILDERS PTY LTD /95 
Tuesday 4 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal from a decision of Master McLaughlin who was asked to review an order made by the Registrar that the defendant/appellant pay the plaintiff's/respondent's costs of a winding up summons and that those costs have priority in the administration of the defendant. 
The basic facts are not in dispute. On 23 August 1995, the plaintiff filed a summons seeking an order that the defendant be wound up under the Corporations
Law. That summons was returnable before the Registrar at 11 am on 21 September
At 10.30 am on 21 September 1995, a meeting of the directors of the defendant was held and those directors resolved that the defendant company ("the Company") was insolvent and that administrators should be appointed.
They appointed William James Hamilton and Pino Fiorentino as administrators pursuant to the Corporations Law.

Shortly after 11 am that day, the Registrar made certain orders and the proceedings were stood over. After a further adjournment the proceedings were listed for hearing on 20 October 1995.

On 18 October 1995, a majority of the creditors of the defendant resolved that a Deed of Company Arrangement should be executed. The plaintiff did not support that resolution, but notwithstanding such opposition, the resolution was carried and the deed was executed.

The deed did not refer at all to the pending winding up proceedings, but essentially provided that the directors would make available a fund which, together with the Company's assets and less the costs of administration, should allow creditors to be paid 6.66 cents in the dollar. The deed provided that no creditor would take any further proceedings in any action pending against the Company as at the commencement of the deed and that the deed would be pleaded as an absolute defence should any such proceedings be taken. The deed provided that upon payment to participating creditors of the amounts due to them under the scheme, each would execute if asked a deed of covenant not to sue in respect of the remainder. There was provision for preferred creditors who might be paid in full, preferred creditors being persons "whose debt or claim would be entitled to the priority given by <case> of the Law in the case of the winding up of the Company under the Law substituting the date of commencement of this Deed for the date of Commencement of the winding up."
It would seem that the deed commenced on 18 October 1995. It bound all creditors of the Company including contingent creditors as existed as at the
Fixed Date which the deed defined as meaning 21 September 1995.

On 20 October 1995, it would seem that solicitors appeared for both the plaintiff and the defendant. After hearing them, the learned Registrar made the following order:- "Summons dismissed: defendant to pay plaintiff's costs: those costs to be paid in priority to the administrator." 
The Company appealed to the Master for review of that decision, but the Master did not alter the decision. The defendant now appeals to a court constituted by a Judge.

I am informed by Mr Svehla who appears for the defendant/appellant, that the present appeal raises questions of frequent occurrence in company administrations and that although the amount involved in the present case is small, the principle involved in this appeal is of considerable significance.

Mr Svehla puts that it should be observed that the learned Registrar should not have made an order at all. Mr Svehla points to <case> of the Corporations
Law. That section as subsection (1) makes clear applies to "a person bound by a deed". The plaintiff was bound by the deed (vide <case>). Section 444E(3) provides that a person cannot proceed with enforcement process against the company or proceed with legal action against the company in relation to its property without the leave of the court. However, <case> prevents a person proceeding with an application for winding up made before the deed. There is no proviso in subsection (2) permitting a person to proceed with the winding up with the leave of the court.

Ordinarily, a winding up summons is not a procedure for enforcement; see for instance Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Trellis Holdings Ltd [(1996) 14
ACLC 650.] Accordingly, there would seem to be two distinct rules, one for winding up summonses and the other for execution. As only the execution provision provides that there is to be an exception where the court gives leave, one can assume that there is no such exception where the winding up summons is concerned.

Butterworths Australian Corporation Law Principles & Practice Vol 2 p ,109 suggests that "Unless there are special circumstances present a winding up application should be dismissed following the execution of deed of company arrangement." Unfortunately, the Corporations Law does not make any explicit provision for this.

Thus, one must ask oneself, what is meant by proceed with a winding up summons? 
Ordinarily, the word "proceed" means "the action of going onward". There have been, however, some cases in the Admiralty Jurisdiction such as The Gladys [[1910] P 13], , where it is held that an immovable vessel is not proceeding, but it is also clear from cases in that jurisdiction that a vessel which is merely temporarily stopped is still in the course of proceeding; see for instance
Wood versus Smith [(1874) LR 5 PC 451] and
Forest Oaks Steam Shipping Co Ltd versus Richard & Co (1899) 5 Times
Commercial Cases 100. See also Wigton versus Ratke [(1984) 9 DLR (4th) .] 
Not every incident of a claim by one person against another is classed as proceeding with litigation. In the 1930s, when persons had to elect between commencing workers compensation proceedings or common law proceedings, it was held that not every step that a claimant took was a step in the proceedings.
Thus a woman did not proceed with a claim if she merely asked for some small maintenance from the insurer before instituting any legal action; see Latter v Muswellbrook SC <case>; [(1936) 56 CLR 422.] 
The closest case to the present situation is probably Re Conomo [[1960]
ALR 742.]
That was a decision of Clyne, J in the Federal Court of Bankruptcy. Section 35 of the Bankruptcy Act 1924 provided that where a petitioner did not proceed with due diligence on his petition the court might substitute another petitioner. Clyne, J held that the words "`proceed ... on his petition' ...
mean to go on with or continue with the petition until a sequestration order is made." (p 744). The point does not seem to have been considered in any other case. The 1966 Act <case> which is the equivalent 1924 <case> does not use the word "proceed", but rather the words "prosecuted with due diligence." Some of the reasoning in Conomo's case was criticised by the New Zealand Court of Appeal in Ronaldson versus Dominion Freeholds Ltd [[1981] 2 NZLR 132], but not the passage which I have cited.

Mr Svehla cited cases in which the word "proceeding" was given a very wide meaning by courts including Australian Broadcasting Commission versus Industrial
Court of South Australia <case>; [(1985) 62 ALR 512] and Grout versus Gunnedah SC [(1995) 129 ALR 372] at 383. I have considered these cases but it does not seem to me that they assist. The operative word in the subsection is "proceed" which is a different word to "proceeding".

Once one has got to the stage of realizing (A) that there is no relevance in any court giving leave because subsection (2) applies and not subsection (3); and (B) that not everything that happens in litigation involves a person who proceeds with litigation, one has got to analyse whether what happened in fact in the litigation contravened the proviso directed against a person who proceeds with litigation.

There were two steps that were taken by the Registrar, (a) dismissal of the summons; and (b) making an order for costs. As to dismissal, the order did not to my mind involve someone who was proceeding with litigation. Rather than moving the summons towards consummation of the winding up order, what happened was just the reverse. The order made effectively prevented anything happening on the summons. Accordingly, in my view, a person who applies for dismissal of a summons does not proceed with the summons. There is thus no bar to dismissal of the summons under <case>. Indeed, if no-one took any action to dismiss the summons and it remained on foot, then it would only be a matter of time before <case> operated, so that the summons would cease to have the potential of allowing the court to put the company into liquidation. This is because s
R automatically dismisses a summons after six months unless something special happens.

The next question is whether the making of an order for costs is a step which involves a person who proceeds with a summons. The learned Master simply said that "I do not consider that the section allows the Court to dismiss the application to wind up the company but precludes the Court from making an appropriate costs order, such costs order being, in my view, a concomitant of the order for dismissal of the winding up proceedings." 
With great respect to the learned Master, this is an over-simplification. One has in this legislation not to see what is common sense, but rather to analyse the terms which the legislature has used. What one must do is to see whether a person who seeks an order for costs proceeds with a summons.

However, using the test which was enunciated by Clyne, J in Conomo's case,
I do not consider that taking this step involves a person who proceeds with the summons. The course is not taken of moving the summons from an incipient stage to consummation: rather, the summons is terminated. Its potentiality for good or ill ceases and the making of the costs order is something that occurs in connection with the summons' death, not its fruition. Accordingly, I believe that when one does analyse the terms used by the statute one gets to the same result as the learned Master, that the costs order is a concomitant to the order of dismissal and that it does not involve a person who proceeds with the summons. Accordingly there was power in the Registrar to make the order.

The next question then is whether the order which the learned Registrar made giving the costs priority should be disturbed.

There is an initial problem with this in that the Master said "No argument has been put to me that, if the Registrar did have the power to make the costs order, he incorrectly or wrongly exercised that power." Ordinarily, an appeal on a point which was not taken below has little chance of success. However, here again one must actually look at the precise principle. It is stated as precisely as possible by the High Court in Suttor versus Gundowda Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 81 CLR 418], 438, where three Justices said, "The circumstances in which an appellate court will entertain a point not raised in the court below are well established. Where a point is not taken in the court below and evidence could have been given there which by any possibility could have prevented the point from succeeding, it cannot be taken afterwards." 
In the instant case, the point concerned is a pure question of law and there was no evidence which could have been tendered below which could have affected the matter. Miss Pitts for the plaintiff/respondent made a valiant effort to suggest some, but apart from applauding her ingenuity, I still cannot see how there could have been any such evidence. However, in the instant case the point is one which needs to be considered at some stage between these parties as it would appear fairly obvious that if the point is not dealt with now it will have to be decided later in the administration. Accordingly, it is appropriate to deal with it on this appeal notwithstanding it was not considered by the learned Master.

Under <case> of the Corporations Law a person who issues a winding up summons which leads to a winding up order prosecutes those proceedings at his or her own cost, but when an order is made, the liquidator is bound to pay the costs to that plaintiff. Under <case>(b), the section of the Corporations Law dealing with priority in a winding up, with a court ordered winding up the costs in respect of the application for the order including the applicant's taxed costs payable under <case> are given high priority. In the instant case there was no winding up. The order that the learned Registrar made was that the plaintiff's costs of the summons be paid in priority in the administration of the Company.

Mr Svehla says there was no jurisdiction to make such an order.

I cannot see how the submission that there was no jurisdiction to make an order for costs can be sustained. The court always has complete discretion as to what, if any, order for costs should be made in any proceedings before it.
Once one accepts that the Registrar could entertain an order for costs, then it was within his power to make whatever order in his discretion he thought appropriate; vide [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) <case>.

Accordingly, the real dispute is whether there was jurisdiction to make the order that was in fact made, that is, that the costs be paid as a matter of priority in the administration. Again I think that if the matter was within jurisdiction, then the Registrar's decision as to the appropriate order should be left to his discretion especially as the discretion was not challenged before the Master.

Before dealing with the power given to the court under the Corporations Law or under the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/) to make such an order, it is useful to look at a few basic matters which are pertinent to the order that was made.

It is important to note that <case> of the Corporations Law only binds creditors "so far as concerns claims arising" on or before the fixed date, which in the instant case was 21 September 1995. Accordingly, if for instance, on 22 September 1995, an employee of the Company (in circumstances where the
Company was vicariously liable) crashed the Company's car into X's car, X's claim for damages would not be a matter by which X would be bound by the deed.
However, X might be a creditor of the Company who in respect of other claims was bound by the deed. If one read <case> literally, X, if he was a creditor before 21 September, could not take any proceedings to wind up the Company because of the damage to his car, yet if X were not a creditor he could do so.
This is such an absurd result, that one must, to my mind, read <case> as if the words "so far as concerns claims arising on or before the day specified in the deed" were implied in <case>.

On this basis, if the claim for costs was not a contingent debt as at the fixed date, then the effect of the order of the Registrar would be to create a debt after the fixed date. This debt could then, at least on the appropriate amount, enable the claimant to issue fresh proceedings to wind the Company up and the creditor would be entitled ex debito justiciae to such an order. This would then have the effect of destroying the whole scheme. 
Although Mr Svehla argued that the claim for costs would be a contingent debt,
I cannot see how this could be so. A contingent debt is a claim under an existing obligation pursuant to which the Company may become subject on the happening of some future event or at some future date: Re William Hockley
Ltd [[1962] 1 WLR 555], 558; Community Development Pty Ltd versus Engwirda Construction
Co <case>; [(1969) 120 CLR 455], 459 and see Re International Harvester Creditor Corp (Aust) Ltd [(1983) 7 ACLR .]
As under <case> there is a personal obligation to bear one's own costs of a winding up petition until the winding up order is made and then a statutory right to get costs which commences as at that day, it does not appear to me that a claim for costs before the order is made can be classed as a contingent debt.

The court has, under <case> of the Corporations Law, power to make an order as it thinks appropriate about how the part is to operate in respect to a particular company. This section is to be widely construed; see for instance
Cawthorn versus Keira Constructions Pty Ltd [(1994) 33 NSWLR 607.] Where a court can see that the administration may well be undermined if no step is taken then the court will be able to step in and make the appropriate order under <case>. I have no doubt that a possible order would be to direct the administrator to call a meeting of creditors to consider a variation of the deed to enable the order for costs to be dealt with so that there would not be the consequence that the Company would be put into liquidation.

However, it is to my mind impossible to justify what the Registrar did under s
A. What he has done is to bring into the administration a debt which was not one of the debts affected by the deed and has diminished the pool of assets available to the creditors under that deed by giving this new debt priority. If the mathematics were that without this claim for costs creditors were to be paid 6.66 cents in the dollar, then either more money has to be put in by the directors or alternatively the creditors are to receive a lesser dividend.

I cannot see any power in the Corporations Law to add a debt to the deed of arrangement. It must follow that the Registrar's order, in so far as it made the order for costs a debt in the administration, was beyond power.

There was, however, ample reason for the Registrar to make an order for costs in this matter. Although I have not re-examined his exercise of discretion, it does seem a fairly obvious case. The plaintiff had duly prosecuted its petition and half an hour before the petition was due to be heard, the
Company, apparently without consultation, held a directors' meeting, conceded that it is completely insolvent, appointed an administrator and set in motion the holding of meetings of creditors. It would seem to me that the plaintiff creditor has been the source of the pressure which has culminated in the deed of arrangement. The learned Registrar obviously thought so because he considered that there should be further affidavits filed to show whether the administration was bona fide in all the circumstances.

Unfortunately, the deed does not appear to be particularly well thought out.
When one looks at it one can see on its face that the drafter thought that the
Interpretation Act 1897 was still in force, though most lawyers would know that it had been repealed and replaced in 1987. It was common in schemes of arrangement under what is now <case> of the Corporations Law, where there was an existing winding up summons pending, to make provision in the scheme for the costs of the winding up petition as a matter of priority. Not only does this deed not do that, but it also makes no provision for such costs at all.

It seems to me that with such an omission, the plaintiff may well have moved the court under <case>(f)(i) to terminate the deed because of unfairness to it; cf Milankov Nominees Pty Ltd versus Roycol Ltd <case>; [(1994) 14 ACSR 296], 302-3. It may well be a reason why the plaintiff did not do so that the Registrar made the order in the form that he did.

Unfortunately, the Registrar's good intentions cannot be effectuated under the scheme of the Law. Accordingly, his order for costs must stand, but the proviso that the costs are to take priority in the administration must be set aside. This means that the plaintiff is free to issue a new winding up summons.

Commercially, the more acceptable course may be for the administrator to apply to vary the deed. This may be an expensive process with the convening of fresh meetings of creditors and the plaintiff may maintain its attitude that it does not want to have anything to do with the deed. However, an opportunity should be given for this course of action to be considered.

When I reserved judgment, I indicated to Mr Svehla and Miss Pitts that I would entertain further submissions. However, after preparing this judgment in draft, my Associate informed both lawyers that this would not be necessary.
This was because I thought it preferable for me to publish these reasons and to stand the matter over before making formal orders to say 12 June at 9.50 am. On that day I will not at all feel offended if either lawyer wishes to reargue some matter involved in the case, or if there is some notice of motion filed by Mr Svehla's client to do something further in the administration. I believe that by publishing these reasons now I am taking a more efficient course than merely waiting for further submissions in writing on the original application which may not be directed to the matters which I have dealt with in these reasons.

I have not directed my mind fully to the question of costs before the Master and myself. My present inclination is that the costs order of the Master should stand, but each party should bear its own costs of this appeal. I will hear submissions on 12 June on this question if necessary.

FAI WORKERS COMPENSATION LTD V PHILKOR BUILDERS P/L (NO 2) /95 
Tuesday 3 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I gave reasons for judgment in this appeal on 4 June 1996. The judgment is now reported in (1996) 20 ACSR 592; 14 ACLC 1059. 
The conclusion I reached in that judgment was that the learned Registrar and the learned Master had power to make an order as to costs when dismissing a winding up summons because a company had entered into administration and also to make an order for costs. However, although I held that the Registrar was perfectly justified in making an order that the costs be paid out of the fund being the fund the subject of the Deed of Company Arrangement, he did not have power to do so. I then stood the matter over with suggestions as to how the problem might be able to be resolved. One of these suggestions was the variation of the deed.

Mr Svehla, for the administrator/appellant, has indicated that there are only two ways in which the deed could be amended, the first under <case> on an application by the administrator, and the second pursuant to ss 445A and 445F of the Corporations Law. For the good reasons which are set out in Mr Svehla's additional submissions, the administrator does not wish to make such an application.

However, Mr Svehla says that even if the administrator or a creditor sought to vary the deed under <case> and <case>, it would not be competent to make an amendment which had the effect of a person (whether a future creditor or otherwise of the company) receiving money from the company under administration in priority to existing creditors.

In my earlier judgment I said that there was no power for the Registrar to add a new debt to the debts being considered in the administration. Mr Svehla puts that it would be incompetent for like reasons for the creditors to vary the deed. He says, quite correctly, that it may well have been that the original deed was brought about by a balance of considerations of the creditors voting and had the additional debt been brought into consideration, the deed would not have been passed in the first place. A fortiori is this the situation where there is a substantial minority vote on the question as to whether the deed should be approved.

I think this is correct. If it is not correct, then I do not consider that the
Court should put the administration to the costs of convening a meeting of creditors to find that out.

It is quite clear under <case> (and by analogy the same matters are relevant under <case>) that consideration must be given as to the effect on other creditors; see the judgments of Branson, J in the Mulvaney versus Rob Wintulich
Pty Ltd [(1995) 18 ACSR 384] and
Molit (No 55) Pty Ltd versus Lam Soon Australia Pty Ltd [(1996) 19 ACSR .] 
Accordingly, that route of solving the present problem appears to have been closed. There is the question of setting aside the whole deed for fundamental unfairness, but again that is not a thing that should be contemplated without a specific application from a creditor and it may well be that it is now too late for such an application to succeed in the light of distributions being made in accordance with the deed.

Mr Svehla suggests that I might like to re-examine the reasons that I gave on June 1996 and delete the order for costs. The reasons he gives for that point of view cover much the same ground as in his earlier submissions which I have rejected. I adhere to my earlier reasons.

The result is that the appeal should be allowed to the extent of deleting the
Registrar's order affirmed by the Master that the order for costs be paid in priority by the administrator. There should be no costs of the appeal. The appellant has been partially successful, but only on a point which was not the main point in the appeal.

Thus there is now an order for costs against the company which is not borne by the creditors in administration. Commercially, this probably means that a fresh summons to wind the company up will be lodged by the respondent. Thus, unless the persons who financially bailed out the company for the deed to take effect put in further moneys, or someone else does so, the company may well have to be wound up. I have no regrets about this possible outcome because it must be made quite clear that it is not an available option to companies to put their creditors through the large expense of taking winding up proceedings, and then at the last moment, entering into administration without making any provision for the costs of the winding up proceedings.

Mr Svehla has put that that was too harsh an attitude to take. He posited the situation where a lot of expense had been gone to in preparing for a three week equity suit to start on a Monday, and on the Friday before the directors took the view that it was too expensive an exercise and the company should merely go into administration. He put that in that situation it would be quite wrong to allow the equity suit to proceed and to make the costs payable out of the fund, or alternatively, by the company. One must always be wary of examples which are really not in the same plight as the current case. I would have thought, however, that in that situation, a company that did not make provision in the deed for at least the costs to that date of the equity suit if the other side were successful, would run the risk of the deed being set aside if the appropriate creditor applied in time or the same thing happening as has occurred in this case.

The only formal order I make is that the appeal is allowed to the extent only of deleting the Registrar's order "Such costs to be paid in priority by the administrator". The costs order made by the Master should stand: each party should pay their own costs of the appeal.
 * * * 
