

Paul James Management versus Alliance Properties [1996] NSWSC 134 (16 May 1996) 
PAUL JAMES MANAGEMENT versus ALLIANCE PROPERTIES /96 
Thursday 16 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
Brownie J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By contract dated 30 May 1994 the defendant areed to sell a business to the plaintiff. The amount payable by the plaintiff was about $1.3 million, together with some stock which was to be valued in an agreed way. The first defendant agreed to lend the plaintiff the purchase money and it took, by way of security, a fixed and floating charge over the plaintiff's assets.

The first defendant also agreed to lease to the plaintiff the land from which the business was conducted. Shortly after completion of a contract to buy the business Mr Levick, a director of the plaintiff and it seems the moving spirit behind the plaintiff company, formed the view that he had been misled as to the worth of the business. However, on the plaintiff's case he was also of the view that the plaintiff had no remedy and he applied his efforts to improving the business. According to him he has, over the last two years or so, converted the business from a loss-making to a profit-making enterprise but this has been at a cost to the plaintiff and to Mr Levick and his family, so that their cumulative financial resources have been over-extended and the plaintiff is now in breach of its contractual obligations to the first defendant.

On the plaintiff's case it was only last month that the plaintiff learned of facts which it says justified it in rescinding the original contract to buy the business, and the two associated contracts, that is, the contract creating the charge, and the lease.

The plaintiff asserted that it had taken the appropriate steps to rescind these three agreements and it sued seeking the assistance of the court to declare that the three contracts had been effectively rescinded and to enable the appropriate adjustments to be made. Plainly enough, since some two years have gone by and since the plaintiff has conducted the business in the meantime, rescission at common law is unavailable; but the plaintiff says that it has taken the steps available to it to effectively rescind the three contracts, but that it needed the assistance of the Court in order that the appropriate adjustments be made.

At the moment the plaintiff seeks an interlocutory injunction enabling it to remain in possession of the leased premises so as to be able to conduct the business until the final hearing. It seeks an early final hearing and to that end suggests a reference under Part 72 of the Rules. It says that if this were to be done it ought to be possible to have a final hearing within a couple of months or so.

The first defendant resists the application for an interlocutory injunction and, if I understood its position correctly, does not agree that the matter can be brought on for hearing as quickly as the plaintiff suggests. It wishes to exercise its powers under both the charge and the lease and to re-take possession of both the land and the business.

The position of the other defendants is irrelevant for the purposes of this interlocutory application and I say no more about them.

The heart of the plaintiff's case consists of the allegation of misrepresentation. I do not need to say more for the moment than that the evidence establishes what seems to me to be a serious question to be determined as to this.

The first defendant suggested the plaintiff's case was weak as to the element of reliance. I say only that in my view sufficient evidence is shown to justify the granting of an interlocutory application, if this was the only issue, and that it would not be correct to categorise the plaintiff's case on this question as so weak as to adversely affect the exercise of the discretion so far as the plaintiff was concerned, whether or not to grant an interlocutory injunction. No doubt there are serious questions involved which will be debated on the final hearing.

However, the first defendant submitted that the plaintiff had no right to an interlocutory injunction because it had no right or equity calling for protection. It submitted that if the plaintiff's case was ultimately accepted, it followed that the plaintiff had already rescinded the contract to purchase the business as well as the other two contracts, so that there was nothing left at all in equity to be protected by an interlocutory injunction.

If, on the other hand, the plaintiff's factual case failed, then, according to the first defendant, by reference to the principle expounded in such cases as
Inglis versus Commonwealth Trading Bank Australia (1972) 126 CLR 161, the plaintiff had no right to an injunction at this stage because the plaintiff cannot bring the mortgage debt into court.

In my view the case is not as simple as this. If on the final hearing the plaintiff succeeds in establishing the misrepresentation, the right to rescind, and the act of rescission, as it asserts, there might then be a difficult question to resolve as to the effect of the act of rescission. No doubt it is true as a general proposition that rescission is the act of a party rather than the result of a judicial determination, but in a case such as this one it is questionable that the plaintiff's acts of rescission are by themselves sufficient to effectively rescind all three contracts; that is, it may well be the case when the matter is finally analysed, and assuming that the plaintiff succeeded on the factual arguments, that what is necessary in order to achieve rescission is some declaration or declarations as well as a series of orders making the appropriate adjustments of the rights of the parties. See Kramer versus McMahon [(1970) 1 NSWR 194.] In this case, and assuming for the moment the success of the plaintiff's case factually, more needs to be done to adjust the rights of the parties upon rescission than simply declaring that the contracts have been rescinded.

As I have said, on the plaintiff's case it has by its efforts, or the efforts of Mr Levick, converted a loss-making business into a profit-making business.
On the plaintiff's case, the plaintiff is entitled to a charge over the business in order to secure the plaintiff's right to an adjustment in this respect.

On the plaintiff's case, if there is not an interlocutory injunction now, its right to an appropriate adjustment might very well be lost. No authority was cited for the proposition that a court of equity will impose a charge or perhaps some other form of equitable interest in order to protect a right to an adjustment upon the rescission of a contract, and in the limited time available I have not found one, but as a matter of principle I do not see any reason why it should not be so.

If, in a proper case, a court of equity considers it appropriate to grant relief and to mould the relief so as to make an adjustment in favour of one party, then the court might also mould relief so as to secure that right and not suffer the right to be lost. At the least, it seems to me, there is a serious question to be determined to this general effect, being a mixed question of fact and law.

As to the argument based upon Inglis versus The Commonwealth Bank I accept that in the ordinary case between mortgagee and mortgagor, cases such as Inglis demonstrate that the mortgagor must ordinarily bring the money the subject of the mortgage into court as a term of obtaining relief. However, this is not the universal rule. Inglis itself is authority for that, but see also
Glandore Pty Limited versus Elders Finance & Investment Co Limited <case>; [(1984) 57 ALR 186]; and, more generally, the discussion by Bryson J in an article in [11 Australian Bar Review 1.] 
In this case if the plaintiff's case is accepted, the mortgage itself is subject to impeachment. Subject then to a consideration of the balance of convenience, I consider the case is one where it is appropriate to grant an interlocutory injunction.

The injunctions which the plaintiff seeks at this stage are in these terms: first, that the first defendant will not sell, encumber or otherwise dispose of the relevant property without giving seven days' notice in writing to the plaintiff's solicitors; and secondly, that the first defendant will not appoint a receiver or enter into possession of the property or take any step or do anything to disturb the quiet possession of the property by the plaintiff.

In the circumstances of this case, a consideration of the proper protection of the interests of the first defendant pending a final hearing seems to stand at the forefront of the matters to be considered. It is, after all, a mortgagee and the plaintiff is a mortgagor which is in default. The plaintiff is also a lessee of the first defendant and it is in default under the lease.

There is evidence that the first defendant wishes to sell the property. The tactical position seems to have changed from time to time during the present hearing, but in the end the position seems to be that the first defendant wishes to sell the business together with the freehold interest i the land from which the business is conducted. The proposed injunctions would not prevent that from happening. They will merely require the first defendant to give to the plaintiff seven days' notice of an intention to sell the business.

Obtaining vacant possession is in rather a different position, but in all the circumstances it seems to me that granting an injunction which will prevent the first defendant from re-taking possession of the property for a short time is not so serious a matter as to warrant refusing to grant an injunction.

I cannot say that the evidence inspires any real confidence in me that a sale is truly likely in the near future. It is certainly a possibility, but I do not think the present evidence justifies any observation more favourable to the first defendant than that. Presumably, if the first defendant does find a buyer for the land and the business, it will offer to the plaintiff the right to buy them, and if the plaintiff can raise the money, that will provide a prompt commercial solution of the whole litigation. In the circumstances that does not seem terribly likely either.

The real difficulty confronting the plaintiff lies in the security to the first defendant of the undertakings which were proffered. The plaintiff itself proffered the usual undertaking as to damages. The first defendant attacked the adequacy of that. After a time the plaintiff proffered further securities, including undertakings as to damages by two associated companies, Goldbear Pty
Limited and Crossley Real Estate Pty Limited, and also by Mr Levick personally. Mr Smith proffered to the court Certificates of "Title in respect of three unencumbered properties, together worth about $250,000.

There was a great deal of debate and evidence about these securities and their worth. One needs to distinguish between the financial position of the plaintiff itself and the financial position of the plaintiff as trustee of a family trust. In its capacity as trustee, it seems to have an excess of assets over liabilities; but viewing the position of the plaintiff itself, it seems to have an excess of liabilities over assets. I do not think its undertaking as to damages is worth very much at all.

The undertakings as to damages proffered by Goldbear Pty Limited and Crossley
Real Estate Pty Limited are worth something, but in the overall scheme of things not very much. They do not have significant assets. I do not think I know enough about the financial position of Mr Levick to pass judgment on the adequacy of his proffered undertaking. On the other hand, so far as I can see, the securities proffered by Mr Smith seem to be quite ample to meet any loss that the first defendant might incur if there is an interlocutory injunction as of now.

So far as I can tell from the evidence, the first defendant might lose two months, perhaps three months, of income. It might incur a liability for interest for that period. It will no doubt incur some legal costs. However, the lost income or the extra interest likely to be incured does not seem likely to amount to anything like the value of the land proffered by Mr Smith.

I conclude that the securities proffered are sufficient. I bear in mind the importance generally of the principle that the financiers should be entitled to expect that their securities will be able to be enforced notwithstanding that debtors make allegations of impropriety against them. I bear in mind the submissions made against the credit of Mr Levick but at the end of the day it seems to me that the balance of convenience lies in favour of the granting of interlocutory injunctions generally in the terms sought by the plaintiff.

I invite submissions as to the precise terms of the injunctions, the precise terms of the undertakings to be extracted and any other matters the parties wish to debate. I note the plaintiff indicated a willingness to refer the entire litigation to a referee under Part 72. If the plaintiff is willing to incur that expense, I am inclined to think that the court should probably make such an order unless the defendant elects to say that the case is not that urgent. The matter can be disposed of by Part 72 reference more quickly than it can be disposed of if it is tried in the ordinary way, even if the hearing is expedited.

Subject to what might be submitted I consider that the costs of the motion should be reserved for the trial judge.

Exhibit 11, the confidential exhibit, should be returned to the custody of the first defendant immediately.
 * * * 
