

Regina versus King Matter No 70087/96 [1998] NSWSC 289 (13 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 
REGINA versus PEARL MAY KING /96 August 1998 
Studdert J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: The prisoner, Pearl May King, pleaded not guilty to murder but guilty to manslaughter upon the presentation of an indictment charging her with the murder of John Desmond King. The Crown accepted that plea in full discharge of the indictment and it is clearly established by the decision of the High Court in Maxwell versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 501] that I am required to sentence the prisoner on the basis of that plea. 
The prisoner was duly convicted for the crime of manslaughter on 21 July 1998 and after receiving evidence on that and the preceding day and submissions by counsel, I remanded the prisoner for sentence. The prisoner has been in custody since 21 July 1998.

The deceased, John Desmond King, was the husband of the prisoner, the marriage date being 9 February 1987. It appears that the prisoner and the deceased had lived together for several years prior to that date and they were living together up to the date of death, although by then they occupied separate bedrooms.

The prisoner killed the deceased on 17 April 1996 inflicting a single but fatal knife wound upon him. The stabbing occurred at about 3.45 pm at the prisoner's home at Lalor Park. Earlier that day the prisoner attended the
Blacktown RSL Club and so did the deceased. During the time spent at the club, both the Kings consumed beer. The prisoner had three schooners of beer altogether but the deceased had considerably more. Indeed, blood analysis testing referred to in the post mortem report of Dr Little shows that the deceased had a blood alcohol level of .248 grams per 100 ml of blood. The vitreous humor reading was .241 grams per 100 ml. The Court was informed that these figures indicated that the approximate level of alcohol in the deceased's body at the time of death was the equivalent of eleven schooners of beer and given the history of drinking by the deceased that day and the deceased's body weight, the Crown further informed the Court that the deceased must have consumed approximately sixteen schooners of beer in the period from .00 am until 3.30 pm on the day of his death.

The prisoner drove the deceased home from the club and in the course of that journey the prisoner alleges that the deceased was verbally abusive and derisive of her and he accused her of infidelity. At home the prisoner claims that the abuse continued and referred not only to her but to her mother, who the deceased kept calling "a slut". According to the prisoner, the abuse continued whilst she was in the kitchen attending to feeding her cats and the deceased was in his bedroom. Eventually the prisoner picked up a knife from the sink in the kitchen and walked into the bedroom where the deceased was lying on the bed. She then inflicted the knife wound, to a description of which I shall return shortly. The deceased was taken by ambulance to Blacktown
Hospital where he died some three hours later.

The summary of events I have recorded thus far I have taken from a number of sources, including the prisoner's evidence and the ERISP interview which the police conducted. I find those facts as recorded to have been established.

The prisoner claims that she was the victim of violence and verbal abuse by the deceased over many years. It is claimed on her behalf that this is a very significant feature in the case which must impact upon the assessment of her behaviour in bringing about her husband's death and consequently upon the determination of an appropriate sentence.

Plainly close scrutiny of the evidence in point is required and I must bear in mind that what the prisoner claims to have occurred over the years in the privacy of the matrimonial home cannot readily be refuted. The very nature of the crime prevents the Court from hearing from the spouse who it is alleged mistreated the prisoner.

The prisoner presented as being anything but verbose. This is not intended as a criticism of her but this circumstance has added to the difficulty of assessing the evidence which she gave. In the ERISP interview conducted on the night of the death of the deceased, the prisoner did advert to being subjected to verbal abuse: see, for instance, questions and answers 43, 77 and 135; and to physical abuse: see, for example, questions and answers 77, 83, 105, 108 and 124. However, that interview by no means gave a detailed account of the history of the marriage. It did not purport to do so.

The prisoner gave evidence before me in the witness box. Her evidence, supported in this regard in particular by Mrs Doreen Ibbett and also by material tendered from Local Court records, persuades me that the deceased was a very heavy drinker throughout the period of his relationship with the prisoner. I accept that he was regularly under the influence of intoxicating liquor and that his behaviour changed when he was affected by alcohol. I accept that the deceased did abuse the prisoner verbally and that this happened often when he was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. I accept that he was also verbally abusive of the prisoner's deceased mother and that the prisoner found this to be particularly distressing. Whilst the prisoner was relatively impassive throughout her evidence, she became extremely emotional when asked to recount what the deceased said about her mother and I do not doubt that the prisoner's reaction to being asked those questions was genuine.

I also accept that the deceased did accuse the prisoner of having affairs with other men and that he also accused her of being a lesbian. Indeed, there is a reference to this latter type of accusation in records of the Local Court which were tendered before me and to which I shall shortly refer. I observe that although there is now a serious relationship between Mr McDonald and the prisoner, there is no evidence that the prisoner was unfaithful to the deceased in his lifetime with Mr McDonald or anyone else.

This brings me to the prisoner's evidence as to physical violence. The prisoner said that the deceased behaved himself in this way throughout the marriage and that he used to strike her about the head. In the last five years of her marriage the prisoner said this happened two or three times per week and that when the deceased assaulted her he would "just continue till he was exhausted". The prisoner said that the deceased always punched her to the head and not the body. The prisoner had sustained a head injury in a car accident leaving her sensitive to the right side of the head and I accept that the prisoner had told the deceased this. The prisoner said that there were five occasions over the years upon which the deceased assaulted the prisoner, pushed her out of the home and then locked her out. This happened most recently, she said, about two months before the death of the deceased.

The prisoner said that she did not tell people about the repeated beatings and in more recent years she said that she stopped reporting to the police because of her embarrassment. There were, she said, a number of occasions upon which she took out apprehended violence orders.

The prisoner said that she sought medical treatment for the effect of an assault on only one occasion; this was some six years ago when she consulted a
Dr Cheung. Her explanation for not seeking medical assistance on other occasions was that she did not want others to know her business.

It seems to me that care is required in assessing the frequency and the extent of the physical abuse to which the prisoner was subjected. If the prisoner was attacked as often and as violently as she claims, it might have been expected that the marks of such violence would have been regularly observable upon her person and would have been seen by neighbours and friends and acquaintances at the Blacktown RSL, where I find both the deceased and the prisoner attended so regularly. I therefore approach my analysis of the relevant evidence with necessary caution.

A number of people were interviewed by police. Whilst these people were not called as witnesses before this Court, their statements were tendered and I propose to refer to their statements: 
Mr Hutt was a longstanding member of the Blacktown RSL and he knew both Mr and Mrs King. He saw them at the club on the day of the deceased's death and indeed he had a drink with them. He said he knew nothing of any problems between the prisoner and the deceased.

Mr Niblock was a manager at the Blacktown RSL and as at April 1996 he had held this position for ten years. He too knew the Kings "fairly well". He said they came to the club almost daily and drank beer at the club. He said he never observed the Kings arguing or fighting with each other inside the club but he did see them together on 17 April 1996 shortly before they left it and he said he could see from the look on the deceased's face that something was wrong. Mr Niblock did not elaborate upon that observation.

The deceased's son by an earlier marriage gave the police a statement.
He ceased to see much of his father after his father developed the relationship with the prisoner but his observation was that the relationship between the Kings was a volatile one. There was one occasion when the prisoner complained to him that the deceased had hit her but on that occasion Mr King
Junior could see no injuries.

Gloria Heath was a neighbour who lived two doors away from the prisoners' home in Lalor Park. It was Mrs Heath who was the first person that the prisoner alerted to the fact that she had stabbed the deceased and she sought
Mrs Heath's help. Mrs Heath told police that she was aware that there had been a lot of domestic trouble in the King household but her statement contains no detail of her observations in this regard.

Mr Heath was aware that the deceased had served time as a result of a domestic violence incident and the deceased said to Mr Heath after that experience that what he did at home was to go to his bedroom and push the bed against the door, thus indicating in those circumstances violence could not occur. However Mr Heath's statement does not refer to any detail of quarrelling observed or heard in the King house in the years immediately leading up to the death of the deceased.

Before this Court evidence was given by Mr McDonald, by Mrs Gralton and by Mrs
Ibbett.

Mr McDonald had known the Kings over a period of some thirteen years and, indeed, in recent times since the death of the deceased he has been occupying the same house as the prisoner. His evidence was that he intends to marry the prisoner. Mr McDonald said that the deceased was aggressive towards him, threatening to break his arm and he said that the deceased was jealous and accused the prisoner of having affairs. He said that he had seen bruising around the prisoner's eye and cheek on a few occasions over the years but he did not ask her how such injuries had been occasioned.

Mrs Gralton is the prisoner's daughter. She kept in contact with her mother after the prisoner's relationship with the deceased first developed and then after their marriage. She said she became aware of discord in the King home when the prisoner rang her one night about twelve years ago to complain that the deceased had struck her and she said that there have been other occasions when the prisoner made a like complaint. Altogether she said there would have been ten such complaints made. Mrs Gralton said that the deceased used to ring her and accuse the prisoner of having an affair. Different men were named as being involved and when he rang making this accusation the deceased appeared to be affected by alcohol. In November 1995 Mrs Gralton said that she asked the deceased to stop hitting her mother and he said he was sorry for what he had done and that he would not do it again.

Mrs Ibbett gave evidence that she has known the prisoner for some thirty years and it was she who introduced the prisoner to the deceased. There was a time before their marriage that Mrs Ibbett lived in what came to be the matrimonial home of which the prisoner was the long term tenant. Mrs Ibbett said there was a period of years during which there was a parting of the ways and in which she did not see so much of the Kings but she still saw them regularly at the club up until the time of the death of the deceased. Mrs Ibbett heard the deceased use abusive language towards the prisoner, calling her a bitch and a slut and she also saw bruises on the face of the prisoner from time to time.
She estimated the frequency of these sightings as being monthly up until 1995 but she saw no bruises on the prisoner thereafter. Mrs Ibbett gave evidence that the deceased was a very heavy drinker who drank continually during games of bowls.

The evidence given by Mr McDonald, Mrs Gralton and Mrs Ibbett was not the subject of challenge and I accept the thrust of this evidence.

There was further evidence bearing upon the conduct of the deceased towards the prisoner in court records from Blacktown Court. These records assume relevance to the extent that they bear upon assaults the deceased committed upon the prisoner and also in relation to his drinking behaviour. From the
Local Court records the following facts emerge: 
The deceased was charged with assaulting the prisoner on 7 July 1988. The nature of the assault was that the deceased punched the prisoner on the face.
The deceased was also charged at that time with driving a vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor. The deceased was granted bail and the bail conditions were that he should not assault, molest or intimidate the prisoner.

On the following day whilst on that conditional bail, the deceased again assaulted the prisoner, this time at the Seven Hills RSL Club by running towards her and throwing a packet of chips at her face. The deceased also accused the prisoner on that date of having a lesbian relationship with a woman in whose company she had been at the club.

On 22 July 1988 the deceased was fined $100 on each of the two assault charges to which I have referred. The deceased was also sentenced to six months imprisonment on the driving offence, with a minimum term of two months.
However, the deceased appealed successfully to the District Court where, in lieu of the sentence of imprisonment, he was placed on a recognizance.

On 3 April 1992 the deceased was convicted in the Local Court at
Blacktown for assault, the assault charged having occurred on 9 February 1991.
The prisoner gave an account of what happened on that date and I accept the thrust of that account. According to the prisoner and the evidence she gave before this Court, the prisoner and the deceased were at their club and the prisoner concluded that the deceased was too drunk to drive home. A scuffle occurred when she endeavoured to take the keys from the deceased and in the course of that scuffle the deceased closed a powered window upon her left hand whilst she was outside the car. The deceased then began to drive off, though fortunately it would seem he did not go very far.

On this particular occasion the prisoner said that she was injured and I note from the Local Court records that the prisoner was seen by police at the casualty department of Blacktown Hospital and was observed to have cuts and grazes to her right arm and hand, bruising to the left hand and cuts and bruises to the left ankle.

For this offence the deceased was sentenced to seven months imprisonment with a minimum term of one month and an additional term of six months.

The material tendered from the Local Court records includes a pre sentence report concerning the deceased dated 8 July 1991 in which Mr Walker, the
Community Corrections Officer of the Blacktown District Office of the
Probation and Parole Service set out the detail of what he referred to as the alcohol history of the deceased. I do not propose to record the detail of that report but it addresses what the author described as the deceased's then "longstanding alcohol problem." 
I have not set out the material from the Local Court that bears upon the deceased other than for the relevant purpose of recording from such records the support that the records afford to the evidence of the prisoner that her late husband did drink to excess and that he did assault her. Having regard to the basis upon which the records were tendered, I accept that the various assaults for which the deceased was convicted did occur in the manner I have outlined.

In summary then, there is considerable corroboration for the prisoner's evidence as to the manner in which the deceased treated her. The evidence satisfies me that the deceased's heavy drinking persisted to the time of his death and his misconduct towards his wife of the type I have identified was characteristically conduct that occurred when the deceased was under the influence of liquor.

The question does arise as to why the prisoner put up with the deceased's treatment of her for so long and why she did not leave him. The prisoner told
Dr Lucas that the home at Lalor Park had been hers for thirty years, that she wanted to maintain her independence and that in any event she saw herself as having nowhere else to go. I accept that the prisoner loved the deceased as she claimed in her evidence and she said that when he was sober "you could not meet a nicer person". I accept that that was her perception of him. The most likely explanation for the prisoner's decision to continue to live in the same house as the deceased notwithstanding his conduct towards her is to be found in a combination of those circumstances.

Having reflected on all the evidence, including the detailed history Dr Lucas took from the prisoner, I find that the prisoner was subjected over the period of her association with and later marriage to the deceased to repeated verbal abuse, including allegations of infidelity, and that there were very many instances of assault, when the deceased punched his wife about the head.

I do not however find that the deceased assaulted the prisoner on the day he met his death. Indeed, the prisoner does not assert that he did and I observe that the prisoner told Dr Lucas that the deceased had last been physically violent two weeks before he died. Bearing that history in mind, I do not find that there was any more recent episode of violence in the last two weeks of the deceased's life.

I return now to the occasion of the stabbing.

The acceptance by the Crown of the plea of guilty to manslaughter was made in recognition of the burden of proof it would otherwise have carried to eliminate any reasonable possibility that the prisoner acted under provocation. The Crown acknowledged that there was sufficient evidence of provocation by the deceased towards the prisoner to reduce the crime from murder to manslaughter. Hence I should approach my task upon the basis that when the prisoner killed the deceased she had formed the intention to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm but that the gravity of the crime was reduced from murder to manslaughter because of provocation. Mr Coorey for the prisoner challenged this analysis of the evidence, submitting that the evidence established neither an intention to kill nor an intention to cause grievous bodily harm. He submitted that I should proceed to pass sentence upon the basis that the requisite intent to establish the crime of murder was not established and that the case should be regarded as one of manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous act.

The distinction between the two approaches is of significance and it is for the Crown to prove that the intention for which it contends is the proper finding on the evidence. Should I be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner acted with intent to kill or with intent to cause grievous bodily harm? If not, then I should proceed to sentence upon the basis that this is a case of manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous act: see R versus O'Neill [(1979) NSWLR 582.] 
I referred earlier to the fact that the prisoner had been drinking. It has not been suggested that the beer she had consumed was sufficient to render her incapable of forming the requisite intent and I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by her actions in driving the deceased home and by the account she has given of events after leaving the club that alcohol did not render her incapable of forming the intention requisite for murder. Nevertheless, the issue remains as to whether she did form such intention.

The account which the prisoner gave in her sworn evidence was as follows: "Q. Now I want you to tell his Honour what you remember happening when you got back into the house, do you understand, when you both got into the house? 
A. Well, I was being verbally abused all the way home and kept continuing in the house and it just wouldn't stop and I went to feed the cat and he just wouldn't stop using foul language and just went on and on and I just couldn't take it any more...

Q. Now you said to his Honour `I just couldn't take any more'. What's the next thing you remember? 
A. I just remember seeing the knife on the sink and the next thing I remember
I was getting off the top of him." 
Later, the prisoner said: "Q. Did you want to kill him? 
A. No.

Q. Did you want to stab him? 
A. No." 
The prisoner was not cross-examined directly on the above evidence but the word "want" in the last two questions is not necessarily to be equated with "intend". In any event the prisoner's intention is not to be determined on a consideration only of the above passage from her evidence in this Court.

I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner picked up the knife from the sink and that she carried it into the bedroom where her husband lay and that she stabbed him with the knife. I am further satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the knife was a sharp knife and that the prisoner knew this to be so. The post mortem report discloses that the knife penetrated the left side of the deceased's chest above the nipple at an angle of 45°. The wound passed through the soft tissues and penetrated the body of the deceased to a distance of 150 mm. Having regard to the length of the knife it must have been thrust into the deceased's body almost to the hilt. There was but the one stab wound. In themselves the actions of the prisoner in the carriage and use of the knife are capable of supporting an inference that the prisoner acted with an intention to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm but I should not draw that inference unless it is the only reasonable inference to draw in all the circumstances.

After the stabbing the prisoner ran to her neighbour and in her statement Mrs
Heath told the police: "At this time I heard the back wire sliding door being opened up in a very hurried fashion. I looked up and I saw my neighbour, Pearl King, coming through the doorway, she was flinging her arms about and she yelled `Get the police, get the ambulance, I've just stabbed Kingie.'" 
I accept that account from Mrs Heath and it compels the inference that the prisoner, by then at least, appreciated what she had done and that the deceased was in need of urgent medical help.

The ERISP interview contains a number of responses by the prisoner which bear upon the issue of whether there existed the intention to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm, although the responses do not all point in the one direction. The responses to questions 43, 44, 53, 58-63, 69-73, 78-83, 124 and are all relevant to this issue of intent. I have read the record of interview many times and I have considered all the responses in context. It is not without significance that the prisoner was able to tell the police what hand she held the knife in and how she held it and that she employed it with force (see in particular questions 60-69 and the answers). On the other hand, there were other responses, as for instance, to questions 43, 44, 58, 70, 71 and 78-83, which, taken literally, did not suggest the requisite intent.

I made reference earlier to Dr Lucas who examined the prisoner recently. The report pursuant to that examination was tendered by Mr Coorey in evidence.
Whilst I have not had the added advantage of hearing from Dr Lucas, the doctor is a specialist psychiatrist and his assessment has not been challenged. I am considerably assisted in my task by the doctor's report. Dr Lucas obtained a very thorough history and he wrote a very comprehensive report in which he traced in much detail the prisoner's account of the deceased's misconduct towards her. That account I have closely read.

Dr Lucas detected no indications of psychiatric disorder on interview and I extract from the doctor's report of 14 July 1998 the following passages: "Diagnosis 
At the time of stabbing her husband Ms King was not suffering from a major psychiatric disorder but she had longstanding symptoms of anxiety and depression. On the day these symptoms were not prominent. However her symptoms constituted an important background factor for some time, perhaps two or three years, as she had been feeling depressed with loss of interest, poor sleep and disturbed appetite associated with weight loss over a lengthy period. Her symptoms may have amounted to dysthymia, chronic depression but not at the level of a major depressive disorder. She was abusing alcohol whereas before her relationship with Mr King she had not. It was unlikely she was alcohol dependent and her current intake of alcohol is low to moderate and not causing problems. On the day of the stabbing she had had a number of drinks but there is no evidence suggesting she was much more than mildly intoxicated...

Ms King's conduct on the day in question was influenced by a number of psychosocial factors including the long history of physical and verbal abuse which she suffered during her second marriage. Her husband was jealous, possessive and accusing. She appears to have had a lengthy period of anxiety and depression. She had been abusing alcohol and on the day was probably mildly intoxicated. Her husband was abusing her using familiar and hurtful themes. When she saw the knife she in effect thought she had had enough.

Ms King was subjected to important recurrent psychosocial stressors throughout her relationship with Mr King. These were of moderate and quite frequently severe degree.

Opinion 
Although Ms King had a number of psychiatric symptoms for a considerable period before the stabbing of her husband it does not appear to me that she was suffering from a major psychiatric disorder at the time of the stabbing.
She did not mention to me a major symptom on the day but she had had a few drinks. She was being subjected to verbal abuse by her husband who was not in the kitchen with her. She did not anticipate other than verbal abuse at the time and she had not been assaulted for about two weeks. Ms King cannot recall leaving the kitchen and going to the ironing room where she stabbed him although the record of interview does indicate she has some recollection of seeing him there just before or at the time of the stabbing. When she had some realization of what she had done she left and went to a neighbour to raise the alarm. Thus, she has a patchy recollection of what she did, a not uncommon experience in violent offences especially if the victim is a close relative or associate and if alcohol is involved. Ms King had brief feelings of unreality but I do not think these are best explained by ascribing to a dissociative state. Along with amnaesia, they are quite common experiences in perpetrators of violence.

In my opinion she does not have a psychiatric defence to the charge of murder. I would not describe her as having suffered an abnormality of mind and there is no question of a disease of the mind." 
The Crown has not proved beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner intended to kill the deceased and accordingly I do not find that she did have that intention. However, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner acted with intent to cause grievous bodily harm. In reaching that conclusion I am particularly influenced by the actions of the prisoner above reviewed which were taken immediately before and after the stabbing and by the opinion expressed by Dr Lucas. Mr Coorey informed me that Dr Lucas was provided with the written record of interview to which I have referred and, indeed in what he has written, Dr Lucas has made it clear that he considered that document.
As I understand the doctor's opinion as expressed in his report, an incomplete recollection of events in the prisoner does not negate the relevant intent at the relevant time. I accept the doctor's opinion that the prisoner was not experiencing a dissociative state and that "a patchy recollection" is "a not uncommon experience in violent offences especially if the victim is a close relative." I also accept the doctor's opinion that "along with amnesia they [brief feelings of unreality] are quite common experiences in perpetrators of violence." Dr Lucas did not consider that the prisoner was at the time of the stabbing suffering from any abnormality of mind and again I accept the doctor's opinion in this respect.

Whilst I find beyond reasonable doubt that the prisoner acted with intent to cause grievous bodily harm, I do not find that her action was premeditated.
Indeed, I am satisfied to the contrary.

The prisoner is now fifty-six years of age. She is a person of prior good character with only one conviction in April 1988 for a high PCA. That conviction is of no significance for present purposes.

The prisoner did not have an easy childhood, the history of which Dr Lucas traced in his report. Her parents separated when she was a child and the prisoner told Dr Lucas she was sexually abused in her childhood. She spent some of her adolescent years living with her grandmother. Having left school at the age of fifteen, she sought and obtained employment and she was in regular employment throughout her life until made redundant in recent years.
The prisoner said, and I accept, she has been looking for work in this recent period of unemployment. The prisoner married at the age of eighteen but the marriage ended after sixteen years. There were two children of that marriage, one of whom gave evidence. Since the death of the deceased, the prisoner has formed an association with Mr McDonald and it is the expressed intention of both the prisoner and Mr McDonald that they will marry.

I take into account the diagnosis and opinion of Dr Lucas set out earlier.

A medical report from Dr House was tendered. That doctor has been treating the prisoner over the past two years for hypertension, asthma, cervical spondylosis and an anxiety state. The doctor has been prescribing medication for her. X-rays were also tendered indicating the presence of degenerative changes of cervical spondylosis. I bear the prisoner's state of health in mind.

I accept that the prisoner is contrite and that she almost immediately regretted what she had done, seeking assistance for the deceased. The prisoner admitted that she had stabbed her husband. She co-operated with the police from the outset. I must also take into account the considerable saving in time and cost resulting from the plea which the prisoner made upon arraignment in this Court.

I would perceive the prisoner's prospects of rehabilitation to be excellent.
It is the opinion of Dr Lucas that "There is little chance [the prisoner] will offend again in a serious manner", and I accept that expression of opinion. In the future the prisoner may look forward to the continued support of the daughter who gave evidence before the Court and to the support of Mr
McDonald.

I have received in evidence a statement from a daughter of the deceased which is admitted under <case> of the Criminal Procedure Act. In R versus Previtera (unreported, 27 May 1997) Hunt CJ at CL held that where the crime involved the death of a victim, a victim impact statement by a member of the family of the deceased dealing with the effect of the death upon the family can never be relevant to the sentence to be imposed. That decision was approved by the
Court of Criminal Appeal in the recent unreported judgment in R versus Bollen (25
March 1998) and in the circumstances I must follow those two decisions.
Accordingly, whilst I accept that the emotions identified in the impact statement have been experienced, I cannot treat the impact statement as being relevant to the sentence to be imposed.

It follows from my findings as to the intent with which the prisoner acted that I must approach this matter upon the basis that the prisoner caused this death whilst acting under provocation. Provocation was considered by the High
Court in Masciantonio versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 129 ALR 575] and I heed what was said in the joint judgment of Brennan,
Deane, Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ at 590-591. I must regard the behaviour of the deceased towards the prisoner such as constituted the provocation to be such as could cause an ordinary person to form an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm; I do further regard the relevant provocation as having caused the prisoner to lose her self control and to act to inflict the grievous bodily harm before she had the opportunity to regain her composure.

It is relevant to have regard to the conduct of the deceased towards the prisoner not only on the day of his death but before that time. It is well settled that loss of self control can develop after a lengthy period of abuse: see R versus Chhay [(1994) 72 A Crim R 1], and in particular the judgment of Gleeson CJ at 10-14. It is necessary to consider the cumulative effect of the conduct of the deceased upon the prisoner.

It seems to me from the evidence which I accept that the prisoner endured much suffering by way of continuing mistreatment by the deceased over the years.
The deceased treated the prisoner very badly indeed. The physical ill treatment was very serious in itself. But so too was the constant mistreatment by way of verbal abuse, including the allegations of infidelity and also including disparaging remarks not only directed at the prisoner but directed at her deceased mother. I earlier expressed my findings as to the level, the nature and the duration of the abuse of the prisoner by the deceased. In accordance with findings to this effect, and accepting as I do the diagnosis expressed by Dr Lucas, I have concluded that I should sentence the prisoner upon the basis that the cumulative effect of her earlier mistreatment contributed to her loss of self control at the critical time as well as the relentless abuse by the deceased directed at the prisoner on the journey home from the club on 17 April 1996 and in the home thereafter. It seems to me that the level of provocation viewed in this way was great and that the level of the prisoner's criminality should be regarded as having been very substantially reduced by reason of such provocation.

Mr Coorey submitted that there was an element of self defence in what the prisoner did. The prisoner gave evidence that the deceased used to go and lie down and that he would then get up and beat her. Mr Coorey referred also to the ERISP interview and in particular to the prisoner's response to question
However, even if the prisoner believed she was in immediate danger of being physically attacked again, and she did not so assert, the action taken by her and the timing of her action were not such as could have rendered the killing lawful. I do not consider, consistently with Zecevic versus DPP <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 645], that the issue of self defence was a viable one in this case: see in particular the joint judgment of Wilson, Dawson and Toohey JJ at -662. Therefore I do not accept Mr Coorey's submission on self defence.

Mr Coorey submitted that I should not sentence the prisoner to a term of imprisonment but that I should place her upon a recognizance. He referred me to a number of cases involving abused wives in which the court took this course: R versus Bogunovic [(1995) 16 A Crim R 456] (a decision of Maxwell J); R versus Roberts (unreported decision of Hunt J, as he then was, 31 August 1989); R versus Gardner (unreported decision of Wood J, as he then was, 27 March 1992); R versus Woolsey (unreported decision of Newman J, 19
August 1993); and R versus Varagnolo (unreported decision of McInerney J, 21
March 1996). I have considered those cases but find each of them to be clearly distinguishable. One of the distinguishing characteristics, at least in four of those five cases, was that there was absent in the offender in those cases an intent to cause death or grievous bodily harm.

I have given that submission by Mr Coorey anxious consideration but I cannot accede to it.

Whilst the range of sentences available for the crime of manslaughter is greater than for any other crime and whilst the authorities upon which Mr
Coorey relies evidence that it may be appropriate in a particular case not to sentence the offender to a term of imprisonment, such a case must be exceptional: see R versus Bogunovic (supra, at 461) and R versus Roberts (supra) where Hunt J said at p 12: "It has been made very clear by the courts that the taking of a human life, even within the context of domestic violence, will not be viewed with leniency. Not even extreme domestic discord can ever be an excuse for the victim to take the law into her own hands and to extinguish the life of the aggressor..." 
Referring to judicial statements to the above effect, his Honour proceeded: "Those statements have been made in cases where the victim is standing for sentence upon the basis that there has been an intention to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm, and where the crime of murder has been reduced to manslaughter by reason of provocation. In that situation, it is only in the most exceptional case that a non custodial sentence will be imposed..." 
I respectfully agree with the above statement of principle.

In R versus Whiting (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 27 September 1979)
Street CJ, in the context of considering a crime of domestic violence, said in a much cited passage: "The circumstances inevitably attract a very considerable degree of sympathy towards the appellant but she has taken a human life and this is one of the most dreadful crimes known to the law. Whilst one can understand the circumstances and the trauma which led up to her committing this crime, it would nevertheless be a failure on the part of the criminal law to take too lenient a view of the matter... It has always been the policy of the criminal law to emphasise that a victimised person cannot be permitted...to take the law into his or her own hands by killing the aggressor... It is necessary to ensure that there be an adequate element of deterrence for the community at large against crimes such as the present..." 
Those dicta I regard as being in point in this case.

Notwithstanding the strong favourable subjective features of this case and the significance of the provocation in my assessment of it, I have concluded that in this case I have no alternative but to impose a term of imprisonment. Apart from the cases referred to by Mr Coorey, I was referred by the Crown to a case of R versus Troja (unreported, Court of Criminal Appeal, 16 July 1991). That case emphasises, if emphasis be required, that the appropriate range of sentence for the crime of manslaughter varies greatly from case to case. It also highlights the risk to be avoided by the court of concentrating on the circumstances of the offender and her explanation for the offence to an excessive degree.

Apart from the authorities referred to above, I have considered many other cases, to only several of which I intend to make specific reference. The first is the case of R versus Alexander [(1995) 78 A Crim R 141.]
The decision at first instance was reported only on sentence but an appeal against the sentence imposed in that case was dismissed. In Alexander Hunt
CJ at CL prepared a table recording cases identified by the Judicial
Commission as cases in which sentencing judges had taken into account provocation, reducing murder to manslaughter. The table identified decisions from 1 January 1990 onwards and that is from about the time that the maximum penalty for manslaughter was reduced from penal servitude for life to penal servitude for twenty-five years. Of the twelve cases thus tabled the range of total sentences, that is including any minimum term and any additional term, was from a deferred sentence to eight years six months. In Alexander the total sentence imposed was one of six years with a minimum term of two and a half years and an additional term of three and a half years.

I must approach earlier sentences with caution because no two cases are the same and what is an appropriate sentence in a particular case depends upon its particular circumstances, both objective and subjective. However, I have found
Alexander to be helpful as being a pointer towards the upper and lower limits of the sentencing range, although I do not overlook the sentence in
Troja (supra) and the sentence imposed in Morabito and upheld by the Court of Criminal Appeal (10 June 1992) as reminders that there is no rigid sentencing pattern. My task ultimately is to determine what is appropriate in this particular case.

I must have regard to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively. A human life has been taken and the courts have repeatedly emphasised that unlawful homicide is a very serious crime. I must also have regard to all the relevant purposes of sentencing identified in Veen <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 465] at 476, namely "the protection of society, deterrence of the offender and of others who might be tempted to offend, retribution and reform." In this case, I consider there is little prospect of the prisoner re-offending but retribution must be taken into account. Moreover, I reject Mr
Coorey's submission that general deterrence can be of no relevance when the crime occurred in circumstances of provocation: see Roberts (supra),
Whiting (supra), Alexander (supra) and Khan [(1996) 86 A Crim R .] 
I find that there are special circumstances for the purposes of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). I so find because this is the first time that the prisoner will have been in custody and having regard to her age, she will benefit from, and indeed require, an extended period of supervision and support to make her adjustment in society at the end of the minimum term.

I now proceed to impose what I perceive to be the appropriate sentence in a case which I regard as being a tragic one in every sense. I impose a total sentence of six years penal servitude. Allowing for the special circumstances
I have found, I fix a minimum term of three years commencing on 21 July 1998 and expiring on 20 July 2001 and an additional term of three years to commence on 21 July 2001 and to expire on 20 July 2004.

I specify 21 July 2001 as the first date upon which the prisoner is to be eligible for release on parole.
 * * * 
