

White and Anor versus Hayden Matter No Ca 40440/97 [1997] NSWSC 564 (14
November 1997) 
White versus Hayden /97, DC 5139/96 November 1997 
Powell JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
ROBERT JOHN WHITE & JOHN DANKS & SONS PTY LIMITED v

DAVID WILLIAM HAYDEN 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: The issue in this appeal is the finding of her Honour Judge Tupman regarding non-economic loss that the respondent/plaintiff's ability to lead a normal life was significantly impaired for six months or more. Alternatively, that her Honour's factual findings were inconsistent with the overwhelming body of the evidence or `glaringly improbable'. Her Honour found that the respondent's non-economic loss was 18% of a most extreme case. 
On behalf of the appellant, Mr Morrison of Senior Counsel has placed reliance on the legislative intent to limit claims for relatively minor injuries. In doing so, he has taken us to the relevant second reading speeches relating to the Act and the important amendments to the part of the Act with which this appeal is concerned, in particular <case>.

The accident involving the respondent occurred on 24 May 1995 and was governed by the 1995 amendments to the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) , in particular [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html)
Liability was admitted and the claim was for non-economic loss only, apart from agreed out-of-pocket expenses of $1,234.00.

Her Honour found that the collision between the respondent's motor vehicle and the appellants' was one of reasonable force causing extensive damage to both vehicles. The respondent collided virtually head-on with the passenger side of the vehicle driven by the first appellant, that vehicle having attempted to turn in front of the respondent.

The respondent was 24 years' old at the time of the accident and 26 years' at the trial in June 1997. He is a property valuer and required by his employment to regularly drive to visit sites for valuation purposes.

Her Honour found that the respondent had experienced ongoing pain in his lower back from the day of the accident and continuing to the trial, a period in excess of 2 years.

Her Honour said: 
As I have said the plaintiff is 26-years-old. His job requires him to submit himself to the very activity which I accept exacerbates the pain in his lower back. The condition has continued now for just over two years, albeit there has been some improvement. There does not, on the evidence, appear to have been any significant improvement in the condition to that which the plaintiff reported in November 1995. [AB 50] 
To interpolate here, the 24th November 1995 would be period of 6 months from the accident. I continue with her Honour's reasons: ... and there is no evidence that the plaintiff is likely to change his job in the foreseeable future. He is likely to continue to need to undertake this prolonged sitting in the course of his employment for a very long period in the future. He had no history of lower back pain before the accident, and I accept before the accident he was a healthy person. [AB 51] 
The trial judge further found: 
Given the plaintiff's relatively young age and occupational needs, I accept for this plaintiff such ongoing pain over the last two years, and into the future, amounts to a significant impairment in his ability to lead a normal life, which, as I have said, I accept has been ongoing since the date of the motor vehicle accident and which is likely to continue. [AB 51 N-S] 
Her Honour concluded: ... I accept that for this plaintiff, at his age, with his occupation, and the length of time that the complaints have persisted, this amounts to a significant impairment in his ability to lead a normal life. In my view an appropriate assessment of this is 18 percent of a most extreme case. [AB 52] 
The trial judge accepted the respondent's credit. Indeed, she was impressed by his evidence which did not attempt to exaggerate or embellish his injury.

In the accident the respondent sustained a ligamentous injury to the lower back. Within a few hours of the accident he felt a sharp pain in his lower back. He had hitherto had a trouble free back. As a result, he saw Dr Miller complaining of pain over the lower dorsal and lumbar areas. Tenderness was found on examination, although no restriction of movement. Her Honour, as she was entitled, accepted the respondent's subjective experience of pain. His experiences does have relevance.

The respondent continued to see Dr Miller for 2 months and was treated with anti-inflammatory drugs. Until August 1995 the court found that the symptoms were acute. Dr Miller referred the respondent to Dr O'Brien, an orthopedic surgeon whom he saw between August and November 1995. During these months he was referred to physiotherapy.

Dr O'Brien could find no significant symptoms on 26 October 1995, which was after the respondent returned to golf. The trial judge nonetheless accepted the respondent's evidence that he was still experiencing ongoing pain and discomfort after prolonged periods of sitting. Her Honour said: 
I accept ... that as at October 1995 the plaintiff was still experiencing the pain and discomfort on sitting, even though he was working and had returned to his golf about two months after the motor vehicle accident. [AB 47] 
Her Honour also found that as at late November 1995, 6 months after the accident, the respondent still exhibited stiffness on palpation of the lower three lumbar facet joints. (AB 48F) This particular finding related to a report of a physiotherapist, Mrs Helen McDevitt. For some reason part of her report was not included in the appeal book. An additional page, being the second page of her report, was handed up and became p 31A. It is from this report that her Honour's finding, which I have just mentioned, has been taken. The report also notes that the physiotherapist last treated the respondent on 16 November 1995 when, to quote the report, `he was still experiencing lumbar aching with prolonged sitting and driving'. [AB 31A]
The report also found that on objective assessment on 16 November there was revealed limited range of lumbar spine flexion secondary to hamstring tightness.

The respondent thereafter did not seek any active medical treatment, that is after November 1995, although it seems that he ceased physiotherapy because it was difficult to combine such treatments with work commitments. He did, however, take with him from the physiotherapist a strength and flexibility programme. There is some evidence that he continued with that by himself.

By November 1995 her Honour found that the acute symptoms (present until
August) had resolved. However, the respondent's evidence was that he experienced ongoing pain in his lower back which continued and, indeed, was present at the time of trial. It was exacerbated by prolonged sitting, particularly in his car. Unfortunately, the nature of his work meant that this occurred on a regular basis. Her Honour found that the respondent experienced a strong nagging ache some 5 or 6 days each week in the afternoon.

In my opinion, her Honour's findings, including those which I have quoted earlier, were open on the evidence. To the extent that Dr Harvey, who examined the respondent on behalf of the appellants, was of the opinion that the respondent had not suffered a significant injury, she rejected that opinion.
She made much the same finding with regard to Dr O'Brien but, perhaps, not expressly so. It is apparent, however, that she preferred the respondent's own view of his experiences. I have already referred to her entitlement to do this in my reasons.

Given her findings on the respondent's credit, I do not see any relevant error. In my opinion there was ample evidence, which the trial judge accepted, which justified her finding that the respondent's ability to lead a normal life was significantly impaired for more than 6 months. I do not see that she misconstrued her task under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) of the Act. The conclusion cannot be said to be `glaringly improbable' and the finding of 18% of a most extreme case was open to be made.

At the hearing of the appeal the appellant sought and was granted leave to add a further ground of appeal.

New ground 7 is in the following terms: `Her Honour's judgment was inadequate in that she erred in failing to determine the issue between the parties.' 
The submission in support of the ground is essentially that her Honour failed to resolve a conflict between Dr O'Brien's findings and the respondent's claims. Reliance is placed on Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Ltd [(1987) NSWLR 247] at 259. Having considered the additional ground of appeal, I do not see that to the extent that she may not have resolved the conflict, that it was necessary for her Honour so to do. Accordingly, I would dismiss the appeal with costs.

POWELL JA: Although I am disposed to think that, if I had been the trial judge, I would have come to a different conclusion from that which her Honour expressed, the inescapable fact is that, central to her Honour's conclusion that the Respondent sustained a significant impairment in his ability to lead a normal life for a period longer than provided for in the Act, is the fact that her Honour accepted the Respondent as a witness of truth and accepted his complaints of pain as being correct and far from being exaggerated. This being so, it seems to me, that this is one of those cases in which, notwithstanding one's own instinctive reaction to the evidence, the Court is precluded from intervening. I agree with the Order proposed by Stein JA. 
The Order of the Court is that the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
