

Regina versus Clark Matter No Cca 60439/97 [1998] NSWSC 126 (17 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus GARRY RAYMOND CLARK /97 April 1998 
McInerney J, Studdert J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
McINERNEY J: The appellant (Garry Raymond Clark) was charged for that he on or about 16 September 1994 at Mannus in the State of New South Wales did have sexual intercourse with the complainant (Matthew Bernard Williams) without the consent of the complainant knowing that he was not consenting. 
The appellant pleaded not guilty when indicted before Mahoney DCJ and a jury at Albury on 1 September 1997. On 3 September 1997 the jury returned a verdict of guilty.

The appellant was sentenced by his Honour to nine years' penal servitude comprising a minimum term of six years and nine months penal servitude and an additional term of two years and three months.

The facts relied upon by the Crown shortly were that the complainant, a 19 year old prisoner, arrived at Mannus Correctional Centre on 14 September 1994, to serve a prison sentence of three months imprisonment. He stayed in a cell in Unit 12 that night and the following morning he was taken to Unit 4.

At lunch time the complainant was introduced to the appellant who was an occupant of Unit 4. After dinner that evening another inmate approached the complainant in his cell and requested that he go to the appellant's cell where he saw the appellant lying on his bed with another person standing next to him.

The complainant returned to his own cell and after about five minutes the same inmate came back to his cell and told him that the appellant wanted to speak to him. He again returned to the appellant's cell where the appellant was alone. At the invitation of the appellant, he sat down and watched a movie on television with the appellant. During the evening the appellant allegedly told the complainant that there were six people who wanted him. He said that he was not one of them but that if he did anything with the appellant, the appellant would be his protector.

When the movie finished, the complainant went out and made a cup of coffee. He returned to the appellant's cell where there was more conversation. The complainant then got up from the chair to leave the cell. As he did so he was grabbed from the back by the appellant and flung around towards the bed. His head was pushed face down into the bed by his neck. He was bent over the bed with his feet on the floor. The complainant then felt a sharp pain in his backside. He screamed into the bed. The pain lasted a few minutes. The appellant then let him go and the complainant left the cell and showered.

The complainant sought unsuccessfully to contact his parents by telephone the next morning. He subsequently complained to the Deputy Governor and a Welfare
Officer at the Mannus Centre that he had been raped by the appellant.

Detective Lang who was in charge of the investigation interviewed the appellant on 21 September 1994. The appellant admitted to having consensual sex with the complainant.

The appellant gave evidence at the trial that when they first met the complainant told him that there were three people hassling him. The appellant said to him that he would look after him and "if you do the right thing by me,
I'll do the right thing by you".

The appellant denied that the sexual intercourse occurred in the manner described by the complainant. He said that after he and the complainant watched the movie they had a cup of coffee. He then asked the complainant for sex and the complainant agreed. The appellant was in his bed. The appellant asked the complainant to get the Nutra plus moisturising cream. The complainant, he alleged, then stripped off and hopped into bed. He said the complainant voluntarily applied the cream to his own anus as a lubricant. He said that the complainant then grabbed his penis and penetration occurred.

There was some conversation after the sexual intercourse finished. The complainant then went to the bathroom. He returned and they both had a cigarette. The complainant then left the room.

The appellant relied on the evidence of Dr. Reed who was called to give evidence in the Crown case. Dr. Reed examined the complainant at Tumut
Hospital the following day and completed a sexual assault protocol kit. It was
Dr. Reed's opinion that his findings were consistent with anal intercourse having taken place. However, he testified that he would find it hard to accept that it was involuntary intercourse if no lubricant was used as he would have expected more trauma to the complainant's anal area.

The appellant was a patient of Dr. Reed's medical partner, Dr. McAlpine. Dr.
Reed also gave evidence that the appellant had suffered an injury to his left knee and ankle as a result of a motor cycle accident based on his reading of
Dr. McAlpine's clinical notes and an examination of the appellant on the occasion of a previous trial. He said that the appellant had a moderate loss of function of his left leg.

It was the appellant's case that it was a physical impossibility for the sexual intercourse to have occurred the way the complainant described because of the disparity in their heights and the disability that the appellant had because of the injury to his left leg.

The issue then before the jury was clear: was the complainant raped by the appellant without giving his consent or was the intercourse consensual? The case was essentially oath against oath as no-one had witnessed the event or heard anything untoward.

Ground 1 
The summing-up to the jury did not properly relate the law to the evidence and the issues in the case.

This relates to part of his Honour's summing-up (AB190): "Now members of the jury, you remember the Crown Prosecutor also said to you in his final address that absence of consent does not mean that you have got to fight and scratch and kick and shout and resist. Just because someone passively submits to something does not mean to say that they welcome it. If it is a question of a person putting up with the inevitable without a struggle, that is not the same as consent.

Members of the jury, in broad form this case really is a question for you to determine whether on the one hand, one person was being violated over the bed, that is the Williams version, the Crown version, or whether both persons were lusting on the bed, that is the accused's version." 
It is submitted that the summing-up in that respect was misleading as the appellant's version was not that "both persons were lusting on the bed" but that the complainant had agreed to have sex with the appellant in return for the appellant protecting the complainant from three other prisoners who were "putting the bounce" on him. Equally, it is submitted, the Crown case was not that the complainant "passively submitted" to pressure from the appellant but that, when the appellant grabbed him and "flung" him across the bed, pushing his face into it, the complainant screamed but did not otherwise resist.

It is submitted the danger in those directions was that it could have been understood by the jury that they could convict the appellant on his own version of what had occurred, rather than on the prosecution case. This danger was enhanced, it is submitted, by the failure to give the traditional balancing direction that consent may be "hesitant, reluctant, grudging ..." but still constitute consent: Holman [[1970] WAR 2] at 6.

The jury were obviously concerned about the evidence given by the appellant (but denied by the complainant) of the complainant's assertion that he needed help because he had people after him.

After the jury retired to consider their verdict, the jury sent a note to the judge in the following terms (AB217): "If after giving the alternative of being left to three men or having sex with one, plus you are unable to leave the room, that is, it is sex with the one or leave and other three will have you, do you take the first alternative as the lesser of two evils? We seek legal guidance as to whether that is consensual sex or rape." 
After hearing submissions on the direction he should give, his Honour further directed the jury in the following terms (AB219): "The way I propose to answer your question is this: One of the essential elements that the Crown has to prove is that the activity took place without the consent of Williams, and the first portion of that proposition is that
Williams must not have consented to the accused putting his penis in Williams' anus. And I want to direct you that consent is free choice, consent is not submission due to some pressure. That is the direction I give you." 
Having given that direction, the jury asked the following further question :
 "Your Honour, we ask can we recommend the accused receive counselling with regard to his coercive behaviour?" 
Subsequently the jury returned a verdict of guilty.

The jury were clearly concerned about the appellant's allegation that the complainant had sex with the appellant in order to seek his protection from three other persons. The question then is, if those were the facts accepted by the jury, was it open to the jury to convict the appellant? 
It could follow that a jury (properly instructed) could come to the conclusion that in those circumstances the complainant did not consent to sexual intercourse in the sense that he exercised his free choice.

The jury's question required a very careful direction by his Honour. Whilst I sympathise with the judge being required to answer this question, it is my view that his Honour's answer to the question did not properly direct the jury as to how consent could be vitiated in such circumstances.

It is true that consent is free choice, however, his Honour went on to say, "Consent is not submission due to some pressure". It was necessary for his
Honour to very carefully direct the jury in what circumstances pressure could vitiate consent. The danger (amongst other matters) is that the jury may have concluded that persuasion by the appellant in the circumstances was sufficient to vitiate consent. It was a question of directing the jury (amongst other matters) about whether s.61D(3) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) applied.

The learned Crown has conceded that his Honour's direction was inadequate.
That being so, clearly there was a miscarriage of justice. The appeal must succeed and the conviction must be quashed.

Whilst, strictly speaking, it is not necessary to consider it, the second ground of appeal is in the following terms: . The learned trial judge erred in directing the jury that alleged lies by the appellant were available to be used to indicate a consciousness of guilt.

His Honour gave a number of directions in respect to the way in which the jury could rely upon lies as a consciousness of guilt on the part of the appellant (AB195-199).

The lies in question relate to the knowledge of another inmate, Bridges. It was alleged by the complainant that the appellant said to him "Bridges is next".

There is no evidence of when Bridges arrived at the institution. The appellant stated in his record of interview and in evidence that he did not know Bridges and there is no independent evidence that the appellant knew Bridges at the time.

In order to rely on lies to prove guilt, the lie has to be precisely identified by evidence independent of the complainant. This the Crown has failed to establish. In any event, the statement allegedly made by the appellant, in my view, could not in the circumstances be used by the jury to infer a consciousness of guilt on the part of the appellant.

The other suggested lie relates to answers given in cross-examination by the appellant regarding his handwriting on a particular document. The appellant agreed the handwriting was his. Thus, it was not open to the jury to use that evidence as evidence of a consciousness of guilt. See generally Edwards v
The Queen <case>; [(1993) 178 CLR 193.] 
Ground 3 
The conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory. 
Mr. Odgers on behalf of the appellant relies on the two grounds of appeal referred to above. It is necessary for the court to make its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the whole of the evidence in order to determine (notwithstanding that there is evidence to sustain the verdict) whether it is persuaded that it was not open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the appellant's guilt.

I see no reason why the jury would not have been entitled to convict the appellant on the Crown case. The critical matter to be determined was the credibility of the complainant. That is peculiarly a jury question. The complainant on the whole gave a consistent version of events. He sought to communicate with his parents the next morning but when he was unable to do so he complained to the Deputy Governor and a Welfare Officer that he had been raped.

Whilst the doctor expressed the view that he thought there would have been greater injury to the complainant if forcible rape had taken place, the jury had to evaluate the Crown case, and in particular the evidence of the complainant. I see nothing in the evidence which would lead me to conclude that the jury in the circumstances described above ought to have acquitted this appellant.

The question to be determined therefore is whether this court in the exercise of its discretion (bearing in mind the length of time which has elapsed since the alleged commission of this offence and the fact that there has been an earlier trial) should quash the conviction. It appears that the appellant has spent a little over twelve months in custody on protection relating to this offence.

It cannot be said that the trial of the appellant has miscarried because of any failure of the prosecution authorities. It is a serious matter relating to the alleged rape of a young man whilst in the custody of the Department of
Corrective Services.

Whilst there may be reasons for quashing the conviction, it is my view that having regard to the circumstances of this offence the interests of justice require that a new trial be ordered. See Director of Public Prosecutions for
Nauru versus Fowler <case>; [(1983-84) 154 CLR 627] and Regina versus Timothy Edward Anderson (CCA, unreported, 6 June 1991).

I therefore propose the following orders:
The appeal is allowed.
The conviction of the appellant is quashed.
A new trial is ordered.

STUDDERT J: I have read the judgment of McInerney J and I agree with the conclusions he has reached on each of the three grounds of appeal. I therefore agree with the orders proposed by his Honour. 
I have also read the judgment of Simpson J in draft form. I agree that the jury should have been given the "third strand" of the directions on consent in the terms suggested by her Honour.

SIMPSON J: I have read in draft the judgment of McInerney and agree with the orders he proposes. I wish to add my own views on the very difficult question of consent that arose in this trial. 
The appellant was charged with having sexual intercourse with the complainant without his consent, and knowing that he was not consenting. The charge was brought under [s
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61i.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).

Two competing versions of the events were put before the jury in the sworn evidence of the complainant, and that of the appellant. The complainant gave a clear account of sexual intercourse without consent. Had the jury accepted beyond reasonable doubt the account given by him, there is no question that their duty was to convict. The Crown case can be put to one side. What is at issue here is whether, if the jury accepted the appellant's version, he was nevertheless liable to be convicted.

The appellant's account was contained, relevantly, in his answers to a few questions asked of him in chief, and was essentially repeated in cross- examination. It is worth setting out the whole of those passages of the evidence. The first appears in the evidence he gave in chief: "Q. Can you recall now the content of that conversation? 
A. Well we were just talking about people that were hassling him, and like I said to him, I just wanted, you know I was going to help him and that was basically about all we really talked about was that.

Q. Was there any other subject discussed while the movie was going? 
A. Yeah well like I said to him that I'd look after him if he done the right thing by me I'd do the right thing by him.
 ...

Q. Well did he say anything to you? 
A. Yeah he said that he was thinking of choosing me to look after him whilst he is there." 
After some other questions and answers the detail of which does not matter the appellant was asked what happened next after he and the complainant returned to his room. He replied: "Well then we returned to the room and he was drinking his cuppa and that and
I was, had a couple of sips out of mine and then I asked him for sex." 
He then gave an account of the sexual intercourse between the two.

In cross-examination the appellant gave the following evidence: "Q. Mr Clark I suggest to you that you wanted to have sex with Mr Williams from the time you saw him that afternoon? 
A. No you're wrong.

Q. Sorry? 
A. You're wrong.

Q. I suggest to you that you first tried to persuade Mr Williams by telling him that it would be helpful to him to have sex with you? 
A. No.

Q. That you told him `If you have sex with me I will be your protector'? 
A. Yes I said that to him because he needed help, because he said he had people after him, so I don't know.

Q. You suggested to him that he would benefit by having sex with you because you would then be his protector? 
A. Well I said I'll look after him, if he does the right thing by me I'll do the right thing by him.

Q. And the right thing you're talking about was having sex? 
A. Yeah well whatever.

Q. What do you mean? I mean you're the person who used the word. What were the right thing you expected him to do for you? 
A. Well all that I wanted was something else but he didn't do that so I had to ...

Q. So it was sex wasn't it...

A. .. I had to ..

Q. You didn't want him to write a book for you did you? 
A. No.

Q. It was sex that you wanted him to do, to have with you? 
A. Oh well not actually sex but it was the other, not what." 
It was open to the jury, in my opinion, to take this evidence as meaning that the appellant secured the consent of the complainant to intercourse by an offer of protection against others who wished or intended sexually to assault him.

This raised the question of the correct direction to give a jury where it is open to them to conclude that consent has been obtained in this way.

The direction given by the judge was this: "Now members of the jury, you remember the Crown Prosecutor also said to you in his final address that absence of consent does not mean that you have got to fight and scratch and kick and shout and resist. Just because someone passively submits to something does not mean to say that they welcome it. If it is a question of person putting up with the inevitable without a struggle, that is not the same as consent.

Members of the jury, in broad form this case really is a question for you to determine whether on the one hand, one person was being violated over the bed, that is the Williams version, the Crown version, or whether both persons were lusting on the bed, that is the accused's version." 
The final passage in this direction does not accurately represent the appellant's version of events. He never suggested that either participant was "lusting on the bed", and particularly did not suggest that Williams was doing so. This, however, is not the issue raised in this appeal.

The issue that concerned the jury was what they should make of the consent allegedly given by Williams as outlined by the appellant in his evidence. That is plain from the question they asked which reads: "If after giving the alternative of being left to three men or having sex with one, plus you are unable to leave the room, that is, it is sex with the one or leave and the other three will have you, do you take the first alternative as the lesser of two evils. We seek legal guidance as to whether that is consensual sex or rape." 
In response to this question the judge gave the jury this further direction: "The way I am going to answer that question is not specifically to answer that question because I want to ensure that my own personal views about any part of this case are not put up to you in any persuasive way. The way I propose to answer your question is this: one of the essential elements that the Crown has to prove is that the activity took place without the consent of Williams, and that the first portion of that proposition is that Williams must not have consented to the accused putting his penis in Williams' anus. And I want to direct you that consent is free choice, consent is not submission due to some pressure. That is the direction I give you." 
The complaint that was made about the initial direction was framed in this way: "The danger of these directions was that they could have been understood by the jury as permitting them to convict the appellant on his own version of what had occurred, rather than the prosecution case. This danger was enhanced by the failure to give the traditional balancing direction, that consent may be `hesitant, reluctant, grudging ...' but still constitute consent (R v
Holman [[1970] WAR 2] at 6)." 
It is necessary to break this argument into its two component parts, and convenient to deal firstly with what was described as "the traditional balancing direction" drawn from the judgment of Jackson CJ in Holman.
The Chief Justice was there dealing with a direction given to a jury concerning the definition of "rape" as it then stood in <case> of the Western
Australian Criminal Code. The definition provided that consent obtained by force, or by means of threats or intimidation of any kind, or fear of bodily harm, or by means of false and fraudulent representations as to the nature of the act, or, in the case of a married woman, by personating her husband, was not consent for the purpose of the definition. The trial judge had directed the jury that the consent referred to in the definition: "means a willing consent. It does not mean a mere submission induced by force or by threats or by fear." 
The notion of "willing consent" appeared on two further occasions in the directions.

On appeal, Jackson CJ acknowledged that the trial judge had been seeking to distinguish between a consent obtained by threats or by fear and one which is not so obtained, but, by reference to the dictionary definition of the adjective "willing", concluded that so to qualify the word "consent" in relation to rape could be positively misleading. It was then that he wrote the passage which has been referred to as "the traditional balancing direction."
It is in these terms: "A woman's consent to intercourse may be hesitant, reluctant, grudging or tearful, but if she consciously permits it (providing her permission is not obtained by force, threats, fear or fraud) it is not rape." 
It seems that a direction in these terms would no longer be appropriate in
Western Australia, its State of origin. In Ibbs versus The Queen [[1988] WAR ] at 93,
Burt CJ said: "I should add that if not positively wrong, it would be highly dangerous for a jury now to be told that for the purposes of the new offence of sexual penetration without consent: `A woman's consent to intercourse may be hesitant, reluctant, grudging or tearful, but if she consciously permits [emphasis mine] it, providing her permission is not obtained by force, threats, fear or fraud, it is not' sexual penetration without consent: ...the recent amendment to the Criminal Code has now made it clear that the consent which is required is to be `freely and voluntarily given'. Whether that be the fact or not is of course entirely a question for the jury but for myself I think it would now be a misdirection and a serious misdirection to tell the jury that as a matter of law the consent as given would be of that quality notwithstanding the fact, if it be so found, that it was `hesitant, reluctant, grudging or tearful'. It would be a misdirection to tell the jury that `if she consciously permits it' it must as a matter of law be held that she had `freely and voluntarily given' her consent to it. On the contrary I would find it difficult to accept that a consent of that kind was `freely and voluntarily' given. It is, as I have said, a jury question and juries should now be directed in the terms of the definition and defence counsel in addressing the jury should in future be restrained from formulating the question so as to convey to them the idea that consent `freely and voluntarily given' is the same thing as `a reluctant submission.' See Nevile J in
Holman's case (supra) at 10." 
At p 101 Brinsden J expressed the view that the expression "free and voluntary consent" does not sit readily with the dictum from Holman, and added: "A hesitant, reluctant, grudging or tearful, permission may in the circumstances in which the permission is given not amount to a free and voluntary consent ... with respect I think that Jackson CJ's dictum should now read `a woman's consent to intercourse may be hesitant, reluctant, grudging or tearful, but if she freely and voluntarily consents it is not sexual assault'.
However I think it best that a trial judge not address the jury in those terms." 
These judgments were given specifically in the context of a charge brought under the Western Australian Criminal Code which, by the time Ibbs was decided, contained, in <case>, the following definition of "consent": "...means a consent freely and voluntarily given and, without in any way affecting or limiting the meaning otherwise attributable to those words, a consent is not freely and voluntarily given if it is obtained by force, threat, intimidation, deception or fraudulent means." 
Sub <case> of section 324G provides as follows: "A failure to offer physical resistance to a sexual assault does not of itself constitute consent to a sexual assault." 
These provisions did not appear in the Code when Holman was decided.

S 61R of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) is the NSW counterpart to <case>. It is not a precisely analogous provision. In particular it does not contain express reference to consent "freely and voluntarily given". It does provide, in sub s (2)(c), that: "(2)(c) A person who submits to sexual intercourse with another person as a result of threats or terror, whether the threats are against, or the terror is instilled in, the person who submits to the sexual intercourse or any other person, is to be regarded as not consenting to the sexual intercourse; ..." 
S 61R(2)(d) is substantially similar in content to <case>. It provides: "(d)A person who does not offer physical resistance to sexual intercourse is not, by reason only of that fact, to be regarded as consenting to the sexual intercourse." 
The remaining sub paragraphs of <case> sets out specific instances of circumstances which, if proved, vitiate consent given to sexual intercourse.
It is to be noted, however, that the opening words of the sub section are: "(2) For the purposes of [ss
I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61i.html) and [61J](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61j.html) and without limiting the grounds on which it may be established that consent to sexual intercourse is vitiated: ..." (emphasis added) 
In my opinion the absence of a reference in the NSW legislation to "consent freely and voluntarily given" does not create any point of material distinction between the law applicable in the two States. "Consent" for the purposes of NSW law, just as for Western Australian law, means consent freely and voluntarily given. I am therefore of the view that the judgments in
Ibbs, while not binding on this court, should be adopted and followed.

In reaching this conclusion I observe that my researches have not disclosed a single instance in which the direction drawn from Holman, has received the authority of this or any other criminal appellate court in Australia. In my view it should not receive that authority. Firstly, it must be read in the context of the whole passage in which it appears, a passage in which the Chief
Justice was seeking to explain why the references of the trial judge to "willing consent" were incorrect. Secondly, despite its acknowledgment that permission obtained by force, threats, fear or fraud does not amount to consent, it is apt to create confusion. It is capable of implying that the only circumstances that vitiate consent are proven force, threats, fear or fraud. This, in my opinion, is too limiting. It was never the case that these were the only circumstances that vitiate consent, and it certainly has not been the case since the introduction of <case> into the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). Thirdly, the passage in the judgment was never intended to be taken as prescribing a direction to be given in charges of unlawful sexual intercourse. It was an observation in the context of the specific passage in the jury direction then under appeal.

I should note that Holman appears to have been approved by the New
Zealand Court of Appeal in R versus Cook <case>; [[1986] 2
NZLR 93](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1986%5d%202%20NZLR%2093 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 97. That decision was given in relation to a particular section of the
NZ Crimes Act 1961 which was interpreted by that court as having the consequence that: "It matters not that the consent is a reluctant or even an unwilling consent or one produced by persuasion or some fraudulent means or even by threats other than threats of bodily harm." (p 97) 
There was, in my view, no error constituted by the failure of the judge to give a Holman direction, nor can the absence of the direction have "enhanced" any danger created by the trial judge's other directions. I turn, then, to the complaint principally made about the directions, that is that they may have been understood by the jury as permitting them to convict the appellant on his own version of what had occurred.

In my opinion there was evidence before the jury from the appellant himself on which they could have found that the complainant's consent was not freely and voluntarily given. There was evidence from the same source on which the jury could find that the complainant submitted to sexual intercourse with the appellant as a result of threats or terror, his consent thereby being vitiated as a result of <case>(c). That sub-paragraph does not require that the threats or terror emanate directly from the person with whom sexual intercourse takes place. A simple example will illustrate the point. If A holds V at gunpoint demanding that V have sexual intercourse with B, B could not succeed in a defence of consent to a charge of sexual intercourse without consent.

On the appellant's account, he, knowing of the complainant's fear of others in the prison, took advantage of that fear to secure the complainant's consent to intercourse with him. The jury should, in my view, have been given a three stranded direction in relation to this evidence. Firstly, they should have been directed that the offence was committed if the Crown had proved, to the requisite standard, that the complainant did not consent to intercourse (see
R versus Olugboja <case>; [[1982] QB 320).] Secondly, they should have been directed that consent is not consent unless freely and voluntarily given. Thirdly, they should have been directed that, if the complainant, to the knowledge of the appellant, submitted to sexual intercourse with the appellant as the result of threats or terror, even if those threats or terror emanated from persons other than the appellant, then the complainant was to be regarded as not consenting to the sexual intercourse. (It would, of course, have been necessary also to give a direction as to recklessness consistent with <case> and to have reminded the jury of the evidence relevant to each of these matters.) 
I agree that the direction given to the jury was inadequate and for that reason I agree that the appeal should be allowed, the conviction quashed, and a new trial ordered. In coming to this last conclusion, I am conscious that this court was, subsequent to the hearing, advised that the appellant had served the entirety of the sentence imposed (that is more than twelve months) on protection. Nevertheless, I am of the view that the issues in this matter are sufficiently significant that the decision whether a new trial should take place or not should be made by the officer to whom such decisions are principally entrusted, the Director of Public Prosecutions.

I agree, for the reasons given by McInerney J, that the jury should not have been directed that lies allegedly told by the appellant were available to be used as evidence of a consciousness of guilt, and that the ground asserting that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory should be rejected.
 * * * 
