

Pope and Ors versus Christie Matter No 4918/94 [1998] NSWSC 118 (16 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 `JAYNE MAREE POPE & ORS versus RICHARD JOHN CHRISTIE` `RE THE ESTATE OF GLENDON FREDERICK DOBRICH` ` 4918/94` `16 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These are proceedings brought by an adult daughter for an order out of the estate or notional estate of the late Glendon Frederick Dobrich. Mr Dobrich died suddenly on 6 October 1994. Probate of his last will was granted to the defendant, a solicitor of this Court, on 15 December 1994. 
On the 21 December 1994, when the present summons was filed, it included claims not only by the present plaintiff, but also by her sister and two brothers. The other three plaintiffs filed a notice of discontinuance earlier this year and it has been agreed between the parties that there will be no order for costs so far as the discontinuing plaintiffs are concerned.

The deceased was married twice. He married his first wife, Thelma, in 1958 and she was the mother of the plaintiff and the three former plaintiffs. The plaintiff was the eldest of the four children, having been born in 1958.
Thelma died in 1990. The deceased remarried Miss Valerie Anne Reed on 26
September 1992.

Unfortunately, as often happens in families, there has been friction between the children of the first marriage and the deceased's second wife. In the case of the present plaintiff this friction has to a great degree subsided, but that cannot be said for the other three children. Unfortunately, the friction has not dissipated to an extent where the parties could amicably settle their differences, and so far it would seem they have spent about $200,000 on legal costs in fighting each other.

The deceased made his last will in contemplation of marriage on 17 September
In the events which have happened it has been assumed that the whole of the estate passes to his second wife.

Although this is a very simple case in many ways, it has a number of bizarre features. Indeed, this case is the epitome of the rule that if anything will go wrong in a case everything will go wrong. Some of the events that make me make this observation will be set out in due course. There could be some contest as to the meaning of the will, but everyone has assumed that the estate passes wholly to Valerie Reed, as she now calls herself again, and I will act on this assumption.

The estate appears to be worth $152,000. This is a net figure and the make up is as follows: (1) property at Bondi worth about $135,000; (2) some shares worth $3,000; and (3) some cash, less the costs and disbursements of these proceedings.

In addition to the actual estate, there have been moneys generated because of the superannuation scheme in which the deceased was a member. This was a scheme administered by trustees. The trustees were empowered to determine to whom the moneys payable on the death of the deceased would be paid. They determined that the moneys would be paid to the widow. This in due course meant that the widow was paid by the trustees the sum of $917,860 including accrued interest. It would seem that of this sum various legal costs were paid and the bulk of the balance, amounting to some $780,000 was placed in two accounts with an entity called Asgard Capital Management Ltd; $430,000 being placed in a superannuation account and $350,000 in an investment account.

However, before those moneys were paid, there was litigation between the parties. The [Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/soca1993464/) of the
Commonwealth Parliament set up a Tribunal to deal with complaints, inter alia, against trustees by persons concerned with distribution from superannuation funds.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/soca1993464/s37.html) of this Act purports to invest that Tribunal with jurisdiction to review decisions of trustees under superannuation schemes. The four children complained to the Tribunal and, after hearing submissions, the Tribunal affirmed the trustees' decision. The children then appealed to the Federal
Court, as was permitted under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/soca1993464/s46.html) of that Act, and R D Nicholson J allowed the appeal and returned the matter to the Tribunal to reconsider.

There was a further appeal by the widow to the Full Federal Court. On 17 March the Full Federal Court made orders allowing the appeal and affirming the decision of the Tribunal. The court has never given reasons for that view, but it would seem that the matter which induced the Full Court so to order was that counsel for both the widow and the children agreed, at least before the
Full Federal Court, that the widow was under an obligation by virtue of an agreement she had made with the deceased about making mutual wills to leave fifteen percent of her estate to each of the four children of the deceased's first marriage. It would seem that in the light of that fact the Full Court thought that the decision of the Tribunal was fair and, notwithstanding the problems raised by R D Nicholson J, its decision should be affirmed.

Unfortunately, no-one took the point that even assuming that the Commonwealth has some jurisdiction to deal with the whole field of superannuation, a matter which in itself is very arguable, that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/soca1993464/s37.html) of the Act was completely invalid as an attempt to confer judicial power on an administrative body.

When the matter came to this Court counsel Mr Nye Perram, for the Attorney
General of New South Wales, intervened and wished to argue that as [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/soca1993464/s37.html) was invalid nothing that happened before the Tribunal could give rise to any res judicata.

The Full Federal Court in Wilkinson versus Clerical Administrative and Related
Employees Superannuation Pty Ltd <case>; [(1998) 152 ALR 332], and in a supplementary decision given the same day (Breckler versus Leshem (12 February 1998, unreported)) held by majority of two to one that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/soca1993464/s37.html) was invalid, in that it purported to confer the judicial power of the
Commonwealth on the Tribunal.

Mr A Barry, who appeared for the defendant, argued that those decisions were wrong. However, it seems to me that the decision of the majority was free from obvious error, and that it is the duty of a single judge of this Court in comity to follow the decision. Accordingly, I should find, in case someone wishes to have this as a matter of appeal, that despite Mr Barry's submissions, <case> of the Commonwealth [Superannuation (Resolution of
Complaints) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/soca1993464/) is invalid.

I think it follows that because this is so, there can be no res judicata arising from the Tribunal's decision. The requirements of a res judicata are set out in Spencer Bower and Handley The Doctrine of Res Judicata (Butterworths London 1996) at par 19, and one of the elements necessary to be established is that the Tribunal concerned had jurisdiction over the parties and the subject matter. The fact that the Tribunal did not is sufficient to dispossess of res judicata.

Accordingly, it is not necessary to consider the alternative argument that the
Tribunal was not in any event a Tribunal of the type from which one would conclude that there could be a res judicata (see Spencer Bower and Handley pars 22 and 23).

Accordingly, as things have turned out, it was quite unfortunate that the parties spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in litigation before a tribunal which had no jurisdiction to deal with their dispute, and in appeals to the
Federal Court that got no-one anywhere. The only lasting significance, however, is that there was this consensus before at least the Full Federal
Court that there was a constructive trust arising from mutual wills.

Because of this consensus, and because its statement more likely than not led the Full Federal Court to allow the appeal, and because of the effect on the three discontinuing plaintiffs, I should assume in this case that if there were not mutual wills under the traditional doctrine there are such estoppels which operate that the conscience of the widow is affected in the same way as if there had been mutual wills.

To flesh this out, although we know now that the Federal Court proceedings were just a waste of time and money, that was not known last year and the parties apparently obtained some benefits because of the statement of consensus. So far as the three discontinuing children are concerned, it may be that they discontinued on the basis that they were entitled to an equitable interest over the property which the widow has at the date of her death and that because of this they could not say that they were entitled to any further support.

So far as the present plaintiff is concerned, I need to assume that she is entitled to a similar interest, that is, as cases such as Birmingham v
Renfrew <case>; [(1936) 57 CLR 666] state, that she has an equitable interest in fifteen percent of the property that the widow has at the date of her death, whether that property derived from the testator or otherwise. Of course, a conditional order can be made, when and if one gets to the quantum aspect of this case, that she take something in lieu of that benefaction, but the fact that it exists is certainly relevant to the initial question as to whether the testator failed to make proper provision for the plaintiff.

The matter is also complicated by the fact that the other three children have discontinued their proceedings. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s20.html) of the [Family Provision Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/) provides that on an application like this the court may disregard the interests of any eligible persons who have not made an application in relation to the deceased person. The purpose of this section is clear, and that is to avoid the strange result that flowed from cases such as Re Bourke Deceased [[1968] 2 NSWR 423], where if for some reason a person to whom the testator owed a primary duty did not make a claim all other claims failed, even though they were relatively good.

The section then suggests that one must notify every eligible person, that one disregards those who have been notified but have not made an application, and then one hears all the applications, either together or sequentially, so that one can assess them.

What happens, however, where four children make an application but three discontinue before the hearing? There is no authority on the point. In my view the submissions of Mr Orlov for the plaintiff are correct, and that is the court treats them as being persons who have not made an application, yet the court determines that the service of a notice in the statutory form is unnecessary because their initial joining in the application shows that they know about their rights.

There is some material digested by the Commonwealth Tribunal which suggests that the testator's other daughter may be in similar plight to the present plaintiff. Of course, it may well be that when all the facts come out that is not so at all. However, it seems to me that, because of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s20.html),
I do not need to consider the testator's duty to his other daughter, or the effect that a claim by such a daughter might have on the present plaintiff.

This, Mr Barry says, puts his client in an awkward position. There has been a discontinuance by the three children, it may be if the plaintiff succeeds in this case that there will be further claims by the other three children and his client will then be faced with not only perhaps greater provision than otherwise having been given to this plaintiff because her case was heard first, but then consequential claims by the other children.

I understand the problem. There is not that much I can do about it. Nothing, of course, that I say is binding on the other three children because they are not parties to the present proceedings. However, it would seem to me that if an order made in favour of the present plaintiff uses up the whole of the actual estate then it would be necessary for the other children in making an extension of time application to fit themselves within [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s28.html) of the Act. They would need to show that there are special circumstances which justify the making of an order designating further property as notional property out of time, which is quite a hard barrier to surmount. Of course, if the plaintiff fails in these proceedings the question really becomes academic.

One other matter that I should mention before dealing with the merits of the case is that the widow has placed the bulk of the moneys from the superannuation policy into a superannuation account. She says she did this because the time for any possible appeal from the Full Federal Court expired and she considered that the moneys should be paid to her and she should invest them. She never explained, nor was she ever asked, why she took that action before these proceedings were disposed of. She also says that she was advised by an investment adviser that the way in which she invested the money was the best method for her. It would seem from the facts I have that the investment adviser did not take into account any effect that an order in these proceedings may have.

The money in the superannuation account is generating both capital growth and income, which has been capitalised and will not be payable to the widow until she is at least fifty-five. At the moment her income is flowing in the main from the investment account, but it is only by drawing on capital that she is able to generate income of $43,000 a year, which is what she says she needs.

This problem is ameliorated by the fact that paper capital profits are being generated by the shares held by the managed trust that constitutes the "investment account", so that in the bullish stock market over the last three months the capital has only been depleted by about $9,000.

Apart from the proceeds of a superannuation policy and about $70,000 of her own in a cash management account with the Macquarie Bank, the widow has the unit at Kingsford, which did not flow to her through the estate, which generates about $4,000 net per year, plus the matrimonial home at Maroubra in which she lives.

The matrimonial home at Maroubra was purchased by the deceased in his own name solely on 3 July 1992. On 28 February 1993 (that is within three years of his death) he transferred the property to himself and the widow jointly and there is no evidence that she supplied any consideration for that transfer. Thus on his death, by virtue of the ius accrescendi, the Maroubra property passed to the widow.

I have been told that the costs of the executor to date are about $41,000. It is difficult to make a meaningful comment on this because the costs were incurred between 1994 and 1998, and there would have been some complications in the constitutional point which really only vanished on 12 February this year when the Full Federal Court made its decision in Breckler's case.

However, I regret to say that the information provided by the solicitors for the defendant as to the state of the widow's affairs was very sketchy. In one sense this does not matter because the testator left all his property to the widow and she is entitled to that property, subject to the Act, whether she is rich or poor, and she has no obligation to disclose to the court what her assets are or her income is.

However, this creates an awkward situation, because where there is to be an order in favour of the plaintiff the court has to consider how the order should be borne and what property should be designated as notional estate. The court tries as much as possible to make the designation of notional property, or to place the burden of the order in such a way as to do the least harm to the widow, and where there are insufficient details, the court is really proceeding in the dark and may make an order, through lack of information, which might affect the widow's well-being far more than it might otherwise do.
However, I have taken the view that where I am not given appropriate information and where the widow does act on financial advice ignoring the possibilities of an order in these proceedings, that there is only a limit to which I can protect her against her own decisions.

Having unburdened myself of all that, I will now turn to the actual facts of the case. The basic facts are that the testator had his widow and the plaintiff to consider as to the disposition of his property. He had an actual estate of about $152,000 and notional estate of $918,000, plus half the
Maroubra house. He then had to consider what was the proper way in which to have those assets distributed.

It was clear that his duty to his widow was his prime duty and that a man, who was neither over wealthy nor poverty stricken, would need to provide his widow with a house and with sufficient moneys to be able to protect her from the vicissitudes of life. The marriage was a marriage that only lasted for two years, but one must discount that stark fact for the facts are that there was obviously deep affection between the testator and the widow, and that neither thought for a moment that the marriage would be so short-lived.

After discharging his obligation to his widow, the deceased then would have to consider whether in all the circumstances he should make provision for his daughter, the plaintiff.

To look at this question, one first must look at the duty to the widow and how much of the estate would be absorbed in discharging that duty. This is hard to do because there is very little evidence put forward by the widow. She says that she is in ill health and she has lost her job. However, she has no dependants and apart from having a house, and having about $40,000 a year income, the only need that she puts forward at the moment is that she wants to go overseas for twenty months to England where her parents are. I have been given no costs for that trip or how it is going to be funded, apart from the fact that the widow intends to let her home at Maroubra and rent a property in the Midlands in Britain. At the moment her assets are $1.3 million, including the property that she has inherited from the deceased. It seems to me that with a lady in her circumstances that there was room after providing for the widow to also consider other claims on the deceased's bounty.

One then must turn to see what the plaintiff received and what are her needs.
When this is done the court must ask whether judged by the standards of the community the deceased fulfilled his duty to his elder daughter. Although there have been various statements of the duties, the most usual test is that set out in the judgment of Mahoney JA in Kearns versus Ellis, Court of Appeal, December 1984, unreported, which, although a dissenting judgment, has been subsequently adopted by the Court of Appeal in stating the law in this aspect of the case.

His Honour said that the court must determine what is proper for the plaintiff and in determining what is proper regard is to be had to all the circumstances, and in the end it is to be determined according to what is the current community feeling as to what would be fair and reasonable. The court in making the assessment of what is fair and reasonable is really the spokesperson of the fair and reasonable person in the community. Thus the question really becomes what would the fair and reasonable member of the community think in all the circumstances this deceased should have done for this daughter.

I have already set out the deceased's assets, including notional property, and the property of the widow. The plaintiff is a married lady who lives in the
Bunbury district of Western Australia. She trained as a teacher and she married on 3 January 1981 to her present husband. There are four children of the marriage, currently aged between eight and fourteen. The plaintiff is a very family orientated person. She spends most of her time looking after her family though she does occasionally work ten to fifteen hours a week, which brings her in something like $10-15,000 a year. Her husband is in full employment.

As I have pointed out elsewhere, in one sense the earnings of a plaintiff's spouse are irrelevant because one must treat even the most devoted husband and wife as separate people in the eyes of the law. On the other hand, where one can see that there is a close and affectionate marriage that has lasted for seventeen years, the court can in that particular fact situation assume that for the foreseeable future the applicant will also benefit from the income generated by the applicant's spouse.

The plaintiff's husband currently earns $43,000 a year. The plaintiff has set out her expenses and these total about $54,500 a year. When I say her expenses, they are the family expenses. The only cross-examination of the plaintiff on these matters was that of the expenses. About $6,400 were expended, in donations to a church of $1,000 and in private educational expenses for the children of $5,400, and it was put that these were excessive, that the plaintiff hasn't been to a private school so she was not in a state of life where she should expect her children to go to such a school.

To this the plaintiff vehemently replied that she was very concerned with the education of her children and that she and her husband had made the assessment that despite the tight budget in the family this was an appropriate way for money to be spent.

I thought it rather odd, I must confess, that there was cross-examination concentrated on this fact, because, after all, the plaintiff's children are the deceased's grandchildren and the deceased did seem to be a person who was very close to his family. However, I was told in Mr Barry's address that the real point being made was that the court should not give a benefit to a person who was not an eligible person, and by giving a mother money so that she could educate her children was really giving a benefit to the children.

This submission, however, flies in the face of the authorities, and that is that it is quite appropriate to make an order under the Act even though there will be an incidental effect that someone else will be benefited. If a claimant has a child and she wishes to benefit the child by having the child properly educated, then that is a legitimate matter for the court to give to the applicant the appropriate sum of money if the circumstances warrant; see
Goodman versus Windeyer <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 490] at 498.

The plaintiff and her husband own their home, which is valued at approximately $100,000 and mortgaged to the extent of $43,000. The house has three bedrooms.
The plaintiff and her husband occupy the smallest of the three bedrooms and the four children occupy the other bedrooms, two in each bedroom. Apart from a car worth approximately $12,000, and furniture, there are no assets of any note owned by the plaintiff or her husband. They owe about $10,500 on credit cards and also a further $7,000 for the costs of the abortive Federal Court proceedings. Their total indebtedness is about $66,800, including the mortgage.

When cross-examined as to her needs, the plaintiff said: "A. I was not brought up with a silver spoon in my mouth. I don't ask for the world, but to be able to live in a home where my children are not sharing a bedroom. I have two boys and two girls they are four years apart. The boys are growing into teenagers; the girls are growing into teenagers. The boys want space of their own, as do the girls. We have moved from the largest bedroom in the house to the smallest bedroom in the house. To be able to perhaps pay for things without constantly going to have to think who is going to suffer because we paid this this week or that this week. To be able to provide adequately for my family. My family are extremely important to me. I am a mother above all else and a wife. To be able to have enough to be comfortable on without being extravagant. I am in a situation now that I didn't choose to be in initially. If I could have my father and mother back now alive I could think of nothing more wonderful but we are here and right at this moment I feel like a little fish in a big pond and I don't know, what do I say to a question like that.

Q. Mrs Pope, I am just asking you about your financial matters? 
A. We have a mortgage which we pay. Now to be able to not have that would be bliss, to be able to perhaps not work would be bliss and to be able to spend time with my children before the years fly by so quickly you don't even know they are gone." 
That evidence was not challenged.

The deceased did not make any direct provision for the plaintiff out of his estate. However, there are two indirect provisions. The first concerns a stamp and coin collection. The evidence suggests that the deceased and his first wife were very keen on the hobby of collecting stamps and coins and that on one occasion the deceased remarked that he imagined his collection was worth $20,000. That statement has since been translated to mean that the collection has a current value of $20,000, a conclusion that I myself would not draw. I do not know what it is worth. It would seem that the asset was an asset of the estate so that technically it would pass to the widow. However, the undisputed evidence is that the widow gave it to the four children, so that indirectly there flowed from the testator to the plaintiff a one-quarter interest as tenant-in-common, I suppose, of a stamp and coin collection. She says that because of the sentimental value of this collection she and her siblings do not intend to sell it. At the moment it is seemingly held by a solicitor in his safe. I really think for current purposes one disregards the stamp and coin collection, but I need to make some notes about it when making my orders.

The second indirect benefaction is the constructive trust that flows from the alleged mutual wills. If the widow never spends another cent and does not acquire any further property, and should she die in the very near future, the plaintiff will receive fifteen percent of $1.3 million, which is roughly about $200,000. However, as Mr Orlov points out, there is no restriction on the widow dealing with her property as she may consider appropriate, at least so long as she does not deliberately put it out of her power for the trust to attach to property. There is certainly no restriction on using the property in the ordinary course of living.

The widow has said that she intends to keep the property preserved and indeed this is one of the reasons why she put the $450,000 in the superannuation account. I am quite sure that that is what she presently intends to do, but whether the vicissitudes of life allow that to happen is of course very doubtful.

There is also the factor that if one paid some regard to the Australian life tables, that a widow of forty-nine may very well live for another thirty-five years. This has two aspects to it. The first is that any hard cold cash that may flow to the plaintiff through this constructive trust is something that may not happen until 2033, yet she is at the moment in one of her most expensive periods of her life, having four children in early teenage or sub- teenage years.

The second is that one would need to discount the benefit by applying the present value of $200,000, or whatever it is, by the three percent tables over thirty-five years and then discount further for contingencies on the basis that the widow may, despite all her intentions, have to use up some of the property for her own ordinary living. When looked at this way there is not that much benefit that flows through the trust, but it would be appropriate to make an order, if the plaintiff is entitled to an order, conditional upon her renouncing any benefits under the trust in such a way that her fifteen percent will not accrue to her siblings, but to the widow.

In all these circumstances then would the community have considered that the plaintiff was left without proper maintenance and support? 
In my view the community would come to an affirmative answer to that question.
There was a man who had more than his widow needed for her proper provision.
There was a daughter with genuine needs. The house in which she is living is far too small. She is living a relatively frugal lifestyle and is not able to amass any savings. I consider the deceased who was close to this daughter, would be expected to have made some provision for her.

I should emphasise that despite the friction that occurred on the deceased's second marriage it was acknowledged that there was no conduct disentitling by this plaintiff. She said that she did keep in touch with her father after the time he moved from Western Australia to Sydney; that he often came back to
Perth on business and stayed with her and she continued to correspond and talk to him and this was not challenged.

The next question is what was proper provision for the deceased to make for this plaintiff? 
In the absence of any reliable evidence as to any detriment that might be caused to the only other person affected, namely the widow, it seems to me that I am justified in looking at the plaintiff's claim without any need to discount it because of a need to look after two people with only one pot of money.

The plaintiff has put forward evidence that houses in the Bunbury area that would be sufficient to house herself and her family comfortably would be in the vicinity of $170-200,000. I will take a mid figure of somewhere about $190,000. The existing home can be realised for $100,000, so that one has a figure of $90,000 needed to upgrade the home. There would probably be moving expenses and stamp duty and agent's commission and the like, and the figure of $20,000 for those does not appear to me to be unreasonable.

If the mortgage does not have to be paid, and the bank loan, then the plaintiff's income would increase sufficiently to be able to meet the increased costs of a sub-teenage family.

The other debt involved in the plaintiff's liability is her share of the legal costs of the Federal Court proceedings. I am not really too sure whether this is a proper figure to take into account, because the proceedings were not really necessary, in that the plaintiff could have brought these proceedings without them, but on the other hand the plaintiff needed to establish what was the estate before she could mount these proceedings because otherwise she might have been met with the defence that she was entitled to a quarter or some other percentage of the superannuation moneys, and so proper provision had been made for her. So probably one should take that into account, but I think the best way of taking it into account is by putting it into some general nest egg.

There is then the fact that this lady is still relatively young with a young family. She has got no assets behind her and it seems to me that a fair and proper provision would be to add $75,000 for a fund that will deal with the vicissitudes of life. Accordingly, the proper provision that the testator should have made for the plaintiff was $245,000.

The actual estate is not sufficient to bear the whole of these orders. The actual estate really is the real estate and the shares which will probably realise $138,000, less $8,000 capital gains tax. There will thus be $130,000 available. The plaintiff, as she has succeeded, is entitled to an order for costs. I do not have any figure as to the plaintiff's costs, but will assume for the moment a round figure of $20,000. There will thus be $110,000 available to meet the order, so that it is necessary to designate $135,000, or perhaps more, of the notional estate in order to provide for the plaintiff.

Accordingly, I need to turn to the question of notional estate. This requires consideration of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/).
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (e), when read with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s24.html) , means that if the testator is a member of a superannuation scheme and, on the occurrence of a decision made by the trustees of that scheme, moneys are payable to a person, then immediately before the person's death the person is deemed to have entered into a prescribed transaction. If a person has entered into a prescribed transaction within three years of his or her death then the court can designate the property as notional estate.

There has been some argument before me as to whether this provision applies to this superannuation fund. Some argument was put as to the fact that in the present case there was no nomination of a beneficiary. I recognise that that is so, but it does not seem to me that that affects the operation of par (e).

It may be that there is a stronger case if there is an act of nomination, but
I cannot see why the paragraph does not apply generally.

Mr Barry earnestly submitted that there must be something which the deceased did or something which he failed to do before he can be said to have taken part in a prescribed transaction. I do not consider that that is so and, indeed, in this day and age more and more courts are coming to grips with transactions that take place between two computers or by options exercised by silence, and I cannot see any warrant at all for reading down the wide words in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/fpa1982209/s22.html) (e) in the circumstances where the deceased did or failed to do some actual act.

There are not many cases on the point, but it would seem to me that what there is, and the only decisions that seem to assist are two unreported decisions, one of Master McLaughlin on 10 December 1992 in Weekes versus Weekes and one of
Bryson J on 28 February 1991 Ormsby versus Ormsby, both of which tend in the direction of holding that this is a case where there is a prescribed transaction.

If this were not a prescribed transaction then it would be necessary to look to see whether the 1993 transaction of transferring half the Maroubra home was a prescribed transaction. I was reminded of my decision in Wade versus Harding [(1987) 11 NSWLR 551.] However, I consider that as the widow intends to live in the Maroubra property I should not designate that property as notional estate unless there was no other available, and because I consider there is other property available then it is unnecessary to decide whether the passing of the one-half interest in the Maroubra home was a prescribed transaction.

Accordingly, there should be an order that the property currently held in the investment account with Asgard Pty Ltd in the name of the widow should be designated as notional estate to the extent to which the actual estate is deficient in being able to meet an order that the plaintiff receive a legacy of $245,000 and her costs of these proceedings.

I think that the best thing is to now stand the matter over for short minutes of order, but to guide the parties I will just recapitulate.

The orders should include: 
A declaration that the stamp and coin collection is now the property of the plaintiff and her brothers and sister; (2) That conditional upon the plaintiff renouncing any benefit under the trust with respect to the mutual will in favour of the widow she receive a legacy of $245,000; 
An order designating the Asgard investment account as notional property up to the extent required to meet the deficiency in the actual estate; 
An order that the costs of the plaintiff and the costs of the defendant on the trustee basis be paid out of the estate; 
An order that each of the discontinuing plaintiffs neither pay nor receive costs; 
An order that exhibits DX01, DX02 and DX04 to be returned and the other exhibits to remain with the papers; and 
Note that the intervenor does not seek any order as to his costs.

I will have the matter listed at 9.30 am on 19 May 1998 for short minutes to be brought in. This date may be altered by arrangement with my Associate so long as she is contacted at least 5 days before that date.
 * * * 
