

Evans and Ors versus The General Manager of the Office of the Board of Studies and Ors [1997] NSWSC 15 (3 February 1997) 
Evans & Ors versus The General Manager of the Office of the Board of Studies & Ors /96 December 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
SULLY J 
JUDGMENT 
Introduction 
HIS HONOUR: By a further amended summons filed by leave on 13 November 1996, and as further amended by leave granted in Court on 12 December 1996, eight named plaintiffs seek against three named defendants certain declaratory relief. The three named defendants are the General Manager of the Office of the Board of Studies, as first defendant; the Board of Studies as second defendant; and the State of New South Wales as third defendant. The summons is framed in the following terms: "1. A declaration that by imposing as an essential criteria for the advertised positions of Board of Studies Liaison Officers the criteria of "recent teaching experience" the Defendants or each of them are unfairly and unlawfully excluding the Plaintiffs or each of them from consideration for appointment to those positions.
A declaration that by imposing as an essential criteria for the advertised positions of Board of Studies Liaison Officers the criteria of "recent teaching experience" the Defendants or each of them are improperly and unlawfully excluding proper consideration of the merits of the Plaintiffs or each of them within the meaning of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/s26.html) of the [Public Sector Management Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/) and/or
Regulation 21C of the Public Sector Management (General) Regulations 1988 and/or Regulation 8(a) of the Public Sector Management (General) Regulation .
An order that the Defendants or each of them may not dispense with the services of the Fourth Plaintiff as proposed in February 1997
Such further order as the Court thinks fit.
Costs." 
On 12 December 1996, the first day of the hearing before this Court, the plaintiffs filed in Court short minutes notifying the discontinuance by the plaintiffs with the consent of the defendants, of the proceedings as against the second defendant. At the conclusion of the oral submissions, it was indicated by learned counsel for the plaintiffs that the relief sought in the further amended summons would not now be pressed against the third defendant.
That leaves the General Manager of the Office of the Board of Studies as the sole defendant for present purposes.

On 13 December 1996, the second and final day of the hearing before this
Court, there was tendered, and admitted as Exhibit C, a letter from the
General Manager of the Office of the Board of Studies [to whom I shall refer in what follows as, "the defendant"], acknowledging receipt of a letter of resignation, taking effect from 27 January 1997, from Mr. Michael O'Mullane, the eighth plaintiff in the present proceedings. Mr. O'Mullane has, therefore, "ceased to be a proper or necessary party": see SCR Part 8, Rule 9(b).
Accordingly, and by virtue of that Rule, I order that Mr. O'Mullane cease to be a party to the present proceedings. There was some dispute as to whether any, and if so what, costs order should be made consequent upon this order dismissing Mr. O'Mullane from the current proceedings. I am of the opinion that it would be just to order that he pay the costs of the defendant, as agreed, assessed or taxed, thrown away by the termination at his instance of the proceedings brought by him against the defendant. I so order; and I indicate for the assistance of any assessor or taxing officer that, in my opinion, the time taken by the hearing in this Court was not affected by the dismissal of the eighth plaintiff from the proceedings.

The Relevant Legislation 
It is convenient to begin by noticing some of the provisions of the [Public Sector Management Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/) , ["the PSM Act"]. This is a statute that is intended, according to its long title, to be an: "Act for the management of the Public Service of New South Wales and of other public sector employment; ............". The PSM Act arranges the Public Service of New South Wales into a series of "Departments" The "Departments" constituting from time to time the Public Service of New South Wales are stipulated in Schedule 1 to the PSM Act. The Schedule stipulates, in the case of each such "Department", the name by which the "Department" is to be known; and the designation of the officer of the Public Service who is to be, for the purposes of the PSM Act, the nominated "Department Head".

Two such scheduled "Departments" are, and were at all material times, the "Officer of the Board of Studies"; and the "Public Employment Office". The "Department Head" in each such case is described as, respectively, the "General Manager of the Office"' and the "Commissioner for Public
Employment".

Sections 11 and 12 of the PSM Act contain provisions which are significant for present purposes. Those two sections are in the following terms: "11. General responsibility of Department Heads 
A Department Head is responsible to the appropriate Minister for the general conduct and the effective, efficient and economical management of the functions and activities of the Department.
 
For the purpose of exercising the responsibility imposed by subsection , a Department Head may take such action as the Department Head considers appropriate in the circumstances, but may not take action that is inconsistent with the functions of the Minister or The Public Employment Office specified in this Act.
Delegation by Department Head 
A Department Head may delegate to an officer of the Department any of the Department Head's functions under this Act, other than this power of delegation.
 
If: a function of a Department Head is delegated to an officer of the
Department in accordance with subsection (1), and the instrument of delegation authorises the sub-delegation of the function, then, subject to any conditions to which the delegation is subject, the officer may sub-delegate the function to another officer of the Department.
 
In this section: a reference to the functions of a Department Head includes a reference to any functions delegated to the Department Head under this Act, and a reference to an officer of a Department includes: a reference to a person holding an appointment to or in the Department, and where the Department is the group of staff attached to a body, organisation or group specified in Schedule 1 -- a reference to a person holding an appointment to or in that body, organisation or group, and a reference to a temporary employee." 
Part 2 of the PSM. Act is expressed to be concerned with the Public Service of
New South Wales. Part 2 is divided into five divisions.

Division 1 deals in general terms with the structure of the Public Service of New South Wales. That Public Service is declared to consist ".......... of the persons who are for the time being employed under this Part". The division provides for the fixing from time to time of the maximum number of staff in any particular Department. Staff positions in any Department are declared to consist of: first, the Department Head: and secondly, "such other positions as the appropriate Department Head from time to time determines in accordance with this Act". With certain exceptions not here relevant, a Department Head has, in effect, plenary power as to the structuring and the staffing, from time to time, of his Department.

Division 2 contains various provisions as to Department Heads. It is not necessary to notice in particular any of the sections making up Division 2, other than sections 11 and 12 which have earlier herein been quoted in full.

Division 3 deals with what are described as "Senior executive officers".
None of the provisions of Division 3 is of particular relevance for present purposes.

Division 4 deals with what are described as "Officers (other than
Department Heads and senior executive officers)". In my opinion, the structure of Division 4, and its place in the general scheme of Part 2, indicate that Division 4 is intended to apply to officers who are permanent officers of the Public Service holding appointments that have been formally gazetted in accordance with the particular provisions of Section 25. Division appointments are so made, formally, by the Governor upon the recommendation of the appropriate Department Head.

Section 26 of the PSM Act forms part of Division 4; and it provides for the making of Division 4 appointments on merit. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 26 were referred to extensively in the submissions put for the plaintiffs; and it is convenient to note at this point the particular provisions of those two sub-sections, which are as follows: "(1) A Department Head shall, for the purpose of determining the merit of the persons eligible for appointment to a vacant position under this section, have regard to: the nature of the duties of the position, and the abilities, qualifications, experience, standard of work performance and personal qualities of those persons that are relevant to the performance of those duties.
 
In deciding to make a recommendation for the appointment of a person to a vacant position which has been advertised in accordance with this Act: the appropriate Department Head may only select a person who has duly applied for appointment to the vacant position, and the appropriate Department Head must, from among the applicants eligible for appointment to the vacant position, select the applicant who has, in the opinion of the Department Head, the greatest merit." 
Sections 33 and 34 of the PSM Act deal with what are described "Temporary appointments". I quote hereunder the terms of these two sections, because it seems to me that their inclusion in Division 4 strengthens the inference to which I have earlier referred, that Division 4 employees in the Public Service are permanent, and not temporary, employees, albeit they may hold particular appointments which are permanent or temporary.
 "33. Temporary appointments 
If a position in a Department is vacant, or the holder of such a position is suspended from duty, sick or absent, the Department Head may appoint an officer to the position temporarily.
 Restriction on temporary appointment 
An officer who is appointed to a position temporarily may not continue in that position for a period of more than 6 months except with the approval of the Public Employment Office.
 
The Public Employment Office shall not give an approval for the purpose of subsection (1) unless satisfied that it should be given having regard to the exigencies of the Public Service." 
Division 5 is expressed to be applicable to "Temporary employees". There is only one section, namely Section 38, in Division 5; and it is of significance for present purposes. Section 38 provides as follows: . Appointment of temporary employees 
The appropriate Department Head may, if of the opinion that it is necessary to do so, employ temporarily a person who has appropriate qualifications to carry out work in the Department.
 
The employment of a person under subsection (1) is subject to the regulations (if any) concerning the employment of temporary employees.
 
The appropriate Department Head: may employ a person under this section for a period not exceeding 4 months, and subject to the regulations, may from time to time employ the person at the end of that period, or at the end of any subsequent period, for a further period not exceeding 4 months.
 
A person may not be employed under this section for: a continuous period in excess of 12 months, or  or more periods that together are in excess of 12 months in any period of 2 years.
 except with the approval of the Public Employment Office.
 
The appropriate Department Head may dispense with the services of a temporary employee at any time, but may not dispense with the services of a person employed as referred to in subsection (4) without the approval of the
Public Employment Office." 
Division 6 deals with miscellaneous matters of which one is the making of arrangements for the use of members of the "Education Teaching Service
Staff". It is this particular provision, forming part of Division 6, that is of present significance; and it is in the following terms: "41. Arrangements for use of Education Teaching Service Staff 
The appropriate Department Head may, with the approval of the
Director-General of the Department of School Education, on such terms and conditions as may be arranged, make use of the services of any member of the
Education Teaching Service.
 
The services of a person may not be made use of under subsection (1) for: a continuous period exceeding 12 months, or or more periods that together exceed 12 months in any period of 2 years, except with the approval of the Public Employment Office." 
Regulations have been made pursuant to the PSM Act and with respect to the implementation of Section 41 thereof. The relevant regulation is regulation
C of the Public Sector Management (General) Regulation 1988. That regulation is in the following terms: "21C The circumstances in which the approval of the Industrial Authority may be regarded as having been given for the purposes of section 41(2) of the Act are where: a person's services are obtained by means of the selection on merit of an applicant for an advertised vacancy; and the person's services are to be used for the purposes of a specified project for a continuous period not exceeding 3 years or for 2 or more periods not exceeding 3 years." 
As of 1 September 1996 Regulation 21C was replaced by a fresh regulation made under the Public Sector Management (General) Regulation 1996. That new regulation is in the following terms: "Arrangements for use of certain teaching staff -- approval of PEO 
The circumstances in which the approval of the Public Employment Office may be regarded as having been given for the purposes of section 41(2) of the
Act are where: a person's services are obtained by means of the selection on merit of an applicant for an advertised vacancy, or the person's services are to be used for the purposes of a specified project for a continuous period not exceeding 3 years or for 2 or more periods not exceeding 3 years." 
It will be observed that the only material difference between the two regulations is that the new regulation makes the paragraphs (a) and (b) alternative rather than cumulative.

Part 3 of the PSM Act is expressed to deal with the "Administration and management of the public sector". Division 2A of Part 3 was inserted in 1989 as part of a wide-ranging revision of the PSM Act. Division 2A is expressed to deal with the "Public Employment Office". The Public Employment Office is constituted as a body corporate; and as a statutory body representing the
Crown. The affairs of the Public Employment Office are to be managed by a
Commissioner for Public Employment. The functions of the Public Employment
Office are as set out in section 49D. It is not necessary to analyse in detail these functions, it being sufficient to understand that their nature and scope are such as to bring within the remit of the Public Employment Office the general coordination of the administration of the Public Service of NSW.

Included among the particular powers conferred upon the Public Employment
Office is a power of delegation. The relevant provisions of the PSM Act are those contained in section 49F which is in the following terms: "Delegation by Public Employment Office 
The Public Employment Office may delegate to a Department Head or any other officer of a Department any of the functions of the Public
Employment Office, other than this power of delegation.
 
Any delegation of a function with respect to the making of a determination fixing salaries, wages or other remuneration of officers or temporary employees is subject to the condition that any such determination must be at a level that is lower than the lowest amount of the remuneration packages for executive officers determined for the time being under the
Statutory and Other Officers Remuneration Act 1975.
 
In this section: a reference to the functions of the Public Employment Office includes a reference to any functions delegated to the Public Employment Office under this Act, and a reference to an officer of a Department includes a reference to a person holding an appointment to or in the Department and a reference to a temporary employee, and (where the Department is the group of staff attached to, but not comprising, a body, organisation or group specified in the
Schedule 1) a reference to a person holding an appointment to or in that body, organisation or group." 
The General Manager of the defendant holds, relevantly for present purposes, delegations in the following terms from the Public Employment
Office: "5) Temporary Employees - Continued Employment 
Under section 38(4) of the Act, to approve of the continued temporary employment of a person for a continuous period exceeding 12 months; or for 2 or more periods that together exceed 12 months in any period of 2 years; where the Department Head is satisfied that approval should be given where an appointment, under section 26, to a position is not appropriate.
 ) Temporary Employees - Dispensing with Services 
Under section 38(5) of the Act, to dispense with the services of a temporary employee at any time where approval has been given under section (4) to the continued temporary employment of a person having regard to the exigencies of the Department.
 ) Arrangements for the use of certain staff 
Under section 41(2) of the Act, to approve of the use of the services of any person for a continuous period exceeding 12 months; or for 2 or more periods that together exceed 12 months in any period of 2 years; where the
Department Head is satisfied that approval should be given having regard to the exigencies of the Department." 
In order to complete the foregoing synopsis of the relevant legislation, it is necessary to take note of two further statutes, namely, the
Teaching Services Act 1980 , and the Education Reform Act 1990 .

The Education Reform Act is a detailed revision and codification of the law relating to the provision by the NSW State Government of primary and secondary schooling services. The Act provides for the constitution of a body described as the "Board of Studies". That Board is to comprise a President and some 22 members both ex officio and appointed. Put in simple terms, the Board is charged with the oversight of the proper provision of "the education of children at both the primary and secondary level". Originally, the Board was empowered to have, and did in fact establish and maintain, an extensive staff in connection with its own administration and operations. Subsequently, and by reason of statutory amendments, the fine detail of which are not of present significance, the present defendant was constituted for the purpose of providing, as an autonomous "Department" established pursuant to the PSM
Act, the administrative and operational support services required by the Board of Studies.

The Teaching Services Act can be described sufficiently for present purposes as a statutory revision and codification of the law respecting the employment of school teachers. So far as concerns school teachers at the primary and secondary school level, they are grouped into what is described in the Act as the "Education Teaching Service".

The Relevant Facts 
Each of the plaintiffs is a career, professional school teacher. Each holds at present an appointment, the designation of which is "Board of Studies Liaison Officer". It is apparently established Public Service practice to refer to such an officer by the acronym "BOSLO", and I shall adopt, in what follows, that practice. Each plaintiff, with the exception of the fourth plaintiff, Mr. Jenson, came to his or her present appointment as a BOSLO from the government-school system. Each such plaintiff has been, therefore, seconded from the Department of School Education to the defendant, and pursuant to section 41 of the PSM Act. Mr. Jenson, exceptionally, came to his present appointment as a BOSLO from the non-government school sector. He, therefore, holds his present appointment as a temporary employee of the defendant, holding that status by virtue of section 38 of the PSM Act.

In July 1996 a report was presented to the Board of Studies in connection with a general review, which the Board of Studies had instituted, into the BOSLO programme as it then stood. A copy of this report is Annexure A to an affidavit sworn on 8 November 1996 by the general manager of the defendant.
That report contains the following two paragraphs which explain succinctly the historical background to the BOSLO programme: "2.1.1 Regional Field Officers 
In 1985 the Department of Education appointed ten Regional Field
Officers to provide liaison between the Board of Senior School Studies and secondary schools. The Field Officer program was continued by the Board of
Secondary Education with the officers being given a specific major task; assistance to schools in the implementation of the Board's policy relating to the school assessment component of the Higher School Certificate. During the term of the Board of Secondary Education the Regional Field Officers were made jointly responsible to the Board and the Department of Education and additional duties were gradually added to their role. For example, in 1988 all ten Officers were added to the Higher School Certificate Illness and
Misadventure Panel. Later that year they were commissioned by the Board to identify high priority Content Approved Courses, nominate people to take part in development workshops for those courses and then review the resulting drafts. During the terms of both the BSSS and the BSE, most Field Officers were seconded within the Department of Education at SEO II level. Some non-
Departmental teachers were employed on a temporary basis. .1.2 BOSLOs 
In 1990 the Education Reform Act established the Board of Studies as an independent Statutory Authority with its own staff, replacing the Board of
Secondary Education which had largely been serviced by the Department of
Education. The Regional Field Officers who by this stage had largely completed their specific task of assisting schools to implement the HSC assessment component, were renamed Board of Studies Liaison Officers [December 1990] and had other duties added to their role. Unlike the BSE, responsible for curriculum, assessment and credentialling 7-12, the new BOS was responsible for these matters from K to 12 and was also given the task of administering the registration of home schooling, two potential additional sources of duties for Liaison Officers. From January 1991 the BOSLOs have been classified as
Principal Education Officers." 
Paragraph 2.2.1 of that report sets out as follows what is described as the "Current role statement" of a BOSLO: "By 1995 the BOSLOs' role was defined in a general Role Statement, within an
Organisational Context and setting out Key Responsibilities and Functions. In relation to schools the general Role includes: planning, organising, implementing and evaluating of regional liaison services to all clients of the Board of Studies, in a regional context, providing advice on all aspects of Board policies, procedures and programs, disseminating of information on curriculum, assessment, credentialling and registration, conducting educational forums and workshops on Board-related matters.
 
The Key Responsibility is: providing accurate and timely advice to schools, systems, students and the community on all matters relating to the Board of Studies.
 
The Functions are: providing a prompt and reliable enquiry service to schools, systems and the community on matters pertaining to all the policies and procedures and programs of the Board, and working cooperatively with school systems and individual schools to enhance educational outcomes for students" 
Each of the present plaintiffs has been a BOSLO for several years. Each holds an appointment that is current until 2 February 1997. In the case of each plaintiff with the exception of Mr. Jenson, the formalising of his or her current appointment as a BOSLO took the form of a letter written to the individual plaintiff by the General Manager of the defendant, and in the following terms: "The Department of School Education has agreed to extend your current secondment to the Office of the Board of Studies as a Board of Studies Liaison
Officer, Principal Education Officer until February 2, 1997.
 
Your conditions of employment and salary will be as determined by the terms of the Ministry of Education and Youth Affairs and NSW Board of Studies -
Chief Education Officers, Principal Education Officers, Senior Education
Officers, Education Officers, Seconded Officers, Enterprise Agreement. In accordance with clause 3.5 of the Agreement your appointment will be in terms of [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/s41.html) of the [Public Sector Management Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/). Your working conditions in terms of clause 7.3 of the Agreement will be as per the provisions of the [Public Sector Management Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/) and the Personnel Handbook. Your classification will continue to be Principal
Education Officer with salary currently at the rate of $64,139 per annum ($121.40 wage base).
 
To formally confirm acceptance of the extension of your secondment would you please sign this copy of the appointment letter and return it to the Assistant
Personnel Officer, Corporate Services Unit within seven (7) working days from the date of this letter." 
Each plaintiff signed an endorsement at the foot of such letter. The endorsement read, in each case, as follows: "ACCEPTANCE OFFER 
I accept the above extension of secondment as Principal Education Officer, with salary currently at the rate of $64,139 per annum (121.40 wage base)." 
The fourth plaintiff, Mr. Jenson, was dealt with in exactly the same way, except that his letter referred to section 38 of the PSM Act rather than to section 41 of that Act.

It is not disputed by the defendant, and has never been so disputed, that each plaintiff has performed with professional skill and with all proper diligence his or her duties as a BOSLO.

The 1996 review, from the report of which I have earlier quoted, went to the
General Manager of the defendant for action. He decided that BOSLOs should continue to be employed; that they should continue to be employed pursuant to either section 38 or section 41 of the PSM Act; and that their responsibilities should be altered by relieving them of responsibility for home schooling monitoring and from certain aspects of policy development. It was decided, in connection with this review of the BOSLO programme, that a
BOSLO employed at the conclusion of the current terms of appointment, that is to say, a BOSLO appointed with effect on and from 3 February 1997, should be graded as a Senior Education Officer, Grade II rather than as a Principal
Education Officer; such re-grading entailing a reduction in the order of $6,000 odd in the remuneration paid to a BOSLO.

In the course of coming to the foregoing decisions, the General Manager of the defendant invited current BOSLOs to comment upon the Report into the BOSLO programme. They did so in a document which is Exhibit B in the current proceedings. It is a detailed document of which it is sufficient, I think, to say for present purposes that it expresses the concluded view of the current
BOSLOs that they: "find that the Review lacks the validity to justify the decisions affecting the quality, magnitude, relevance and delivery of the liaison services to Board of Studies clients and the restructuring of the liaison positions".

The proposed restructuring of the BOSLO positions, and in particular the proposal to reduce the remuneration paid to the BOSLOs, have led to an industrial dispute in which the cause of the BOSLOs has been taken up by the
NSW Teachers' Federation, an Industrial Organisation of Employees registered under the [Industrial Relations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ira1996242/), and having industrial coverage of, inter alia, BOSLOs.

The Teachers' Federation instituted proceedings in the Industrial Relations
Commission of NSW; and in due course, and on 4 July 1996, those proceedings came on for hearing before her Honour Justice Schmidt. The proceedings were before the Industrial Relations Commission on various days between 4 July 1996 and 8 October 1996, on which latter day they were, by leave, discontinued. The proceedings were so discontinued, as I understand the fact, for the reason that, in the light of developments to which I shall refer presently, it became pointless to maintain the proceedings.

Attached to the affidavit sworn by the General Manager of the defendant on 8
November 1996, are extracts from the transcripts of proceedings in the
Industrial Relations Commission of NSW on 23 August, and on 27 August, 1996.
It is not easy to draw from these transcripts a confident view of the overall course of the proceedings before the Commission; but it appears to have been the case that, during the course of those proceedings, the parties before the
Industrial Relations Commission were in dispute about the terms of advertisements which the defendant was proposing to publish, calling for applications for appointment as a BOSLO with effect on and from 3 February
It is apparent from the transcript that Schmidt J was very critical of the form of advertisement as initially proposed by the defendant; and was so critical for the reason that, in her Honour's view, the proposed advertisement called for, among other things, outstanding teaching skills "drawn from recent school based experience in government or non-government schools", without giving any indication at all, either to selection panels or to applicants, of what exactly was envisaged by the description "recent".

The upshot of all of this was that on 27 August 1996, the representative of the defendant tendered, and there was admitted without objection as Exhibit 25 before her Honour, what is described in the transcript as "Board of Studies' definition of `recency' ". I do not have before me in the current proceedings a copy of this document. The document elicited a very astringent response from
Schmidt J; and the general tenor of the document is discernible from the following exchanges between her Honour and the advocate appearing for the defendant: "HER HONOUR: Yes. Is this a document or a view which has been conveyed before now to the Federation? 
COUNSEL: This is a document which, from the Federation's point of view, has just been tabled.
 
HER HONOUR: I see, so this document indicates that in terms of the essential criteria, what is required is teaching experience within the last three years?
Does it follow from this that no current BOSLOs would meet this criteria? 
COUNSEL: No, that is not the case your Honour. In large measure it is the case but, as I understand it, there would be one of the existing officers who would qualify under these arrangements.

Your Honour, as you know from Exhibit 20, the Board had not intended to take a hard and fast view and had not intended to impose any views on the education professionals on the panel. However, the Board has accepted the comments made by your Honour last week and in fairness to current staff, has decided to provide this table to assist in that process.
 
HER HONOUR: So that on exhibit 1, all these BOSLOs should now understand that they are not eligible to be considered for appointment to the BOSLO position? 
COUNSEL: Given the very serious way in which the Board considered the issue last week, your Honour, the Board now deems it appropriate, in the interests of fairness, to make this test available and that would be the likely outcome, your Honour.

Your Honour, if I might just conclude by saying this: the Board's capacity to have appropriate staffing arrangements in place and to meet its valid operational requirements for the 1997 school year will be at risk if recruitment does not exist now and this urgency, in our interests, is in relation to the need to maximise the options for current staff not successful in gaining selection; to maximise the time for negotiations over conditions and timing of release to be resolved without impacting adversely on either party; to minimise the impact on school staffing operations; to maximise the pool of interested parties outside the Board; and the need to offer appropriate training to successful applicants.

Your Honour, the Board proposes therefore to advertise the positions so that they appear in the Public Service notices on 3 September and the press on 31
August and to that end, advertisement (sic) would need to proceed immediately, your Honour.
 
HER HONOUR: Ms Seymour, the position is pretty plain. All bar one of the existing BOSLOs are not eligible for this criteria which the Board has determined upon and it now proposes to advertise in terms of exhibit 24.

The prospect of the parties reaching some agreement on the matters which have been at issue between them in these proceedings appears to me to be non- existent in those circumstances." 
In due course the defendant caused newspaper advertisements to be published, calling for applications for appointment as a BOSLO. The closing date of applications was notified as 20 September 1996. Each advertisement contained, among other information, details of what were described as "Essential
Criteria". One such nominated criterion was expressed as follows: "Outstanding recent teaching experience in government or non-government schools." 
No advertisement appears to have referred in any way at all to the working definition upon which the defendant had decided in connection with the requirement of "recent" teaching experience. It appears that a selection panel was convened for the purpose of considering applications; and I infer that, in some way which the evidence before this Court does not disclose, the selection panel was informed that "recent" teaching experience was to be understood as meaning actual classroom or equivalent teaching experience during the past 3 years.

Contemporaneously with the publication of these advertisements calling for applications, the President of the Board of Studies and the General Manager of the defendant jointly signed, and caused to be circulated to all schools, a document in the following terms: "25 September, 1996 
BOARD OF STUDIES LIAISON OFFICERS: 1997 
The BOSLO program for 1997 will continue to provide a high level of quality services to schools. The following points are relevant:
Ten BOSLOs will provide enhanced services to schools across NSW.
BOSLOs will still be available to talk to parent and student groups.
BOSLOs will still conduct school talks and workshops on Board matters.
Services will not be cut. They will be increased. BOSLOs will have additional time in 1997 currently being used for home schooling registration.
BOSLOs will still be based within regions as near as possible to the schools they serve so that they understand the particular issues relevant to those schools.
 
The current BOSLOs have served schools and communities well, delivering a quality service over several years. Advertising these positions now in no way reflects on the expert skills that current officers have brought to the position. Advertisements have been placed now because the BOSLO role is a temporary one. The advice available to the Board suggests widespread support for the view that the role should continue to be temporary.
 
We have every confidence that the officers who will fill the BOSLO position for the next three years will be highly skilled, experienced professionals who will quickly win the confidence of schools and their communities by providing a high standard of service." 
Each of the present plaintiffs made application for appointment. Each such application was acknowledged in writing and in the following form: "I am writing to acknowledge your application for recruitment as a Board of
Studies Liaison Officer from 3 February 1997.
 
As you are aware the Board has decided to reduce the scope of the role of
Board of Studies Liaison Officers as from 3 February 1997. This coincides with the conclusion of your current period of secondment on 2 February 1997.
Subject to any industrial award to the contrary the Office of the Board intends to remunerate such work at the salary rate for Senior Education
Officer class 2.
 
You were, of course, entitled to apply for a further period of secondment.
However, as a result of recent proceedings in the New South Wales Industrial
Relations Commission, it is appropriate that I draw your attention of the job applicant's package for the BOSLO role which indicates how the Board views "recent" in relation to the essential requirement of "outstanding recent teaching experience". In this regard, the Board views recency, in the context of the selection criterion requiring outstanding recent teaching experience, as being within the last three years. This experience must have been for a period in which the full range of duties of a school executive or classroom teacher can be demonstrated to have been undertaken by the applicant. This period will be whatever the applicant cites in which the applicant can demonstrate that he/she has undertaken the full range of duties. However, this is unlikely to be less than one school term.
 
You will be advised in due course as to the result of your application" 
What in fact happened was that, before any interviews were held with applicants, a culling process was conducted by the selection panel. As a result of that culling process, each of the present plaintiffs was culled from the total body of applicants. The evidence is not entirely clear, but I infer that all likely applicants who were not culled were interviewed, and that appointments have been made, or are on the point of being made, to the ten available positions.

It is against this overall background of facts and circumstances that the present claims by the plaintiffs for relief have now to be considered.

The Present Claims for Relief: Generally 
In my opinion, the evidence discloses the taking by the General Manager of the defendant of the following sequence of administrative decisions now relevant: [1] To continue the current practice of recruiting BOSLOs as either temporary employees pursuant to section 38 of the PSM Act, or as seconded employees pursuant to section 41 of that Act.
 [2] To redefine the duties of BOSLOs by relieving them of their current duties and responsibilities in the areas of home schooling and of policy development.
 [3] To redefine the criteria for appointment as a BOSLO, so as to include a criterion of "(o)utstanding recent teaching experience in government or non- government schools"; and to define "recent" so as to entail a requirement of classroom teaching or its equivalent for the period of 3 years immediately preceding an application for appointment.
 [4] To cull applications for appointment by reference to the newly defined criteria.
 [5] To exclude "in limine" the plaintiffs from consideration for appointment, because of the manifest inability of the plaintiffs to satisfy, in particular, the new criterion referred to in [3] above.

What has to be resolved in the present proceedings, is the question whether any or all of the decisions taken by the general manager is or are properly reviewable by this Court; and, if so, whether the plaintiffs have established on the balance of probabilities a case for the intervention of this Court so as to prevent the practical implementation of any or all of such decisions.

In that connection, it is, I think, important to establish at once the limitations upon the relevant jurisdiction and power of this Court. It is important to be clear that this Court is not an administrative appeals tribunal, such as, for example, the Commonwealth Administrative Appeals
Tribunal established pursuant to the [Administrative Decisions (Judicial
Review) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/adra1977396/) (Cth).
That is to say, this Court does not have, as it were, a free-wheeling mandate to open up any administrative decision, and, if the Court thinks fit, to set aside the view of the primary decision-taker, substituting the Court's own view as to what would be a desirable administrative outcome. I emphasise that matter at this point in the present judgment because I would be lacking in frankness if I did not say that in my opinion there is available, on the evidence before the Court, a cogent argument that the present plaintiffs have been treated rather shabbily, given their years of admittedly satisfactory service doing precisely the work that will be done by the appointees who take up the duties of BOSLOs on 3 February next. All the more reason for all concerned, including the Court itself, to keep carefully in mind that the
Court is not entitled to act upon that essentially subjective view of the merits of the administrative decisions above referred to.

The proper extent of what the Court can now do is limited by the following questions, asked in respect of each of the five decisions above referred: [1] Was the decision within the power of the General Manager? [2] Was it taken for an improper purpose? [3] Was it taken, in so far as it involved an exercise of discretionary power, improperly? [4] Was it taken in such a fashion as to deny natural justice to the plaintiffs? 
I shall deal in turn with each of those four questions.

Were the Decisions of the General Manager within Power? 
I am unable to see any reason why the General Manager may not lawfully appoint the BOSLOs who are to take up their positions on 3 February next, either pursuant to section 38 or pursuant to section 41 of the PSM Act. Because it is proposed that each new appointment will be for a term of 3 years from 3 February next, it is, plainly, necessary for the General Manager to make the appointments, in so far as they may rely upon sections 38 or 41 of the Act, with the approval of the Public Employment Office.

The scheme of the relevant legislation as I have earlier summarised it, provides three possible ways of obtaining any such required approval of the
Public Employment Office. First, an actual approval may be obtained for the particular case. Secondly, the approval may be taken to have been given if the particular case can be fitted within a relevant part of the Regulation, be it the 1988 or the 1996 Regulation, providing for such automatic approval without the need for specific reference to the Public Employment Office.
Thirdly, the Public Employment Office may delegate its particular function of approval to, relevantly for present purposes, the General Manager of the defendant.

It is plain from the affidavit sworn by the General Manager on 8 November 1996 that he considers his actions to have been taken, so far as Public Employment
Office approval is concerned, upon the basis of the delegation to which I have earlier referred.

In my opinion, clauses 5 and 7 of the delegation are relevant; and I am satisfied that the conditions necessary for their respective operation have been satisfied.

Insofar as the general manager relies upon clause 5 of the delegation, I am satisfied that the General Manager has satisfied himself, as clause 5 of the delegation requires that he should do, that he should give the approval there referred to rather than proceed in accordance with section 26 of the PSM Act.
The affidavit evidence of the general manager raises, in my opinion, a clear inference to that effect; and I consider the inference to be the more readily available having regard to the fact that the General Manager was not cross- examined to the contrary, and no evidence was led, otherwise, to the contrary.

In so far as the General Manager purports to rely upon clause 7 of his delegation, it was contended for the plaintiffs that the evidence did not establish on the probabilities that the General Manager had satisfied himself, as clause 7 requires him to do, that he should give the approval to which the clause refers "having regard to the exigencies of the Department". This argument was supported by reference to the Macquarie Dictionary definition of "exigency". One definition there advanced is: "the need, demand, or requirement of a particular occasion". In the absence of cross-examination to the contrary, or of the adducing of any evidence, otherwise, to the contrary,
I am of the opinion that there is available on the evidence as it stands a clear inference, which I draw, that the General Manager did satisfy himself that "the need, demand, or requirement" occasioned, particularly, by the need to appoint new BOSLOs on and from 3 February next, warranted the giving of approval, in so far as circumstances might require such approval, pursuant to his delegation under clause 7.

The approach that I have taken on this question makes it unnecessary to consider the applicability of the relevant provisions of either the 1988 or the 1996 versions of the Public Sector Management (Regulation). Had it been necessary to make a choice between clause 21C in the 1988 version, and clause in the 1996 version, I would have preferred clause 21C of the 1988 version as the one relevant for present purposes. I would have taken that view because of my opinion that the better inference to be drawn from the evidence, such as it is on the point, is that the relevant decisions were taken prior to 1
September 1996, the date of the coming into operation of the 1996 version of the Regulation. Upon that basis, I would have been of the opinion that the requirements of paragraph (a) of clause 21C had been complied with in the present case; but that the requirements of paragraph (b) had not been complied with. I would have been of that latter view for the reason that in my opinion the continuation of the established employment of BOSLOs, albeit only for a period of three years as referred to in the relevant advertisements for the new positions, could not fairly be described as a "specified project" in the sense which seems to me to be contemplated by the provisions of paragraph (b) of clause 21C. The notion, as relevant to paragraph (b), of a "specified project" seems to me to entail a one-off type of undertaking, rather than an established programme of activities kept on foot continuously by a succession of limited-term renewals of relevant appointments.

As to the decisions numbered above as 2, 3, 4 and 5, I am of the opinion that the provisions of section 11 of the PSM Act would be sufficient, without more, to confer upon the General Manager power to take each of those particular decisions. I do not understand the submissions put on behalf of the plaintiffs as having contended to the contrary.

It was submitted for the plaintiffs that the decisions taken by the General
Manager in the cases of the present plaintiffs were unlawful for reasons which are summarised, sufficiently for present purposes, in the following extract from the written submissions put in by learned counsel for the plaintiffs: "The Department Head has created a `position', a `staff position' and therefore a vacant position which has been advertised within the meaning of [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/s26.html) of the [Public Sector Management Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/psma1988235/), which can be filled by section 25 of the Act and in respect of which the criterion of the greatest merit applies." 
If this fundamental proposition be correct, then, it is argued, "the criterion of the greatest merit" has not been applied in the processing of applications for appointment to the positions which are to take effect on 3
February next. That is so, the argument proceeds, for the reason that the culling of the applications of the present plaintiffs entailed that either no consideration, or no proper consideration, was given, on the one hand to the comparative merits of existing BOSLOs who did not satisfy the criterion of "recent" teaching experience, and, on the other hand, to the merits of applicants who were not experienced BOSLOs but who did satisfy that particular new criterion for appointment.

In my opinion, the fundamental proposition upon which this entire argument rests is erroneous. As I pointed out earlier herein, and when canvassing the relevant legislation, it seems to me that sections 25 and 26, in common with all the other particular provisions making up Division 4 of Part 2 of the PSM
Act, are not intended to apply to temporary employees appointed pursuant to section 38 of that Act, or to seconded teaching staff appointed pursuant to section 41 of that Act.

For the whole of the foregoing reasons, I have come to the conclusion that all of the relevant decisions taken by the General Manager, and as I have summarised them above, were within power.

Were the Decisions of the General Manager Taken for an Improper Purpose? 
The substance of the oral submissions put by both learned counsel has been recorded and transcribed. The transcript contains, as it stands, various transcription errors; but they will be apparent, I think, to anybody reading the transcript; and will not impede a proper understanding of the substance of what was being said both by counsel and by the Court.

It will be apparent from what is there recorded that I had a difficulty throughout the course of the submissions put by learned counsel for the plaintiffs, in coming to grips with what, exactly, was said to have been the improper purpose, which was repeatedly asserted to have tainted the decisions taken by the General Manager of the defendant. I still have that difficulty.

It is clear, I think, that learned counsel for the plaintiffs did not press, ultimately, a submission of bad faith on the part of the General Manager. He did not, I think, abandon clearly any suggestion of improper purpose.
Counsel's submissions on that topic, as debate upon them ebbed and flowed, appeared to focus upon two possible improper purposes as relevant to the decisions here in question: first, the improper purpose of effectuating a complete "spill" of the existing BOSLO appointments; and, secondly, the improper purpose of using repeated appointments pursuant to sections 38 or 41 of the PSM Act as a way of circumventing the provisions of Division 4 of Part of that Act.

I am not satisfied that the plaintiffs have established on the probabilities either of those two suggested heads of impropriety. Nor am I satisfied that the plaintiffs have established on the probabilities any other improper purpose on the part of the General Manager in the taking by him of decisions now in question.

The decisions in fact taken by the General Manager have had, to say the least, unfortunate repercussions from the points of view of the present plaintiffs.It is reasonable to suppose that the General Manager, at the time he took the decisions now in question, appreciated that the practical effect of those decisions would be to exclude from consideration for appointments on and from February next, the existing BOSLOs. (I observe parenthetically that, in the event, one of the existing BOSLOs appears to have been able to satisfy the newly defined criteria for appointment.) It does not follow, however, that because the General Manager appreciated that what he was proposing would have unfortunate consequences for the present plaintiffs, his decisions, as ultimately taken, were taken for the improper purpose of bringing about those unfortunate results deliberately and with animosity towards the plaintiffs, and for no other real and proper purpose(s).

I think that the evidence on the topic is in a less than satisfactory condition. The General Manager was not cross-examined on any of his affidavits. No documentation apt to indicate improper purpose on the General
Manager's part was introduced into evidence. The General Manager himself, in his affidavit sworn on 8 November 1996, gives the following summary of his perceptions as to the need for the redefined criteria for appointment: "14. In my view it is essential that BOSLOs have recent teaching experience in schools. Teachers make judgments about those who provide information and explain issues to them. This is particularly so in relation to matters that are central to their professional performance in the classroom such as those matters concerning curriculum, assessment and credentialling.
Classroom practices and related programming, planning and teaching have altered a lot during the 1990s and they continue to do so. BOSLOs must be acknowledged by teachers to understand their needs. If a person employed as a
BOSLO is seen not to understand and acknowledge the realities of the classroom, people in schools will ignore that person and her/his advice.
A person who has been recently teaching in a classroom will speak with an intimate knowledge of what conditions are like there, knowing the challenges and conditions that teachers are facing in classrooms in 1996. Such a person will be able to speak with empathy to schools. He or she will adjust the Board's communications and interpret them in a way which acknowledges the situation within particular schools because of their own close knowledge of schools.
The kinds of policies the Board implements have to be shown to be able to work in real classrooms now. Classrooms change. The needs of students change over time, depending on the experiences they are exposed to and the influences in the community.
When they explain the Assessment Certification and Examination Manual of rules and procedures, especially those concerning the requirements for the
School Certificate and the Higher School Certificate, BOSLOs must know that those rules are workable and understandable by teachers in schools. It is no use giving explanations that no longer work. Explaining rules on dual accreditation or vocational HSC patterns is more effective if you have experienced these recent changes from inside a school." 
I see no reason why this evidence should not be accepted, and I do accept it.
I see no evidence capable, if accepted, of contradicting the General Manager in what he thus deposes.

For the whole of the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that it has not been shown on the probabilities that the decisions now questioned were actuated by any improper purpose.

Were the decisions of the General Manager taken, in so far as any of them involved an exercise of discretionary power, improperly? 
I take the relevant legal principles still to be, mutatis mutandis, those stated in the joint judgment of Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ in House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 504, 505: "The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of discretion should be determined is governed by established principles. It is not enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the position of the primary judge, they would have taken a different course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the judge acts upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise its own discretion in substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge has reached the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law imposes in the court of first instance. In such a case, although the nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on the ground that a substantial wrong has in fact occurred." 
Insofar as any of the decisions, now questioned, of the General Manager might be thought to have involved the exercise by him of a discretionary power, I do not think that the evidence, such as it is, establishes on the probabilities that any of those questioned decisions contravened the principles thus enunciated by the High Court. I have earlier extracted from the affidavit evidence of the General Manager, the only exposition by him of his relevant processes of reasoning. As I have said, I see no reason why I should not accept that evidence. If that evidence be accepted, then, in my opinion, it cannot be said that the General Manager's process of reasoning was so manifestly unreasonable that no reasonable administrative official in the
General Manager's position could have so proceeded.

Were the decisions of the General Manager taken in such a fashion as denied natural justice to the plaintiffs? 
My views on this question are as follows.

First, I take it to be trite law that the applicability of the rules of natural justice to the taking of decisions such as are now in question, and the definition, if such rules are applicable, of the particular rules of natural justice which are to be taken into account, depend upon the circumstances of the given particular case.

Secondly, each of the present plaintiffs holds an appointment which was accepted by each of them upon the clear understanding that it was an appointment for a period concluding on 2 February 1997.

Thirdly, I think that, according to proper principle, each of the plaintiffs had what is described in the present context as a "legitimate expectation". The nature of that legitimate expectation was, in my opinion, that the plaintiffs would not be excluded from consideration for re- appointment under the new criteria, without being given, at least, a fair hearing to the contrary.

Fourthly, it is clear from the evidence of Mr. Jenson, the only one of the plaintiffs to give oral evidence before the Court, that he, at least, supported his application for re-appointment with a considered argument showing cause why he was suitable for appointment notwithstanding that he did not comply, on a strict view, with the newly defined criteria for appointment.
The relevant evidence from Mr. Jenson appears at page 16 of the transcript for December 1996. I accept that evidence. There is no corresponding evidence from the other plaintiffs, but: either the other plaintiffs put similarly considered arguments in support of their respective applications; or the considered argument put by Mr. Jenson effectively put before the Board the substance of what was available to be put in support, also, of the applications of the other plaintiffs.

Fifthly, all existing BOSLOs had been afforded, and had taken all proper advantage of, an opportunity to put a considered response to the report of
July 1996 into the BOSLO programme.

Sixthly, the plaintiffs did not adduce, or attempt to adduce, evidence which, if accepted, would have demonstrated that such submissions as they put, respectively, in support of their applications for further appointment, were either not considered at all before those applications were culled, or were not considered properly before that cull.

Seventhly, there was no attempt to lead in the case for the plaintiffs any evidence which, if accepted, would have established on the probabilities that, had the plaintiffs or any of them, been interviewed personally by the selection panel, it is reasonable to infer that they, or any one or more of them, would have achieved re-appointment.

It is, I think, opportune to take note at this point of a submission put for the plaintiffs and based upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Abernethy versus Deitz: unreported; 3 July 1996. In that case, Mahoney P, in whose judgment the other members of the Court concurred, stated as follows the basic principle: "In order to examine the validity of such a determination, it is necessary to examine what was done, why it was done, what led to the doing of it, and the reasonableness of it in the context. A party who alleges the invalidity of an act has the onus of showing that, by reference to matters such as these, it should be held invalid. Unless such appears, it will ordinarily be presumed that the act is valid." 
There occurs, later in the judgment of Mahoney P, a passage to which my attention was directed specifically by learned counsel for the plaintiffs. His
Honour, summarising a preceding discussion of the law upon the point, observes: "In my opinion, it is not open to an official - special circumstances apart - to ignore the fact that ................. an issue is before the court for determination and simply to refuse to call evidence upon the matter. In a case such as the present, if the official does not seek to provide a basis for the validity of what was done, it may be inferred, as the judge inferred, that nothing could be advanced in support of the validity of the determination." 
I think that it is important for present purposes to read that latter statement of Mahoney P in the context in which it appears. His Honour was dealing with a case in which a coroner, who was alleged to have unlawfully ordered a post-mortem examination, simply elected to call no evidence explanatory of the purpose to be served, in his perception of things, by the holding of such an examination. Such a case is, as it seems to me, distinguishable on its facts from the facts of the present case. The present case is not one, in my opinion, where the issues for decision by this Court are comparable to the simple, clear-cut issue posed in Abernethy. Nor is the present case one in which the relevant public official has elected to stand mute. He has made three affidavits, all of which have been relied upon in the hearing before this Court. He has given in those affidavits an explanation of his general reasoning with regard to the matters that he had to decide respecting the continuation of the current BOSLO programme. When evidence is left in such a condition, overall, as in the present case, it is timely to recall the observations of Dixon CJ in Hampton Court Ltd v
Crooke <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 367] at 371: "But a plaintiff is not relieved of the necessity of offering some evidence ...... by the fact that the material circumstances are peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant; all that it means is that slight evidence may be enough unless explained away by the defendant and that the evidence should be weighed according to the power of the party to produce it, ......." 
In carrying out that weighing exercise, I think that it is legitimate to bring to account the fact that the General Manager of the defendant was not cross- examined at all upon any of the contents of his three affidavits; and that there was no attempt to discredit his evidence and his conduct by any other evidence.

For the whole of the foregoing reasons, I have come to the conclusion that the plaintiffs have not demonstrated that there was in any relevant sense a denial of natural justice vitiating all or any of the decisions now in question.

The prayer for relief in paragraph 3 of the further amended summons.
 
It is necessary to say something more particular about this particular prayer for relief. The relief claimed relates only to Mr. Jenson, the fourth plaintiff. The claim is based upon the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 38 of the PSM Act.

Fundamental to the claim of the fourth plaintiff is the proposition that what is proposed in the matter of appointing the new batch of BOSLOs amounts to a dispensing with his services in the sense contemplated by sub-section (5). In my opinion, that contention is erroneous. I think that a proper construction of sub-section (5) entails that what is intended to be dealt with by the sub- section is the dispensing with the services of a temporary employee at any time before the expiration of the period of temporary employment as determined under sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 38. If that be correct, then what is now proposed with regard to Mr. Jenson, is, not that his services should be dispensed with in that sense, but, simply, that he will not be reappointed upon the expiration by effluxion of time of the mutually agreed term of his current appointment.

If what I have just said be incorrect, then, in my opinion, the present claim for relief is defeated by clause 6 of the delegation earlier herein cited and discussed. Clause 6 is in the following terms: "Temporary Employees - Dispensing with Services 
Under section 38(5) of the Act, to dispense with the services of a temporary employee at any time where approval has been given under section 38(4) to the continued temporary employment of a person having regard to the exigencies of the Department." 
What I have said earlier concerning "the exigencies of the Department" in connection with clause 7 of the delegation, can stand mutatis mutandis in the case of clause 6.

Conclusions 
Although I am not without sympathy for the situation in which each of the plaintiffs now finds himself or herself, - and particularly so in the case of Mr. Jenson who has no other public sector permanent appointment upon which he can fall back, - I have come to the conclusion that the present claims for relief have not been made good. I make, therefore, the following orders:
Pursuant to Part 8 Rule 9(b) of the Supreme Court Rules, I order that
Michael O'Mullane, the eighth plaintiff, cease to be a party to the present proceedings.
I order the eighth plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs as agreed, assessed or taxed, thrown away by the termination at his instance of the proceedings brought by him against the defendant. I indicate for the assistance of any assessor or taxing officer that, in my opinion, the length of the hearing before this Court was not affected by the termination at the instance of the eighth plaintiff of the proceedings so brought by him against the defendant.
I dismiss with costs the claims for relief in paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the further amended summons filed by leave on 13 November 1996.
The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
