

Xu versus Liu and Ors Matter No 11376/98 [1998] NSWSC 484 (5 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
XU versus LIU & ORS /98 August 1998 
Master Malpass 
In the Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The parties were involved in proceedings brought in the Federal Court. Branson J made certain orders for costs. In October 1997, the proceedings were transferred into this Court. In March 1998, the costs payable under two of those orders (which required costs to be paid on a party/party basis) were referred to a Costs Assessor (Mr Dwyer) for assessment. He issued a Certificate as to Determination of Costs on 28 April 1998. His assessment reduced the amount payable by the plaintiff to the defendants from a sum in the order of $65,000 to a sum in the order of $45,000. 
The parties had also been involved in two Equity proceedings. In each of the proceedings the plaintiff was ordered to pay the defendants' costs. In the first of the two proceedings, the assessment of costs was referred to a Costs
Assessor (Mr Brabazon). He issued his Certificate of Determination of Costs on August 1997. His assessment reduced the amount payable from about $8,319 to about $8,088. In the second of the two proceedings, the assessment of costs was referred to a Costs Assessor (Mr Strikis). He issued his Certificate as to
Determination of Party and Party Costs on 17 December 1997. His assessment reduced the costs payable by the plaintiff from a sum in the order of $7,500 to a sum in the order of $6,000.

These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 2 June 1998. The Summons was not served. An Amended Summons was filed and served on 11 June 1998. This process sought relief under either sections 208L or 208M of the [Legal
Profession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), (the Act) in respect of the assessment made by Mr Dwyer.

Subsequently, the plaintiff's legal advisers became aware that the Summons had been filed out of time. It was decided to amend the originating process and seek an extension of time for the bringing of the appeal. It was also decided to challenge the assessments made by Messrs Brabazon and Strikis. Two further documents were filed on 29 June 1998. One was a Further Amended Summons. The other was a Draft Summons. Apparently, the purpose of this document was to identify the grounds upon which relief was being sought.

On 21 July 1998, I heard both the application for extension of time and the application for leave pursuant to section 208M. The plaintiff relied on an affidavit sworn by Mr Fung (the solicitor for the plaintiff) and a bundle of documents (Exhibit A). The defendants relied on two affidavits. One was sworn by Mr Dwyer, the other was sworn by Mr Junn (the solicitor for the defendants). There was no cross-examination.

Largely, the Court takes a similar approach to each of the applications. The
Court has a discretionary power to grant the relief sought by the plaintiff.
In exercising that power, the Court has regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before it and is concerned to see that justice is best served between the parties. The onus rests on the party seeking relief.

In these proceedings, the parties chose to agitate three discretionary considerations. These were, delay, the explanation offered for delay and the utility of granting the relief sought.

It is convenient to first turn to the assessments made by Messrs Brabazon and
Strikis. The material offered to support these applications may be benignly described as parsimonious. In each case, lengthy delay is involved. In each case, the delay is left largely unexplained.

In each case, the sum assessed is of modest quantum. In each case, the plaintiff says it was too large. There is not much material to assist the
Court in evaluating whether or not there is any merit in the contention.
Argument was brief. Whilst the amount in dispute has not been identified, if there be any merit, it can only relate to relatively minor sums. I am not satisfied that there would be any real utility in granting leave to appeal.

In each case, I am not satisfied that the requisite onus has been discharged.
Accordingly, I refuse the application for relief made in respect of these assessments.

I now turn to the assessment made by Mr Dwyer. At the outset, I should mention one matter. A principal ground for the challenging of this assessment had been founded on an allegation of fraud (on the part of the defendants in the
Federal Court proceedings). Clearly, this was a matter that might have been relevant to a challenge to orders made in those proceedings (and so far no such challenge has been made) but was not relevant to an assessment made on the basis of the existence of a valid order. This ground was abandoned at an earlier stage during the hearing.

Mr Fung commenced to act for the plaintiff during the assessment process.
Prior to that time, Messrs Allen Allen & Hemsley had been acting for the plaintiff.

By that time, Mr Dwyer had given the parties an opportunity to make written submissions. Both sides had taken advantage of that opportunity. The plaintiff's then solicitors had made lengthy submissions which extended to about 36 pages. The submissions contained an extensive list of objections.

Mr Fung deposes to a telephone conversation had with Mr Dwyer on 22 April
He formed the view that additional submissions should be made to Mr
Dwyer (including submissions in relation to the matter of fraud). He contends that there was an agreement reached with Mr Dwyer which enabled him to have a further fourteen days to make additional submissions.

Mr Dwyer gives a somewhat different version of the conversation. He says that he had a conversation with an unidentified person who was told to make an application in writing setting out reasons for wanting more time.

It is common to both versions that Mr Dwyer made a requirement in writing in relation to the application. It is common ground that no letter was sent to Mr
Dwyer.

I am not in a position to resolve the conflict between Messrs Fung and Dwyer and I am not asked to do so.

Mr Dwyer delayed his assessment for about seven days. As he had not received anything in writing, he proceeded to issue his Certificate as to Determination of Costs. The plaintiff claims a lack of procedural fairness by reason of him not being allowed a further fourteen days to make additional submissions.

I am not satisfied that there is any substance in this contention. The plaintiff was given a reasonable opportunity to make submissions. The Costs
Assessor performed his statutory obligations in this respect. The plaintiff had taken advantage of the opportunity by the making of extensive written submissions which put in issue all of the other matters which were sought to be agitated during this hearing.

Perhaps, I should also add some further observations. As I understand the plaintiff's contention, apart from the now abandoned question of fraud, it was desired to amplify submissions that had already been made on other matters.
Largely, it was being suggested that the plaintiff be given a second opportunity. It was not suggested that the defendants should also have such an opportunity. If the request had been granted, the plaintiff would have been given the opportunity to have submissions made on his behalf by different legal advisers. I should add that there is no evidence to suggest that the plaintiff took any action during the seven days for the preparation of further submissions.

I shall now mention the other bases on which the assessment is challenged. It is said that the assessment should have been made having regard to Order 62
Rule 12 of the Federal Court Rules. The material suggests that the Costs
Assessor had regard to Schedule G. It is said that the Costs Assessor erred in allowing costs for work which was not covered by the costs orders.

It is common ground that all of these matters were put in issue by the submissions made on behalf of the plaintiff by the previous solicitors. There is dispute as to whether or not the plaintiff should be allowed to rely on the second of these two bases. The defendants say that they were unaware of the plaintiff's intention to argue it and that the plaintiff should not now be allowed to do so. There is substance in this contention as it is not identified in any of the documents filed by way of process in the proceedings and was put forward at a late stage. The defendants were clearly prejudiced.
They were placed in a position where they were not ready to meet the arguments which the plaintiff has now sought to put. There have been amendments of process and the plaintiff had more than ample opportunity to raise it earlier.
In my view, the plaintiff should not now be allowed to rely on it as a ground for relief.

In the case of this assessment, the delay is not large (merely a matter of a couple of weeks). Whilst there is material that may be seen as indicating that
Mr Fung was busily engaged in matters involving the plaintiff, there is otherwise a lack of explanation for the failure to bring the appeal within time. It may be that Mr Fung was unaware of the time limit. It may be that he merely overlooked it. Whether or not either of these matters had application in the present case, the evidence provides no assistance to the Court. Mr Fung has chosen not to elaborate on the matter.

The question of the appropriate scale was not fully argued. There is little assistance from the authorities. Section 208F specifies matters which the
Costs Assessor must consider when making an assessment of costs ordered by a court or tribunal. Subsection (1A) provides that an assessment must be made in accordance with the operation of the rules of the relevant court or tribunal that made the order for costs. This provision was inserted in the Act in
During argument, this provision was not brought to my attention.
Further, it seems that it may not have been brought to the attention of Mr
Dwyer.

If subsection (1A) does have application, it may be that Mr Dwyer has been led into legal error. There are, of course, other considerations. The plaintiff did not rely on it during the assessment process. It may be that he should not now be allowed to rely on it, if he wishes to do so. The defendants rely on [section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/joca427/s11.html) of the [Jurisdiction of Courts (Cross-Vesting
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/joca427/)), 1987. It is not necessary to express any final view on its application. However, from what has been said so far, I doubt that it does bear upon this question. It may be that, if error is demonstrated, it may not justify disturbing the determination of the Costs Assessor.

It has been said that Schedule G provides a much more generous cost regime, though the difference that may flow between the application of Schedule G as opposed to the Federal Court Rules has not been identified. Whilst I am not in a position to form any certain view on this question, it may have the potential to be of significance. If so, there may be utility in granting an extension of time to bring an appeal on this question only.

The question of whether or not leave should be given is not easy to resolve.
Whilst the delay has not been satisfactorily explained, the delay itself is minor. I contemplated whether or not I should have this matter relisted for the purpose of hearing argument on the question of the application of subsection (1A). Ultimately, I came to the view that a better option could be to extend time and allow it to be finally debated as a matter in the appeal.
After considerable deliberation, I have come to the decision that this is the course to be taken.

I extend time for the bringing of an appeal pursuant to section 208L, on the ground specified in 1(d) of the Draft Summons only, up to and including 2 June
I refuse the application for leave to appeal pursuant to section 208M.

The question of costs is often a vexed one. Largely, the defendants have been successful. The plaintiff is seeking an indulgence in all of the applications.
It is the unexplained delay that necessitated the bringing of each of them.
The defendants were justified in resisting the only application in which the plaintiff had some success. In the circumstances, I order that the plaintiff pay the costs of the applications. The exhibit may be returned.
 * * * 
