

Sellers Fabrics Pty Limited and Anor versus Hapag-Lloyd Ag Matter No 12/96 [1998] NSWSC 645 (15 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 December 1998 
SELLERS FABRICS PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus HAPAG-LLOYD AG /96 October 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division Admiralty List 
JUDGMENT - On admissibility of statement of Captain Bozier dated 18 September 1998 
HIS HONOUR: For reasons I have given I admitted into evidence as Exhibits J two reports of Captain Bozier dated 10 and 22 October 1996. The basis for my decision was that they were business records. Mr White has now sought to tender "in rebuttal" a statement of Captain Bozier dated 18 September 1998, which, I was informed from the Bar Table without objection, was only served on the legal representatives for the parties on 14 October 1998. I was similarly informed that Captain Bozier is overseas and, hence, is not available to be cross-examined. As I had reached a clear conclusion that this statement should be rejected I advised the parties of that view and stated that I would give my reasons to-day. That I now do. 
One substantive objection to the admissibility of the reports of Captain
Bozier was that they were "statements", which had not been served in accordance with the directions the Court previously made by consent for the provision of statements, and that consistently with the rulings, which I gave in this case earlier this week, their tender should be rejected. That submission fails to distinguish between documents, which were tendered as business records and which I held to be admissible as such, and a witness statement for the provision of which directions had been given. The reports, on the view I took, were admissible on a discrete basis and my receiving them into evidence did not involve my granting an indulgence to any party.

The witness statement of Captain Bozier is in quite a different category. It is one which should have been served conformably with the directions given.
There is no explanation why it was not, or indeed why it was not served on or about 18 September 1998. Its fate falls to be determined in exactly the same way as the other witness statements with which I dealt earlier.

It was not submitted that it was admissible as a business record, no doubt because it was clearly made in circumstances identified by s.69(3) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).

Finally, as Captain Bozier is not available for cross-examination I would not grant leave to rely on his statement in all the circumstances of this case.
 * * * 
