

Dutch versus Campbelltown City Council Matter No Ca 40698/93 [1996] NSWSC 582 (29 November 1996) 
Last Updated: 15 February 1999 
DUTCH versus CAMPBELLTOWN CITY COUNCIL 
CA 40698/93 November 1996 
Meagher JA, Sheller JA, Simos AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM MCLELLAND CJ in EQ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40698/93;ED 5406/86 
DELIVERED: 29 NOVEMBER 1996 
HEARING DATE: 1 NOVEMBER 1996 
PARTIES: DUTCH versus CAMPBELLTOWN CITY COUNCIL 
CORAM: MEAGHER JA SHELLER JA SIMOS AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: R MOLINARI 
Respondent: M WILLIAMS 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: GELLS 
Respondent: B J R FUDGE 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 6 
CATCHWORDS: Appeal from findings of fact of trial judge. 
DUTCH versus CAMPBELLTOWN CITY COUNCIL 
FACTS 
The appellant was refused injunctive relief against the respondent council.
The appellant was and is the registered properietor of land of which the respondent Council owns the adjacent block. The appellant claimed that landscaping work conducted by the respondent caused rain water to flow onto his land and cause damage to his house. McLelland CJ in Equity found for the respondent.

HELD 
By the Court - 
On the evidence, McLelland CJ in Equity found for the respondent, which he was entitled to do.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

DUTCH versus CAMPBELLTOWN CITY COUNCIL 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal by Mr Dutch against a decision of McLelland CJ in Equity refusing injunctive relief against the respondent Council. The appellant is and was at all material times the owner of certain land known as Lot 195 Evergreen Avenue, Campbelltown. The respondent Council owns the adjacent block Lot 196. The principal claim of Mr Dutch was that in 1981 the Council, when doing landscaping work, caused rain water to flow onto the appellant's land in a more significant way and in a more concentrated volume than usual, causing damage to his house, and thus rendering itself liable in both negligence and nuisance. 
The learned trial judge heard the plaintiff's evidence on this matter both in affidavit form and orally. His Honour also considered various reports from six different experts, three of whom additionally gave oral evidence. At the conclusion of this aspect of the appellant's case, his Honour held: "I am unable to uphold so much of the plaintiff's case as is based on damage to his house being caused by altered flows of water resulting from the 1981 landscaping". One would have thought that was the end of the matter, as his
Honour came to a conclusion on a matter of fact in circumstances where he must have impliedly rejected the appellant's credit. Learned counsel for the appellant pointed out that there was no express rejection of Mr Dutch's credit, a proposition which is true enough but hardly of great relevance.

In any event the appellant, starting from this point, invited us to re-examine all the evidence. We did so, for some hours. This exercise only served to demonstrate that his Honour was obviously correct.

His Honour found many reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim. He did not doubt that the house had been damaged, but he was unable to ascribe any of the damage to the cause assigned. The damage effected by the Council's landscaping was a matter which the appellant had addressed on numerous occasions. He was a compulsive compiler of epistles, which he addressed to every authority he thought appropriate. On each occasion he complained that the additional water generated by the respondent's landscaping affected the rear of lot 195, behind the rear line of his house; and, inferentially, nowhere else on his property except that rear position. He said the same thing in the witness box. All the experts, called by either side, said the same thing. All learned counsel for the appellant could do when confronted with this volume of evidence was to suggest that if one went through the process of examining the material line by line one might trip over an ambiguity or make an immaterial modification. In the course of argument, Sheller JA put to counsel that this was "quibbling", an analysis which in my view was entirely accurate. The attack on his Honour's findings about the effect of surface water after 1981 must be rejected.

However, that was not the appellant's only line of attack. There was also the question of a leaking tap. One of the experts, Mr Allen, discovered a leaking tap on Lot 196 in March 1985. It was remedied in May 1985. It was hardly of great concern to the appellant, because it was not mentioned in his statement of claim as originally filed. At the close of the case that statement of claim was amended so as to read: "9A During April and May 1985 the Defendant permitted a leaking tap on Lot 196 to drip and thereby permitted a flow of water onto the Plaintiff's property.
 "9B On or about 24th April 1985 the Plaintiff's architect warned the Council of the nuisance and the Defendant failed to rectify the leak until May 15, .
 "9C By virtue of the matters pleaded in 9A and 9B the Plaintiff suffered loss and damage." 
An application yet further to amend the statement of claim in this regard was made in this appeal, but refused. As the learned trial judge pointed out this claim also had to fail because a defect which existed during April and May could not have caused damage supposed to have been suffered between May and January 1985.

In my view the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree with Meagher JA. 
SIMOS AJA: I agree with Meagher JA. * * * 
