

Regina versus Busarah Che Yook Regina versus Wanchai Sae Sung Nos. 60004/95 [1996]
NSWSC 82 (29 April 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), ALLEN(2) AND SULLY(3) JJ Appeal against sentence from a decision of Simpson J
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 24:11:1995 #ADD 29:4:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant Che Yook   T J Golding 
Solicitor for the Appellant Che Yook  T A Murphy 
Counsel for the Appellant Sae Sung   M C Ramage QC 
Solicitor for the
Appellant Sae Sung  T A Murphy 
Counsel for the Respondent       Buddin/O'Connell 
Solicitor for the Respondent  
S E O'Connor
ORDER
Appeal allowed (Che Yook)
Appeal dismissed (Sae Sung)
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ The first appellant, whom I shall call Che Yook, and the second appellant, whom I shall call Sae Sung, in conformity with the manner in which they were described by the sentencing judge in her reasons for sentence, seek leave to appeal against the severity of sentences imposed by Simpson J.
Each appellant pleaded guilty to a single charge. The appellant Che Yook pleaded guilty to an offence against s233B(1)(b) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/),
Commonwealth, the offence being that he imported into Australia a quantity of heroin not less than the commercial quantity. The maximum penalty for that sentence is imprisonment for life.
The appellant Sae Sung pleaded guilty to an offence against [s25(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) , the offence being that he knowingly took part in the supply of heroin in an amount not less than the commercial quantity.
The maximum penalty prescribed was imprisonment for twenty years.
Her Honour sentenced the first appellant to imprisonment for 26 years and fixed a non-parole period of twenty years. She sentenced the second appellant to imprisonment for a total period of sixteen years made up of a minimum term of twelve years and an additional term of four years.
Simpson J had previously sentenced a co-offender known as Yun Bai, who had earlier pleaded guilty to the same offence as that to which Sae Sung pleaded guilty. She had sentenced Yun Bai to imprisonment for six years and four months made up of a minimum term of four years and nine months and an additional term of one year and seven months. She observed that Yun Bai had been given a discount for co-operation with the authorities in accordance with the principles set out in R versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243.] She said that otherwise the sentence imposed on Yun Bai would have been imprisonment for fourteen years.
All three men were engaged in a transaction which involved the importation into Australia of what was said to be the largest quantity of heroin the subject of sentence in any Australian court. The amount of heroin seized by the authorities was 70.5 kilograms in its impure state, which was the equivalent of 51.4 kilograms of pure heroin.
The first appellant, Che Yook was a director of two companies, one
Australian and one Malaysian, the premises and business operations of which facilitated the entire activity of importation. He was actively involved in the preparations in Malaysia and flew to Australia in order to supervise the unloading. Her Honour said of the first appellant: "It is difficult to escape the conclusion that he was, in truth, at a very high level in the organisation, if not a principal. I find myself on the evidence unable to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he was, indeed, a principal; but I am quite satisfied that he was intricately and immediately involved at a level very close to that."
Of the appellant
Sae Sung her Honour said that his role in the organisation was as a "recruiter, tutor and supervisor for Yun Bai." Her
Honour said: "I accept the submission of senior counsel for Sae Sung that this does not make him a 'boss' in the organisation, but he was certainly higher up the ladder than was Bai. Perhaps an apt analogy with legitimate employment would put Bai as a labourer,
Sae Sung somewhere between leading hand and foreman. That is a long way from principal or organiser and I propose to deal with him accordingly. There is no evidence of what he was to receive for his participation in the scheme."
The street value of the heroin the subject of the importation was shown to be in excess of $77 million. On one view of the evidence it was substantially higher.
In relation to the pleas of guilty of the appellants her Honour made the following findings. As to the first appellant she said: "He pleaded guilty at an earlier stage than did Soe Sung, and before Bai had either pleaded guilty or signified his intention of giving evidence against his co-offenders. Had he not done so, the trial that would have taken place would have been a very lengthy one, involving, I was told, bringing a number of witnesses from Malaysia. It would have been, I was told, largely a circumstantial case. The plea is therefore to be seen as of some significance."
In relation to the second appellant her Honour said: "The prisoner is entitled to credit for his plea of guilty, but the benefit he obtains from this is somewhat limited. The plea came on the day fixed for trial, and after Bai had signified his intention to give evidence. Bai would clearly have been able to give direct evidence of this prisoner's association with the whole of the scheme.
The plea cannot be treated as evidence of contrition. It is more likely a recognition of the reality of the situation in which he found himself, as a consequence of Bai's change of heart. Nevertheless, the rationale for the discount for a plea of guilty is not only that it is taken to evidence of contrition, but also what can only be described as the economically rational view that a great deal of courts' time and resources are saved by the fact of the plea."
Her Honour described the overall enterprise in the following fashion: "What is plain is that this enterprise was an elaborate one on a massive scale designed to release on to Australian streets and into Australian lives vast quantities of the life destroying drug, and to produce for the organisers monetary profits on an immense scale."
In that connection I mention again that her Honour regarded the first appellant as one of the organisers. He was apprehended by the authorities at the premises and in close conjunction with the container in which the imported heroin was located. The evidence made it clear that he had arranged for the importation.
It is necessary for present purposes to make further reference to the detail of the facts. Both appellants placed primary reliance upon the submission that the sentences imposed made insufficient allowance for the pleas of guilty. The findings made by
Simpson J as to those pleas have been set out above. The appellants also submit that considerations of the sentences imposed in comparable cases demonstrate the excessiveness of the sentences imposed by Simpson J.
Because of the length of the sentences involved both appellants should have leave to appeal against the sentences which were imposed. It is convenient to deal first with the appeal of Che Yook.
In considering comparable sentences that were drawn to her attention
Simpson J placed considerable reliance upon two cases. Her reliance upon those cases has provided grounds for the argument now advanced on behalf of the appellant. One of the cases to which her Honour made extensive reference was the decision of this Court in R versus Yun Choy Ng (Court of Criminal Appeal unreported July 1991). Her Honour said she derived substantial guidance from the sentence imposed by the Court in that case. However, it has been fairly conceded by the Crown on this appeal that her reasons disclosed that her Honour misunderstood in one material respect what was decided in that case. She said that the sentence would have been twenty years as a head sentence but for some mitigating factors. She then went on to say: "That putative sentence took into account also his guilty plea, in respect of which he is comparable with the present prisoner."
In truth an examination of the judgment in that case indicates that the putative sentence of twenty years did not take into account the offender's guilty plea, which was referred to later in the reasons for judgment as one of the mitigating considerations justifying a reduction from the original figure of twenty years.
Another case on which her Honour placed considerable reliance was the decision of Sully J in relation to a major heroin importation involving, amongst others, a man named Cheung Wai Man. Sully J had sentenced that offender to a head sentence of twenty-eight years with a non-parole period of twenty years. Her Honour took that sentence as a guide in the present case.
However, subsequent to the decision of Simpson
J in the present case this
Court (Court of Criminal Appeal unreported 13 April 1995) revised Cheung's sentence downward and he was ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for twenty-four years with a non parole period of eighteen years.
One of the key passages in the reasoning of Simpson J dealt with the problem arising out of s16G of the [Crimes Act 1914](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) of the Commonwealth. Her
Honour concluded, principally by reference to the enormous quantity of heroin involved in the present case, and the importance of the role of the appellant in the organisation responsible for the importation, that notwithstanding the appellant's plea of guilty this was a case which, but for the operation of s16G, would have warranted the maximum sentence, that is to say a sentence of life imprisonment.
Her Honour was then confronted with the difficulty involved in applying s16G to a case that otherwise would have warranted an indeterminate life sentence. Section 16G provides: "16G. If a federal sentence is to be served in a prison of a
State or Territory where State or Territory sentences are not subject to remission or reduction, the court imposing the sentence must take that fact into account in determining the length of the sentence and must adjust the sentence accordingly."
It has been held in a number of cases in this State that, although indeterminate life sentences were never the subject of remission, the expression "remission or reduction" is sufficiently wide and flexible to apply to the system that operated in the case of indeterminate life sentences. This, after all, is Commonwealth legislation which was expressed in terms that needed to be sufficiently comprehensive and flexible to cover the sentencing regimes in force from time to time in every State and Territory of the
Commonwealth.
In dealing with s16G Simpson J said: "I think it is necessary to commence with the age of the prisoner, now 36. Applying a broad rule of thumb, he could expect to live another 35 to 45 years. A life sentence, were he to serve the whole of it, would therefore be of that order.
Reduced by one-third to accommodate the 'remission factor' such a sentence would be about 26 years. I consider that the appropriate sentence, after the s16G adjustment, is imprisonment for 26 years. I propose to fix a non-parole period of 20 years."
There are a number of observations to be made about that process of reasoning. I regret that I am quite unable to agree with an approach to the application of s16G to indeterminate life sentences which begins with a calculation in broad terms of the life expectancy of the prisoner involved, and then applies what was described as "the remission factor" to the figure thus arrived at. It is only necessary to reflect briefly upon the practical consequences of such an approach to indicate some of the anomalies that might arise.
Persons with long life expectancy would receive substantially longer sentences than persons with brief life expectancy. If, for example, there were two co-offenders involved in a major heroin importation, both of whom were subject to s16G and thus deserved life sentences, one co-offender was a younger person with a longer life ahead of him or her, and the other co-offender being a person in middle age, the first co-offender would receive a substantially longer term of imprisonment than the second co-offender.
Furthermore, the reference by her Honour to a reduction of one-third to accommodate the "remission factor" is, in my respectful view, out of place in a consideration of a reduction of an indeterminate life sentence. No doubt the factor of one-third comes from the judgment of this Court in Director of
Public Prosecutions versus El Karhani [(1990) 21 NSWLR 379] at 386. In that case, however, the Court was talking about remissions that used to apply in relation to parole and non-parole periods.
That had nothing to do with the system of release on licence which used to operate in relation to persons serving indeterminate life sentences. The system of release on licence was substantially different in a variety of respects from the system of parole and remission, and I do not understand it ever to have been suggested that it is possible to arrive at a factor of one-third as an indication of the extent of the reduction that might be made to indeterminate life sentences in the case of release on licence.
In R versus Rees (Court of Criminal Appeal unreported 22 September 1995) the
Court dealt with some detailed evidence before it about the operation of the previous system of release on licence. In the course of my judgment in that case I said: "The following features of that evidence may be noted: 
It only covers prisoners who were actually released. Some convicted murderers, for example Baker and Crump, had their papers marked 'never to be released'. Some died in prison.
Such persons did not contribute to the statistics.
As was observed the terms and conditions and circumstances of release on licence are not taken into account. For example, a prisoner who became mentally ill and was released to a psychiatric institution would be shown as released on licence.

There is a wide variation between the times spent in custody before release on licence. Between 1970 and 1990 they ranged between eight years and 34 years.
As would be expected the circumstances of individual cases vary widely. The number of people convicted of multiple offences of murder is relatively small to the total number of convicted murderers.

To illustrate the difficulty with working from average figures and number of years (rounded to the nearest year) and spent in custody by persons who served more than fifteen years ... were as follows: 15, 24, 21, 18, 26, 25, 34, 25, 27, 16, 22, , 16, 30, 15, 18, 16, 15, 15, 15, 21, 19, 17, 16, 15, 15, 34, , 34, 15, 16, 15. It is not easy to say what sensible use can be made of an average of those figures."
Although in some earlier cases, for the purpose of testing the reasoning of individual judges, people have worked backwards, as it were, from sentences that have been imposed to theorise about possible commencing points for the process of reasoning of an individual judge, so far as I am aware, and so far as counsel can indicate, there is no previous case in which a judge faced with the task of applying s1GG to an indeterminate life sentence has engaged in the exercise set out above. In my respectful view it is inappropriate.
It is, of course, not possible to reach a conclusion as to an appropriate sentence in one case, either by comparing it with the details of another case, or by adopting some mathematical formula which proceeds step by arithmetical step from a numerical premise to a numerical conclusion. (See Regina versus Young <case>; [(1990) VR 951]; R versus Gallagher (1991) 23 NSWLR; R versus Engel Court of Criminal
Appeal NSW (unreported 20 November 1995.)
I am of the view that certain of the criticisms made by counsel for the appellant of the reasoning process of Simpson J have been made good and it is appropriate for this Court to re-sentence the offender. Like Simpson J I think considerable guidance is to be obtained from the decision of this
Court in R v
Ng and from the decision in R versus Cheung Wai Man, bearing in mind, however, the way in which the sentence was revised in the latter case. I would agree with
Simpson J that, even allowing for the appellant's plea of guilty, the objective circumstances of the present case were so serious that, subject to s16G, it is appropriate to treat it as a case that would have warranted an indeterminate life sentence.
After taking into account the provisions of s16G, as well, of course, as all the other provisions required to be considered by the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) of the
Commonwealth, I am of the view that an appropriate sentence is imprisonment for twenty-four years with a non parole period of eighteen years.
I would propose therefore that in the case of the first appellant the sentence imposed by Simpson J should be quashed and that in lieu thereof the appellant should be sentenced to imprisonment for twenty-four years and I would specify a non-parole period of eighteen years.
I turn now to the appeal of the appellant Sae Sung. I am of the view that this appeal should be dismissed. The principal ground of appeal was that bearing in mind that the maximum penalty was twenty years, a head sentence of sixteen years, that is four-fifths of the maximum, does not give due allowance for the combination of circumstances involved in the appellant's plea of guilty and his middle level role in the transaction of the supply of heroin.
The answer to that submission, it seems to me, lies in two circumstances.
First, Simpson J understandably took the view that the circumstances in which the appellant ultimately made his plea of guilty were such that although he was entitled to some benefit from that plea the amount of the benefit was not great. Furthermore, although he was only at a middle level of the particular operation it was, as her Honour found, an enormous operation.
Another ground upon which her Honour's reasoning was attacked was that it was said that she incorrectly attributed to the appellant knowledge as to the amount and value of the heroin. The appellant gave no evidence himself in the course of his sentencing proceedings. A detailed statement of facts, which included information as to the precise role of the appellant in relation to the matter, was received by consent. In my view it was well open to her
Honour, on the basis of the admitted facts, to infer beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was aware that the amount of heroin involved was substantially the amount which was precisely known to his co-offender Che
Yook.
The appellant, it is to be noted, never suggested during the course of the sentencing proceeding that it came as any kind of surprise to him to learn that the transaction in which he had involved himself was such a large one.
Reference has been made in the course of argument to comparisons between the sentence imposed by Simpson J and sentences imposed in other similar cases. Particular reference has been made to the decision in R versus Ra (Court of
Criminal Appeal unreported 17 June ). It is also evident that in her process of reasoning Simpson J paid careful regard to the sentence she had imposed upon Yun
Bai.
I see no error of fact or principle in her Honour's process of reasoning and the sentence that she imposed has not, in my view, been demonstrated to be excessive. In the case of the second appellant I would propose that the appeal should be dismissed.
In the case of both appellants time spent in custody pending the appeal will of course count towards the sentence.

The orders of the court will be the appeal of the appellant Che Yook is allowed, the sentence imposed by her Honour is quashed and in lieu thereof the
Court imposes the following sentence: You are sentenced to imprisonment for twenty-four years. I fix in relation to that sentence of imprisonment a non-parole period of eighteen years. The head sentence and the non-parole period alike will date back to 29 June 1993, the date of your arrest. I am required by s16F of the Commonwealth [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) to explain the sentence to you. The sentence is one which will expire on 28 June 2019. You will be eligible for parole on 28 June
You will be imprisoned until at least that date but on or after that date you will be eligible for release on parole and if a parole order is made you will be permitted to serve the balance of your sentence at large in the community (subject, of course, to the possibility that you will be deported). The parole order if made will be subject to conditions and should you fail without reasonable excuse to comply with any such condition, the parole may be revoked which would result in your being returned to custody.
The parole order will be automatically revoked if you are sentenced to gaol for another crime for a period in excess of three months.
In relation to the appellant Sae Sung, the appellant should have leave to appeal but the appeal will be dismissed. Time served is to count.
JUDGE2
ALLEN J In respect of each of these appeals I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice and for his reasons as stated proposing those orders.
JUDGE3
SULLY J Although I, too, am in general and respectful agreement with what has been said by the Chief Justice, and although I agree in the orders proposed by his Honour in each of the present matters, there are some brief comments that
I would wish to say on my own account. I do that because I think I would be lacking in a proper frankness if
I did not say that the result which has been achieved in the case of the first appellant, that is to say Mr Che Yook, leaves me with a sense of dissatisfaction: not because I can fault the analysis which has led to the proposing of the particular orders in that case: all to the contrary, I acknowledge the reasoning and agree in the orders. But, as I say, I am left with a feeling that the end result is not what I would regard as, in absolute terms, a just one.
In that regard I wish to say this: it seems to me that the importation into Australia of quantities of heroin of the order here involved, and each and every step in any such importation, constitutes a threat of the most serious kind imaginable to the peace, order and social well-being of
Australian society. It is, in my opinion, time to establish with unmistakable clarity three principles by reference to which any foreign national who participates in any such importation will be judged. 
There will be a very lengthy term of imprisonment, the proper severity of which will be attenuated to the minimum extent necessary to give effect to legislative policies of the kind exemplified by section 16G of the
Commonwealth [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/), or to curial policies established by curial decisions. In a proper case, a sentence of life imprisonment will, in fact, be imposed with no section 16G adjustment - (see e.g. the approach adopted by
Badgery-Parker J in R versus Cheung Yung Lim unreported, 6 August 1993) - and without adjustments deriving from curial policies established by curial decisions. 
Every practicable step will be taken to trace and to seize any property which represents profit derived from the importation. 
The person concerned will be certainly deported from this country at the conclusion of any determinate non-parole period.
It seems to me that the law as it stands, and whether established by statute or by curial decision, does not yet provide with what I would see as the proper resolve, for the operation of guidelines such as I have suggested.
The end result in the case of the present appellant Che Yook seems to me to call for a serious reappraisal at both the legislative and the curial levels of the resolute combating of, and the resolute stamping out of, drug importation activities by foreign nationals; but especially of colossal and socially subversive importations of the kind in point in the present matter.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/82.html  
