

Currabubula Holdings Pty Ltd versus D R E Downtown Real Estate Pty Ltd and Ors
Matter No 4592/94 [1998] NSWSC 518 (23 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 November 1998 
CURRABUBULA HOLDINGS PTY LTD V D R E DOWNTOWN REAL ESTATE PTY LTD & ORS /94 July 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
FILE NO: 4592 of 1994 
DELIVERED: 23 July 1998 
HEARING DATE: 20 July 1998 
PARTIES: Currabubula Holdings Pty Ltd versus D R E Downtown Real Estate Pty Ltd & Ors 
JUDGMENT OF: Hodgson CJ in Eq 
COUNSEL: 
Plaintiff: Mr B Coles QC 
Defendant: Mr H Nicholas QC 
SOLICITORS: 
Plaintiff: Gadens, Sydney 
Defendant: Murray Stewart & Fogarty, Sydney 
CATCHWORDS: 
Equity - Fiduciary Duties - Liability of Agent of Fiduciary 
By reason of breach of fiduciary duty, real estate agent, a corporation, held not entitled to retain commission - Plaintiff applies for judgment against directors - Held that directors not subject to recipient liability by reason of increase in value of shares corresponding to corporation's receipt of commission; and that their actions did not involve dishonesty such as to subject them to accessory liability for loss.

Barnes versus Addy <case>; <case>; [(1995) 2 AC .] 
CURRABUBULA HOLDINGS PTY LTD V D R E DOWNTOWN REAL ESTATE PTY LTD & ORS 
JUDGMENT (On Various Matters Arising from Judgment Delivered 23.6.98) 
HIS HONOUR: In my reasons for judgment given on 23rd June 1998, I invited submissions on interest and costs, and also on whether Mr. Thornton and/or Mr. Collier were liable in addition to DRE. I have now heard submissions on these matters. In addition, Mr. Coles QC sought to re-open the question of whether plaintiff could recover damages in addition to return of the commission. Both sides have provided me with written submissions, which I will leave with the papers; and these were supplemented by short oral submissions. 
DAMAGES 
Mr. Coles submitted that the principle as to disgorging of a commission by an agent in breach of fiduciary duty is independent of the agent's liability to pay damages caused by the breach.

In my reasons for judgment, I did not assert anything to the contrary.
However, I said that, in calculating damages, it was necessary to compare two situations, namely the actual situation, and the hypothetical situation where no breach was committed. If the actual situation was that the principal had never paid commission, whereas the hypothetical situation was that the principal was liable to pay commission and was otherwise better off by an amount less than the commission, it seems clear that no damages could be recovered. In my opinion, it makes no difference that the actual situation is that the principal has paid the commission and now recovers it.

LIABILITY OF MR. THORNTON AND MR. COLLIER 
Mr. Coles submitted that a third party who knowingly assists an agent fiduciary to breach its obligation is as accountable as the agent fiduciary, particularly where the agent fiduciary is a body corporate and the third party is its controlling mind. In this case, Mr. Thornton and Mr. Collier themselves owed fiduciary duties to the plaintiff. The plaintiff was entitled to judgment against all three, so that they all become jointly and severally liable. He referred to Barnes v. Addy [(1874) LR 9 Ch.App. 244];
Consul Development v. DPC Estates <case>; [(1975) 132 CLR 373]; and Royal Brunei Airlines v. Tan <case>; [(1995) 2 AC .] 
Mr. Nicholas QC submitted that I had not found the requisite consciousness of breach in Mr. Thornton and Mr. Collier to make an order against them.

It seems clear that employees, and ever directors of companies, are not in general liable for procuring a breach of contract by the company (Said v.
Butt [(1923) KB 497] at 506; O'Brien v. Dawson <case>; [(1942) 66 CLR 18)], and no submission was made to the contrary. However, it was contended that, where the company's breach of contract is also a breach of fiduciary duty, the directors may be liable, either as being fiduciaries themselves or as accessories. I should say at once that, although the directors had fiduciary duties to DRE, I do not think that their being directors of DRE, a fiduciary of the plaintiff, ipso facto made the directors fiduciaries to the plaintiff.

Consul Development does show that the Barnes v. Addy principles apply to fiduciaries, as well as to trustees; but it is I think necessary to distinguish a number of different situations, and to take account of whether the liability being considered in each case is recipient liability, which is restitution-based, or accessory liability, which is not: see Royal Brunei
Airlines at 386.
Where property is held on trust by a trustee, and is disposed of by the trustee in breach of trust, then a person holding the trust property, or property to which it can be traced, may be subject to recipient liability, unless the person took a legal estate for value without notice of the trust.
The trustee will be liable to the beneficiary for any loss; while if the trust property is recovered from a person to whom it was transferred, the trustee may be liable to that person. A person who dishonestly assists the trustee in the breach of trust may have an accessory liability for any loss, similar to that of the trustee for breach of trust: Barnes v. Addy, Royal Brunei
Airlines.
Where a fiduciary obtains property in breach of a fiduciary duty, then the fiduciary may become a constructive trustee of that property; and in that event subsequent disposal of that property in breach of the constructive trust will involve the principles discussed above. A person who dishonestly (or knowingly?) assists the breach of fiduciary duty and thereby obtains property may become subject to recipient liability, and thus to a constructive trust in favour of the fiduciary's principal: Consul Development, Royal
Brunei Airlines. A person who dishonestly assists in the breach of fiduciary duty, but does not thereby obtain property, may become subject to an accessory liability to the principal for loss caused by the fiduciary's breach of duty:
Royal Brunei Airlines.

Applying those principles to this case, there was no constructive trust until the commission was received as such by DRE; and I have no evidence concerning subsequent disposal of the commission by DRE. I have no evidence that Mr.
Thornton or Mr. Collier received any part of the commission so as to become possibly subject to recipient liability: I do not think any increase in the value of their shares in DRE, corresponding to DRE's receipt of money, is enough to attract possible recipient liability. Accordingly, the only liability which may possibly be established on the evidence before me is accessory liability for loss; and I have found that the loss caused by
DRE's breach of fiduciary duty was no more than about $10,000.00.

On this analysis, Mr. Thornton and Mr. Collier could be liable for this loss, if their assistance to DRE's breach of duty was dishonest, as discussed in
Royal Brunei Airlines. The breach which I found was that DRE acted in the interests of the purchaser and potentially against the interests of the vendor; and on the whole I do not think this involved dishonesty such as to subject Mr. Thornton and Mr. Collier to accessory liability.

Accordingly, I do not make any order against Mr. Thornton or Mr. Collier.
However, I do think the circumstances are such that DRE became a constructive trustee of the commission; and it is conceivable that, if it turns out that
DRE cannot repay the commission to the plaintiff, this may be because of subsequent events that involve accessory liability or recipient liability in
Mr. Thornton and/or Mr. Collier. If that were the case, the plaintiff may have remedies against them: whether these remedies could be pursued in these proceedings, as being incidental to giving effect to the constructive trust established by these proceedings, or would need to be the subject of fresh proceedings, may depend upon the circumstances.

INTEREST AND COSTS 
Mr. Nicholas QC submitted that the cause of action in the original Statement of Claim had not been made out at all. In particular, the plaintiff had not shown the allegation in paragraph 7, in that it was not shown that the consensus excluded the crops from the sale; had not shown paragraph 8(a), in that the plaintiff did not establish that the words alleged were said or that the words which were said constituted a breach of duty; did not establish paragraph 9, in that the purchaser's requirements as to conditions were stipulated prior to the meeting; and did not establish paragraph 11, in that any breach did not cause the making of the contract on the purchaser's terms, but at best involved the loss of a slight chance of having a contract on the vendor's terms. The case made out was not even disclosed in the affidavits served in early July 1996. Those affidavits were served in gross breach of directions, giving rise to delay and wasted costs. Furthermore, the costs involved in the evidence from the sharefarmers were thrown away, in that their version of the meeting was not established. The plaintiff succeeded only on an amendment made at the hearing. Accordingly, there should be no interest, or at best interest from July 1996. Each party should pay its own costs.

Mr. Coles submitted that interest should run from DRE's receipt of the commission for its own benefit; and that costs should follow the event.

Dealing with Mr. Nicholas' submissions concerning the Statement of Claim, I note first that as regards paragraph 7, I found the consensus unclear concerning inclusion of crops: the plaintiff believed they were excluded, the purchaser believed they were included. As regards paragraph 8, I did find statements were made disparaging of the plaintiff's financial circumstances; and, although I was not satisfied that those statements considered in isolation from the circumstances constituted a breach of duty, they were part of the overall breach involved in calling and conducting the sharefarmers' meeting. As regards paragraphs 9 and 11, although the purchaser had required a contract on its terms prior to the sharefarmers' meeting, the breach which I found encouraged the purchaser to continue this requirement and destroyed any remaining chance the vendor had of getting a contract on its terms. In my view, the affidavits served in July 1996 did contain the substance of the case on which the plaintiff succeeded.

I allowed the amendment at the hearing in order to make it clear what the issues in the case were. Having regard to the purpose of pleadings as discussed in Dare v. Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658] at 664, I am by no means certain that the plaintiff could not have succeeded without the amendment. The disparaging remarks, which I found, were within the allegation in the original paragraph 8; and in considering whether they amounted to a breach of fiduciary duty, the Court may well, without amendment, have been able to have regard to the whole of the circumstances in which they were made.

In any event, the amendment was allowed because the defendants did not suggest prejudice, in the sense of any different conduct or preparation of the proceedings if paragraph 8(b) had been in the Statement of Claim from the start. By contrast, when an amendment was sought to allege a breach of duty occurring prior to the calling of the meeting, in not upholding the vendor's interests in excluding the crops from the sale, the defendants submitted that they would be prejudiced by this amendment, and I refused it.

I do not think the evidence of the sharefarmers was irrelevant to the case which I found proved: although I was not satisfied as to the details of the conversations, I was satisfied that disparaging remarks were made about the vendor's financial circumstances, which constituted part of the breach which I found.

However, I do consider that the circumstances that there was delay in commencing the proceedings, and delay in conducting them, and also a very late amendment, are relevant to the questions of interest and costs. Although an award of interest is in no way punitive, nor a reward for diligence by the plaintiff, but is rather to compensate the plaintiff for being without money to which it was entitled, and is also partly justified by the defendant having the benefit of money to which it was not entitled, delay is in my opinion still relevant. Furthermore, the breaches of directions and delays referred to, and the late amendment, are also in my opinion relevant to the question of costs.

Taking all these matters into account, in my opinion the plaintiff should have interest at Schedule Rates from the date on which the proceedings were commenced, and the first defendant should be ordered to pay two-thirds of the plaintiff's costs. There is no suggestion that the involvement of the second and third defendants has affected costs incurred on behalf of the defendants, and I make no order as to their costs.

I direct the plaintiff to bring in short minutes to give effect to these decisions within seven days.
 * * * 
