

International Entertainment New Zealand Ltd and Anor versus Lewis and Ors
Matter No 1551/98 [1998] NSWSC 149 (26 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 
INTERNATIONAL ENTERTAINMENT NEW ZEALAND LTD & ANOR versus LEWIS & 6 ORS /98 March 1998 
Bryson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These reasons relate to the application of the plaintiffs for interlocutory injunctions heard on 19 and 20 March. The proceedings were commenced on 27 February 1998 when the Court (Cohen J) made an Anton Piller order. The defendants took the opportunity offered by the order of making an application to the Court immediately on learning of it, and on 2 March 1998 the Court (Hodgson CJ in Eq.) made orders which required the defendants to deliver up documents that day in a way which obviated search. Solicitors representing the plaintiffs were thereby enabled to inspect documents and computer records and obtain copies. Hodgson CJ in Eq. also made directions to prepare for the hearing of an application to continue the interlocutory injunction. His Honour made some interim injunctions for a limited period and I have continued them in effect until further order so as to enable myself to consider the application. The interim injunctions restrain the use, copying and dealing with documents provided by the plaintiffs to the second defendant, and also extracts and computer records of those documents. The documents are (a) lead cards; (b) work sheets or other records of telephone canvassing of leads including receipts for donations; (c) lists or details of sponsor contacts and (d) lists or details of contacts for organisations involved with disadvantaged or under privileged children. There is a proviso - "use of information not provided by the plaintiffs will not be a breach of this order, even though such information may be written on documents provided by the plaintiffs or copies of such documents." 
The defendants do not resist the interlocutory continuation of the order in its present form. The plaintiffs ask that the interlocutory order extend not only to documents or information provided by the plaintiffs but also to documents or information "obtained by the second defendant in the course of acting as Promotional Director for the plaintiffs or either of them". The plaintiff also presses for deletion of the proviso.

The first defendant Daphne Lewis worked as a Promotional Director in connection with the plaintiffs' business in an arrangement in which her services were provided by the second defendant. The third defendant worked for the second defendant in an arrangement in which his services were provided by the fourth defendant. The fifth, sixth and seventh defendant are not so far as evidence shows involved in the events in any way which would justify any interlocutory relief against them.

The plaintiffs' business has two sides. One is the presentation of entertainments for children. These entertainments were sponsored by and arranged on behalf of service clubs or other community organisations so as to raise funds. The other side is sale of tickets to attend the entertainments; the tickets are sold to charitably-disposed business houses or individuals who pay for the tickets so that disadvantaged or needy children may receive the tickets as gifts and attend the entertainments. A Promotional Director manages the process of selling the tickets by telemarketing, that is, by approaching telephone subscribers and soliciting them to purchase tickets.

There are or have been Promotional Directors in several different countries and states where the plaintiffs or associated businesses have operated; the present events relate to operations in New South Wales from Sydney at an office in Camperdown. That office has existed for some years and the first defendant became Promotional Director about August 1995 and so continued until
February 1998. The plaintiffs hold some leasehold right to the premises and allowed the Promotional Director to use them. There are well-understood arrangements as to which of the expenses are borne by the plaintiffs and which by a Promotional Director; the plaintiffs bear the rental costs, but the
Promotional Director and not the plaintiffs makes and has responsibility for all arrangements about persons who work in her organisation. Remuneration at each level is by commission and no employment relationships are created. At the relevant times the contractual relationship between the plaintiffs and the
Promotional Director, or the second defendant which provided her services, were not defined in any formal contract or otherwise in writing, nor were they established explicitly in any oral exchange of which there is evidence, and the terms of the contractual relationship are left to be inferred from the parties' behaviour under them and the practice followed in the business.

For each particular project of selling tickets for an entertainment or series of entertainments for a sponsor the plaintiffs would send to the Promotional
Director from an office in New Zealand a number of lead cards and a supply of work sheets. Lead cards are records of leads, that is particulars of names, telephone numbers and other information about persons who are to be telephoned and asked to buy tickets. There are often some short details of relevant information on lead cards such as the name of the contact person in a business house, records relating to earlier purchases of tickets, and other small pieces of information which might be useful when soliciting a purchase.
Aspects of each particular promotion could conceivably influence the plaintiffs' decision about whom to approach; the plaintiffs have the opportunity to classify persons to be approached by age, location, history of charitable donations, association with the sponsor or any other consideration the plaintiffs think useful. Work sheet are forms for recording events when lead cards are used for telemarketing. If a ticket is purchased the purchase and payment method is recorded and a receipt is prepared in several copies, as several persons including the sponsor, the Promotional Director and the plaintiffs need for the information in them. The practice has been that at the completion of each promotion the lead cards and work sheets are returned to the plaintiffs in New Zealand. There have been delays on occasions but they have always been required to be returned on completion and they always have been returned. When the work sheets go back they contain information which could be used for developing future leads, or for disregarding leads for the future, or otherwise for some useful business purpose.

While there is no analogy with secret industrial processes the highly confidential nature of which is obvious and does not need to be established by an express contractual provision, the lead cards and the work sheet are strongly analogous to customer lists for which confidentiality is readily, perhaps automatically inferred, so that employees and former employees are not entitled to retain, copy or use customer lists. The defendants did not resist continuance of the restraints on use of the lead cards and work sheets and in my view it is obviously an appropriate interlocutory arrangement that they should be returned and that defendants should not use them. Evidence does not deal explicitly with (c) lists or details of sponsor contacts and (d) lists or details of contacts for organisations involved with disadvantaged or underprivileged children, but in the circumstances of the plaintiffs' business and the Promotional Director's involvement in it they too should have the interlocutory protection which I would readily grant for customer lists. It is not contentious that the plaintiffs should have interlocutory protection for information in the documents which they usually receive back; the lead cards and the work sheets recording work done with the use of the lead cards. The point of conflict is the information obtained by the Promotional Director and persons acting within her organisation as they canvass for the sale of tickets and record information about the responses, up-to-date information about contact names, purchases of tickets and particulars relating to payment and the manner of payment. The practice relating to return of lead cards and work sheets has not extended to copies of the receipts which the Promotional
Director obtained and used to calculate her claims for commission. It must have been obvious to the plaintiffs that the Promotional Director had records of that kind. Nor has the practice of return extended to copies of work sheets which the Promotional Director has retained; her case is to the effect that there was never, until recent conflict, an objection to her making and having these documents and she was never asked to send them to the plaintiffs, while the plaintiffs' position is that they were unaware of their existence and would not have approved had they known. The evidence before me presents no clear picture of whether or not the plaintiffs knew or approved of the existence and retention of copies, or whether they had the opportunity to know and object.

The plaintiffs' case is that all the promotional activities and all the collection of information which took place in the course of the promotional activities by and under the Promotional Director took place in an activity which the plaintiffs commissioned the Promotional Director to carry out as a part of and an aspect of the plaintiffs' business, integrated within the plaintiffs' organisation, occupying the plaintiffs' premises, using the plaintiffs' lead cards and working only from them and returning the records at the end; so that the plaintiffs contend that it appears clearly that all the information relating to persons who purchased tickets was collected for the plaintiffs and on their behalf.

The defendants' position is to the effect that the Promotional Director was conducting her own business, for the benefit and advantage of herself as well as of the plaintiffs, and that fresh information collected and recorded in the course of telephone canvassing as part of her business is available for her to use in her own interests without restraint by the plaintiffs. She does not claim to prevent the plaintiffs from using it the information, which they can see on the work sheets and lead cards which they are entitled to have back.
The value of the information fades rapidly with time and recent updating information has higher value and greater utility than the information which the plaintiffs furnished earlier in the promotion. According to the defendants' position the proviso excepting the use of information not provided by the plaintiffs from the injunctions is appropriate as it represents her rights.

In whatever form it is to be made the interlocutory injunction would operate as a restraint on competition. A contractual restraint on competition is not usually or readily implied, but the practice from previous promotions, continued in the promotion which was current when conflict began, of furnishing lead cards and work sheets at the beginning and requiring their return at the end seems to show rather clearly that restraint on competition was involved in the relationship between the plaintiff and the Promotional
Director, inasmuch as removal of the records took away the practical opportunity for competition.

It is an unfortunate characteristic of the relationship that there was no formal or other written agreement and, so far as evidence shows, no explicit oral arrangement setting out the basis on which the Promotional Director was to act. This leaves the plaintiffs' case, at least in large part, to consideration in the difficult area of implied contract. Protection of confidential information is not limited to enforcement of contractual arrangements, but where there is a contractual relationship between the parties the terms including implied terms are the primary source for any legal rights which they may have against each other, and their contractual obligations must be determined and considered fully before a decision is made to grant any equitable remedy not supported by them.

In my opinion the evidence of the communications between the parties and their practices does not establish clearly whether or not the relationship of confidentiality between them extended to preventing her from using the information which she collected in the course of her work. The considerations put forward by the plaintiffs relating to her operating integrally within the plaintiffs' organisation are very largely offset by the independence of her position as a contractor not subject to any contractual restraint on her other activities, even if they should be in competition with the plaintiffs, and by the obvious possibility that with her skills, knowledge and contacts she might herself engage in some other telemarketing activity not connected with the plaintiffs, as indeed in 1997 in the Sailability project she did, at other premises. There are some indications of disappointment and indignation on the part of the plaintiffs at her doing business entirely on her own account, but these are quite unjustified.

The five tests for the implication of terms established in BP Refinery
Pty Ltd v. Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 and Codelfa
Construction Pty Ltd v. State Rail Authority  <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] plainly could not be met by the plaintiffs so as to establish the rights which they claim, and the perhaps simpler test in Byrne v.
Australian Airlines Ltd [(1995) 185 CLR 410] at 422 for informal contracts does not in my opinion present a clear answer favourable to the plaintiffs either. In my opinion the plaintiffs have some prospect of establishing a contractual entitlement to restrain the Promotional Director's use of the information derived in the course of her activities, but the prospects of success are not at all strong and the preponderantly probable outcome is unfavourable.

The plaintiffs also put their case on the basis of an entitlement to equitable protection of confidentiality irrespective of contractual obligation, and I take a similar view of the likely outcome; there are prospects of success but they are not high. The principal reason why they are not high is the anticompetitive nature which the equitable intervention would take, and it would operate in a context in which the employment relationship was deliberately not adopted and the Promotional Director conducted her own independent activity, in which there was an obvious possibility that she might compete in a way for which the informatioin would be useful, and she compiled the information using resources for which she was to pay where the economic outcome for her was interrelated with her success.

On the balance of convenience it seems to me to be quite important that if the interim injunction is not modified, both parties will have access to the information as the plaintiffs will be entitled to its work sheet with records of the information collected by the Promotional Director. The plaintiffs can bring into the balance of convenience only the potential that they may face competitive use of the information which the Promotional Director herself collected. There is no reason to think that they are likely to face competitive use by anybody else of that information. The inconvenience for defendants would be that the Promotional Director would be unable if the restraint is amplified from using the information collected recently in her own organisation by activities for which she has paid. Information of this kind loses its value relatively rapidly, and if it took one or two years for the merits to be determined the value of the information would probably diminish greatly.

The plaintiffs' conduct of the proceedings in relation to the Anton Piller orders was in my opinion unmeritorious and this weighs rather heavily in the balance against a discretionary decision to grant the plaintiffs increased interlocutory protection. The facts revealed to Mr Justice Cohen in the application on 27 February appear to me not to have met the demanding standards required for ex parte applications, particularly Anton Piller applications. The intervention in the defendants' affairs to be made was very great, was to be made at the sacrifice of procedural justice, and was likely to be very disruptive, involving searches with no practical notice at several different premises and the seizure of papers and computer records. On my reading of Mr Webb's first affidavit the application was largely posited on a view of the facts in which defendants had precipitately removed property from the plaintiffs' premises including pieces of furniture likely to contain papers, and that attempts by Mr Webb to interrupt this process had been resisted and evaded and had been unsuccessful. His affidavit concluded with a long list of fears about what may have been removed and what use may be made of things removed. I found it very striking, when I had the opportunity to read the affidavit with ample time for consideration, that the evidence included no statement anywhere that any property of the plaintiffs was missing. The evidence did not show that the property which defendants were seeking to remove and in fact removed was theirs; on a careful reading there was no suggestion the affidavit that it was not, and hence no basis for thinking that their removal of it was in any way unlawful. As it had been made fairly clear by conduct (and not indeed by any expression) on behalf of the plaintiffs that the first defendant's appointment as Promotional Director was about to be ended, and defendants seem to have come to understand this, it was in no way surprising that they should leave the premises and take their property with them. Mr Webb also failed to reveal, except in a way which was quite obscured, that there had been a process over earlier days of removal from the office of other property belonging to the first defendant; she had told him in a written communication that this was to happen before it happened, and indeed he produced that communication as the last page of
Exhibit 22 of the 24 exhibits which he produced with his affidavit, but did not there mention the uncontested removals of her property which followed.
Further Mr Webb did not reveal that files which he had looked at and copied a few days earlier, while he had taken charge of the first defendant's business during her absence overseas, were her files and had nothing to do with the plaintiffs. Moreover I have seen an additional body of evidence relating to Mr
Webb's behaviour when he sought to interrupt the removal which shows, prima facie but rather strongly that he behaved with unjustifiable violence and disgusting profanity. If he had revealed his own conduct at that time, a different view might well have been taken about whether extraordinary and urgent remedies should be extended to the plaintiffs. All these circumstances have contributed to my view that the plaintiffs' behaviour in obtaining interlocutory protection at earlier stages has been extremely unmeritorious, but the most stunning aspect is the realisation, on a careful reading and re- reading of Mr Webb's first affidavit that there is no evidence in them that any lead cards or work sheet were missing.

Overall, the circumstances of this application are another unsatisfactory experience of circumstances of Anton Piller orders, and earlier unsatisfactory experiences have emphasised the need for scrutiny and vigilance before they are granted, and the dangers of granting them. It must always be remembered that when deciding to grant such an application the Court places itself for relevant information wholly in the hands of an interested party whose motivations and interests could well obscure from that party what needs to be done to comply with the obligation of frank disclosure. Competitive rivalries are often at work, as they are in this case, and the prospect of delivering a heavy and disruptive first blow on a business rival who does not know of the existence of the litigation is a temptation and distraction from which an applicant may not be able to free itself. Anton Piller orders were introduced with observations on their availability in an extreme case where there is grave danger of property being smuggled away or of vital evidence being destroyed: see Anton Piller KG v. Manufacturing Processes Ltd [1976] Ch 55 at 61. The risks must, it seems to me, be clear and grave that there will be criminal or contumelious defiance of the ordinary processes of discovery and of a higher level of intervention in the form of an order to preserve and produce documents before there could be grounds for a peremptory search.
Judgments in authorities which introduced and approved of these orders are replete with expressions of caution and with emphasis of the need for an extreme case and for safeguards against excessive intervention. These were referred to by Hoffmann J (as his Lordship then was) in Lock PLC v. Beswick [[1989] 1 WLR 1268] at 1279-1281. My own experience has led me to approach applications with the same initial scepticism as Hoffmann J: see 1280H. With time for reflection, hindsight of the results and the benefit of the defendants' version of the precipitating events it can now be seen that a sceptical reception of the application would have been appropriate.

If it were not for the defendants' concessions, and the very clear basis of the plaintiffs' entitlement to continuation of interim protection for its lead cards and work sheet, I would not have extended any further interlocutory protection to the plaintiffs at all.

ORDERS: 
The injunctions of 2 March 1998 are continued in effect as interlocutory injunctions until the determination of these proceedings or further order.

The costs of the application for interlocutory injunctions are defendants' costs in the proceedings.

Referred to: 
BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v. Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v. State Rail Authority  <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] 
Byrne v. Australian Airlines Ltd [(1995) 185 CLR 410] at 422 
Anton Piller KG v. Manufacturing Processes Ltd [1976] 
Lock PLC v. Beswick [[1989] 1 WLR 1268] at -1281 * * * 
