

Dunford versus Gleeson [1997] NSWSC 162 (28 April 1997) 
DUNFORD versus GLEESON /95 
Monday 28 April 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
SIMPSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: The plaintiff brings these proceedings under the provisions of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). He claims damages for injury to his back he alleges he suffered in late March or early April of 1993 when he pushed a four-wheel drive vehicle owned and driven by the defendant out of a bog. It is common ground that, around the relevant time, the defendant did drive his vehicle into boggy ground and the plaintiff did bring about its release by pushing it while the defendant steered it. The defendant, however, denies that any injury was thereby caused to the plaintiff. On his behalf it was conceded that, if any such injury occurred, the plaintiff is entitled to an award of damages under the Act.

Neither party can recall with any precision the date on which the vehicle was bogged and it is upon that date that resolution of the claim depends. A critical date is 6 April 1993. One objective piece of evidence in the case is a medical certificate issued to the plaintiff by his general practitioner, Dr
Aalders, on that day, noting that he was under care for lumbar disc prolapse and bilateral sciatica and that he was unfit for work for two weeks thereafter. It is the plaintiff's case that he consulted Dr Aalder, and obtained the certificate following, and as a result of, injury occasioned to his back while pushing the vehicle. It is the defendant's case that the incident occurred at a time subsequent to 6 April, that the plaintiff (although unknown to the defendant) was already suffering the lumber disc prolapse, and that the pushing did no further damage to the plaintiff's back.
Each party, being unable to identify the date from direct recollection or record has, by a process of reconstruction and reference to other events the dates of which can be ascertained, selected a date as that which he argues is most likely to have been when the incident occurred.

It is necessary now to say a little more about the parties, their relationship, the circumstances which led to the plaintiff pushing the defendant's vehicle, and that incident itself.

The plaintiff was employed as manager of a property called Bangate near
Lightning Ridge in NSW. He had been so employed since 1989. Bangate was one of a chain of three properties of which the defendant was supervisor. The defendant was in the habit of visiting the property on a fairly regular basis.
On some such occasions he drove to Bangate in the four-wheel drive vehicle, and on others he flew in his private aircraft. It was on one such visit that the incident occurred.

Another critical date is 27 March 1993. On that date a storm of unusual ferocity and torrential rain struck Bangate and caused considerable damage.
The parties were in agreement that the bogging occurred in the aftermath of this storm, while the ground still bore its effects. Both agreed further that the bogging occurred in a paddock on the property known as Bogwarra (misspelled in some parts of the transcript as Bob Warren.) 
Their recollections of the event itself are at variance. The plaintiff recalled the defendant, after the vehicle initially became bogged, attempting unsuccessfully to release it by reversing and then driving forwards, and then instructing the plaintiff to get out to try pushing. He recalled his efforts in the following terms: "I pushed my insides out and the truck moved and he kept it going." (t 24) 
He recalled being himself bogged up to his knees and having severe pain in his back which he began to experience as soon as he started pushing and the pain continued after the vehicle was released. He recalled, on his re-entry into the vehicle, telling the defendant that his back was painful.

The defendant gave his description of the event in rather less dramatic terms.
He denied being told anything about pain by the plaintiff. He claimed to have known nothing of that until he was served with the statement of claim in the present proceedings, eighteen months later.

After some initial confusion the plaintiff settled on 31 March as the most likely date. The defendant urged that 8 April was more probable. Both made reference to a diary produced by the defendant in which he recorded his movements in 1993. There was no challenge to the accuracy of the diary and it bears the signs of authenticity. It shows that over the relevant period the defendant visited Bangate on 30 March, 31 March, 4 April and 8 April. 30 March can be eliminated as a possibility because both the diary, and separately produced medical records, show that the plaintiff was in Lightning Ridge seeking medical attention on that day. 4 April can be eliminated because the diary shows that the defendant travelled by private aircraft to the property on that day and hence his vehicle was not present.

That leaves as possibilities 31 March and 8 April.

On each occasion, it appears, the defendant visited Top Bogwarra. The defendant's recollection was that two tractors were sowing barley in the paddock where he was bogged. The plaintiff's recollection was to the contrary, that there was no such activity in the paddock at the time of the bogging.
Since the diary further shows that a decision to commence sowing was not made until 31 March, and accordingly the tractors could not have been present and working on that day, it was argued on behalf of the defendant that 8 April was the most likely date of the incident. Acceptance of that argument depends upon acceptance of the defendant's firm recollection of their presence, and, as a necessary consequence, rejection of the plaintiff's clear contrary recollection. I see no reason to prefer the defendant's recollection to that of the plaintiff - nor, indeed, to prefer the plaintiff's recollection to that of the defendant. The presence or otherwise of the tractors is therefore neutral.

But there is evidence that tends to corroborate the plaintiff's selection of date.

His wife gave evidence. Although she had been living with the plaintiff at
Bangate, early in 1993 she moved to live in town at Lightning Ridge. She recalled the plaintiff telephoning her one night and reporting that he had had to move the four-wheel drive vehicle as a result of which he could hardly stand. She recalled this as being in the first week of April and was able to pinpoint the date by reference to their son's graduation from the University of New England. This occurred on April 3. She and the plaintiff had travelled to Armidale for the graduation and she recalled that this was a couple of days after the telephone call from her husband. She further recalled that on their return the plaintiff consulted Dr Aalders. The plaintiff's son gave evidence to similar effect. He recalled that at the graduation firstly his mother, and then his father told him of the incident and that the plaintiff had hurt his back quite badly. Additionally, a co-worker of this plaintiff's, Mr Peter
Forgione, gave evidence that a day or two after the storm, the plaintiff recounted to him how the vehicle had become bogged, and said "I've done my back in again." 
There was one more piece of evidence related to this question. Dr Aalders has been the plaintiff's general practitioner for some time. He was not called in the proceedings, but he produced on subpoena his records relating to the plaintiff. In one sense, these records create mystery. There are two different cards. Except for one matter, the entries contained in the cards are typical of a general practitioner's patient record cards. The dates, and the notes applicable to each date, flow sequentially. However, on one card appears the date 30 March 1993, with an entry concerning stress. The next entry on that card is dated 6 April 1993. It records the plaintiff's attendance with a back problem complaining of marked lumbar pain and pain radiating down back of both legs; an examination which disclosed marked lumbar spasm and what appears to be a reference to marked limitation in mobility; the issue of a certificate of unfitness from 6 to 20 April, and the prescription of medication. The entry is followed by initials which appear to be those of Dr Aalders. There is nothing remarkable about any of this. But the second card also contains an entry for 6
April 1993. The notes read as follows: "Improved but now his back has gone out. [one week] now also with sciatica - both sides. Didn't come before as went to son's graduation. Has had fusion done. Plan - should have bed rest. Really needs a holiday. Needs more
P/Forte." 
This entry is followed by initials which appear to be identical to those on the previous entry.

Why there are two entries for the same date on two cards which appear to be part of a single sequence was never explained. The first entry is perfectly consistent with the certificate which was issued on 6 April. The second entry, if it is accepted as part of the record kept by Dr Aalders, assists the plaintiff's case in that it confirms the recollections of his wife and son about the timing of the back injury relative to the son's graduation. It is, as counsel for the defendant pointed out, noteworthy that neither card makes any mention of any event precipitating the back pain, and, in particular, any mention of pushing a heavy vehicle out of a bog.

Although it is difficult to understand why the two entries appear to have been made separately, there is nothing in the cards, and nothing put before me that would cause me to regard the cards as other than authentic. That being so, it is plain that whatever condition the plaintiff had existed prior to the graduation, and therefore prior to 8 April. The cards do not assist the plaintiff in identifying the date of the vehicle bogging incident.

I consider it far more likely that the incident occurred on 31 March, as contended on behalf of the plaintiff. Quite apart from the other arguments, it is to be noted that, if the defendant is correct, by 8 April the plaintiff, then suffering from a lumbar disc prolapse and bilateral sciatica, and in possession of a certificate authorising two weeks off work, was able and willing, without a word of protest to the defendant, to push a heavy four- wheel vehicle drive out of a bog. Even having regard to the plaintiff's work history to which reference will later be made, I consider this scenario unlikely. In the event, I accept the evidence of the plaintiff's wife and son, and of Mr Forgione, and therefore I am satisfied that the vehicle was bogged and was pushed out of the bog by the plaintiff on 31 March, and that one week later, on 6 April, after his son's graduation, he consulted Dr Aalders and received the certificate. The plaintiff's recollection has been shown to be erroneous in one respect. He claimed that, on the day he received the medical certificate, 6 April, he presented it to the defendant who refused to accept it, saying that they were too busy. The defendant denied that the plaintiff had ever proffered a certificate to him. The defendant was not at Bangate on 6
April. If that event occurred, it must have been on 8 April. I am satisfied, though it has little direct bearing on the other matters I have to decide, that the defendant did reject the proffered certificate as described by the plaintiff. The plaintiff's error in relation to the occasion on which he presented the certificate to the defendant is not material to the substantial question which is whether, when he pushed the vehicle, he was already suffering from a back condition such that no additional damage was done.
Although, as will be seen, the plaintiff had had long term difficulties with his back, I am satisfied that the specific condition referred to in the certificate of 6 April was attributable to his action in pushing the vehicle out of the bog one week earlier. It was expressly conceded that, as the defendant was well aware that the plaintiff had a pre-existing back condition, requiring or even permitting him to push the vehicle constituted fault in the defendant in the use or operation of the vehicle. The plaintiff is accordingly entitled to an award of damages.

Damages 
There is no dispute that the plaintiff is now unfit for any form of work for which he would otherwise be suited. He ceased work on Bangate on 11 June 1993 and was granted an invalid pension on 1 July of that year.

The assessment of damages is complicated by his previous work and medical history. In order to assess the loss occasioned to the plaintiff by reason of the defendant's fault, it is necessary to appreciate his pre-injury condition.
In this case, because of his long medical history there is an abundance of such evidence.

The plaintiff was born on 13 December 1937 and was fifty-five years of age at the date of accident, fifty-nine at date of hearing. He had performed heavy and demanding physical work all of his life and had suffered the accumulated physical consequences of that hard work and of a series of specific injuries.
His back condition dates back to 1977 when, following a fall down some stairs, he underwent lumbar laminectomy. Dr Ellis, who has been his treating orthopaedic surgeon since that time, even then considered him unfit for other than light duties. There followed a history of heavy work, and various injuries, culminating in a spinal fusion in 1985. In 1987 he underwent further surgery for removal of a plate in his back, and in April 1987 Dr Ellis observed that his range of movement in the cervical spine was limited to less than half normal. X-ray showed well marked cervical spondylosis with narrowing of all disc spaces, marginal lipping on vertebral bodies and degenerative changes in facet joints. In 1987 and 1988 he continued to have a painful neck, at one time having it treated by the use of a brace.

He began work at Bangate in 1989 and there is no dispute that he worked extremely long hours, at extremely heavy work. He claimed to work one hundred hours per week, a claim that was denied by the defendant. The defendant did, however, say that at some busy times of the year he worked ten hours per day, seven days per week. During less busy times he continued to work ten hours per day but on fewer days of the week. In a report dated 21 November 1991, ie prior to the injury, Dr Ellis reported him as complaining that his legs "ache like blazes", his back was troublesome during shearing and at other times, his neck was "terrible" and he woke with headaches which soon after improved. He recorded details of a number of injuries and accidents suffered while working at Bangate. Dr Ellis again considered him unfit for the work he was then doing. Notwithstanding this report, the plaintiff pressed on until 1993.

Dr Ian Bryan had examined him in 1984, 1987 and 1991 in respect of a claim then being brought by the plaintiff against the Lightning Ridge Bowling Club, a former employer.

As long ago as April 1987 Dr Bryan noted quite significant degenerative changes and a number of operations which had produced little or no improvement. He expressed the opinion that the plaintiff would continue to have some problem with his back and neck and remain off work indefinitely (he did not). In July 1991 Dr Bryan noted complaints of pain in the low back and legs, some numbness and tingling to both legs, pain on sneezing and when required to perform bending or lifting work, and some discomfort when at rest.
He again thought that the plaintiff could have continuing problems with his back and that he would experience difficulty carrying out his duties on
Bangate, but that he was intent on continuing with them. He assessed him then as having about 25 percent impairment of his low back, and about 15 percent loss of the efficient use of each leg..

Dr David Millons examined the plaintiff in 1989, considering him quite unfit to work in any but very light semi sedentary positions, and unfit permanently for the normal duties of a cellarman/barman. He was unfit for this work by reason of his neck, but this lumbar condition alone would have had the same result. Like Dr Bryan, Dr Millons anticipated continuing problems. In July he expressed himself "wary" of allowing him back to the work he was doing at Bangate. He again considered continuing low level back symptoms inevitable, and the prognosis guarded. In 1992 he reported the development of some stiffness around the hips reflecting attritional change not related to the back condition he then had, he reported pain in the neck and shoulders which was becoming worse and again thought him only suitable for work of a light, semi-sedentary nature which he would be unlikely to obtain.

Dr Bryan examined him again in August 1996 and recorded a history of a fall from the back of the truck in which the plaintiff hurt his neck and shoulders, an event which occurred in 1990. He appears to have taken no history of the incident with which I am concerned, and although he did record that the plaintiff had been on a disability pension since 1 July 1993 still he appears to have elicited no reference to the event of 31 March. On one view of it, this may be taken to suggest that the plaintiff himself saw little significance in that event by the time he was examined by Dr Bryan. But, in the particular circumstances of this case, I do not so read it. The plaintiff is somewhat taciturn and is unlikely to have volunteered information not sought from him. Dr Bryan appears to have been more concerned with evaluating the plaintiff's fitness and condition rather than the details of the historical origin of that condition. I do not draw any inferences from the omission to mention the event the subject of these proceedings. But it does mean that Dr Bryan's reports are of less assistance on the question of the degree to which that event contributes to his present condition. I should note here that in 1996 Dr Bryan considered him unfit for work and unlikely ever to return to work and that neither additional treatment nor rehabilitation programme was likely to be of any assistance.

For these reasons, counsel for the defendant argued that his present condition is anything but wholly or even substantially attributable to the incident in
Certainly it is not wholly attributable to that incident. The degree to which it is so attributable is one of the difficult issues in this case.

In May 1995 Dr Ellis assessed the permanent impairment of the plaintiff's back as 60 percent. He also considered that there was 60 percent impairment of the neck. Having treated him for many years, Dr Ellis is thoroughly familiar with his history of injury and he has more than once expressed the view that conditions of his work, and episodes prior to 1993 have been material in producing back and neck pain. In his report dated 8 March 1997 he wrote: "There is no doubt that a lifetime of hard work and the numerous episodes of trauma in the course of his work have contributed to his bad back but the final episode when he pushed a motor vehicle was the last and a significant injury." (emphasis added) 
Dr Richard Evans, who examined him at the request of his solicitors for medico legal purposes on 4 May 1995 assessed the permanent impairment of his neck at percent, and permanent impairment of his back at 46 percent. He also noted permanent loss of efficient use of both arms to a small degree, and permanent loss of efficient use of both legs, also to a small degree. He considered that one half of the disabilities were the result of the 1993 injury.
 
Notwithstanding the consistent opinions expressed over the years, the plaintiff equally consistently returned to the heavy work he was doing, since at Bangate. But when asked if he now could do that work he replied "no way". He did not think there was any work he really would be physically capable of doing. He would be unable to do any sort of bar work, cellar work, labouring work, he would be unable to ride a horse or a motor bike. He continues to have severe bouts of back pain on occasions. He would be unable now to play golf which he had done previously although, he said, not "for years". He is able to walk approximately a kilometre but then he begins to experience pain. Sitting or lying down tends to precipitate pain. He sleeps badly and this was the case prior to the 1993 injury. His sexual relations with his wife have suffered. He deals with back pain by turning the electric blanket on to the highest setting, even in locations such as Lightning Ridge where temperatures are extremely high, and to compensate he also turns on an electric fan. He takes medication for depression, but this, too, was part of his regime prior to 1993.

What is noteworthy is that it was only after the March 1993 incident that the plaintiff considered himself unfit to persevere in the work which he said he enjoyed.

Damages for Non-Economic Loss 
Counsel for the plaintiff argued that that part of the plaintiff's present condition attributable to the 1993 incident should be assessed as 33 - 40 percent of a most extreme case. Counsel for the defendant argued that 25 percent is a realistic assessment.

In my view, taking into account the plaintiff's age, and all of the complaints and symptoms to which I have referred, his present condition is 70 percent of a most extreme case. I accept the assessment of Dr Ellis that half of that is attributable to the 1993 injury and I accordingly find, for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) of the Act, that the plaintiff's non-economic loss attributable to that injury is percent. The maximum amount which currently may be awarded under this head of damages is $247,000, 35 percent of which is $86,450, which amount I allow.

Economic Loss 
Past 
The plaintiff has not worked since 11 June 1993, and has been in receipt of an invalid pension, since 1 July of that year. He was earning $328.00 net per week. He was also provided with accommodation, which he valued (without dissent) at $60 per week and was provided with meat, which he valued (again without dissent) at $40 - $50 per week. His total wage package was therefore valued at $432 net per week.

Counsel for the defendant argued that he should not be allowed damages for economic loss for the whole period to date and indeed should be allowed only a very small proportion. He argued that the plaintiff would have retired by the end of June 1993 in any event. Certainly, he had every medical incentive to do so. I have already referred to the numerous occasions on which medical practitioners had considered him unfit for the work he was doing. But he nevertheless persisted in the face of that advice. He said he could not afford to give up work, and that he enjoyed his work. He said that he had intended to continue working until he attained the age of sixty-five, which will occur in
December 2002.

There were two specific pieces of evidence to which the defendant pointed to establish that this should not be accepted. The first of those emerged from a report of Dr Millons dated October 1992. Dr Millons opened his report by writing: "He still has widespread symptomatology. He is still working on the property at Bangate Station but claims the job is going to kill him. His son has just finished university but he cannot find employment and as soon as he finds employment, Mr Dunford plans to get off the property and go onto the invalid pension." 
The plaintiff emphatically denied making this statement to Dr Millons, and denied any intention of giving up work when his son found employment. He agreed that he may have said that the work was killing him, and he may even have said that he would be better off doing nothing and collecting the pension, but, if he had said such things, they were said in frustration and did not represent his real intention at any time. His son in fact obtained temporary work in November 1993. The plaintiff had helped to support him until that date and the defendant argued that it was likely that once the financial pressure of the need to contribute to his support was alleviated the plaintiff would have given up work.

The second piece of evidence arose from the proceedings previously commenced against the Lightning Ridge Bowling Club. Prior to his employment on Bangate the plaintiff had been there employed as a cellarman/barman/yardman. The work was heavy and he suffered an injury for which he eventually commenced proceedings in this Court. A statement of particulars pursuant to SCR [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p33) rule 8A was prepared and became exhibit 4. Under the heading "Future Loss of
Income" there appears the following: "(a) But for the plaintiff's injuries and disabilities, the plaintiff would worked until age sixty-five. The plaintiff estimates he will be forced to cease work by 30 June 1993." 
The plaintiff denied giving his solicitors such instructions. His solicitor was called to explain how this passage was inserted into the statement of particulars. His explanation was that he was in a dilemma by reason of the fact that, despite the strong opinions of the medical practitioners, particularly Dr Ellis, that the plaintiff was unfit for work, he persisted in his employment. After consulting counsel, he was of the view that the statement of particulars should include some reference to the plaintiff's capacity for work as perceived by his medical practitioners notwithstanding that he ignored their advice. I am satisfied in the circumstances that the statement of particulars does not provide evidence that the plaintiff had, prior to 1993, an intention to cease work by that date. I am equally satisfied that the plaintiff may have said something to Dr Millons about his incapacity for work, and the impact his work at Bangate was having upon him, but that if this was said, it was said in the heat of the moment and did not reflect any real or firm intention on his part. I am satisfied that, unless forced by injury to cease work, the plaintiff would have remained in employment at
Bangate at least until now.

He is therefore entitled to the whole amount of his economic loss to date which comes to the sum of $84,744.

Future 
I am satisfied that, uninjured, the plaintiff would have continued work until at least the age of sixty-five. His history demonstrated beyond doubt that he was the sort of man who preferred working to not working, and who accepted a burden that almost anyone else would have found debilitating. Senior counsel who appeared for the plaintiff realistically accepted that the probabilities are that, even so, his long history of injuries and accumulated stresses would have forced him out of the kind of work he was doing at Bangate by the age of sixty-one, but argued that it is equally probable that he would have taken on some other form of employment to the age of sixty-five. I think this is a not unreasonable approach.

I consider that, had it not been for from the injury of March 1993, from the age of sixty-one the plaintiff would have had an earning capacity of, say, $150 per week and he is entitled to be compensated for this loss in the present case.

On the 5 percent tables, to age sixty-one, in respect of the losses incurred by reason of his inability to work at Bangate, undiscounted, the loss is $35,856.00 The loss thereafter of $150 per week for four years on the 5 percent tables yields a figure of $28,440, which must be deferred for four years yielding an ultimate figure of $23,406. Undiscounted, the total figure for future economic loss is $59,262. Senior counsel for the plaintiff argued that the discount for vicissitudes should be no more than 15 percent, the period being so short. I agree. The amount awarded for future economic loss is $50,372.

The plaintiff was unable to provide any material related to out of pocket expenses.

There will accordingly be a verdict for the plaintiff in the amount of $221,566. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
