

Clark versus State of New South Wales [2016] NSWSC 808 (20 June 2016) 
Last Updated: 21 June 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision:
Leave to bring the proceedings proposed in MFI 4 and MFI 6 is refused. 
Leave to bring the proceedings proposed in MFI 5 is granted, other than in relation to the alleged 2007 assault with the fire hose, malicious prosecution and abuse of process claims. 
Mr Clark has leave to file an amended statement of claim pleaded in accordance with the requirements of the Uniform Civil Procedure Rules in respect of the other claims sought to be advanced in MFI 5.  
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - prisoners - leave sought to commence proceedings under the [Felons (Civil Proceedings) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fpa1981240/) - scheme of Felons Act - whether proposed claims are not an abuse of process and that there is a prima facie ground for the proceedings - orders made  
PROCEDURE - application for an adjournment - refused - reasons  
PROCEDURE - pro bono application - application for referral to pro bono legal panel - not granted - reasons  
JUDGMENT
In June 2014, Mr Clark sought leave to commence proceedings under the [Felons (Civil Proceedings) Act 1981](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/) . His summons has since been amended. By the 16 November 2015 version he sought leave to pursue three statements of claim against various parties. At the hearing on 2 December 2015, over objection, I granted leave to amend what was there sought, by reference to three amended statements of claim, then marked MFI 4, 5 and 6.
In MFI 4 the nominated defendant is the State of New South Wales, which is sought to be sued under the [Crown Proceedings Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1988193/) and the Law Reform Vicarious Liability Act 1983 in respect of the acts and omissions of identified police officers. Damages, including aggravated and exemplary damages are sought. There Mr Clark pleads: false arrest and false imprisonment in January 2005 in relation to an alleged assault of a police officer, unlawfully obtained goods and possession of child pornography;  malicious prosecution for those offences;  trespass to goods and chattels during execution of a search warrant in
January 2005;  false arrest and false imprisonment in August 2008 when he was charged with offences of indecent assault and procuring a child for pornographic purposes, which charges were withdrawn in March 2012;  malicious prosecution for those offences;  false arrest and false imprisonment in August 2007 for historical offences of intercourse with male children under the age of 18 years and using a child for pornographic purposes, in respect of which he was found not guilty in June ;  malicious prosecution for those offences; and  abuse of process in the pursuit of these various charges.
In MFI 5 the nominated defendants are the State, the Commissioner of Corrective Services New South Wales /Corrective Services New South Wales and GEO Proprietary Limited. There damages, including aggravated and exemplary damages are also sought. Mr Clark pleads: 
Claims in negligence in respect of a number of assaults, the first in
November 2007, while Mr Clark was held in custody at the Metropolitan Remand and Reception Area at Silverwater, when he was assaulted by another inmate and sustained life threatening injuries. The second in December 2007, when struck by an identified Correctional Services Officer and the third, when that officer, accompanied by two others, threatened and intimidated him in his cell and threatened his daughter. 
A claim of trespass to goods and negligence in relation to the loss of exculpatory legal materials, as well as part of the Crown brief delivered to him at the MRCC, with the result that relevant material was not available to be led at the hearing of his conviction appeal. 
Assault and abuse of process in July 2013, after he was transferred from protective custody, despite knowledge by identified Corrective Services officers that threats to his life had been made, with the result that the following day he was threatened and intimidated by another prisoner, before being returned to segregation. 
Assault, negligence and abuse of process between September 2013 and
February 2014, when he was placed in custody with violent offenders, despite
Corrective Service officers knowing of threats against him from other offenders, with the result that over a course of some 4 months he was repeatedly threatened, intimidated and assaulted, before being returned to segregation. 
False arrest and false imprisonment in May 2015, after he was charged with having altered documents which had been altered by an identified Correctional
Services officer.
MFI 6 nominates Voros Lawyers Pty Limited, Theo Voros, Daniel Roff and Robert Webb as defendants. It appears from submissions advanced for Mr Voros that the named corporate defendant does not exist. These claims concern alleged negligence and breach of contract in the conduct of proceedings at trial and on appeal in which Mr Clark was represented by Mr Robb, a solicitor and Mr Webb of counsel, for whom Mr Voros is claimed to be vicariously liable. The claimed damage is not there specified, but inferentially, it is Mr Clark's claimed wrongful conviction of various offences. Aggravated and exemplary damages are also sought
The State and Mr Voros opposed the leave sought. The other parties are not active in the proceedings.

The parties were given leave to appear
Section 7 Right of appearance of the Felons Act provides: "At the hearing or determination of an application or appeal under this Act, except by the leave of the court to which the application or appeal is made:  the applicant or appellant, as the case may be, is not entitled to appear in person, and  the person who would, if the proceedings to the institution of which the application or appeal relates were instituted, be the defendant in those proceedings, is not entitled to appear or be represented."
I was satisfied that Mr Clark and the defendants who sought leave, the State and Mr Voros, should all be given leave to be heard on Mr Clark's applications. In part that conclusion flowed from a motion filed by Mr Clark, which he amended on 1 December 2015, where he sought to have orders made by Registrar Kenna on 1 September set aside. Those orders were: "1. Extend the time for Plaintiff to file and serve evidence in support of his Summons to 16 September 2015.  . Defendant is to file and serve any evidence opposing the Summons by 7
October 2015.  . Plaintiff is to file and serve any evidence in reply by 21 October . Plaintiff is to file and serve written submissions by 21 October 2015.  . Defendant is to file and serve written submissions by 11 November 2015.  . Plaintiff is to file and serve any written submissions in reply by 25
November 2015.  . List matter for hearing on 2 December 2015 - estimate 1/2 day.  . Plaintiff is unable to rely on any evidence served after the dates in
Orders 1 and 3 without leave of this Court.  . Registry is to advise all parties of these orders.  . Section 77 Order for Plaintiff to appear by AVL."
The material filed by the State and Mr Voros pursuant to those orders had generated the December motion. The orders there sought by Mr Clark were: "1. The applicant is granted leave under Pt 7 [Felons (Civil Proceedings)
Act 1981](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/) to appear before the Court via AVL at the hearing on 2 December 2015.  . Orders 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 given by Registrar KENNA in the Supreme
Court on 1 September 2015 are hereby set aside.  . In particular order "5. Defendant is to file and serve written submission by 11 November 2015" is set-aside, as the proposed defendants have no standing to appear and put submissions opposing any proposed statement of claim.  . The proposed Defendants in the proposed statements of claim are ordered not to appear and their submissions filed erroneously are struck out.  . The administrative decisions of the 3rd and 4th Defendants, Mr Larry
BULGER General Manger(sic) and Superintendent Mr Glen PIAZZA of Goulburn
Correctional Centre and Superintendent Mr Michael HOVEY of the Commissioner's
Office not to arrange for the delivery of the applicant's leave application documents to the High Court Registry in the Law Court's Building Queen's
Square Sydney are hereby set aside. 
In the alternative  . The Defendants are hereby ordered to arrange for the applicant's leave application documents to be delivered to the Sydney Registry of the High
Court, Level 23, Law Court's Building Queens Square Sydney on behalf of the applicant 'instanter'!  . The administrative decisions of Correctional Officers Superintendent Mr
Michael HOVEY and Director Mr Glen PIAZZA to charge the applicant for the printing, photocopying and for second hand folders to prepare his leave application to the High Court and for other legal documents needed for Court is hereby set aside. 
In the alternative  . The Defendants are hereby ordered to reimburse the applicant's gaol account with all said costs and are further ordered not to charge the applicant in the future for any printing and/or photocopy of legal documents needed by him to put before any Court.  . The administrative decision of Director Mr Glen PIAZZA and/or other
Correctional Officers to rescind the applicant's daily access to the computer classroom on Deck B1 of the MPU of Goulburn Correctional Centre where the applicant is domiciled is hereby set aside. 
In the alternative  . The Defendants are hereby ordered to reinstate the applicant's daily access to the computer classroom on Deck B1 of the MPU at Goulburn
Correctional Centre instanter.  . The applicant, the summons and the proposed Statement of Claims are referred to the Bar Association for pro bono assistance instanter.  . The Summons itself is adjourned pending the High Court's determination of the applicant's leave application to that Court with respect to his criminal convictions.  . Costs are in the cause.  . Any further orders this honourable Court deems fit and proper."
The motion was supported by a 38 page unsworn affidavit of 19 November, in which Mr Clark advanced submissions, as well as evidence. There he responded to short written submissions which had been filed by the other active parties. Filed with that affidavit were two of the amended statements of claim in respect of which the leave which Mr Clark sought in his amended summons was pressed. It emerged that those documents had not been served on the other parties and that one further amended statement of claim, which Mr Clark wished to pursue against Mr Voros, had not been filed or served. It was then faxed to the Court and copies of it and the other amended statements were provided to the other parties to consider during an adjournment.
In the circumstances which I will discuss below, and given Mr Clark's record of litigation whilst in custody, I considered that justice demanded that both he and those who would be defendants in the proceedings he wished to bring, if the leave which he sought were to be granted, should be heard.

Adjournments and refusal of application for pro bono assistance
At the commencement of the December 2015 hearing, I refused Mr Clark's adjournment application, pending his pursuit of an application to the High Court for leave to appeal from a judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal given on 16 October 2015, as to various of his convictions (see Clark versus R (No 2) <case>
On Mr Clark's explanation of what he sought to pursue in the High Court, it did not seem likely that even if he was granted leave and his appeal succeeded, that all of his 2009 conviction of some 23 offences would be set aside. If that was a possible outcome, it would have meant that the leave he sought under the Felons Act would no longer have been necessary. That not being likely, I concluded that justice did not require the hearing of the summons to be adjourned.
I also refused to adjourn the hearing in order to refer Mr Clark for pro bono legal assistance. That was also a late application, first advanced in the motion filed on 1 December. It was supported by Mr Clark's submissions that the serious nature of the matters which he wished to pursue by his applications; the problems which he confronted in pursuing any litigation, given his incarceration; his past lack of success when he had appeared unrepresented; and his success when assisted by pro bono legal assistance, all meant that the adjournment and his referral for assistance should be granted.
The practical difficulties of pursuing the litigation on which Mr Clark has embarked, while being held in custody, are no doubt considerable, given the reality of his incarceration. Those are matters which he is presently agitating, it was common ground, in other proceedings then on foot before the Court of Appeal, which were due to be heard in March 2016.
The resources available for pro bono assistance are, however, limited. Mr Clark has already had the benefit of such referrals for other matters which he has pursued. Given the nature of what was here in issue, I was satisfied that his circumstances did not warrant another such referral as to this application, nor the adjournment which it entailed.
The Felons Act contemplates that the Court may be unassisted by oral submissions. Given the extensive and articulate written submissions which Mr Clark had already advanced and the relatively low threshold which he has to satisfy under the Felons Act, in order to obtain the leave which he seeks, to which I will come, I concluded that justice did not demand that his late application for referral for pro bono assistance should be granted.
The hearing was, however, finally adjourned, in order that the State might have the opportunity to consider and respond to the application Mr Clark finally pressed, in relation to the amended statements of claim he was given leave to proceed on, over its objections (MFI 4 and MFI 5).
At the resumed hearing in February 2016, Mr Clark made, and I refused, a further adjournment application. It became evident from his submissions that what Mr Clark then wished to do was to find other documents by which he wished to demonstrate that he had been wrongly convicted of various offences at a jury trial and that the Court of Criminal Appeal had erred in rejecting his conviction appeal. He took the view that his case would be better advanced if he was given further time to produce other such documents. He thus sought another adjournment so that he could search for them, amongst the voluminous material, which he said was very disordered, but to which he explained he had access in custody, albeit with practical difficulties.
I accepted that the circumstances of Mr Clark's imprisonment; what he explained to be the results for his mental capacity of an assault he had suffered while he was an inmate; and the fact that he is unrepresented, all made it difficult for him to advance his case, as he would, if he did not have to contend with these difficulties. I was, nevertheless, still satisfied that justice did not permit the grant of the further adjournment which he sought, particularly over the objections of the other parties.
Mr Clark contended that if a judge of this, or another court, sees that an injustice has occurred, even in conclusions reached by the Court of Criminal Appeal on a conviction appeal which has failed, that judge is obliged to act to address that injustice.
Judges must, of course, always seek to do justice, but that obligation is not unconfined. It must be met by the exercise of the powers granted the judge, whether by common law or statute, in the particular case the judge has been allocated to deal with.
Mr Clark is wrong in his contention that having brought these proceedings, he now has the unfettered right to seek to establish that he has been wrongly convicted, despite what the Court of Criminal Appeal concluded on his conviction appeal. All that falls to me to decide in these proceedings is whether he has met the onus which falls upon him, under <case> of the Felons Act, so that the leave he seeks can be granted. 
While Mr Clark must have a fair opportunity to put his case, I was satisfied that he had received that opportunity. What he was not entitled to receive was a further adjournment, so that he could search for other evidence to establish that he has been wrongly convicted, or that the Court of Criminal Appeal had erred on his conviction appeal.
As it finally transpired, there were, nevertheless, a series of further adjournments. On Mr Clark's application the matter was relisted because he had forgotten to tender an affidavit, which he believed that he had filed and served. There was no objection to Mr Clark being given the opportunity to provide another copy.
After repeated adjournments, a 71 page affidavit sworn on 3 May 2016 was provided under cover of a letter of 3 May. The annexures to that affidavit were not provided. In a covering letter Mr Clark said that this affidavit required close scrutiny because it duplicated facts and evidence which he had already put before the Court, as well as putting "other crucial facts of evidence before the Court". What they were was not identified.
The position of Mr Voros was that the affidavit had not been properly sworn, and predominantly comprised inadmissible submissions and arguments and not evidence and ought, accordingly to be received, in large part, as a submission only. That was accepted by Mr Clark.

Background to this application
Despite his incarceration Mr Clark is a frequent litigant. Some of his litigious history is relevant to this application.
After a judge alone trial before Garling DCJ, at which Mr Clark appeared unrepresented, he was convicted of three offences. Mr Clark was later represented by Mr Ramage QC, instructed by Voros and Associates Lawyers, on his partially successful appeal (see Clark versus R <case>; [(2008) 185 A Crim R 1).] It was Mr Roff who gave the instructions. On appeal Mr Clark's offences were described at [2], to have been: "1. that on 4 December 2004 at Taree he attempted to procure a certain child over the age of 14 years to be used for pornographic purposes;  . that at the same time and place he incited the same complainant, a person then under the age of 16 years, to commit an act of indecency towards him; and  . that on 27 January 2005 at Taree he had child pornography in his possession."
The conviction on the third count was quashed on appeal and a verdict of acquittal entered. The appeal on sentence was allowed and Mr Clark was resentenced to a non-parole period of one year and six months, commencing on 12 December 2006 and expiring on 11 June 2008 and to a balance of term of one year and six months expiring on 11 December 2009. The Court also directed that he be released on parole on 11 June 2008.
Mr Clark was also, however, charged with 29 other counts, some in the alternative: 19 counts of sexual assault or acts of indecency involving six different complainants; 3 counts of possessing child pornography or using a child for pornographic purposes; and 7 counts of perverting the course of justice.
Mr Clark was represented at this 27 day trial by Mr Webb of counsel, instructed by Mr Roff and others, all of whom Mr Clark complained in his written submissions in these proceedings were totally unfamiliar with exculpatory material and his defences. A verdict of not guilty was entered in relation to one count and he was convicted of 23 counts. He was sentenced to a non-parole period of 10 years, 9 months and a balance of term of 3 years, 8 months for those offences.
Mr Clark's former solicitors filed a notice of appeal on 17 December 2009, but he was unrepresented at the hearing of his conviction appeal and his sentence appeal. The grounds of his conviction appeal included that he had lost a "significant possibility" of an acquittal because, amongst other things, of the incompetence of trial counsel; fresh and/or new evidence was sought to be led; that there had a miscarriage of justice because identified evidence was not tendered; and that Mr Clark was innocent on all counts and that justice had miscarried. After an adjourned hearing, so that Mr Clark could put his case into some order, his appeals were dismissed (see PFC versus R; R versus PFC <case>; PFC versus R [[2011] NSWCCA 275).]
The Crown called evidence on this appeal from Mr Roff, Mr Webb and from the solicitor who had instructed the Crown. Mr Webb and Mr Roff were extensively cross-examined. Their evidence was, however, largely accepted and contrary to Mr Clark's case, they were found to have been impressive witnesses (see PFC at [63]).
Mr Clark has repeatedly since sought to have the second conviction appeal judgment re-opened, including by application for special leave to the High Court. He has also been involved in other litigation.
In Clark versus Robards  <case>, Hidden J dealt with motions concerning proceedings which Mr Clark had brought in 2002 and 2005. The 2002 proceedings, where the defendant was the State, concerned claims arising from his arrest and prosecution on three occasions, in respect of which he alleged false arrest, false imprisonment and malicious prosecution. His Honour described those claims (at [3] - [5]) as: "3 The first claim related to Mr Clark's prosecution in 1997 for aggravated indecent assault upon a boy. He was convicted of that offence in the Local
Court but that conviction was set aside on appeal to the District Court, the complainant having declined to give evidence at the hearing.  The second claim related to his prosecution in 2000 on charges of using a false instrument (s 300(2) [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)) and further charges of serving or causing to be served false tribunal documents [(s 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s4.html) [Unauthorised Documents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/uda1922269/)). Only the latter charges were proceeded with in the Local Court. He was convicted of all charges but his appeal to the District Court was successful in respect of some of them.  The third claim related to his prosecution, following his arrest in 2000, for perverting the course of justice (s 309 [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)). He was convicted of that offence at trial in this court, but his conviction was quashed in the Court of Criminal Appeal due to an error in the summing up of the trial judge and, for discretionary reasons, a verdict of acquittal was entered: R versus Clark <case>"
Mr Clark also pursued claims concerning alleged false arrest, false imprisonment and malicious prosecution and abuse of process in respect of other convictions. Hidden J observed (at [7] - [8]) that: "7 Part of Mr Clark's case in respect of the first claim was that a police officer had solicited a bribe from him so that he would not be charged with indecent assault, a conversation which Mr Clark had tape recorded. What subsequently ensued can be summarised very briefly. Mr Clark later destroyed that tape. This led to a successful application by the State before Johnson J for dismissal of the proceedings on the basis of abuse of process, pursuant to [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/index.html#p13), r 5 of the [Supreme Court Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/): Clark v
State of New South Wales <case>, [66 NSWLR 640.]
Although the taped conversation related to only the first of the three claims, his Honour dismissed the whole of the proceedings on the basis that the claims were linked. That had been the basis upon which Mr Clark had proposed to pursue them.  Mr Clark's appeal against his Honour's decision was partly successful:
Clark versus State of New South Wales <case>
The court decided that the second and third claims should be allowed to proceed on the basis that they could be advanced discretely from the first claim. Accordingly, Johnson J's order dismissing the proceedings was set aside but the first claim was struck out. In addition, Mr Clark was directed to file a second further amended statement of claim within 3 months, removing any reference to the persons or causes of action referable to the first claim: at [109]."
Mr Clark also brought other proceedings in 2005 against Timothy and Terrence Robards and the State, on the basis of its vicarious liability for the alleged tortious acts of certain police officers. There he also alleged negligence against Justice Health, the Department of Justice and Attorney General, the Commissioner for Corrective Services and the Department of Corrective Services and pursued claims under the [Crown Proceedings Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1988193/) and the [Law Reform (Vicarious Liability) Act 1983](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrla1983321/) . In June 2010, Harrison J struck out that statement of claim, but gave Mr Clark leave to re-plead (see Clark versus Robards  <case> Those proceedings were later stayed in July 2010.
In the proceedings before Hidden J, Mr Clark sought leave to amend his pleadings in both the 2002 and 2005 proceedings into one "consolidated" statement of claim. The State opposed that leave and sought to have the proceedings dismissed for want of due despatch; as vexatious and an abuse of the Court's process; and as tending to cause prejudice, embarrassment or delay in the proceedings. Hidden J ordered that: "[108] ... 
The time for compliance with the direction made by the Court of Appeal in order 5 on 22 May 2012 is extended until 4.00pm on 30 June 2014. 
Should the plaintiff fail or decline to comply with that direction, the proceedings are dismissed for want of due despatch pursuant to r 12.7 of the [Uniform Civil Procedure
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/). 
The parties have liberty to apply.  The plaintiff's motion to amend the pleading in both the 2002 and 2005 proceedings in a consolidated statement of claim is dismissed, as is his motion in respect of his conditions of custody.  The 2005 proceedings are dismissed, and the plaintiff is to pay the
State's costs of those proceedings. The parties have liberty to apply in respect of the costs of the 2002 proceedings, including the motion to amend insofar as it related to those proceedings."
Mr Clark appealed the dismissal of the 2005 proceedings. In Clark versus Robards <case>, Mr Clark was granted leave to appeal against so much of the judgment of Hidden J as dismissed paragraphs of the proposed amended statement of claim which dealt with causes of action to be found in the 2005 pleading, other than the conspiracy charge (Part A, par 10), considered by Harrison J in June 2010. Otherwise the summons seeking leave to appeal was dismissed. That appeal was to be heard in March 2016.
Mr Clark later sought to re-open the Court of Appeal's judgment to allow him to re-plead parts of the pleadings which had been struck out and with respect to which he had not been granted leave to appeal. In the alternative, he sought leave to file a new statement of claim in relation to those issues, relying on [s 50F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s50f.html) of the [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) , which deals with persons "under a disability" and new claims for damages arising out of events which occurred whilst he was in custody.
In Clark versus Robards (No 2) <case> leave to reopen the Court of Appeal's earlier judgment, in order to seek leave to add new claims for damages arising out of events which had occurred whilst Mr Clark was in custody, was refused. It was observed at [10] that: "... It will often be inappropriate to seek to amend existing pleadings to add further unrelated causes of action which have arisen after the commencement of the proceeding, where the only common factor is that the plaintiff and one defendant are the same. There is nothing in the judgment of
Hidden J which would prevent the applicant seeking leave under the Felons
Act in order to commence fresh proceedings in relation to the new claims.
..."
In Clark versus the State of New South Wales <case>, Hamill J dismissed a summons concerning a disciplinary charge dealt with under [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cosa1999348/s52.html) of the [Crimes (Administration of Sentences) Act 1999](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cosa1999348/) and a claim that Mr Clark had been denied procedural fairness. In Clark versus The State of New South Wales (No 2) <case>, Hamill J refused an application to reopen his earlier judgment. These judgments have also been appealed and those appeals were also to be heard in March 2016.
In PFC versus State of New South Wales & Anor <case>, Fagan J dismissed another summons by which Mr Clark sought leave under the Felons Act to commence an action against the State of New South Wales and the Director of Public Prosecutions for damages for false imprisonment and malicious prosecution in relation to his May 2004 arrest and charge of offences relating to a boy referred to as "SB". His Honour concluded that what was there sought to be pursued involved an abuse and was unsupported by any "prima facie ground" within the meaning of <case> of the Felons Act. The appeal against that judgment was also to be heard in March 2016.
In Clark versus R (No 2) <case>, given in October 2015, Mr Clark sought again to pursue his conviction of an offence of aggravated sexual intercourse with child between 14 -16: [s 66C(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s66c.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , one of his 23 convictions. Mr Clark's application for leave to re-open the 2011 conviction judgment failed. It was there observed at [4]: "... Mr Clark seeks to advance issues that were decided adversely to him in his appeal against conviction (PFC versus R [[2011] NSWCCA 275)]; in an application under r 50C to set aside that judgment (PFC versus R (No 2) <case>; and in an application under r 50C to set aside the refusal of his first r 50C application (Clark versus R <case>"
On his own explanation in the submissions which he advanced in these proceedings at the February 2016 hearing, in the proceedings which he now seeks leave to pursue against the proposed defendants, he wishes, again, to raise issues that have been decided adversely to him, in various of these earlier decisions.

The scheme of the [Felons (Civil Proceedings) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/)
There was no issue that the Felons Act applies to Mr Clark, he being held in custody, having been convicted of a number of serious indictable offences. Accordingly, under <case> he requires the Court's leave to commence the proceedings he wishes to pursue.
Under <case> the Court may not grant him such leave unless "satisfied that the proceedings are not an abuse of process and that there is prima facie ground for the proceedings".
In Application of Malcolm Huntley Potier <case>, it was explained at [17] that in this statutory context, <case> "is properly understood as referring to a ground which on its face is not "hopeless or unarguable". What is involved in resolving such an application is forming a "broad impression as to whether a claim enjoys a realistic prospect of success and is thus not "hopeless" or "unarguable". It requires the legal principles invoked by the cause of action on which the proposed claim is based, as well as the factual allegations made, to be considered. It does not involve "a detailed analysis of the claims and the evidence which might support them".
Further, as the State submitted, the need to consider potential abuse of process requires consideration to be given to whether what is sought to be pursued amounts to pursuit of substantially the same causes of action, already pursued in other proceedings.
Whether Mr Clark has met the onus which falls upon him, in respect of each case which he seeks leave to pursue, is in issue.

Requirements of the Rules
It is apparent that MFI 4, MFI 5 and MFI 6 do not comply with relevant requirements of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) .
The Rules require, for example, that a statement of claim be brief (r 14.8); that it contain only a summary of the material facts on which Mr Clark relies (r 14.7); that the effect of documents or spoken words referred to must, so far as material, be stated (r 14.9); that any matter that, if not pleaded specifically, may take the defendant by surprise be pleaded (r 14.14); that such particulars of any claims necessary to enable the defendants to identify the case that the pleading requires them to meet be provided (r 15.1); that particulars of any alleged fraud, misrepresentation, breach of trust, wilful default or undue influence must be given (r 15.3); and that particulars of the facts on which any pleaded condition of mind relies must be given (r 15.4).
In the case of alleged negligence, Rule 15.5 requires that what must be pleaded is the facts and circumstances on which the party pleading relies as constituting the alleged negligent act or omission, and where more than one negligent act or omission is pleaded, so far as practicable, the facts and circumstances relied on in respect of each alleged negligent act or omission must be stated separately.
As to aggravated and exemplary damages claims, the facts and circumstances which are relied on to establish the claims advanced must be pleaded separately (r 15.7 and r 15.8).
These requirements are not met in Mr Clark's proposed pleadings.
It follows that were it to be concluded that Mr Clark has established that what he seeks leave to do by MFI 4, MFI 5 or MFI 6, is to pursue claims which do not involve an abuse of process and for which there is a prima facie ground, the appropriate order would be to give him leave to commence the proceedings. He could not, however, be given leave to file his proposed statements of claim, because they do not satisfy the requirements of the Rules, or indeed other relevant pleading principles. Those pleadings would need to be recast.
The difficulty can be simply explained by reference to Mr Clark's pleading as to the tort of malicious prosecution and damages. The elements of the tort of malicious prosecution were explained in A versus State of New South Wales [[2007] HCA 10] at [[1]](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b2007%5d%20HCA%2010#para1) to be: "(1) That proceedings of the kind to which the tort applies (generally, as in this case, criminal proceedings) were initiated against the plaintiff by the defendant; 
That the proceedings terminated in favour of the plaintiff; 
That the defendant, in initiating or maintaining the proceedings acted maliciously; and 
That the defendant acted without reasonable and probable cause."
These elements and the facts which Mr Clark claims establish them are not revealed, as they must be, by his proposed pleadings. The loss or damage he claims to have suffered is also not identified. Nor is how such damage was said to be caused revealed.
While the State may be vicariously responsible for the tort of a prosecutor in a public prosecution, the person who is alleged to have committed the tort, must be identified. As discussed in A versus State of New South Wales at [34] "[t]he identification of the appropriate defendant in a case of malicious prosecution is not always straightforward. To incur liability, the defendant must play an active role in the conduct of the proceedings, as by 'instigating' or setting them in motion".
Given the requirements of [s 56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) , which imposes obligations on the Court and parties to proceedings, to have regard to the overriding purpose there specified, the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings, it follows that if Mr Clark were given leave to commence the proceedings he wishes to pursue, he would have to recast his proposed pleadings, in order to comply with the requirements of the Rules, before he could exercise any leave he was granted under <case> of the Felons Act.

Has Mr Clark established that his proposed claims are not an abuse of process and that there is prima facie ground for the proceedings? 
MFI 6
It is convenient to begin with the claims sought to be pursued against Voros Lawyers Pty Limited, Mr Voros, Mr Roff and Mr Webb of counsel.
The claims against Mr Voros are sought to be pursued on the basis of his vicarious liability for both Mr Roff and Mr Webb. That there is any legal basis for such a claim in relation to Mr Webb, counsel briefed to appear for Mr Clark in criminal proceedings, is not apparent. Mr Clark cannot be granted leave to pursue such a claim. On its face it is hopeless. Nor could he be given leave to pursue a claim against a non-existent company.
MFI 6 commences with complaints advanced about Voros Lawyers, Mr Voros and Mr Roff in relation to matters identified by way of seven "sequences". Firstly, in relation to the appeal, concerning the victim MGH. Mr Clark pleads that at a judge alone trial at which he was unrepresented and did not give evidence, he was convicted of three charges. He was granted legal aid to appeal and instructed Mr Voros, who he also instructed in relation to five outstanding charges in relation to other victims CB, DM and SB, after he received a further grant of legal aid. Mr Clark also pleads that other solicitors, Ms Duffy and Mr Roff, subsequently advised him and that Mr Ramage QC was retained to appear on the appeal.
Mr Clark seeks to pursue a claim that Voros Lawyers, Mr Voros and Mr Roff breached their duty of care to him in relation to the appeal proceedings, which resulted in the dismissal of his appeal.
These claims are sought to be advanced on the basis that Mr Clark instructed his solicitors with voluminous exculpatory materials, which would totally exonerate him. He instructed Mr Roff to put that material before the Court of Appeal. Mr Roff failed to bring his defences and the exculpatory material to the attention of Mr Ramage QC, with the result that the appeal failed. That, it is claimed, involved negligence, breach of contract and of the duty of care he was owed.
Secondly, Mr Clark seeks to pursue a claim as to negligence and breach of contract in relation to the second trial in May 2009 before Norrish DCJ, identified as "Sequence Two: The Latter Matters". Mr Clark claims that Mr Roff failed to have him medically examined; to marshal exculpatory material; and to interview identified witnesses.
Thirdly, under the heading "Sequence Three: The Further Latter Matters", Mr Clark seeks to pursue a claim in negligence and breach of contract in relation to charges concerning the complainants DB, TB and MH, also heard at the May trial.
Fourthly, further claims of negligence and breach of contract are sought to be advanced by way of complaint as to the conduct of the trial on the basis that all charges would be dealt with in the one trial; that the contract was breached when identified witnesses were not called; when a charge of perverting the course of justice by destruction of a tape was not pursued; and by his legal representatives failing to follow Mr Clark's instructions during the trial.
Fifthly, claims in deceit and conspiracy, involving Mr Roff and Mr Webb are sought to be advanced, Mr Clark claiming that they fabricated defences and conspired to intimidate and coach him in giving fabricated defences, which they knew were false.
Sixthly, torts of trespass to goods and chattels are sought to advance against Mr Roff and Mr Webb, who it is claimed refused to return to him exculpatory materials.
Seventhly, Mr Clark seeks to advance claims against Mr Roff, who he alleges conspired with Mr Webb to lie in their affidavits sworn in the appeal against his conviction of 23 offences.
Further claims are sought to be separately advanced against Mr Webb, some of which replicate those sought to be advanced against Mr Roff.
Firstly, it is sought to be claimed that prior to trial Mr Webb negligently failed to take identified steps, in preparation for the trial, in breach of his contract.
Secondly, it is sought to be alleged that Mr Webb failed in his duty to Mr Clark, by not representing him to the requisite standard of competence.
Thirdly, it is sought to be claimed that Mr Webb had prepared a defence contract which Mr Clark had signed prior to trial, which all defendants breached at trial. Particulars of breach are not given, but they are also claimed to involve negligence.
Fourthly, it is sought to be claimed that Mr Webb breached his duty by failing to represent Mr Clark ethically and to the requisite standard of competence, resulting in negligence, breach of contract and deceit.
Fifthly, torts of deceit and conspiracy are sought to be advanced against Mr Webb as the result of the claimed fabrication of defences, and it is claimed, by he and Mr Roff intimidating and coaching Mr Clark into giving fabricated defences.
Sixthly, torts of trespass to goods and chattels sought to be advanced against Mr Roff and Mr Webb, who it is claimed refused to return exculpatory materials.
Seventhly, Mr Clark seeks to advance claims against Mr Webb, who he alleges conspired with Mr Roff to lie in their affidavits sworn in the appeal against his conviction of 23 offences.
Mr Clark also seeks to advance aggravated damages for his hurt, injury and loss of freedom, and exemplary damages for the contumelious disregard of his rights of liberty and society's disapprobation of such conduct by barristers and solicitors and as a salutary deterrent for likeminded persons.
The leave sought, I am satisfied, that cannot be granted because Mr Clark has not established that any of the claims in MFI 6 do not involve an abuse of process, or that they have a prima facie ground, that is that they are not "hopeless" or "unarguable".
Having been convicted by Garling DCJ of three counts, Mr Clark instructed Mr Voros. Employed solicitors, initially Ms Duffy and then Mr Roff, acted for Mr Clark. Mr Ramage QC was briefed. Mr Clark claims that Mr Roff failed to bring his defences and the exculpatory material he had supplied to Mr Ramage's attention and that he did not ensure that they were put before the Court of Criminal Appeal. That, Mr Clark claims, involved a breach of the duty of care he was owed, as well as a breach of his contract, with the result that his appeal was dismissed, causing him to suffer loss and damage.
That Mr Clark enjoyed certain success on this appeal, his conviction appeal on one charge being overturned and his sentence being reduced, is inconsistent with the claim that Mr Roff failed properly to instruct Mr Ramage QC as to the arguments which Mr Clark wished to advance on appeal.
Mr Clark has not attempted to show that it is arguable that the exculpatory material on which the case he wishes to advance depends, was admissible on this appeal, or that it would have provided a basis on which his other grounds of appeal could have been established.
What that evidence was, is not entirely clear. That it was exculpatory is not apparent. For such material to be received on appeal, it must be shown to be "credible, cogent, relevant and plausible" (see Mickelberg versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 259] at 310). While that does not have to be established on this application, there must be some explanation advanced as to how that could have been shown, if the leave which Mr Clark now seeks is to be granted. That was not attempted to be dealt with on this application.
In the May 2016 affidavit Mr Clark again dealt with the proceedings before Garling DCJ at which he had appeared unrepresented and the evidence then led, as well as that led at his second trial, the appeals and the later proceedings which he has pursued. He there explained how he came to be legally represented on the appeal; he outlined in extensive detail his complaints as to how the proceedings had been conducted by his legal representatives; materials which he claimed would have exonerated him, had they been tendered; the inadequacies of detailed aspects of the preparation for the proceedings, including advice and correspondence he had received, instructions he had given, including in relation to certain tendency and coincidence evidence; work which had been performed or not performed, including obtaining a proper draft proof of evidence from him and why he had refused to sign various drafts which had been prepared; exculpatory evidence which was available; what transpired in the various proceedings; lies he alleges his legal representatives told in the proceedings in the Court of Criminal Appeal and materials which he claims proves such lies. There are extensive extracts from the cross-examination he pursued at the hearing in the Court of Criminal Appeal in the affidavit, as well as from evidence led at the trial and in written instructions he had given, which he contends were not followed, including for example, in relation to the cross-examination of particular witnesses at trial. He explained how instructions given as to numerous matters were not followed; how the "defence contract" he had entered had been variously breached and gives numerous examples of what he claims to have been flagrant negligence and incompetence on the part of his legal representatives. He also advances explanations as to why he had not been able to properly prepare for the hearing of the second conviction appeal and the difficulties he had faced in preparing for later hearings, because of his conditions of custody.
Ordinarily an appeal is decided on the evidence led at trial. There are only limited circumstances in which other evidence may be led on appeal, as discussed in PFC versus R [[2011] NSWCCA 275] at [[37]] at 683 and 685 "a party is bound by the conduct of his or her counsel, and counsel have a wide discretion as to the manner in which proceedings are conducted". An unrepresented litigant may also be bound by decisions he or she made as to the conduct of the trial and the evidence then led. Nothing which Mr Clark advanced suggests a basis upon which it could be considered that he was not bound by the way in which he decided to conduct his trial, including in relation to the now claimed exculpatory material.
An exception can arise on error being established on appeal, where a miscarriage of justice has resulted. In Grant versus R <case>, for example, such leave was given where it was established that counsel had failed to give necessary advice and had failed to obtain necessary instructions. Where, however, deliberate tactical decisions have been made as to the evidence that should or should not be called at trial and the issues that should or should not be pursued, there is nothing unfair, and there will be no miscarriage, in holding an accused to such decisions, even though it is conceivable that other decisions or something else may have worked better (see [Ratten versus R](http://jirs/hca/judgments/1974/1974HCA35.html)[](http://jirs/hca/judgments/1974/1974HCA35.html) [1974] HCA 35; (1974) 131 CLR 510 at 517). 
In MFI 6, Mr Clark seeks to plead that he elected not to give evidence "following advice from his Honour during the trial to 'keep one's powder dry if there were any outstanding charges'." Nothing led suggests a basis on which it could have been concluded that he was not bound by that decision.
It follows that Mr Clark has not established that this aspect of the case he seeks to advance is arguable and not hopeless.
There were further difficulties connected with what was clearly intended to be a collateral attack on the failure of Mr Clark's second conviction appeal, which support the conclusion that what he seeks to advance does involve an abuse of process and has no prima facie basis.
Mr Clark was convicted of 23 counts after the second trial. He unsuccessfully challenged that conviction (see PFC versus R [[2011] NSWCCA 275).] On that appeal the Crown called evidence from Mr Webb and Mr Roff, who gave affidavit evidence and were both extensively cross-examined by Mr Clark, as to matters of the kind he seeks to pursue again in the proposed proceedings.
On the appeal Mr Clark filed over 950 pages of affidavits and submissions, pursuing grounds of appeal which, it was observed at [60], included grounds which relied on the conduct of his defence at trial by his counsel and solicitor. This material was supplemented by a complete set of the written instructions Mr Clark had given his legal representatives. The grounds which he advanced were discussed from [61], his claim being that he had lost a "significant possibility" of an acquittal because of: "1. The incompetence of trial counsel led to a miscarriage of justice in that counsel -  a. failed to put the appellant's defence of being setup by one group of complainants to the court,  b. failed to act on the appellant's written and verbal instructions before and during the trial including alibi evidence,  c. failed to call upon crown witnesses for cross-examination,  d. failed to call upon defence witnesses to give evidence.  e. failed to defend the appellant with respect to the aspersion made by his
Honour before the Jury that the appellant may be a MIND READER,  f. failed to put exculpatory statements and/or documents before the court and to the various Crown Witnesses as outlined in the submissions,  g. failed to properly and/or adequately examine the appellant in chief and/or in re-examination to establish his innocents [sic] with regard to the state of the evidence,  h. failed in general to defend the appellant to a professional standard having regard to all matters raised in these submissions inter alia, no proof of evidence.  . A miscarriage of justice was caused by the Crown -  a. failing to call upon Crown Witnesses to give evidence,  b. becoming emotionally involved in the trial,  c. breached it's(sic) duty of disclosure in concealing exculpatory evidence from the court,  d. misstating the true state of the evidence during the trial and in Her summing-up to the jury,  e. caused unfair prejudice to the accused in cross-examination by casting aspersions against his character in that he had lied to the court when in fact the appellant had told the truth and the Crown had evidence to support this.  . The learned trial Judge erred and/or misled the jury as to the true state of the evidence in his Honour's summing-up, this led to a miscarriage of justice.  . The learned trial Judge cast an unjustifiable aspersion against the appellant which was highly prejudicial this led to a miscarriage of justice.  . The appellant was mentally ill shortly before and during the trial which led to a miscarriage of justice.  . The appellant was under DURESS that if he exposed that the complainants had set him up his family would be gravely endangered this led to a miscarriage of justice.  . The prosecutions were malicious carried out by police who were and are defendants in the appellant's statement of claims for malicious prosecution this led to a miscarriage of justice.  . That the verdicts of the jury on all counts which the appellant was found guilty by the jury were unsafe and/or unreasonable and/or unsatisfactory and/or inconsistent having regard to the whole evidence at the trial. And the learned trial Judge had reservations about the guilty verdicts of the Jury; see his Honour's remarks, Sentencing and Bail transcripts 4 days, December . Fresh and/or new evidence as outlined herein was never put before the court has led to a miscarriage of justice inter alia Counsel did not know the "Full Carrot Video" existed and has never seen the "Todd Ellis" Video.  . That the appellant is innocent on all counts and justice has miscarried the appellant relies globally on the contents and/or all matters raised in this entire document for this Appeal."
The Court of Criminal Appeal dealt in great detail with the evidence of Mr Clark's instructions to Mr Roff and Mr Webb. The difficult relationship which had developed with Mr Clark, given advice which they had to give him, as to the course which Mr Clark wished to pursue at trial, particularly given his belief that he had been set up, is also dealt with in the judgment. As is his desire to have all matters heard together, so that he would be better able to establish the claimed conspiracy to bring false allegations against him.
The Court considered and rejected the various grounds of appeal which Mr Clark advanced, observing that when Mr Clark's specific instructions were followed, the result was often unsatisfactory and when counsel refused to do so, that there were sound forensic reasons for the decision made (see at [81]). The Court considered that "[m]any of the specific complaints now raised by the appellant involve a considerable element of hindsight and a failure to understand the double-edged nature of this evidence." (at [71]).
The Court also concluded, for example, that a decision not to press the tender of a particular video "was undoubtedly correct. Its benefit to the appellant's case was problematic at best, but its prejudicial effect would be inevitable and substantial. The tender of that video could only have damaged the appellant's case." (see at [90]).
It is apparent from Mr Clark's own submissions that the claims which he now seeks leave to advance in these proposed proceedings are directly contrary to conclusions which were reached by the Court of Criminal Appeal on the conviction appeal, which failed.
That means that like the circumstances considered by Rothman J in Gillies versus Brewer <case>, Mr Clark faces the insuperable difficulty that what he seeks to do by way of matters pleaded in MFI 6, is to pursue a claim for unspecified damages, which arise from his imprisonment following conviction. That is not "damage" in any justifiable sense (see at [31]).
Mr Clark's extensive complaints about his solicitor and counsel have already been examined and dismissed in light of the evidence which they gave on appeal. I am satisfied, in the result, that to permit Mr Clark to pursue his proposed claims would involve an abuse of process, concerned as they are on the one hand with the conduct of his former solicitor and counsel during the trial, and on the other with the Court of Criminal Appeal's examination of that conduct on the conviction appeal.
To illustrate this point, in his further written submissions, Mr Clark advanced detailed submissions, for example, as to his complaints about the failure of Mr Webb and Mr Roff to prepare a draft proof of his evidence before the second trial. These were matters about which Mr Roff was cross-examined on appeal. Mr Clark also complained that in Mr Roff's absence, inexperienced clerks and other solicitors with inadequate knowledge of his case had attended to instruct counsel; that Mr Roff had not adequately briefed Mr Webb with his comprehensive responses and defences to the counts dealt with at the second trial; that they had failed to obtain statements from the exculpatory witness SC; that an exculpatory video had not been found in a timely manner, so that a witness DM had to be recalled to be cross examined about it, as the result of the flagrant incompetence of Mr Webb and Mr Roff; and that they had failed to follow his strict instructions
It is unnecessary to outline all of Mr Clark's other very detailed submissions as to numerous examples of what he wishes to argue was the flagrant incompetence of Mr Roff and Mr Webb in not advancing by way of his defence at trial, various defences, alibis and exculpatory material, which he had provided Mr Roff.
Despite Mr Clark's detailed submissions, it simply cannot be accepted that the claims he seeks to pursue are not hopeless or unarguable or that they enjoy a realistic prospect of success, given the case which he unsuccessfully advanced on the conviction appeal.
The claims Mr Clark now seeks to advance are also inconsistent with the concept of witness immunity discussed in Ollis versus New South Wales Crime Commission <case>; [(2007) 177 A Crim R 306] Also necessary to be borne in mind is the overriding and paramount duty which every legal practitioner owes to the Court, discussed in Gilles at [74] - [76], with which certain of Mr Clark's claims seem to be inconsistent.
Advocate's immunity applies to work by a party's legal representatives, in court or out of court which leads to a decision affecting the conduct of the case in court (see D'Orta at 500). In Attwells versus Jackson Lalic Lawyers Pty Limited what was decided in D'Orta was adhered to by the plurality, which observed (at [35]) that: "... where a final order has been made resolving litigation, a claim that "but for the advocate's conduct, there would have been a different result" is objectionable as a matter of public policy. That is because the consequences of the decision about which the claimant wishes to complain are "consequences flowing from ... a lawful result ... lawfully reached." The advocate's immunity is, therefore, justified as an aspect of the protection of the public interest in the finality and certainty of judicial decisions by precluding a contention that the decisions were not reached lawfully." (footnotes omitted)
The matters about which Mr Clark seeks to complain involve complaints about his legal representatives' work in court and that connected with his proceedings out of court, intimately connected with their work in court. That he seeks to pursue his claims in both negligence and contract, makes no difference. Nor does the fact that in 2013 he received advice that his solicitors and counsel breached their duties to him under the [Legal Profession Act 2004](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lpa2004179/) (repealed), if he has received such advice, or the nature and extent of the errors he alleges they made in the conduct of his proceedings.
As discussed in Jackson Lalic Lawyers Pty Limited versus Attwells <case> at <case> "the operation of the advocates' immunity does not depend on the degree of negligence involved. The public interest in the finality of litigation has been held to outweigh consequences to the aggrieved litigant of letting a wrong go without a remedy: D'Orta at [71] - [73]".
While, as Mr Clark submitted, in Young versus Hones <case>, the Chief Justice observed at [5] that "it is not appropriate in all cases for questions of advocate's immunity to be decided as a preliminary question", in this case Mr Clark requires the Court's leave to bring a claim which raises the question of advocate's immunity, in circumstances where he has already unsuccessfully agitated the complaints which he seeks to advance in the conviction appeal. Unquestionably, as he explained when advancing his case, Mr Clark disagrees with his conviction and the Court of Appeal's rejection of his appeal.
Both his proposed pleading and the submissions which he advanced reveal that he does not accept the Court of Criminal Appeal's conclusions about the alleged serious deficiencies of the conduct of his trial by his legal representatives. That, however, is not a basis on which it can be concluded, as it must be, before Mr Clark is granted the leave that he seeks, that his proposed claims have a prima facie basis and are not "hopeless" or "unarguable".
That Mr Clark seeks now to claim that his legal representatives acted mala fides and in dereliction of their duty, to take up the language used in authorities such as Abriel versus Rothman <case> at <case> and Swinfen versus Lord Chelmsford <case>; [(1860) 5 H&N 890], with the result that the advocates' immunity does not extend to them, takes the matter no further, given the nature of the case which he advanced on the conviction appeal. What he seeks to now pursue does not, in truth, depart from the case which he failed to establish on that appeal, he believes, because of the Court of Appeal's misapprehension of his case and the evidence which he claims proved it.
As Mr Clark submitted, he wishes to advance a case that his criminal trial lawyers did not act with due care and skill and accordingly are both criminally and civilly culpable for the dereliction of their duty to him. That, however, is in substance no different to his case on the conviction appeal. It did not succeed and cannot now be relitigated in the civil proceedings he seeks leave to pursue.
Mr Clark also wishes to pursue a case that Mr Webb and Mr Roff told blatant lies in their evidence in the appeal proceedings, about various identified materials which he believed were exculpatory and which competent counsel would have led at trial. That is also a hopeless claim which he is simply not entitled to advance, given their evidence in the appeal proceedings and the conclusions which the Court of Criminal Appeal reached on the matters over which issue was there joined. That case, too, as Mr Clark explained, depends on his view that the Court of Appeal erred in conclusions which it reached. While it is conceivable that they could be prosecuted for perjury, an exception to the witness immunity principle, the claims which Mr Clark seeks to advance have no prima facie from basis and are an abuse of process.
In the result the leave sought in respect of MFI 6 must be refused.

MFI 4
It must be remembered that what Mr Clark has to establish is that his claims are arguable and not totally hopeless (see Ford versus Simes <case> at <case>). That requires consideration of the legal principles involved in the cause of action upon which the claim is based, as well as the factual allegations in the proposed pleading (see Re Application of Potier <case> at <case>). In determining whether there is any abuse of process involved in what he seeks to pursue in MFI 4, consideration must also be given to the other proceedings which he is pursuing. Provisions of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) also arise for consideration.
MFI 4 commences with claims in relation to alleged false imprisonment, arising out of Mr Clark's arrest in January 2005, when charges were laid under the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) in relation to unlawfully obtained goods and possession of child pornography. It pleads that at trial before Garling DCJ in 2006, Mr Clark was convicted of the pornography charge and sentenced, but was found to have no case to answer in respect of another charge of assault officer in the execution of his duty. It also pleads that he was acquitted of the pornography charge after a successful appeal.
The State's case was that the leave Mr Clark sought would be refused both because of the hopelessness and futility of the proceedings which he hopes to bring and because, in part, they involve the pursuit of concurrent proceedings for substantially the same causes of action. It also identified problems with the proposed pleadings, which it is apparent, do not accord with the requirements of the Rules, in various ways, the details of which it is not necessary to further discuss in detail. Suffice it to note that the claimed duties, how they were breached and what loss or damage was caused, has not been pleaded as the Rules require. Nor is the claimed collateral abuse of process adequately pleaded, given the failure to identify the process or the individual who it is alleged invoked the process, so as to damage Mr Clark.
The claims sought to be advanced in this summons are directed to the same police officers in respect of whom claims have been advanced by Mr Clark in the proceedings dealt with by Hidden J in Clark versus Robards [2014].
Claims are made in respect of false arrest, false imprisonment and malicious prosecution. There is no tort of false arrest, but the tort of false imprisonment is concerned with the liberty of an individual, which cannot be interfered with, without valid authorisation (as Kirby J explained in Ruddock versus Taylor <case>; <case> and [140]). The elements of the tort of malicious prosecution are those earlier discussed.
Mr Clark pleads that he was arrested on 27 January 2005, charged at the police station and later that day granted conditional bail. In Clark versus R [2008] it was observed that it was after complaint by a 14 year old boy that he was shown certain videos of naked boys at Mr Clark's home, that police were informed and on 27 January 2005 they executed a search warrant at his home, taking away computer equipment. Pornographic images of boys were found on two of the hard drives then taken (see at [10]). They were the subject of the possession of pornography count of which he was convicted. The appeal was upheld, it being concluded that possession of those images had not been established, that depending on proof that Mr Clark both knew of the data on the hard drive and how to retrieve it (see at [246] - [247]).
Appeals against his convictions of the two other offences with which he had been charged and convicted were then dismissed and he was resentenced to a term of imprisonment expiring on 11 December 2009, with a non-parole period expiring on 11 June 2008.
On that sequence of events, even though not adequately pleaded, it is apparent that Mr Clark wishes to pursue claims that his arrest on 27 January 2005 and later imprisonment were unlawful, false and unjustified, claims which are both not arguable and totally hopeless. So, too, are claims that his prosecution for these offences, by an unidentified prosecutor, was malicious. That he was finally found to have no case to answer in respect of an alleged assault and possession of unlawfully obtained goods, with which he was also charged, leads to no different conclusion, on what has been pleaded.
Further, what is sought to be advanced appears to deal with the same events, namely those of 27 January 2005 and what resulted, which are already the subject of claims advanced in the 2005 proceedings. There, by his 1 April 2010 second further amended statement of claim ("the 2005 claim") Mr Clark pursues claims in trespass, conspiracy, defamation and negligence. At [31] of that pleading vicarious liability for the alleged torts of the identified police officers is pleaded. The events of 27 January are pleaded in respect of alleged trespass at [33] - [38].
Given the procedural history of the 2005 proceedings, that in these proceedings, brought only in 2014, new tortious claims in respect of the same events are sought to be pursued involves an obvious abuse of process. It also raises [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) considerations.
These proceedings were not commenced until June 2014. Under [s 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) of the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), pursuit of the claims which Mr Clark seeks leave to pursue became statute barred 6 years from the date on which his cause of action first accrued, that is, when the damage on which his claims depend occurred.
Mr Clark relies on the exception to [s 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) provided in [s 53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s53.html), in the case of a person under a "disability", with the result, he contends, that the limitation period has not yet expired. "Disability" is defined in [s 11(3)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s11.html) to include a person who is, for a continuous period of twenty-eight days or more incapable of, or substantially impeded in, the management of his or her affairs in relation to the cause of action in respect of the limitation period, by reasons which include lawful restraint of his or her person.
That Mr Clark has been impaired in the management of his while in custody, must be accepted. The extent of that impairment is arguable, given all of the litigation he has been able to pursue in that time, including as to these events. In the circumstances, however, I am not satisfied that his claims are unarguable or hopeless, because of the expiry of the limitation period. Had that been the only problem with the claims pursued in MFI 4, the leave sought could have been given.
In MFI 4 there are other claims of false arrest, false imprisonment and malicious prosecution sought to be advanced in relation to charges laid on 5 August 2008, in relation to KB, which it is claimed were withdrawn in March 2012. Those charges are the subject of a claim in trespass at [45] of the 2005 claim and so also involve obvious abuse.
Claims of false arrest, false imprisonment and malicious prosecution are sought to be advanced in relation to charges laid on 28 August 2008, in relation to CB, DM and DB, of which Mr Clark was not convicted after trial in June 2009. They are also the subject of claims in trespass at [48] of the 2005 claim and also involve abuse.
The claim of abuse of process, by unidentified person in respect of "the criminal process" the subject of other claims in MFI 4, is so vaguely pleaded that it is impossible to see a basis on which it could be concluded that this claim is either arguable, or not totally hopeless.
In the result, the leave sought in respect of MFI 4 cannot be granted.

MFI 5
By this pleading Mr Clark seeks to pursue claims in negligence for injuries which he suffered while on remand in November 2007 when he was assaulted with a concealed fire hose nozzle; when he was assaulted by an officer on 6 December 2007; when he was again assaulted on 7 December 2007; when materials relevant to the pursuit of his legal proceedings, including exculpatory evidence, were not returned to him from 1 July 2009; when he was repeatedly threatened, intimidated and assaulted by other violent offenders between 17 September 2013 and February 2014; when he was falsely charged, arrested and imprisoned on 7 and 8 May 2015 in relation to an attempt to mislead the courts that correctional centre staff were not giving him documents; that these events also involved malicious prosecution, assault, trespass to goods and negligence and abuse of process. Claims for aggravated and exemplary damages are also sought to be pursued.
There are obvious problems with this pleading, given that it also does not comply with applicable requirements of the [Uniform Civil Procedure Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/), as was the State's case.
The assault with the fire hose nozzle is already the subject of a negligence claim made in the 2005 claim (see at [125] - <case> it was observed at [482] that the foundation of such an action lies "in the abuse of the process of the system of justice by wrongfully setting the law in motion" and that "it is designed to discourage the perversion of the machinery of justice for an improper purpose". It follows that it cannot be concluded that what Mr Clark seeks to pursue as malicious prosecutions has been shown to not involve an abuse of process, or not to be hopeless or unarguable, given that what is sought to be pursued concerns Mr Clark's treatment in custody.
The same conclusion must be reached in relation to the proposed claim of abuse of process, the tort of collateral abuse of process involving as it does acts amounting to a misuse or attempted or threatened misuse of identified process, involving intentions or motives on the part of an identified person, who set the proceedings in motion, in order to effect an improper purpose (see Maxwell-Smith versus S & E Hall Pty Ltd  <case> That what Mr Clark seeks to pursue is not hopeless or unarguable has not been established.
Otherwise, what is claimed appears to be at least arguable and not totally hopeless. While Mr Clark must, accordingly, be given leave to commence these proceedings, he cannot do so on the basis of MFI 5, because, if filed, it would have to be struck out as not complying with the requirements of the Rules, earlier discussed.
Given the overriding purpose of the [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), namely the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in the proceedings and the obligations imposed by [s 56(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s56.html) on parties to assist the Court further that purpose, Mr Clark's pleadings must be recast. He should have an opportunity to do so, other than in respect of the alleged 2007 assault with the fire hose, the malicious prosecution claims and abuse of process claims, in respect of which a basis for the leave sought has not been established.

Costs and Orders
The usual order under the Rules is that costs, as agreed or assessed, will be ordered in favour of the successful party. In the case of an unrepresented litigant, a costs order is usually confined to an order for disbursements.
In this case that would be a costs order against Mr Clark in respect of MFI 4 and MFI 6 and an order in his favour, in respect of disbursements connected with his pursuit of MFI 5.
I will hear the parties if they seek a departure from the usual orders.
Otherwise, I order: . Leave to bring the proceedings proposed in MFI 4 and MFI 6 is refused.  . Leave to bring the proceedings proposed in MFI 5 is granted, other than in relation to the alleged 2007 assault with the fire hose, malicious prosecution and abuse of process claims.  . Mr Clark has leave to file an amended statement of claim pleaded in accordance with the requirements of the [Uniform Civil Procedure
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/ucpr2005305/) in respect of the other claims sought to be advanced in MFI 5.
 
Amendments June 2016 - minor typographical amendments to [38], [59], [85] and [106] * * * 
