

Andrew V Forrest [1997] NSWSC 58 (28 February 1997) `ANDREW V FORREST` `3659/95` ``Friday 28 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Up until 11 October 1989 the parties were partners in an accountancy firm. Differences arose between them. On 21 September 1995, the plaintiff, Mr Andrew, issued a summons seeking a declaration that he was entitled to possession of all records of companies where he had personally been appointed the official liquidator or Trustee in Bankruptcy. On 11 October 1995, the defendants cross-claimed, claiming that there was a partnership from 1 November 1989 and that the plaintiff had not been faithful as a partner. A defence to cross claim was filed on 5 December 1995 denying any liability.

On 1 November 1995, the cross claimants sought various declarations and orders as to the liability of the cross defendant to pay over an account for fees he was receiving as a registered liquidator. That motion came on before me on 21
November 1995. My adjudication is recorded in the Associate's sheet as follows:- "There being no right to take part of an account, the notice of motion of 1 November 1995 is dismissed as incompetent. The only remedy between the parties under clause 15 of the partnership agreement is to take an account. Order that it be referred to the 
Master to take accounts between the parties. Direct that the cross claimants are to file accounts no later than 24/11/95. Stand over to the Senior Master to give further directions from now on." 
Since then the matter has progressed slowly. It would seem that the accounts are still at the stage of being vouched before a Registrar.

Ms Ougham for the plaintiff, now seeks an order that the cross claimants pay the costs of the motion of 1 November 1995 and that those costs be assessed and paid forthwith. She cites to support her application the decision of the
Chief Judge in Charlie Brown Pty Ltd versus Green 3 July 1995, unreported, where his Honour held that where a separate question is determined completely discrete from any other relief claimed in a partnership suit, it is appropriate that those questions be dealt with separately and the costs relating to them should be assessable and payable forthwith.

Mr S Bell, who appeared for the defendant, seemed to me to come to court preparing to consent to an order for costs, as, after all, his client's notice of motion had been dismissed as incompetent, but emboldened by the negative impact Ms Ougham's advocacy had upon the court, shifted to the position that the motion was a stage in the partnership proceedings which changed its direction.

I do not, with respect, think that the decision of the Chief Judge is of assistance in the instant case. The notice of motion filed by the cross claimants which I dealt with in November 1995 was not seeking to deal with discrete questions but rather went to the whole issue in the suit. At that stage it would seem that all parties were pretending in their pleadings that the partnership still existed. They since seem to have taken the attitude that the partnership terminated in August 1995. Up until November 1995 each party had been seeking some partial relief. Initially, the plaintiff sought relief of the type granted by the Chief Judge in Brien versus Barton 28 February , unreported, where he held that where one partner in a firm of chartered accountants is a registered liquidator, that partner is entitled to have the books and records of the companies which he is administering returned to him from his former partners. The cross claim was then to endeavour to obtain some satisfaction for the remaining partners by dealing with certain particular matters which, if resolved in their favour, would mean that the plaintiff would have to pay them moneys.

The notice of motion of 1 November 1995 was misconceived. However, up to that time both parties were taking the view that they were entitled to litigate the rights in the partnership that were favourable to them. It was clear by
November 1995 that the partnership had to be dissolved. The ordinary rule is that the parties must have consented to the ordinary costs of the winding up of their affairs being borne by them as part of the partnership expenses.

The litigation between these parties has been acrimonious as often happens when a firm of professional people is dissolved and there have been far more interlocutory steps taken than one would expect to be the case for practical men and women of commerce. However, the present motion was the vehicle whereby the parties could be steered into the court of taking accounts and winding up all of the questions between them. Accordingly I believe it was really part of the mainstream winding up proceedings of the partnership and the costs of the motion should be considered to be part of the costs of the winding up of the partnership and dealt with in the accounts accordingly.

Accordingly I make no order as to the motion of 1 November 1995.

The costs of the appearance before me in February 1997 should also be part of the costs of the winding up.
 * * * 
