

Orbit Travel Services Pty Ltd and Anor versus Trustees-Travel Compensation Fund and Ors Matter No 3647/96 [1997] NSWSC 230 (4 June 1997) 
Orbit Travel Services Pty Limited & Anor versus Trustees-Travel Compensation 
Fund & Ors /96 June 1997 
Hodgson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
NO 3647 OF 1996 ORBIT TRAVEL SERVICES PTY LIMITED & ANOR V TRUSTEES-TRAVEL 
COMPENSATION FUND & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 4th April 1997, Windeyer, J. considered three Notices of
Motion, including one filed on 17th February 1997 by the first, second and third cross-defendants seeking that the Cross-claim of the defendant filed on th December 1996 be struck out. His Honour did not finally determine this
Notice of Motion, but ordered that the matter proceed on pleadings, and that the pleaded cross-claim be limited at the present time to the relief sought in pars.1-6 and par.8 of the Cross-claim filed on 5th December 1996. Windeyer, J.
then stood the Notice of Motion over generally, with liberty to restore on seven days' notice, and made the costs of the Notice of Motion to that date costs in the proceedings.

I note in passing that an earlier order for costs made on that day referred to the Notice of Motion of 17th February 1997: it seems clear that this order was meant to be about the costs of another Notice of Motion, namely that filed on th February 1997.

Pursuant to the order for pleadings, a Statement of Claim was filed on 17th
April 1997. A Defence and a pleaded Cross-claim was filed on 2nd May 1997. The defendant has now restored to the list the Notice of Motion of 17th February , and it is this which I am now considering.

BACKGROUND 
To deal with the Notice of Motion, it is necessary to give a background of the facts, relevant legislative provisions, and the nature of these proceedings.
The plaintiff Orbit (which is also the first cross-defendant) has, at material times, been a travel agent licensed pursuant to the [Travel Agents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s11.html) of that Act deals with conditions of licences under the Act; and ss.(1) and (2) of that section are in the following terms: (1) The Commissioner may: upon the granting of an application for a licence, and at any other time, impose conditions or restrictions subject to which the licence is to be held; and upon application or of the Commissioner's own motion, at any time vary or revoke any of these conditions or restrictions or any other conditions or restrictions that the Commissioner may impose in relation to the holding of the licence.

A licence is subject to: a condition that the licensee shall, at all times during the currency of the licence, be a participant in the compensation scheme; a condition that each place at which the licensee carries on business as a travel agent shall at all times comply with such standards, and with such other requirements, as may be prescribed; any prescribed conditions and restrictions; and any conditions and restrictions imposed under subsection (1) or any other provision of this Act, of which written notice has been served on the licensee.

The compensation scheme referred to in [s.11(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s11.html) is defined in [s.3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s3.html) to mean the scheme prescribed under [s.57](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s57.html) of the Act. It appears that the effect of Regulation 20 of the Travel Agents
Regulation 1987 and/or 1995 is that the prescribed scheme is a compensation scheme established by a trust deed made on 12th December 1986: see Travel
Compensation Fund v. Travel Guide Pty. Ltd., Federal Court, Lehane, J., 13th
February 1997.

The settlors of that trust deed were certain Ministers of the governments of
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia. Clauses -13 of the deed deal with applications to become a participant in the fund, and contain provisions concerning the financial resources of applicants. Most directly relevant is cl.12, which is in the following terms: .1 The Trustees shall publish from time to time guidelines as to the criteria which they may use to determine whether a person has and is likely to continue to have sufficient financial resources to enable the person to carry on business as a travel agent.
 .2 The Trustees may make it a condition of their determining that a person is or is to remain eligible to be a contributor to the Fund that the person comply with any one or more of the following: that the person maintain and operate the person's business as a travel agent in a manner specified by the Trustees and, in particular, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Trustees may require the persons: to maintain a trust account in respect of moneys received from clients; to increase the capital of the travel agency business; to reduce debt of the travel agency business.
 that the person's business be guaranteed in a way, or by a person or class of person, specified by the Trustees.
 that the person maintain and operate the books of account and other accounting records of the travel agency business in a manner specified by the Trustees.
 that a report be obtained at the expense of the person from a duly qualified auditor or accountant nominated by the Trustees stating that the accounting records of the travel agency give a true and fair view of the financial position of the business. that a report be obtained at the expense of the person from a duly qualified auditor or accountant nominated by the Trustees providing such information as will permit the Trustees to determine whether the person has sufficient financial resources to carry on business as a travel agent.
 that a person provide a floating charge over the assets and undertakings of the person's business in favour of the Trustees.
 .3 The Trustees may - determine a date or period of time for compliance with any condition referred to in clause 12.2.
 authorise payment of the cost of obtaining any report referred to in clause 12.2 from the Fund notwithstanding any other provision of this Deed to the contrary.

Payments from the fund are dealt with relevantly in cls.15.1 and 15.2 which are as follows: .1 Subject to this Deed, the Trustees shall pay compensation out of the Fund to a beneficiary - who is a client; and who has suffered or may suffer pecuniary loss arising directly from a failure to account for money or other valuable consideration by a participant - where - the failure to account arises from an act or omission by the participant or an employee or agent of the participant; and the client is not protected against the loss by a policy of insurance.
 .2 The Trustees may in their absolute discretion: pay compensation to a beneficiary under clause 15.1 in relation to any consequential pecuniary loss suffered by reason of a failure to account; and pay compensation, including compensation in relation to any consequential pecuniary loss suffered by reason of a failure to account, to a person to whom they are not required to pay compensation under clause 15.1.

The defendant and cross-claimant in these proceedings is the Travel
Compensation Fund: s.52 of the Act provides that the compensation scheme trustees may sue and be sued in that name.

The other most relevant provision of the Act is s.40, which is in the following terms: (1) In this section: "unlisted person" means a person (other than an exempted person or the holder of a licence) who carries on business as a travel agent under a name or names that is not included in a list in force under subsection (2).

The Commissioner shall as soon as practicable after the commencement of this section and from time to time thereafter, publish in the Gazette a list in which is specified: the name or names under which each holder of a licence at the time of preparation of the list was authorised to carry on business as a travel agent; the date on which the list comes into force, being a date that is not earlier than the date of publication of the list in the Gazette; and the date on which the list ceases to be in force.

Where a payment is made to a claimant under the compensation scheme by reason of an act or omission by a person carrying on business as a travel agent, the compensation scheme trustees are subrogated to the rights of the claimant in relation to the act or omission.

Where the rights conferred by subsection (3) on the compensation scheme trustees are exercisable against a body corporate, those rights are enforceable jointly against the body corporate and the person who were its directors at the time of the act or omission and severally against the body corporate and each of those directors. 
Where it is proved that an act or omission by a body corporate occurred without the knowledge or consent of a director of the body corporate, rights are not enforceable as provided by subsection (4) against the director in relation to the act or omission.

Where an act or omission referred to in subsection (3) was the act or omission of a person who, at the time of the act or omission, was an unlisted person, any other person who, in the course of carrying on a business, provided the unlisted person with goods or services in relation to which the act or omission occurred shall, for the purposes of subsections (3), (4) and (5) but in relation only to the act or omission in so far as it involved those goods or services, be deemed to have, at the time of the act or omission, carried on business as a travel agent in partnership with the unlisted person.

A person who, in the course of carrying on a business, provides an unlisted person with goods or services for disposal in a manner that would constitute the carrying on by the unlisted person of business as a travel agent shall be deemed to have aided, abetted, counselled and procured the carrying on by the unlisted person of business as a travel agent.

Subsection (6) does not have effect in relation to an act or omission that occurs in relation to goods or services, and subsection (7) does not have effect in relation to goods or services, that are provided at a time when there is no list in force under subsection (2).

When Orbit applied for participation in the compensation scheme, the Travel
Compensation Fund required it to take steps to meet its financial viability criteria. Orbit elected to take one of the alternatives suggested, namely the giving of a bank guarantee in the sum of $18,500.00. This guarantee was provided by Westpac on 23rd January 1992, in favour of the Travel Compensation
Fund. It contained a term that it could be applied by the Fund "in such circumstances for such purposes and in such manner as the Fund in its absolute discretion may determine". From time to time, further guarantees were required and provided, including another guarantee by Westpac in the same terms, dated th June 1994, in the sum of $100,000.00.

It appears that all existing bank guarantees provided by Orbit were replaced by a bank guarantee dated 3rd August 1995 given by National Australia Bank, according to which the Bank was holding at the disposal of the Fund $173,500.00 "in connection with any liability due to the Travel Compensation
Fund from Orbit Travel Services Pty. Limited".

Between about March 1995 and about September 1996, it appears that about 121 persons made payments totalling about $880,000.00 in respect of travel arrangements which they apparently made with the fourth cross-defendant, Vera
Nemes. It seems also that these persons claim losses totalling that amount through failure to account. It also appears that during at least some of the period in question, Ms. Nemes had an association with Orbit. In particular, the Travel Trade Year Book in various editions between 1990 and June 1996 records Ms. Nemes as a member of the Orbit "Selling Staff". There is a service agreement between Orbit and Ms. Nemes dated 8th May 1996. It seems also that from time to time Orbit paid commission to Ms. Nemes.

The Travel Compensation Fund contends that Orbit is liable for the alleged failure to account. It also contends that the 121 persons are entitled to payment of their loss under cl.15.1 of the trust deed, or else are proper objects of a discretionary payment under cl.15.2 of the deed. The Fund contends that it is entitled to be indemnified in relation to such payments by
Orbit.

In about October last year, the Fund gave notice to Orbit that it proposed to call up the guarantee given by National Australia Bank, giving rise to these proceedings.

On 14th October 1996, on Orbit's undertaking as to damages, an ex parte injunction was granted restraining the Travel Compensation Fund from calling up the bank guarantee up to and including 17th October 1996. On 17th October , this injunction was continued until further order.

The Fund put on a Cross-claim in the proceedings seeking inter alia the following orders: . A Declaration as to whether or not the fourth cross defendant was the servant or agent of Orbit Travel Services Pty. Limited at any time in the period 1 March 1995 to 31 July 1996 (inclusive).
 . A Declaration as to whether any person who entrusted money to the fourth cross defendant in the period 1 March 1995 to 31 July 1996 (inclusive) did so as a beneficiary within the meaning of the Regulations made under the [Travel Agents Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/).
 . A Declaration as to whether any person who entered into travel arrangements with Vera Nemes in the period 1 March 1995 to 31 July 1996 (inclusive) did so directly with a licensed person within the meaning of the Regulations made under the [Travel Agents Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/).
 . A Declaration as to whether or not Orbit Travel Services Pty. Limited has a liability to any of the Claimants named in the Defendant/Cross Claimant's documents headed "Claimants Payments - Vera Nemes/Orbit as at 23 September 1996".
 . A Declaration as to whether or not, if a payment is made by the Cross Claimant to any of the Claimants named in the Defendant/Cross Claimant's document headed "Claimants Payments - Vera Nemes/Orbit as at 23 September 1996", the Cross Claimant is subrogated to the rights of the Claimant in relation to the act or omission as against the First Cross Defendant. . A Declaration as to whether or not any rights the subject of the preceding Declaration are enforceable jointly against the First, Second and Third Cross Defendants pursuant to [s.40(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) of the [Travel Agents Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/).
 ...
 . A Declaration as to whether or not the First, Second or Third Cross Defendants have a liability to the Cross Claimant pursuant to [s.40(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html) or [40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/s40.html)(7) of the [Travel Agents Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/taa1986153/).

The Cross-claim sought further declarations arising under the Fair Trading Act and the Trade Practices Act, but pursuant to the judgment of Windeyer, J. of th April 1997, these declarations are not presently being pursued.

Also pursuant to that judgment, on 2nd May 1997, the Fund pleaded its Cross- claim. The relevant paragraphs of this pleading are pars.10-20, which are as follows:- . At all material times, and from at least 1991 to the middle of 1996 the Fourth Cross Defendant: was held out by the First Cross Defendant, to be a member of the sales staff of the First Cross Defendant; was not a participant in the Compensation Scheme within the meaning of the Act and the Trust Deed; and was not a licensed travel agent under the Act.
 . In the period from about October 1995 to May 1996, and no earlier than 1 March 1995 and no later than 31 July 1996, various persons entered into travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements within the meaning of the Trust Deed, which were effected by or through the Fourth Cross Defendant.
 . The persons referred to in the previous paragraph entrusted money or other valuable consideration to the Fourth Cross Defendant in connection with those travel arrangements or travel-related arrangements and accordingly, were beneficiaries within the meaning of the Trust Deed.
 . Of those beneficiaries, certain persons ("the Claimants") did not receive the full benefit of that money or other valuable consideration and, accordingly, had made claims on the Cross Claimant at the time of the commencement of these proceedings in respect of the said pecuniary loss as set out in the document annexed hereto and headed "Claimants Payments - Vera Nemes/Orbit as at 23 September 1996". The claims number 121 and total $884,255.00.
 . The Claimants are persons who have suffered pecuniary loss arising from an act or omission of the Fourth Cross Defendant and from the failure to account by the Fourth Cross Defendant and/or First Cross Defendant.
 . The Claimants entrusted the money and other valuable consideration as set out in the "Claimants Payments - Vera Nemes/Orbit as at 23 September 1996" document, to the Fourth Cross Defendant as an employee, servant or agent of the First Cross Defendant.
 . Accordingly, the First Cross Claimant has failed to account to each of the Claimants for the money or other valuable consideration entrusted to the Fourth Cross Defendant and the First Cross Claimant is indebted to the claimants in respect of the amounts as set out in the "Claimants Payments - Vera Nemes/Orbit as at 23 September 1996" document.
 . The said failure to account is a failure that arises from an act or omission by the First Cross Defendant or by the Fourth Cross Defendant as an employee, servant or agent of the First Cross Defendant.
 . By section 40(3) of the Act and by deed executed by each of the Claimants, upon payment being made to the Claimants, the Cross Claimant is subrogated to the rights of the Claimants in respect of the act or omission.
 . Alternatively, to the extent that the Fourth Cross Defendant carried on business as a travel agent on her own account and was not an employee, servant or agent of the First Cross Defendant, the Fourth Cross Defendant was an "unlisted person" within the meaning of section 40(1) of the Act.
 . The First Cross Defendant, in the course of carrying on its business, provided the Fourth Cross Defendant with goods or services in relation to the act or omission giving rise to the claims by the Claimants and, accordingly, by section 40(6) of the Act the First Cross Defendant is jointly and severally liable in respect of the failure to account by the Fourth Cross Defendant.

SUBMISSIONS 
The parties have provided written submissions, which I will leave with the papers. To distinguish these from other submissions that are with the papers,
I have initialled them and dated them 27th May 1997. I will be brief in outlining the submissions of the parties.

Mr. Gray for the applicant submitted that the cross-claimant had no cause of action under s.40 until actual payment had been made to claimants; and that because s.40(3) provided for subrogation, any action had to be brought in the name of the claimant: Simpson v. Thomson [(1877) 3 App.Cas. 279]; King v.
Victorian Insurance Co. [(1896) AC 250.] Accordingly, no cause of action had arisen when the cross-claim was instituted: Baldry v.
Jackson [(1976) 2 NSWLR 415]; Ritz
Hotel v. Charles of the Ritz [(1988) 15 NSWLR 158] at 195;
Fernance v. Nominal Defendant [(1989) 17 NSWLR 710] at 718,
Accordingly, the Fund had no locus standi to bring the cross-claim:
Thorne RDC v. Bunting [(1972) Ch. 470]; Parramatta City
Council v. Sandel [(1973) 1 NSWLR 151.] 
There being no existing cause of action, declaratory relief could be granted only in exceptional circumstances: Guarantee Trust Co. v. Hannay [(1915) 2
KB 536];
Johnco Nominees v. Albury-Wodonga NSW Corporation [(1977) 1 NSWLR 43] at 50, 57;
Transrealties v. Grbac [(1975) 1 NSWLR 170] at 183-4;
McGarrigle v. Public Service Board [(1979) 1 NSWLR 292] at 303.
Any claim for a declaration was entirely hypothetical; and the proposed declarations were not clear and precise. The case was akin to an insurer seeking a declaration as to whether, if it indemnified an insured, it could recover its loss from a third party: no court would grant such relief.

There was a deficiency of parties, in that the claimants would need to be joined: Mittagong Shire Council v. Wood [(1978) 38 LGRA 160.] A declaration would not finally and completely determine the controversy, but would encourage a multiplicity of proceedings: see [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), [s.63.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s63.html) 
On the need for precision in the proposed declarations, Mr. Gray also referred to Tannous v. Mercantile Mutual Insurance [(1978) 2 NSWLR 331] at 335;
Global Funds Management v. Rooney [(1994) 36 NSWLR 122] at 136.
In further support of the proposition that a declaration will not be made on future or hypothetical facts, Mr. Gray also relied on University of NSW v.
Moorehouse <case>; [(1977) 133 CLR 1] at 9-10, 24; Dormer v. Solo Investments No.2 [(1974) 1
NSWLR 428] at 434-5; Servcorp Aust. v. Abgarus [(1996) 38 NSWLR ]
at 284.

Mr. Francey for the respondent submitted that the case was one appropriate for declaratory relief, pursuant to [s.75](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s75.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/); and he referred to Forster v. Jododex Australia <case>; [(1975) 127 CLR 421.] Mr. Francey also relied on Re May [(1917) 2 Ch. 126]; Attorney-
General v. Roe [(1915) 2 Ch. 235]; London
County Council v. Greenwich Corporation [(1929) 1 Ch. 305.] If and insofar as it was necessary to join claimants, consideration should be given to appointing the first defendant to represent them pursuant to Pt.8 r.13(2): see also Carnie v. Esanda Pty. Limited <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 398.] 
Mr. Francey also submitted that the substantive issues raised by the cross- claim were also raised by the plaintiff's Statement of Claim.

DECISION 
In my opinion, in order to determine this application, it is necessary to focus squarely on the nature of the proceedings brought by the plaintiff
Orbit. The original summons simply sought an injunction until further order against the Fund calling up the guarantee. The Statement of Claim seeks an injunction until either the claimants or the Fund have obtained judgment against Orbit in respect of moneys covered by the guarantee.

Cases such as Wood Hall v. Pipeline Authority [(1979) 141 CLR 143] and
Hortico Australia v. Energy Equipment Australia [(1985) 1 NSWLR 545] show that the courts will not readily restrain the beneficiary of a guarantee such as the one in question here from calling up the guarantee: what is required is a contractual term between the parties precluding such an action, or possibly proof that to call up the guarantee would be contrary to the purpose for which the guarantee was provided: see my unreported decision of Sabemo v. Malaysia
Hotel Australia, 5th July 1990 (reversed on a question of construction by the
Court of Appeal) and Pedna v. Sitep Societa, Santow, J., 8th and 9th January .

In the present case, par.7 of the plaintiff's Statement of Claim alleges that no event entitling the Fund to make a demand on National Australia Bank for the sum of $173,500.00 or any part thereof has occurred. That allegation has been put in issue by the Defence. No particulars of the allegation have been sought or given.

In support of the allegation, Mr. Gray has pointed to the reference in the guarantee to "any liability due to the Travel Compensation Fund from Orbit
Travel Services Pty. Limited"; and he submitted that there was a contractual term to the effect that the Fund cannot call up the guarantee except to satisfy a fully constituted liability of Orbit to the Fund. However, as submitted by Mr. Francey, in my opinion it is by no means clear that this is the effect of the guarantee and the contract or arrangement between the parties; especially in circumstances where the guarantee was given in substitution for earlier guarantees which expressly gave the Fund an unfettered discretion to call up the guarantee.

In any event, it has not been submitted by Mr. Gray, and in my opinion it is not even faintly arguable, that the contract or arrangement between the parties is that the Fund should not call up the guarantee until it or the claimants have obtained judgment. Accordingly, unless at the final hearing
Orbit can make out a case that there is no basis whatsoever on which the Fund can call up the guarantee, it would have to show that justice required that the Fund be restrained from calling up the guarantee before judgment was obtained; and in my opinion one minimum requirement for this would be that it was appropriate for the matter to be litigated in other proceedings and Orbit was doing everything reasonable towards bringing those other proceedings to finality.

That is, in my opinion, either Orbit must in these proceedings negative every reasonably arguable basis on which the Fund could call up the guarantee, or alternatively Orbit must at least be promoting the expeditious determination in other proceedings of the true state of things between Orbit and the Fund.
The need for an expeditious determination of the position under either alternative is particularly important in this case, where the undertaking as to damages supporting the injunction is given only by a company which appears to have a deficiency of assets, and there is no provision for the payment of a notional interest on the amount of the guarantee into Court or into some appropriate account pending the determination of the proceedings. In fact, there is no suggestion of other proceedings being taken by Orbit, and no occasion to require the Fund to commence other proceedings; so in reality it is the former alternative which must apply here.

In my opinion, as the case appears at present, it is reasonably arguable by the Fund that it does have a discretion to call on the guarantee. It is also reasonably arguable, in my opinion, that even if the contract or arrangement between the parties does not give the Fund an unfettered discretion, it does permit the Fund to call on the guarantee to put itself in funds for the purpose of paying claims under cl.15.1 or 15.2 of the trust deed. In my opinion, it is also reasonably arguable that the Fund can seek exoneration in advance from Orbit as the party primarily liable for the claims in question: cf. in relation to guarantors Thomas v. Nottingham Football Club [(1972) 1
Ch. 596](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281972%29%201%20Ch%20596 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Woolmington v. Bronze Lamp Restaurant [(1984) 2 NSWLR 242.] The latter two issues are matters which the plaintiff Orbit would need to negative to make out its entitlement to an injunction; and would in turn require determination of whether the claims made by the claimants are within [s.40(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s40.html) or s.[40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s40.html)(6) with respect to Orbit, and would therefore raise the relationship between Ms.
Nemes and Orbit in relation to the claims.

As I have said, the Fund's position on these issues is reasonably arguable, and so these issues would have to be determined at the final hearing, if Orbit is to make out its case for an injunction; and accordingly, it is necessary, on Orbit's case, to have these issues determined, even if, as submitted by Mr.
Gray, [s.40(3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s40.html) requires payment before the Fund has a fully constituted claim against Orbit and/or requires the use of the claimant's name; and even if it may ultimately be determined that the Fund cannot call on the guarantee unless and until there is a fully constituted liability of Orbit to the Fund.

In my opinion, it also follows from the above discussion that, if there is presently a deficiency of parties, that is a matter which would need to be remedied by Orbit, and not by the Fund. My present view is that, although the determination of the issues I have identified will involve making decisions which in effect pass upon the rights of claimants, it is not necessary that they be joined. If they are not joined, then they are not bound by the decision; and yet on the other hand, having regard to the relatively small size of individual claims, it is likely as a practical matter that the decision will resolve all matters which need to be resolved. There would be considerable costs and complications of attempting to join 121 parties, which in my opinion would be disproportionate to the advantages of so doing.
Furthermore, although there may be differences in the positions of the different claimants, it is by no means clear at present that these differences will be important on the question of agency; and insofar as there may be significant questions concerning the quantification of the loss of individual claimants, they could be left to separate subsequent enquiries.

If, however, I come to be persuaded that the claimants are necessary parties, it seems to me that prima facie they could be represented by one party, though not, I think, any of the existing parties: see Carnie <case>; [182
CLR 398.] It may be necessary, in that event, eventually to split off individual cases, at least in relation to quantification of loss.

As submitted by Mr. Gray, there are problems in attempting to run 121 different cases in these proceedings. However, I am not convinced that those problems are insurmountable, and I think the parties may be able to co-operate to ensure that this can be done without undue expense or delay. The Fund wishes to use statements made by the individual claimants. It seems to me that it might be reasonable for Orbit to agree to that being done subject to specified claimants being made available for cross-examination.

It may also be necessary to refine to some extent the declarations sought in the cross-claim. However, the details have not been closely examined in submissions; and before attempting to do so, it seems to me that there should be some attempt by the parties to define the real issues in the case, having regard to this judgment.

In the result, I refuse the application. Mr. Gray has foreshadowed an argument that it is being refused on a ground quite different from that put by the
Fund. However, the point that the significant issues were raised by the
Statement of Claim was made, if not exactly as I have made it; and my present tentative view is that the applicant should pay the respondent's costs of the
Notice of Motion incurred since the judgment of Windeyer, J. of 4th April .
 * * * 
