

Regina versus Milat Matter No Cca 60438/96 [1997] NSWSC 540 (4 November 1997) 
Last Updated: 16 February 1999 
REGINA versus IVAN ROBERT MARCO MILAT /96 November 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Meagher JA, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: The trial of the appellant commenced on 25 March 1996 and concluded on 27 July 1996. On 5 August 1996 a notice of appeal was filed. On 21 February 1997 the solicitors who were then acting for the appellant filed an amended notice of appeal and provided grounds of appeal. The appellant in subsequent communications to the Registrar indicated that he adopts and intends to rely upon those grounds of appeal, in addition to some other matters he has put in writing to the Registrar. 
On 4 August 1997 the solicitors wrote to the Registry saying that they were continuing to act for the appellant in the matter on a pro bono basis. On 11
August 1997 there was a call over at which today's hearing date was fixed and a timetable was set for filing of further written material by both sides to the appeal.

Between 12 August 1997 and 20 October 1997 there was a series of communications between the solicitors for the appellant and the Registry, the appellant and the Registrar and the Crown. In the course of those communications the Registry was informed of some changes in arrangements concerning the appellant's representation and was ultimately informed that the appellant had decided not to accept the offer of the solicitors to represent him on a pro bono basis and had decided to conduct his own appeal.

The appellant submitted further material to the Registrar and foreshadowed that he would be making an application for an adjournment when the matter came on for hearing today.

When the matter was called on for hearing today the appellant indicated that he would like his appeal adjourned until some date in the new year. The application for an adjournment was opposed by the Crown.

The Court is not satisfied that the appellant has not had a proper opportunity to prepare his appeal and does not consider that any injustice will be caused to the appellant by proceeding today with the hearing of the appeal.

There is a large public interest in having this appeal brought on and heard.
However, we have indicated to the appellant that he will be given an opportunity, as often happens, or as not uncommonly happens, in criminal appeals, to file further written submissions in support of his appeal after today's hearing.

We will give the appellant until Friday 28 November 1997 to file any additional written submissions he wishes to make in support of his appeal, and we will give the Crown until Friday 5 December 1997 to file any response it wishes to make to those submissions.
 * * * 
