

Masri versus Marinko and Anor Matter No 12383/93 [1998] NSWSC 467 (4 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 November 1998 
MASRI versus MARINKO & ANOR /93 June 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
Name of Case: MASRI versus MARINKO & ANOR 
Proceedings: 12383/1993 
Dates of Hearing: 27, 28 May 1998 
Date of Judgment: 4 June 1998 
Counsel for Plaintiff: Mr A J Leslie QC/Mr M J McAuley 
Solicitors for Plaintiff: Paul A Curtis & Co 
Counsel for Defendants: Mr A J Sullivan QC 
Solicitors for Defendants: Blake Dawson Waldron 
Claim by plaintiff for nervous shock. Liability admitted.

Matters to be excluded from consideration: Hinze versus Berry [[1970] 2 QB 40] considered and applied.

Difficulty in assessing damages for nervous shock.
 "Double dipping" by virtue of recovery under Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer by one injured party and, independently, for loss of wages by the care provider considered and rejected: Donnelly versus Joyce <case>; [[1974] QB 454] considered. 
I N D E X 
Page 
Introduction 1 
The Present Proceedings 6 
A Review Of The Evidence 
The Plaintiff 20 
The Medical Evidence 29 
Conclusions Thus Far From The Evidence 43 
General Damages 44 
Past Economic Loss 45 
Loss Of Earning Capacity 46 
Further Matters To Be Considered 47 
The "Double Dipping" Argument 47 
Conclusions 57 
Orders 57 
MASRI versus MARINKO & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
The plaintiff, Mr Issam Masri, for whom Mr A.J. Leslie of Queen's Counsel and
Mr M.J. McAuley of Counsel appeared, was born in Lebanon on 1 February 1953.
He is one of a large family and, after receiving a good education, he left school in 1970 and was employed by his father in a steel fabrication factory as a boilermaker/welder. He left this employment in 1975 and worked as a boilermaker/welder in the United Arab Emirates, and then as a motor vehicle trader in Germany. He migrated to Australia in September 1981 and worked for a period as a boilermaker/welder.

On 29 March 1982 he married his wife, Aisha, who was born on 15 September
There are two children of the marriage, Daniel, who was born on 2 August , and a daughter, Joelle, who was born on 21 August 1987.

He remained in permanent employment and, by about 1989, he was employed as a salesman in the motor vehicle industry. He rose to the position of an assistant manager and, in February 1991, he was offered the position as a retail sales manager at Sydney Mitsubishi at Glebe. He negotiated the terms of his employment, and it was agreed that he should commence work on 1 April 1991 on a base salary of $40,000 per annum. His salary package included, in addition to that, commission on sales he made and the use of a motor vehicle.
He said that he was guaranteed, in the sense that in all probability if he worked well he would earn, an amount from commissions bringing the total financial package to $80,000 per annum.

In the financial year ended 30 June 1990 his average net weekly earnings were $600 and, for the first 36 weeks of the financial year ended 30 June 1991 they increased to approximately $631. It was not in issue that Mr Masri had been, from the time he left school, in full time employment and that by early 1990 he was in receipt of a salary of the level to which I have referred, and was able to negotiate for a better position and salary at Sydney Mitsubishi. I am satisfied that, but for the events to which I shall refer, he would have taken up that employment, and that he would have remained in full time employment, at an equally rewarding remuneration, until he decided to retire, probably in his early to mid sixties. The contrary was not submitted.

Late in 1990 or early in 1991 Mr Masri and his wife discussed their future and decided they would have no further children, and that she would obtain employment in a secretarial position. They wished to improve their financial position for the benefit of the family. She made some arrangements to obtain employment. However, shortly prior to 21 February 1991, Mrs Masri was confirmed to be pregnant. She and Mr Masri discussed what should be done and decided that the pregnancy should be terminated.

This led to their attending on the first and second defendants on 21 February
Mr Masri was told that he would require further money to provide a contraceptive device for his wife, and he left the surgery to obtain it. Upon his return he was told by an extremely agitated secretary that Mrs Masri had collapsed, it being stated that this was due to the treatment she had received and her propensity to epilepsy. She had been admitted to Sydney Hospital in a coma, where she remained for some time. In fact Mrs Masri suffered severe global hypoxic brain injury followed by severe amnestic syndrome and action myoclonus, which is irreversible, and which has left her in a pitiful physical and mental condition. Her physical and cognitive functions have been grossly impaired and will remain so for the rest of her life. She is unable to care for herself and requires full time physical care.

She brought proceedings in this Court through her tutor, the Protective
Commissioner, against the present defendants. They were settled for $3.7m. The settlement had to be approved and evidence put forward in support of the appropriateness of the amount showed that it included $317,200 for past gratuitous care at the rate of $1,000 per week, and $2,726,850 for future care and management at the rate of $300 per day. Her judgment was paid to the
Protective Commissioner, where it is, or has been until recently, administered, basically, by a Mr White. It will be necessary to deal with that evidence in more detail when considering certain submissions.

Mr Masri has not engaged in gainful employment since 21 February 1991 and, accordingly, he did not take up the position with Sydney Mitsubishi. Mrs Masri remained in Sydney Hospital until 9 April 1991, when she was transferred to
Fairfield Hospital, where she remained until June 1991. She was unconscious for a long period whilst in Sydney Hospital, and, at a quite early stage, Mr
Masri was advised that it was unlikely that she would live.

He has devoted himself to her care and rehabilitation ever since. He has given detailed evidence of the care he has bestowed upon her and the steps he has taken to assist her rehabilitation, and I do not think that anyone could have listened to his evidence without being moved by his complete devotion to this task, which has also included caring for the two children, and which has sought to cover all aspects which may be relevant to improving her physical and mental condition so far as possible. Mr Masri has provided for his wife's every need and has not only had to cope with and handle her mental and physical disorientation, but also her physical inability to care for herself in any way. His evidence as to these matters was not challenged and, as I have said, one can only have the highest regard for everything which he has done.

I accept Mr Masri as a witness of complete truth. He gave his evidence in a manner which did not seek to exaggerate the enormity of the situation with which he was confronted, and whilst on several occasions he showed some distress, he maintained, in circumstances which must have been very difficult as he gave his evidence, restraint and composure.

Not only did Mr Masri seek all appropriate medical assistance in Australia for
Mrs Masri, but he took her to Germany to try to find some cure and, some seven months ago, he, Mrs Masri and the children returned to Lebanon, where they are able to live closer to some members of the family.

Whilst one can only have the greatest sympathy and highest admiration for Mr
Masri having regard to the circumstances, the awarding to him of damages, which he seeks, must be carried out conformably with the applicable legal principles. One must be careful against inflating the damages, albeit unwittingly, because of that sympathy and admiration. I would not wish a submission to be made against my award of the type made against O'Connor J's award in Hinze versus Berry [[1970] 2 QB 40] at p.46.

The Present Proceedings 
Mr Masri has sued the defendants alleging that in consequence of their negligence, which was not in issue before me, he has suffered nervous shock and he claims damages pursuant to the common law and s.4(1) of the [Law
Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1944404/) .

The parties provided the following written statement of issues to the Court:- "1. For assessment of damages only. Defendants have admitted breach of duty of care and plaintiff has abandoned claim for aggravated & exemplary damages.
 . Whether plaintiff suffered nervous shock and, if so, whether nervous shock is of a continuing nature.
 . Whether losses alleged by plaintiff flow from nervous shock and, if so, to what extent.
 . Extent of residual earning capacity of plaintiff." 
On the hearing Mr Leslie and Mr A.J. Sullivan of Queen's Counsel, who appeared for the defendants, agreed these were the issues to which Mr Sullivan added that there was also a question of causation.

There was no real issue between the parties as to the basis on which damages for nervous shock can be awarded. The substantial, and in my opinion difficult, questions raised in this case were the extent to which, consistently with those principles, Mr Masri is entitled to damages. In
Hinze versus Berry (supra) Pearson LJ, at p.44, identified four factors as not being compensable in assessing damages according to English law, namely inevitable grief and sorrow arising from the event; anxiety about the welfare of the family; financial stress; and the need for adjusting to a new life. His
Lordship said the one compensable feature was the shock of witnessing the accident.

In Jaensch versus Coffey <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 549] the High Court extended the circumstances in which damages for nervous shock can be recovered to circumstances where the plaintiff was not within the "area of physical risk". It is unnecessary for me to pursue that further because liability has been admitted.

None-the-less, and in this case it is important to keep this steadfastly in mind, liability for nervous shock depends upon the sudden sensory perception of phenomenon which affronts or insults the plaintiff's mind and causes recognisable psychiatric illness: Campbelltown City Council & Ors v
Mackay & Anor [(1988) 15 NSWLR 501.] This led
Kirby P to say, at pp.503-504:- "A re-definition of the cause of action for `nervous shock' has doubtless been restrained by the long established boundaries of the action; the difficulties of proof (or disproof) of psychiatric injury; and concern about the economic consequences of more widely defining the entitlement to recover for such psychiatric injuries: see discussion of Jaensch versus Coffey by A. O'Connell and R. Evans [[1985] MelbULawRw 10](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/MelbULawRw/1985/10.html "View Case" ); [(1985) 15 MULR 164] at 477 where the term `nervous shock' is described as `somewhat crude and imprecise'. 
However, the price paid for the failure of the law to develop is the persistence of a legal entitlement to recovery which nowadays bears little relationship to contemporary psychological understanding. Such artificialities bring the law into disrepute. They force claimants to try to squeeze their claims into outmoded formulae. They subject expert witnesses to the pressure to distort opinions on what they may feel to be legitimate claims, out of deference to outmoded formulations of the legal basis of entitlement to recovery.

So far as the respondents' claims for nervous shock are concerned, as so understood, this is what occurred here. The respondents endeavoured to present their undoubted psychiatric conditions as the direct result of the `shocking' event which occurred when their house moved on a Friday night at the end of July 1984. Their medical expert was solemnly asked to blame upon that event the whole course of their psychological problems. Smart J upheld that complexion which was put upon the case. But as McHugh JA has clearly demonstrated, it is entirely artificial. It does not conform with the commonsense view of the evidence in its totality. Sadly for lawyers, shackled with their nineteenth century notions of `nervous shock', psychological injury is a much more complex process. It is rarely (if ever) explicable as the result of an isolated `shock'." 
At p.509 McHugh JA said:- "Upon this evidence, I cannot accept the submission that Mrs Mackay suffered a psychiatric illness on the Saturday morning in July 1984 as the result of a sudden perception of the damage occasioned to her house or at all. Care must be taken to distinguish between stress, anxiety and depression as incidents of everyday life and the manifestation of those symptoms as evidence of an underlying psychiatric condition. No medical witness gave any express evidence to the effect that Mrs Mackay suffered a psychiatric illness before the still birth of her child. It is significant that Dr Milton expressed the opinion that she suffered `a severe depressive disorder following a stillbirth'. It is true that Dr Milton said that Mrs Mackay's depression was `the direct result of the accident although it followed a stillbirth'. But far from suggesting that Mrs Mackay was suffering from a psychiatric illness before the stillbirth, this statement impliedly denies the proposition.

In an action for nervous shock it is not enough, as Brennan J pointed out in Jaensch versus Coffey, that the psychiatric illness was the foreseeable result of the defendant's conduct. The illness must be the result of a shock caused by the perception of a phenomenon for which the defendant is responsible. Here the shock inducing phenomenon was the stillbirth operating on a mind which had already been subjected to much worry, fear and stress as the result of the `collapse' of the house. What is missing from the present case is any evidence that prior to the stillbirth Mrs Mackay was suffering from any psychiatric condition. Indeed, the evidence establishes that notwithstanding the pressures and stresses she was able to cope." 
In the present case it was not in issue that Mr Masri suffered a psychiatric illness which, conformably with the authority to which I have referred, would entitle him to some damages. The issues were the extent of that illness and the effect it had upon him having regard to the obvious grief and sorrow he suffered from the terrible condition in which Mrs Masri has been placed, the depressing effects of having to care for her every need, of having to cope with and care for the children and the problems which her condition created so far as they were concerned, of having regard to what he had lost by virtue of the injuries she sustained and of being unable to return to employment with the consequential stress and anxiety that occasioned. In these circumstances, so the submission ran, it was necessary for me to apportion in some way, which
Mr Sullivan very frankly conceded was a far from easy task, the consequences of the psychiatric illness, for which Mr Masri is entitled to be compensated, and all the other consequences, which on any commonsense approach flowed directly from the injuries, which Mrs Masri sustained, but which, on the authorities binding on me, are not compensable. In these circumstances I can only respectfully repeat the cri de coeur of Kirby P that this area of the law be reconsidered. In Jaensch versus Coffey the High Court was able to extend the range of circumstances in which liability would attach and it may be, if I may be so bold as to suggest, that a principled approach to the award of damages would not necessarily lead to the result that damages for nervous shock should be shackled in the way in which they presently seem to be.

The matter was considered by the Court of Appeal in Chiaverini versus Hockey & Anor [(1993) ATR 81-223] at p.62,254. Unfortunately the decision is not reported in the New South Wales
Law Reports and, if I may respectfully make a further suggestion, it is that this omission be rectified.

The principal judgment was delivered by Sheller JA, with whom Meagher JA agreed without further comment, and Handley JA agreed. His Honour, however, drew attention, inter alia, to the decision in Campbelltown City
Council.

Sheller JA, at p.62,257, said:- "2. Damages are not recoverable if the psychiatric injury was not induced by shock: Campbelltown City Council ... In Alcock's case Lord Ackner went on to say, at 401F that nervous shock `has yet to include psychiatric illness caused by the accumulation over a period of time of more gradual assaults on the nervous system'. Psychiatric illnesses caused by the experience of having to cope with the deprivation consequent upon the death of a loved one attract no damages; nor does the psychiatric illness suffered by a spouse who has been worn down by caring for a tortiously injured husband or daughter or by a parent made distraught by the wayward conduct of a brain damaged child; Jaensch versus Coffey ...; Alcock's case ..." 
His Honour then considered foreseeability and noted the extensions to the boundaries of circumstances where a plaintiff may recover brought about in
Jaensch versus Coffey.

Another example of the problems confronting a Judge at first instance is referred to by Miles CJ in De Franceschi versus Storrier [[1988] ACTR 1] (contained in 85
ALR). In that case the defendant's negligent driving injured three of the plaintiff's children in consequence of which she suffered headaches and depression. The defendant admitted liability for nervous shock, the only issue being the assessment of damages. Miles CJ held the plaintiff was not entitled to be compensated for mere concern and fear for the welfare of her children as there must be some identifiable damage or injury to the plaintiff's psychological system; and that a distinction is to be drawn between worry and anxiety for an injured child and contribution by the condition of the child to the continuing effect of the "shock" which was suffered at the time of injury or shortly thereafter.

At p.8, after considering the various matters which impacted upon the plaintiff, his Honour said:- "It is a highly artificial exercise to try and separate out those elements in her condition which relate to the nervous shock and those which relate merely to a natural concern for the children, particularly Carol, but the exercise has to be undertaken. I think that uncompensable natural concern will at some stage displace the effects of nervous shock, if it has not already begun to do so, so that eventually the effect of the nervous shock will be minimal. That is not to say that the plaintiff will regain her pre-accident health and disposition, but simply to take the view that her condition will be due to normal and natural concern for the welfare of the children.

The assessment of damages is a difficult task. The plaintiff has not sought to inflate her claim. There is no claim for loss of earnings or earning capacity. The out of pocket expenses have been paid by medical funds and the plaintiff sensibly has not included those in her claim. She makes no claim under Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161.] I was asked on behalf of the defendant to have regard to the fact that the children have all successfully pursued claims. I am unable to see how that should affect the award in favour of their mother.

In all the circumstances, I think that an appropriate total award for the plaintiff is $25,000." 
The various problems were considered in Tort Liability for Psychiatric
Damage - The Law of "Nervous Shock" (1993) Mullany & Hannaford. The authors, after referring to Campbelltown City Council said, at pp.200-201:- "The initial reaction to traumatic stimulus is automatic and instinctive, commonly taking the form of fear, grief or anger and varying in intensity depending upon the stimulus and individual concerned. As noted, on the present law damages do not sound for these responses. Nor can one recover for instant and initial shock, only psychiatric illness generated as a result, despite the inaccurately and imprecisely named category of claims. It is subsequent, more lasting and health-threatening human responses like neuroses which are compensable under the `nervous shock' label. It will be extremely rare that this type of reaction will be triggered by the initial transient sensations normally experienced when trauma is perceived. Rather, mental damage of this sort commonly occurs as a result of a later realisation of the true severity or consequences of the trauma or a continued inability to cope with the situation in question. As one commentator has observe `the consensus of modern medical opinion is that lasting (and compensable) damage does not occur in "normal" individuals as a result of emotional shock, however severe'. Significantly, even in Jaensch versus Coffey itself the wife did not exhibit any psychiatric complaints until about a week after the second visit to the hospital to view her injured husband when she realised that he could actually die. Similarly, in Mt Isa Mines Limited versus Pusey the plaintiff's rare schizophrenic reaction to seeing two fellow workmen horribly burnt did not manifest itself until approximately four weeks later. If the enduring and compensable psychic impact does not normally result from a momentary dramatic event it is therefore inappropriate to insist on an immediate and significant consequence such as a `sudden sensory perception' as a prerequisite to recovery. Such insistence, in the absence of a change in the law barring relief for transient emotions like grief, sorrow, anger or an initial shock, will mean that plaintiffs with recognisable psychiatric illnesses will more often than not go uncompensated." 
At p.273 the authors dealt with the question of an "eggshell" mental state.
They said:- "It was shown earlier that special susceptibility to psychiatric damage is not relevant to the question of liability. If normal members of the community would have suffered harm, the tortfeasor will not escape liability on the basis that the victim of his or her carelessness happened to suffer a particularly severe form of injury due to pre-existing fragility or `eggshell' mental stability. That this may, however, be relevant when it comes to the assessment of compensation is apparent from Dooley versus Cammell Laird & Co Limited where the plaintiff's pre-accident neurasthenia (which had been aggravated and accelerated in its course by a crane accident leaving him `a permanently broken old man') led to the reduction of damages by two thirds. The issue remains unsettled, other courts having refused to reduce the damages for which the defendant is liable consequent on the plaintiff's pre-existing fragile psyche. Another factor which may operate to reduce the damages awarded is refusal to undergo medical treatment for a psychiatric condition. In Marcroft versus Scruttons Limited the plaintiff, who developed severe anxiety neurosis and depression following a minor accident, refused to follow his doctor's advice to undergo treatment at a mental hospital. His damages were reduced on the basis that his refusal was unreasonable, and the assessment was based on what his condition would have been had the treatment been successful, as on the facts was likely." 
I have quoted this passage because it is relevant to several submissions made.
There was some evidence that Mr Masri's pre-existing personality, or psyche, led to his being compelled to care for his wife and, therefore, to give up work. There was no evidence that he was other than in good physical and mental health prior to 21 February 1991 and this would seem to be borne out by his employment record. However, Mr Leslie raised a submission based on foreseeability and the decision of the Court of Appeal in Commonwealth of
Australia versus McLean [(1997) 41 NSWLR 389.] I shall return to that in a moment.

The second part of the passage to which I have referred seems to me to deal with the question of mitigation and the authority to which reference is made underlines the necessity that a party is only required to act reasonably in mitigating his or her damages.

In McLean Handley and Beazley JJA considered the remoteness of damage, which is relevant in the present case in relation to Mr Sullivan's submission as to causation. At p.403 their Honours said:- "A wrongdoer is responsible for all damage of the same type or kind as that which was reasonably foreseeable, even if the particular damage, or its extent, were not reasonably foreseeable, or the damage occurred in an unexpected and unforeseeable manner: see Chapman versus Hearse <case>; [(1961) 106 CLR 112] at 695-696 ... where psychiatric injury was held to constitute actual bodily harm. The Courts have nevertheless treated damage by nervous shock as different `in kind' from tangible physical injury." 
Their Honours referred to the well known statement of Windeyer J in Mt Isa
Mines and to the statement of Brennan J at pp.561-562 in Jaensch v
Coffey, and they continued, at p.404:- "The Judge held that liability for the further damage was covered by the principle that the defendant takes the plaintiff with all his weaknesses and vulnerabilities. This so-called `eggshell skull' principle, certainly applies to all damage of the same kind as that which was reasonably foreseeable. It made the defendant liable for the plaintiff's stress disorder, although the majority of the crew of the `Melbourne' may have suffered no long-term ill effects. It also applied to the plaintiff's phobia for heights, which was an associated feature of that stress disorder. The defendant submitted that this principle does not apply to the further damage which was not of the same kind as his stress disorder." 
Their Honours then referred to Mahony versus J. Kruschich (Demolitions) Pty
Limited <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 522] at 528-529 and, after doing so, said that there appeared to be "no case quite like this".

They considered cases in which the plaintiff's mental illness was of a different kind to that which was reasonably foreseeable and, not being itself reasonably foreseeable, was not compensable: Rowe versus McCartney [[1976] 2
NSWLR 72] and Havenaar versus Havenaar [[1982] 1 NSWLR 626.] In the latter case Reynolds and Hutley JJA held, apparently obiter dicta, that there was no general rule that an injured person could recover damages for an additional injury caused by the voluntary consumption of alcohol merely because this was foreseeable. Their Honours noted that Glass JA concluded that the relevant damage was an aggravation of the plaintiff's condition as a result of attempts to relieve his symptoms, which was attributable to the sort of person he happened to be and, accordingly, was recoverable within the "eggshell skull" principle.

Their Honours referred to Nader versus Urban Transport Authority [(1985) NSWLR 501] and, at p.406, continued:- "It may be taken as a rule of law that damage by nervous shock is different in kind from damage caused by tangible physical injuries. On that view the further damage as a matter of law was different in kind from the stress disorder, but it is not necessary to go that far to decide this appeal. On the most favourable view for the plaintiff this was a question of fact for the jury: see Richards versus Victoria [1969] VR 136 at 146." 
Their Honours continued:- "The `eggshell skull' principle makes a defendant liable for damage of an unforeseeable extent, but not for unforeseeable damage of a different kind. Under this principle a defendant is liable for additional damage of a foreseeable kind suffered by a plaintiff who has some special vulnerability: see Smith versus Leech Brain & Co Limited [[1962] 2 QB 405] which support this submission. That decision is cited in Fleming, The Law of Torts, 8th Edition [1992], but not as authority for Mr Joseph's proposition. It has not hitherto been considered by this Court or the High Court, but is contrary to the approach adopted in Rowe versus McCartney; Havenaar versus Havenaar and Nader versus Urban Transit Authority . It also appears contrary to the statement by the Board in The Wagon Mound (No 1) (at 425) that: `It is irrelevant to the question whether B is liable for unforeseeable damage that he is liable for foreseeable damage'. 
In personal injury cases where psychiatric injuries supervene on physical injuries, it is taken for granted that the plaintiff can recover, but this may be because defendants accept that supervening psychiatric injuries are reasonably foreseeable. The decisive factor in our view is that the Judge's direction appears to be contrary to Mahony where the tortfeasor's liability for aggravation of the original injuries caused by later medical treatment was held to depend on foreseeability. The direction also appears to be contrary to March (especially at 510 and 517-518) where a torfeasor's liability for harmful consequences supervening as a result of voluntary and deliberate conduct by the plaintiff or a third party was held to depend on foreseeability. In March, the later damage being considered (although not arising on the facts of that case) included damage of the same kind as the earlier but, in Mahony, there may have been an argument that they were different. We conclude that the `eggshell skull' principle only applies to damage of the same kind as that which was reasonably foreseeable." 
Their Honours then went on to consider the question of causation. They considered the trial Judge's summing-up in relation to throat cancer the plaintiff sustained by virtue of smoking more cigarettes in consequence, so he alleged, of the negligence. At p.408 their Honours said:- "The validity of such a direction is well-established where the defendant is in breach of a duty to take precautions against a foreseeable risk of injury which occurs. However the Judge applied this principle to the issue of causation in relation to the plaintiff's throat cancer, although the defendant was under no duty to take precautions to prevent persons such as the plaintiff contracting that form of cancer." 
They considered the decision in Bonnington Castings Limited versus Wardlaw <case>; [[1956] AC 613] where the employer breached a statutory duty to remove dust generated by an industrial process and the worker contracted pneumoconiosis.
In that case the House of Lords held that the breach of duty contributed a quota of silica dust, which was not negligible, towards the total that produced the disease and, therefore, causation was established.

On the question of causation their Honours found that if the jury concluded that the plaintiff's excessive smoking and drinking were caused by his stress disorder and were involuntary, they were entitled to find, on the expert evidence, that his stress disorder had caused his throat cancer: p.410.

Mr Leslie submitted that the damage suffered by Mr Masri, in addition to his having a psychiatric illness, was damage of the same kind and was, accordingly, foreseeable and, on the commonsense approach, caused by the incident. It seems to me that it is necessary, as the authorities stand at present, in a case for nervous shock for the plaintiff to establish that in compensable circumstances he or she has suffered an identifiable psychiatric illness. Once that point is reached the plaintiff is entitled to recover damages for foreseeable damage caused by the psychiatric illness, foreseeable damage being, essentially, damage of the same kind. However, one must excise from consideration, in assessing damages, that which is non-compensable although, obviously enough, flowing in a general sense from the circumstances which give rise to the compensable injury. This, of course, is the dilemma to which Kirby P and others have referred. Thus, in the present case, damages may be awarded for the psychiatric illness the plaintiff suffered and the relevant consequences of it, but damages may not be awarded for other matters, such as the grief or the wear and tear upon Mr Masri of caring for his wife and children in the circumstances as they exist. Thus, he must be able to tie back to the psychiatric illness, for it is only the existence of the psychiatric illness which entitles him to recover for "nervous shock", any matter in respect of which he seeks to recover damages. In adopting this approach, however, I start from the position that it was conceded by the defendants that in consequence of their negligence Mr Masri suffered a compensable psychiatric injury, i.e. that he is entitled to damages for nervous shock.

A Review Of The Evidence 
The Plaintiff 
I have, for present purposes, referred to much of Mr Masri's evidence, albeit in summary form. As I have said I accept him as a witness of truth.

He described how he felt whilst at Sydney Hospital initially and the effect upon him of being told that it was unlikely that his wife would survive. He described pains in his stomach and chest, his severe headaches and his being tearful. He remained away from work because of the circumstances and spent most of his time at Sydney and subsequently Fairfield Hospitals caring for his wife. He said he lost ten kilograms in weight and that he felt he was a "lost man". He continued:- "We lost a very good, part of, half of myself, very good part of the family. I felt there is a loss": Tp.11. 
He said he told Sydney Mitsubishi that he did not feel he could take up the appointment and the evidence was that he did not.

He gave detailed evidence about the assistance he rendered to his wife and steps he took in her rehabilitation. He described in some detail what he had to do to look after her and the children.

As he was unemployed he received a carer's pension from the Department of
Social Services in the sum of approximately $290 per fortnight, which figure the parties accepted, but after the settlement of his wife's case that ceased and the pension payments were refunded from the damages awarded to Mrs Masri.

At Tp.21 Mr Masri said that during 1993 he received some out-patient assistance for his own psychological problems, but he said the counselling did not assist him "really" and, at Tp.22, he said:- "Sometimes I found it very - if I talk about it every time I go, I feel like I collapse, I feel disturbed, stress and depression and even I took my kids and my son, he said to me, `Dad, not any more I'm not going there' because she insists she wants the kids too and I said, `That's the last time'. Again, every time they saying, `You have to have like time for yourself, care too and of your wife'. I find that sometimes it's very hard, children attached to me, hard to trust just like that, someone beside the family, you know, like all the time even if someone, like they used to help me, I start next to them to instruct them like, you know, what's to be done." 
He said he was told he needed some respite from the burden of caring for his wife and that he felt some difficulty about making arrangements that were satisfactory, so far as he was concerned, for that, and that he found it difficult to "let go" of the obligation to care. He consulted a psychiatrist,
Dr Canaris, in May 1993 and he said that after he started to look after his problem he regained his lost weight and, in 1996, he consulted another psychiatrist, Dr Osmand Ali. He apparently did not consider he was receiving much assistance from Dr Ali and came to the conclusion that he could manage without attending upon him.

He described how he felt physically and mentally and taking the family back to
Lebanon in 1997. He gave evidence about how he considered he might be able to manage his life in the future and of his hope to return to work as a motor vehicle dealer in Lebanon. It became apparent from his evidence that his wife is more relaxed living in Lebanon and that he has more support from the family there and, in due course, I think that he will obtain employment. He has been in Australia since 24 February 1998 in part to finalise his affairs in this country and in part for the hearing of this case.

Mr Sullivan commenced his cross-examination by reference to the settlement of
Mrs Masri's legal proceedings. It was not in issue that both he and his solicitor, who also acted for Mrs Masri in those proceedings, swore affidavits in support of the settlement of $3.7m plus costs. In his affidavit of 14 April Mr Curtis set forth the various components of that figure, which included for past gratuitous care $317,200 at $1,000 per week and for future care and management $2,726,850 at $300 per day. Thus, a substantial part of the award, exceeding $3m, was attributed to past gratuitous care and future care and treatment. These were the figures put before the Court in support of the application to approve Mrs Masri's settlement.

The purpose of the cross-examination was to seek to establish that the award of damages to Mrs Masri constituted a substantial component to recompense for gratuitous care conformably with the principles in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer <case>; [(1977) 139 CLR 161.]
Ultimately, and I shall deal with this in more detail, several submissions were mounted in relation to this. The first was that in so far as Mr Masri was seeking to recover damages for wage loss by virtue of his having looked after
Mrs Masri, damages had already been paid to Mrs Masri and, in effect, "earmarked" to pay for that help and, so it was submitted, to allow damages to
Mr Masri for loss of wages because he was looking after Mrs Masri would, without more, constitute a "double dipping". The second way the submission was put was that Mr Masri was under a duty to mitigate his loss and that he should have done that by making an application to the Protective Commissioner for payment out to him of an amount to recompense him for caring for Mrs Masri.
The submission then was that I should be satisfied, on the evidence, that it was unreasonable for Mr Masri not to have made that application and, had it been made, the evidence established that, in all probability, the Protective
Commissioner would have paid him. These submissions in themselves raise legal issues, which I do not consider to be easy and, in due course, it will be necessary to consider the principles upon which damages are awarded and whether there is any validity, having regard to those principles, in the submission based on "double dipping". On the question of mitigation, however, the basic question to be asked is whether, in all the circumstances, it is unreasonable for Mr Masri not to have applied to the Protective Commissioner for the payment out of Mrs Masri's moneys of money to him. The further question arises as to whether, if he had made such an application, the
Protective Commissioner would have made the payment.

At Tp.36 Mr Masri gave the following evidence:- "Q. You have never asked the Protective Commissioner, have you, to pay you any money, to your personally, in respect of the past care you have provided for your wife? 
A. For the past care, no. But I asked the Protective Commissioner for money I paid when she was in Germany, when we have got some loan, we have got some to be paid and some of them - he said to me, we discussed that. If you allow me to speak, we discussed that. He said to me: You have got past care money here from the settlement and he said to me - I feel that it is wrong to ask for this money for myself. My feeling. I say why should I ask, that's my wife's money for a start, and secondly, he said to me, the Protective Commissioner, when we discussed it, he said: You are member of the family; you provide her the help, but if anything happened to you, we have to provide her twenty four hours care; it is going to cost her over $150,000 a year and this money, it is going to be gone by many years. That's how he discussed it with me and that's why, you know, I said, I feel wrong about to ask for this money.
 ...

SULLIVAN: Q. Did the Protective Commissioner tell you that you were able to make an application to him for reimbursement or compensation for past care? 
A. We are talking about the estate manager, not the Protective Commissioner. I am dealing with the estate manager. And there is the Protective Commissioner. He is the estate manager of the Protective Commissioner." 
At Tp.37 the question was asked:- 
SULLIVAN: *Q. Is this the situation, that either Mr White or some other officer of the Protective Commissioner has told you that you would have a right to make a claim for compensation in respect of the care you have provided to your wife? .....

A. He didn't say compensate you. He said: You are entitled, if you ask for legal advice you are entitled for some money, not all of them, one member. He said maybe not all of them, maybe we agree, say 100,000, 200,000 dollars. That's what he said, and I said no. That's what my answer is. The second time they asked me, they said to me: you are entitled to ask or ask for legal advice for your entitled, just some past care, not compensate or anything like that, just word for word. He said after, to me, said if we provide her twenty four hours care, the money, it will go after fifteen years of time; wanting the money, it is gone. Why I should ask for her money if anything happen to me? They manage it and they will have the money and I ask for it. That's why I felt something, it is wrong. That's all. That's why the reason I didn't ask for it." 
This evidence was not sought to be contradicted. In the light of the devoted care Mr Masri has lavished upon his wife, I accept entirely his evidence as to why he would not make the application. It flowed from something he was told by the officer of the Protective Commissioner, and it is not difficult to understand that a person, who had devoted himself to the care of his wife for so long, would not wish to do anything which may jeopardise her ability, in the future and in the event of something happening to him, to receive care. In my view it has not been demonstrated that Mr Masri acted unreasonably in not seeking payment for the care he provided and, for the purpose of this finding,
I am prepared to assume that had such an application been made some payment would have been made to him by the Protective Commissioner. There is no evidence, however, as to how much.

I have referred to certain authority about reasonableness in relation to the mitigation of damages and I would, at this point, note the discussion on that point in CSR Limited & Anor versus D'Arcy [(1995) 40 NSWLR 721:] per Giles
AJA at p.733.

Mr Masri said that his sister-in-law, who is looking after Mrs Masri whilst he is in Australia, is in receipt of $500 per week from the Protective
Commissioner: Tp.39, and he said he did not think it wrong that she should be paid and, at Tp.40:- "A. I pay someone. Why shouldn't I pay her? It's not up to me to take her money. I felt it is wrong for me to take her money for myself but not for other people. They want to come to me and work for me, of course I give them - you know, she needs the money to survive too." 
Mr Masri said it upset him greatly to see his wife in her present condition, and to make a comparison between her condition now and that prior to 21
February 1991. He continued, Tpp.41-42:- "Q. And I think you said in answer to my friend that you can remember how she was and that makes you sad when you compare that with how she now is? 
A. Yeh.

Q. That's a major part, is it, of your feelings of sadness and unhappiness, namely, seeing her now in such a poor situation compared to what she used to be in the past? 
A. Not only that, I lost my life too because she's a part of me too.

Q. I'm not wishing at all to trivialise it, I'm just trying to ask you some questions to identify the source of your upset and concern? 
A. That's upset me.

Q. It upsets you to see someone who was as loving, as vibrant and as full of life as your wife was to how she is now in her present condition? 
A. Yes.

Q. That's been a major factor for your feeling depressed and unhappy for many years now, isn't it? 
A. Yes.

Q. You believe it's one of the reasons why you have these headaches and these pains in your chest and your stomach? 
A. That's what I relate it to.
 *Q. And it's one of the reasons why you are frequently sad and you frequently cry, isn't it? 
A. Yes.
 *Q. And it's the major reason now that happens, isn't it, when you look at the state she is in compared to what she was? 
A. Yes.
 *Q. And it's been a major reason, hasn't it, for your unhappiness and your depression for the best part of six or seven years? ...

A. It's related to it, yes, you can say, and also I look at my health and look at myself too. It's not the major problem just my wife, related to my wife too and myself too. I lost my social life. I lost my friend. Put it this way, I lost my life, that's all. Also the kids, when I look at the kids, they lost their mother too and that's related. There's a few things convincing me, not just related to the major problem related to the Mum but all going up and I lost my life when I was thirty seven years old too. I lost my work. I was a very successful worker, very successful sales manager. I lost it all, I lost it. Every time we used to go on holiday, every time we used to go with management meeting with my wife to the restaurant. I lost it. That's affected me too.

Q. Because of your wife's condition and her disabilities you feel as though you have lost a lot of things which are valuable in your life? 
A. Yes.

Q. And day by day you have thought of that, haven't you, and that has made you feel sad and depressed? 
A. Day by day, yes, and healthwise, I don't know what the healthwise is affected. That's related to something. I've got a problem in my health anyway." 
Mr Masri agreed that a major factor for his being unhappy and, from time to time, depressed, was because of the condition of his wife, and the effect upon the children.

He was then cross-examined about his ability to obtain employment in Lebanon.
He explained some difficulties about getting back into the motor vehicle industry and he denied that a major factor of his depression was his feeling that he had sacrificed his life for good purposes.

He was asked about the treatment he was taking at Tpp.49-50 and, at Tp.52, he agreed that he could go out and work and leave his wife in the care of a person provided the person was properly trained and a good person.

The Medical Evidence 
Dr S. Mohan, who was Mr Masri's general practitioner, provided a report dated August 1993 in which he certified that he had been under extreme stress, which was entirely caused by his wife's illness. He described Mr Masri's condition shortly and concluded that he did not think there was any room for
Mrs Masri to improve further and:- ".. I do not see Mr Masri's emotional, stressful condition or situation getting any better." 
Dr Mohan was not required for cross-examination.

The first psychiatrist called on behalf of the plaintiff was Dr Canaris. His initial report is dated 17 May 1993 in which he set out the history. He concluded:- "From his description of himself, he would appear to have a clinically significant depression and this is certainly consistent with my own observations of him at this interview. The critical question, however, is whether he has suffered nervous shock in the legal sense of the word. In other words, does his current mental state constitute a normal reaction to his circumstances or does it constitute a psychiatric illness per se. The answer to this question is not intuitively obvious. On the one hand, it is easy to empathise with Mr Masri's distress. He has suffered a grievous loss of severity equal to what he may have suffered had his wife actually died. However, his situation is in many ways more difficult. Had he been widowed, he would have had the opportunity of mourning his loss and rebuilding his life perhaps with a new relationship. His admirable commitment to the ongoing care of his wife however precludes such a resolution of his grief. Consequently, he is left with all the burdens of caring for his profoundly disabled wife with virtually none of the consolations other than her occasional expressions of appreciation towards him. In this sense, Mr Masri could be said to be a normally functioning individual placed in a highly abnormal situation which results in continuing distress. It is nevertheless my considered view that his present depressed mood does constitute an illness. His sadness has an all pervasive quality to it as exemplified by his statement `Even when I go somewhere I might laugh outside but inside I'm bleeding'. The all pervasive quality of the mood disturbance is consistent with the notion of illness. It is associated furthermore with features sometimes seen in biological depressions such as middle insomnia. His life is constantly dominated by his situation to the point that he never ceases to ruminate about it. Admittedly, such levels of distress may be seen in the early or `acute' phase of the normal grieving process. However, a state of grieving which has persisted with this degree of intensity over such a prolonged period goes well beyond what one would usually accept as normal. The reality is that this man is no longer able to enjoy his life in any meaningful way. Mr Masri's grief is thus pathological. Its pathological quality arises directly from the profoundly abnormal and stressful circumstances in which he has found himself. I am hopeful that in due course Mr Masri will begin to resolve his grief perhaps as he sees his children growing up. For the immediately foreseeable future, however, he will remain a sad and broken man. He is currently receiving counselling and I think he should continue with this - he is badly in need of support." 
Dr Canaris wrote his next report on 5 June 1996 when he concluded there was little change in Mr Masri's condition and that:- "He is a parlous state indeed and is man heading for a complete physical and psychological breakdown. It is very important at this stage that he receive some professional help .... Even with treatment, I think his prognosis is poor. The reality is that he has lost everything that was important to him apart from his children. He does not have the capacity to distance himself from the situation sufficiently to allow himself to accept offers of respite.

His prognosis remains poor." 
On 26 November 1996 Dr Canaris provided another report in which he incorporated certain of the matters to which he had referred in his earlier report, and stated:- "In essence, his life is dominated by his profound and pervasive grieving over his wife's severe disability. This undoubtedly represents major psychiatric disorder and would be very likely to interfere significantly with his capacity to work in full time employment at a demanding level." 
Dr Canaris was of the view that Mr Masri's mood disturbance or grieving was too severe and pervasive for there to be any reasonable prospect of his working, and he expressed the view that it was unlikely that he would return to the workforce.

On 30 April 1998 Dr Canaris wrote a further report, which dealt with the situation since the return to Lebanon. He noted that Mr Masri had not seen a psychiatrist, apart from Dr Ali, and he concluded that he remained "deeply immersed in his grieving for his wife", which he diagnosed as "pathological grief for the same reasons that have been outlined in previous reports". He continued:- "He is as much precluded from working by his grief as by the burden of caring for his spouse. While he acknowledges that he might be able to just manage some part-time work he feels that his ongoing pre-occupation with the disaster afflicted on his wife will prevent him from giving adequate attention to a job. Judging by what I have seen of him over the last five years, I fear he is right." 
The final report of Dr Canaris is dated 4 May 1998 and it must be read together with the letter, which posed the questions. He was asked firstly whether on 21 February 1991 and as a result of his wife's injury the plaintiff suffered trauma of the mind causing risk of physical injury and, if so, whether that physical injury was likely to have been suffered by a person of ordinary strength and fortitude in the same circumstances. He answered both questions in the affirmative. He was nextly asked whether those events gave rise to trauma of the nervous system causing risk of physical injury and whether that would have been suffered by a person of ordinary strength and fortitude in the same circumstances, which he also answered in the affirmative.

He was asked whether the incident gave rise to trauma of the mind causing psychological illness and whether that would have been suffered by a person of ordinary strength and fortitude in the same circumstances and he answered both those questions in the affirmative.

In answer to specific questions he said that his diagnosis was one of pathological grief with many features of major depression, and that the illness was likely to remain with him for the rest of his life with fluctuating severity, though its severity may attenuate a little with the passage of time.

He was asked:- "5. If the plaintiff has suffered continuing chronic psychological illness as a result of his wife's injury, is his determination to be and become her sole carer a manifestation of that illness?" 
He answered:- "5. Yes. His determination to be his wife's sole carer is frankly dysfunctional and indeed may undermine the quality of care she ultimately receives as it ensures that she is being looked after by an exhausted and demoralised person who sees virtually no other role for himself. The sources of this determination are entirely in his illness which may have intensified pre-morbid personality traits. However there is no evidence to suggest that these traits were present prior to 21 February 1991, to a degree which would have consisted of an illness in its own right such as a personality disorder." 
In answer to a specific question Dr Canaris stated that in his opinion Mr
Masri had not been, since his wife's injury, reasonably fit for any form of remunerative work, and in answer to the question as to whether he would be fit, in the future, he responded:- "Maybe but I doubt it and if so on a part-time basis in a supportive environment only." 
The consequence of these answers, in my opinion, is that Mr Masri is suffering from a defined chronic psychological illness, one manifestation of which is his determination to be his wife's sole carer, which, in itself, has prevented him from engaging in gainful employment.

Dr Canaris gave oral evidence. He was referred to certain passages of Mr
Masri's cross-examination and he agreed that the ongoing situation played a very significant role. He said the difficulty for a clinician is to separate that from the impact from the initial shock. He concluded a very lengthy answer, Tpp.56-57, thus:- "So you can't then say: look, that is nervous shock, but some of it also is going to have to come from what happened. I believe that some of it, and a big part of it, also comes from what happened on the very day of the termination and its disastrous aftermath." 
He said it was very difficult, if not impossible, to apportion the causes and:- "Now, I believe that the original nervous shock, for want of a better word - I don't like that word but I guess it's a word I'm obliged to use - was in fact one of the factors that is still operating today." 
He was asked whether he would agree that in the scheme of things and given the passage of time and the continuing stressors in his life that it was likely that the nervous shock was less significant now "in the overall scheme of things than the ongoing stressors". He replied:- "Well, that is actually a very difficult question to answer, simply because one of the things that makes him - one of the things that makes it very difficult for him to deal appropriately with the demands of today, and the demands of today are very considerable. There is no doubt about it. But he could deal with the demands of today, you know, one would like to see him deal with the demands of today in a much more constructive fashion and you have to look at why can't he do that. Now, if you can trace a line of causation back to the original nervous shock and say: well, look, one of the reasons he can't do it today is because of the way he was affected at that time, then you know, you have to say: well, look, the original nervous shock still operates and is still important. Now, I think in terms of apportioning some sort of figure to its level of importance, I think that's a role for his Honour rather than myself." 
If I may say so with respect Dr Canaris was echoing, although in somewhat different and certainly less felicitous terms, the problems to which Kirby P had referred.

He was asked about percentages, and said:- "... I think you could probably, without bending the truth too much, apportion about a third to the ongoing and very real problems that he has to face in the management of his children, and I think you would also reasonably, safely, apportion about a third to the original nervous shock, bearing in mind that the nervous shock is having an impact on the other two thirds and thus in itself making it more difficult for him to deal with. Now, you know, a rule of thirds, it is very crude, it is the best I can do." 
At Tp.59 Dr Canaris agreed that if Mr Masri had been a different sort of man to begin with he might well have conducted himself differently "and, yes, you would then have had different clinical or psychiatric consequences. I think that has to be true": Tp.59.

Dr Canaris conceded, very frankly, that the final figure caused "confusion".
He concluded that to differentiate was "a challenge that's completely beyond me" and continued:- "HIS HONOUR: Q. It seems to me it is artificial? 
A. Well, it is, yes, I don't think you can. 
Q. As I understand it, you say he has suffered a psychiatric illness, is that correct? 
A. Yes.

Q. And it is ongoing, correct? 
A. Correct.

Q. And it still has, in your opinion, as I understand your evidence, an effect on him? 
A. Yes." 
Dr Canaris was asked about the medicines and analgesics being taken by Mr
Masri. He agreed they were not, as such, the type of medication he would prescribe for depression. However, I am not satisfied, although no submission was made to this effect, that Mr Masri has not attempted to obtain appropriate treatment. Dr Canaris was also impressed by the fact that Mr Masri had left his wife for some three months and he felt that that was "healthy" and perhaps a beginning of his "letting go". He said it was "encouraging": Tp.64.

At Tp.69 Dr Canaris agreed, in re-examination, that the subsequent illness was very much "the same sort of beast" as the original illness and that but for the events of 21 February 1991 one would not expect to find that Mr Masri had that condition. He added:- "Obviously the man could have got depressed, we can all get depressed, but he would have no greater chance of developing a depressive illness than the average person." 
When one has regard to the whole of Dr Canaris' evidence it satisfies me that
Mr Masri suffered a compensable injury from which he is still suffering, that a manifestation of that injury is that he should care for his wife, and that in trying to apportion the effects of the injury and other effects one takes a minimum of one third, which operates in conjunction with part or the whole of another one third. The evidence makes it very difficult to determine the amount of the apportionment, although no submission was made to me that the evidence was left in such a state that I could not do so. The evidence also satisfied me that a major reason for Mr Masri's inability to obtain gainful employment is the psychological condition from which he was suffering.

Dr Peter Klug, a specialist forensic psychiatrist, was also called on his behalf. In his first report Dr Klug set out the history and expressed the opinion that Mr Masri has been suffering from a pathological grief reaction following the events of 21 February 1991. He said that the form of pathological grief was characterised by an excessively intense and prolonged grief caused by the sudden loss he suffered through horrific circumstances; his initial belief that he was responsible; and because he may have had a very dependent relationship on his wife.

Dr Klug only saw Mr Masri on one occasion, although he provided a supplementary report on 9 March 1998 in which he opined that his illness was entirely due to the incident resulting in the severe brain damage of his wife and:- "His subsequent difficulties associated with the full assumption of care for her rehabilitation flow directly from this incident and his illness." 
In a letter of 15 April 1998, in answer to specific questions raised, Dr Klug said that he had suffered a trauma of the mind resulting in a psychological illness, namely a major depressive illness or disorder, which is chronic and that his prognosis was poor. He said:- "Mr Masri's decision to become his wife's sole carer is a manifestation of his major depressive disorder, particularly in view of the fact that this role excludes most other activities in his life and I suspect that his devotion to this role may be detrimental to the welfare of his children. It is detrimental to other aspects of his life including his occupational and social functioning." 
He was of the view that Mr Masri may be fit for some form of part-time remunerative work, although he thought it would need to be undemanding and, probably, on a part-time basis.

Dr Klug was cross-examined and he recognised that there was some disadvantage in his not having seen Mr Masri save on the one occasion.

At Tp.75 he gave the following evidence:- "Q. And you have got no doubt in the present case that it is Mr Masri's ongoing recognition of his wife's plight and his own plight and his children's plight which is the major cause of his depression? 
A. I think his level of devotion and the burden he has to a fair degree placed on himself, with taking on her care, that is the result of his psychiatric state, because of what he witnessed and what happened in February of 1991. So I believe that that excessive burden is the product of his illness." 
He said he believed Mr Masri lacked a great deal of insight about his condition "but I think the primary reason for his illness was what happened to his wife initially. That is the main reason for his ongoing depressive state".
He was asked whether he would dismiss another reason and he said:- "He has placed himself in that situation by virtue of the nature of his illness. I believe that Mr Masri is effectively punishing himself because he feels so guilty." 
He thought that subsequent events and conduct were a minor reason compared with that and he explained, in a manner I found satisfactory, why that was so:
Tp.76.

The evidence of Dr Klug, in my view, was substantially corroborative of that of Dr Canaris and, importantly, it emphasised the ongoing nature of the psychological illness and the relationship of that illness to the desire to care for Mrs Masri and, thus, his inability to engage in gainful employment.

Mr Masri was seen by Dr Bruce Westmore, a specialist psychiatrist, on behalf of the defendant. Dr Westmore's reports became Exhibit 1 and he was not required for cross-examination. His first report is dated 16 April 1996 in which he set forth a detailed history and other matters. Dr Westmore considered that he was not suffering "from a major depressive illness".

He concluded:- "The history and the clinical examination would support that this man suffers a reactive mood disturbance, this occurs obviously when he is discussing his wife's difficulties and the significant impact that these difficulties have had both on his own life, the lives of his family, and his family overall. He presents as a man with a number of positive personality attributes. He has a good work history and has demonstrated in the past an ability to progress and achieve. He told me his intentions were quite clearly to support his wife and children, if more home help were available, he would consider returning to some type of employment. 
Obviously if this man does support his wife indefinitely then his life and lifestyle will always be affected to some degree. His prognosis I would have thought is quite good in a general sense, this reflecting the positive personality attributes previously described. He presents as a genuine historian, he delivered his history in an unemotional, matter-of-factish manner but obviously was appropriately distressed at times during the interview." 
Dr Westmore's next report is dated 8 July 1997 in which he expressed the opinion that Mr Masri was presenting "with a continuing set of physical and psychological problems which he is presumably relating to the difficulties experienced by his wife".

In relation to work Dr Westmore said that if he was to return to work he would suggest that a rehabilitation programme be put in place, and that Mr Masri would need some encouragement, support and assistance. He continued:- "The matter is obviously complicated because it is now an issue of compensation. 
I think he should continue with psychiatric treatment and this probably needs to continue for the next six to twelve months, it certainly should be in place when he attempts to return to the workforce. I suspect there is considerable guilt associated with this man's presentation. The physical problems require the opinions of other experts, I am uncertain how disabling they may be in terms of his future employment prospects.

Certainly, if I were managing this case psychiatrically I would be encouraging this man to start exploring his employment prospects and opportunities and assist him getting a case manager in place to help him with the rehabilitation programme. This will need to be a co-ordinated effort and I suspect the task will not be an easy one." 
In his final report of 7 May 1998 Dr Westmore said he would expect any person experiencing the initial psychological trauma apparently experience by Mr
Masri to develop an adverse psychological reaction. He continued:- "It would be a mixed reaction of anxiety, distress, apprehension, perhaps fear for his wife. This would be a normal response to such an event. It would be encountered, more likely than not, in every person who had this experience. In current psychiatric terminology such a condition would be called an acute stress reaction. This is a recognisable psychiatric disorder, it is usually transient in nature and relates directly to the stressor which precipitates it." 
Dr Westmore pointed out that "nervous shock" is not a medical term, but he thought it would be reasonable to assume that Mr Masri had a psychological reaction to the event "which appears to be covered by the term `nervous shock'". He continued:- "The suddenness, unexpectedness and severity of the wife's illness would very likely take his reaction to beyond the more normal psychological reactions of grief or distress.

His situation is obviously complicated in that there have been additional significant stressors in his life, particularly his need to care for his wife over a protracted period of time, her chronically poor prognosis and the fact that there were dependent children involved. This has added to his psychological difficulties. So in this case there has been I would suggest an initial psychiatric response to the acute distress but then also an added response associated with the gradual realisation of and the dealing with the consequences of his wife's long term disability." 
Dr Westmore was asked to apportion the effect and he said it was "a difficult and probably impossible task in psychiatry". He continued:- "What can be said, however in psychiatry, is that it is thought that psychological events tend to accumulate over time. In other words, the longer a particular event is in place as a stressor in a person's life, then the more significant it is thought to be in terms of being responsible for that person's presentation. It is also difficult to know in a case such as this, whether in Mr Masri's mind he has separated the acute injuries experienced by his wife from the subsequent disabilities he experienced in terms of managing her and caring for the children. Of course these two events are different but they are also intrinsically linked." 
If I may say so with respect to the legal position, this seems to be a far more sensible approach to the assessment. However, I do not regard myself by the authorities as being free to adopt it.

Dr Westmore was of the view that Mr Masri's reduced capacity to return to the workforce:- ".. is probably predominantly attributable to the other psychological factors which arose as a result of his wife's chronic problems." 
Dr Westmore referred to other matters, which he thought may bear upon the question of apportionment, including complicating factors in the history.
Whilst Dr Westmore did not think that Mr Masri was suffering from a major depressive illness, which he did not define, I consider that his evidence establishes, as did that of Dr Canaris and Dr Klug, that he was suffering from a significant illness. In my opinion, it is on that basis that Mr Masri is entitled to be compensated.

Conclusions Thus Far From The Evidence 
Notwithstanding the difficulties, which the experts emphasise, I am satisfied that Mr Masri not only suffered the psychological injury, which amounted to nervous shock, for which the defendants concede they are liable, but that, as a matter of probability, he has continued to suffer from that injury to the present. I am also satisfied that a manifestation of that injury has been his desire to care for his wife and, but for the injury, he would not have continued to do so. I am further satisfied that other non-compensable factors have operated in the situation, at least so far as an assessment of general damages for nervous shock is concerned. That means that in relation to general damages it is necessary to make an apportionment between that which is compensable and that which is not. However, in my opinion, it does not follow either logically or in law that once the evidence is accepted that Mr Masri has been unable to work because of a manifestation of the injury, and not because of other non-compensable factors, that there should be any reduction so far as the loss of past wages and of earning capacity is concerned. In other words, in my opinion, the illness has been responsible for Mr Masri's loss of earnings because it caused him to look after his wife on a full-time basis. In those circumstances there would be no justification, in my view, to apportion, because of other non-compensable matters, the loss of earnings.

General Damages 
Mr Masri has suffered from the psychological or psychiatric illness for over seven years and, whilst there is an indication that he is making a recovery, I think he will continue to suffer from it into the future. In my opinion, and doing my best in this obviously imprecise field, I consider Mr Masri is entitled to general damages at the rate of $15,000 per annum for seven years and $10,000 for a further five years, namely $155,000, as the base figure.
Once again doing the best I can with the evidence I apportion fifty five per cent of that amount to nervous shock, on the basis that I am satisfied Mr
Masri is recovering gradually and there will, accordingly, be judgment for the plaintiff by way of general damages for nervous shock in the sum of $85,250.

On this amount interest is payable at the rate of two per centum per annum for seven years on $57,750, i.e. $8,085. There is no claim for any other component of general damages or out of pocket expenses. Hence the award under this heading is the sum of $85,250 and $8,085, viz $93,335. Mr Sullivan submitted the range was from $40,000 to $60,000. Mr Leslie submitted the correct amount was $100,000 plus interest on one half.

Past Economic Loss 
The plaintiff claimed $600 per week net from the date of the accident to the present for lost earnings. Mr Sullivan did not dispute this figure, (indeed, on his evidence, it was conservative), as such, nor did he submit that the amount of the carer's pension should be deducted from the amount of $600 save for the purpose of calculating interest on lost earnings and notwithstanding that Mr Masri did not have to repay it. In my view Mr Masri is entitled to damages for past economic loss at the rate of $600 per week from 21 February to the date of judgment. It was not in issue that the amount should be allowed for 7.25 years and, accordingly, amounted to $226,200. It was further agreed that interest on past economic loss should be calculated on $450 per week, thus taking into account the carer's pension, and that the interest was, therefore, $73,798. I have not made any deduction to the sum of $226,200 because the evidence is that the loss was directly attributable to the injury.
Prima facie Mr Masri is entitled to $226,200 for past economic loss and $73,798 for interest thereon. Mr Sullivan submitted that this amount should be reduced for certain reasons to which I shall refer.

Loss Of Earning Capacity 
I consider that the evidence of Mr Masri and of the doctors supports the view that he will return to gainful employment. It was submitted by Mr Sullivan that there was no evidence as to what he was likely to earn in Lebanon, and that the evidence was that he had now decided to reside permanently in Lebanon rather than Australia. It was submitted by Mr Leslie that what I have to determine is an amount by way of general damages to reflect the loss of earning capacity and that I should allow for one half of the amount he was earning previously, i.e. one half of $600. In my opinion the evidence is sufficient to enable me to make an assessment of the loss of earning capacity.
The plaintiff is presently aged 45 years and, as I said earlier, I would have expected him to work into his early sixties. However, the evidence satisfies me that he will be able to return to full time employment at the expiration of five years. I assess the loss of earning capacity, over that period, as one half of the amount Mr Masri was earning, i.e. $300 per week and, in my opinion, he is entitled to that figure for five years. It did not seem to be in issue that the appropriate multiplier was that provided by the 3% Tables namely $242.50, which would provide a base figure of $72,750. Mr Leslie submitted that should not be discounted for the vicissitudes, because that was already factored in by virtue of other considerations. However, in my opinion, it should be and, in those circumstances, I am of the opinion that the future loss of earning capacity should be assessed at $61,837.50, i.e. eighty five per cent of $72,750.

Further Matters To Be Considered 
As I stated Mr Sullivan raised the fact that Mr Masri had failed to mitigate his damages by obtaining money from the Protective Commissioner. I am not satisfied that he has acted unreasonably in that regard and, for the reasons I have given, I reject this submission.

That leads to the interesting submission relating to "double dipping".

The "Double Dipping" Argument 
Mr Sullivan's argument ran on these lines. He submitted that the defendants paid out to Mrs Masri some $3m for her past and future care, the intention of the payment being that she, or the Protective Commissioner as the person responsible for managing her money, would pay out the money to carers. The next step in the submission was that Mr Masri has provided the care, at least so far as to the present time is concerned, and that in some way, it is proper that he should make a claim on the Protective Commissioner and be paid the amount. It was put, and I do not think I do any injustice to the submission in the way in which I note it, that it would be unfair to the defendants, or perhaps more accurately their insurer, to require, in effect, two payments for the same damages.

This submission requires a careful analysis of the damages, which have been paid, and the call upon them which a person furnishing gratuitous services may have. It also requires careful consideration of the damages payable by a tortfeasor to different plaintiffs, and any inter-relationship between them.

Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer either established or confirmed that a person permanently disabled as a result of a negligent act of another, who received services rendered gratuitously, and who was under no legal liability to pay for them, was none-the-less entitled to recover as damages the value of those services. Gibbs J, at pp.168-169, said:- "However it should no longer be held that the fact that the services have been and will be provided gratuitously is conclusive of this question. The matter should, as it were, be viewed in two stages. First, is it reasonably necessary to provide the services, and would it be reasonably necessary to do so at a cost? If so, the fulfilment of the need is likely to be productive of financial loss. Next, is the character of the benefit which the plaintiff receives by the gratuitous provision of the services such that it ought to be brought into account in relief of the wrongdoer? If not, the damages are recoverable." 
Stephen and Mason JJ recognised that the loss was not the legal liability to pay for the services, but the loss of capacity which occasioned the need for them. In other words the payments are not made on account of moneys, which will necessarily be paid out, but as damages for that particular loss. As
Mason J said, at pp.192-193:- "The respondent's relevant loss is his incapacity to look after himself as demonstrated by the need for nursing services and this loss is to be quantified by reference to the value or cost of providing those services. The fact that a relative or stranger to the proceedings is or may be prepared to provide the services gratuitously is not a circumstance which accrues to the advantage of the appellant. If a relative or stranger moved by charity or goodwill towards the respondent does him a favour as a disabled person then it is only right that the respondent should reap the benefit rather than the wrongdoer whose negligence has occasioned the need for the nursing service to be provided. Enough has been said in the cases which have been decided more recently to indicate that the old view based on the proposition that a plaintiff is not entitled to recover from the defendant the services provided to him unless he can show that he is under a legal liability to pay for them, is no longer acceptable. That view proceeded upon the footing that the relevant loss was the legal liability to pay for the service. It is now recognised that the true loss is the loss of capacity which occasions the need for the service. In consequence the existence of a legal liability to pay is not the dominant consideration." 
This established, and I have not understood the contrary to be suggested, that part of Mrs Masri's damage was that loss for which she was entitled to be compensated. She was not obliged, having been so compensated, to pay it out to those rendering services voluntarily and, as subsequent authority holds, she does not hold the money thus received in any way for the benefit of those providing the services. The amount, although tagged "Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer damages" or in some other similar way, is merely an indication of an amount of damages to which the plaintiff claims to be entitled and, conformably with the necessity for Judges to state how the amount of damages is made up, it is thus characterised. However, that does not take away its essential characteristic of general damages to which the plaintiff, in this case relevantly, Mrs Masri, is entitled.

In Kars versus Kars <case>; [(1996) 187 CLR 354] the plaintiff was seriously injured in a motor vehicle accident, being a passenger in a motor vehicle being driven by her husband.
She required daily assistance and care more than half of which was provided by her husband, the defendant. At first instance it was held that the plaintiff could not recover damages for future gratuitous services, which it was likely the defendant would provide. The Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court of
Queensland allowed the plaintiff's appeal and, on appeal to the High Court, that decision was upheld. The principal argument which was advanced in that case bears a similarity to that upon which Mr Sullivan relied. At p.358 Dawson
J said:- "The argument which is advanced is that, to the extent that the defendant provides services, the need of the plaintiff for them is met and the defendant's liability is accordingly reduced. Put another way, the argument is that having provided the services, the defendant cannot be required to pay, in addition, the cost of providing them. That argument is one which has found favour with most, although not all, State Courts which have considered the issue." 
As I understand it the argument was that the plaintiff was not entitled to both the services and payment for the services from the one source. The present case is different in that what is being said is that the defendants should not be obliged to pay for the services and also to pay Mr Masri because he is not working and is providing the services. That tends to run together several matters, which it will be necessary to disentangle.

At the outset it seems to me that one must ask firstly to what damages was Mrs
Masri entitled by virtue of the defendants' negligence. The answer to that is that, in part, she was entitled in the assessment of her damages to a
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer component. The next question is to what damages Mr
Masri is entitled by virtue of the defendants' tortious conduct. The answer to that is, on the findings I have made, that he is entitled to his loss of earnings, which has been brought about by the psychological or psychiatric disability he suffered in consequence of the tort. Each of Mrs Masri and Mr
Masri had different entitlements to damages and the view may well be taken that because an amount of money may be seen to satisfy one need, and another amount of money may be seen to be providing similar, if not the same, compensation it should not be awarded. However, I think the better view, which accords with principle, is that each of Mrs Masri and Mr Masri had their own rights to damages.

Dawson J referred to English authority that such damages were held in trust for the service provider, but he was of the view, at p.360, that:- "The damages are recoverable to compensate the plaintiff for the loss which is evidenced by the need for the services and it is a matter for the plaintiff whether they are used to recompense the person providing the services." 
His Honour continued, pp.360-361:- "Once it is recognised, as it must be, at all events after the decision of this Court in Van Gervan versus Fenton, that a plaintiff receives the value of services voluntarily provided by way of damages as compensation for the loss suffered by reason of the injuries which manifests itself in the form of a need for those services, and that the need does not have to be productive of financial loss, then cases such as the present one are taken outside the area of special damages, such as loss of wages or out-of-pocket expenses which, at least for the past, may be calculated simply by adding them up. True it is that the value of services provided or to be provided gratuitously to satisfy a need will ordinarily provide a guide in quantifying the damages to be awarded for the loss giving rise to the need. But those damages are general damages which are incapable of precise mathematical calculation and remain at large until quantified." 
At pp.363-364 his Honour said that there was no reason in principle why a person, who has caused the injury, should not render services gratuitously to the injured person, and that by so doing there should not be a reduction in damages.

In the joint judgment Toohey, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ posed the question thus, at pp.364-365:- "This appeal concerns the recovery by an injured person of damages in respect of the voluntary provision of assistance by a family member who also happens to be the tortfeasor. Should recovery be refused on the theory that the tortfeasor, in providing the services, is merely reducing the obligations which the law imposes to restore the injured person? Or should it be allowed as an extension of the logic of this Court's earlier decisions and because to do otherwise would wrongfully reduce the injured person's recovery and, ordinarily, give a windfall to the tortfeasor's insurer?" 
It is, of course, critical to note that these questions were asked in the context of a case where there was a respectable argument for submitting that the plaintiff was, in effect, recovering damages twice, because the services were being provided gratuitously by the defendant and, in addition, the plaintiff was being paid an amount which, on the submission put forward, was to compensate her for the provision of those services.

At p.365 their Honours acknowledged that whichever principle was adopted, there would be anomalies, arising in part from "a novel legal doctrine introduced by the decision of this Court in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer", and in part "from the existence of compulsory insurance which, for many years and in most litigated motor vehicle injury cases, has substituted the deep pocket of an insurer for what may be the empty pocket of the tortfeasor as the source of the injured party's recovery".

Commencing at p.368 their Honours considered the development of the law in
Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer and referred to the decision of the English Court of Appeal in Donnelly versus Joyce <case>; [[1974]
QB 454] in which the trial Judge awarded damages to an infant plaintiff for the salary which his mother had lost by giving up her employment to look after him. It was not suggested, in that case, that there was any legal liability on the child's part to repay his mother. The Court of Appeal rejected a submission that the award of those wages, as part of the infant's damages, contravened the compensatory principle, or that the only way that the sums could be recovered was if there was a binding agreement for repayment. Their Lordships pointed out that the loss was the plaintiff's, such that the method of provision of the services and the repayment, if any, for them were irrelevant considerations. The plaintiff's loss was identified as the existence of the need for the services and the proper and reasonable cost of supplying them.

Their Honours nextly considered the decision of the House of Lords in Hunt v
Severs <case>; [[1994] 2 AC 350], which cast doubt upon the decision in Donnelly v
Joyce and was critical of the concentration on the plaintiff's need and loss as the basis of an award in respect of voluntary care, because it diverted attention "from the award's central objective of compensating the voluntary carer".

Their Honours then pointed out that the High Court had consistently followed the principles in Donnelly versus Joyce and focused upon the "need" of the plaintiff: Van Gervan versus Fenton <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 327], and determined to follow the course of authority in the High
Court in preference to the decision in Hunt versus Severs.

Another reason their Honours advanced for not following that decision was that the House of Lords had determined that the injured plaintiff held the damages under this head on trust for the voluntary carer, a concept which their
Honours thought "would certainly be peculiar", and had, in any event, been rejected by Stephen J in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer.

At p.372 they continued:- "This conclusion is now too deeply entrenched in this part of the law in Australia for this Court to re-open it. It is an accepted principle in Australia that the damages for past and future gratuitous services constitute a sum designed to provide for the injured plaintiff's established needs. That sum may be calculated by reference to what the provider does and even what the commercial cost of doing it would entail. But the focus is upon the plaintiff's needs. The plaintiff might, or might not, reimburse the provider. According to the repeated authority of this Court, contractual or other legal liability apart, whether the plaintiff actually reimburses the provider is entirely a matter between the injured plaintiff and the provider." 
Their Honours rejected a submission, which had found some favour in the Courts below, that there was a distinction between past and future Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer damages.

Their Honours set out reasons against and for recovery and, in the latter category at paragraph 7, they said:- "There is an element of artificiality in the argument that the torfeasor `pays twice'. The plaintiff's needs remain exactly the same. Upon the hypothesis adopted, the tortfeasor provides the caring services. He or she does not additionally pay money to the injured party to fulfil that party's established needs. Such money is paid by a compulsory insurer. Whatever may be the position in the case of voluntary insurance, in the case of compulsory third party motor vehicle insurance the obligation to insure is established by law. To that extent, it is not a res inter alios acta. It is the statutory environment within which the tort occurs. Involved is not a private contractual arrangement which a person can secure or refuse at will, but an obligation established by law. True, it is an obligation of indemnity. But it is indemnity for which the tortfeasor pays premiums to a fund to meet, relevantly, the needs of persons injured in motor accidents including those which cause dependence upon others for gratuitous services." 
I appreciate the present is not a case in which compulsory insurance is involved, although the expectation would be that medical practitioners are insured. None-the-less the basic principles restated in Kars are of direct relevance. The first is that an award of damages based on Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer is to meet an established need of the plaintiff. Secondly, there is no basis to distinguish between past and future services. Thirdly, the injured party does not hold the award of damages on trust for the care provider. Fourthly, in the instant case the care provider had, on the findings
I have made, an independent right to recover damages for loss of wages springing from the psychiatric illness, which gave rise to that loss.

At p.382 their Honours said:- "The choice which we prefer reduces the anomalies and absurdities. It lays emphasis on the provision for the injured plaintiff's needs which is the foundation of recovery in such a case. It avoids an effective windfall to a compulsory statutory insurer, which would depend on its taking advantage of the fulfilment by a family member (who happens to be the tortfeasor) of obligations derived from duty and affection. It measures to the full the plaintiff's need for services. To the extent not already done, it requires their reflection in the premium costs of compulsory insurance levied on insureds as a whole. It reduces the risk of real injustice to a plaintiff should a court, discounting the damages for the plaintiff's needs to be fulfilled by the tortfeasor, fail adequately to take into account the vicissitudes of life which could throw the plaintiff back on others, including commercial care givers, for services no longer provided by the tortfeasor." 
Accordingly, I do not consider that there is any element of "double dipping" by the award to Mr Masri for the loss of wages, which he has suffered because, as a consequence of the psychiatric illness, he has performed voluntary services for his wife. The defendants' submission accepted, as I understood it, that his wage loss flowed from the psychiatric illness. It was not submitted that simply by virtue of a feeling of need to assist Mrs Masri he gave up his employment. His entitlement to recover his loss of wages was an entitlement independent of Mrs Masri's right to recover for her relevant loss, which flowed from the injuries he suffered in consequence of the defendants' tortious conduct. This, of course, makes the case an extension of that considered in Donnelly versus Joyce.

Conclusions 
In my opinion Mr Masri is entitled to the following damages:- 
General damages including interest: $ 93,335 . 00 
Past wage loss including interest: $ 299,998 . 00 
Loss of earning capacity: $ 61,837 . 00 $ 455,170 . 00 
I propose to order judgment for Mr Masri in the sum of $455,170. I would, usually, have ordered that the defendants pay his costs. However, I was informed by Mr Leslie from the Bar Table and without objection, that the question of the correct costs' order may depend on certain offers of compromise, which had been made. I shall hear any argument as to costs after announcing the amount of the judgment.

Orders 
I order judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $455,170.00.

I shall hear any submissions as to the appropriate costs' order.
 * * * 
