

Regina versus David Allan Marks [1997] NSWSC 170 (2 May 1997) 
REGINA versus David Allan MARKS /96 
Friday 2 May 1997 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Smart J, Newman J, Hidden J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW- IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE - JUDGE'S COMMENTS TO JURY ABOUT COURSE OF FUTURE HEARING 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
HEADNOTE 
M was convicted of attempted armed robbery. The victim, S, saw the robber for -3 seconds at close range in a good light in dramatic circumstances and had a good frontal and side view of his face. S gave an accurate general description of the robber and later identified the crocheted table cloth the robber had over his face before its removal and the shirt he was wearing. S identified M as the robber just over a month later from a photocopy photograph included as one of 12 mug shots.

The police had blacked out the names and particulars on the plates. S said that at the date of identification he did not and could not read M's name. The police officer gave evidence that the name could not be read at that date.
There was evidence that the name could subsequently be read and an answer in earlier proceedings capable of sustaining the inference that the name could be read.

The judge held that M's name could not be read as at the date of identification.

HELD: (Hidden J dissenting)
For the purpose of the voir dire the Crown evidence should be taken at its highest and disputed questions of fact left for the jury;
Although the judge had decided the issue litigated his discretion had not been exercised on a correct basis. However, there had been no miscarriage of justice;
While there was prejudice in the admission of the photographs the danger of unfair prejudice did not outweigh their probative value.

After the jury had advised that the members were unable to agree the judge gave a "Black" direction about 3.15pm. He told them that he would prefer not to sit much past 4pm that day (Friday) and offered to release them then or after 4pm to return on Monday. The jury returned at 4.15pm 
HELD: 
The course taken by the judge was not objectionable.

ORDER 
By majority, appeal against conviction dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: David Allan Marks appeals against his conviction of attempted armed robbery in respect of which he received a minimum term of 3 years and an additional term of 2 years.

Immediately after the jury was empanelled a voir dire was held as to the admissibility of certain identification evidence. This included some 12 copy photographs shown to the victim just over a month after an attempted armed robbery and the victim's evidence that the man in photograph 7 was the felon.

On 14 March 1992 Mr Schultz was working in his Shell service station at
Condobolin. About 7.30pm there was nobody else in the shop so Mr Schultz went to the rear section and attended to some boxes of bottles preparatory to filling the drinks fridge. He was facing the back wall. A male voice behind him asked if he had any money on the premises. Mr Schultz stood up, turned around and faced the male who had a rifle or shotgun under his arm and a crocheted table cloth on top of his head. This male again asked Mr Schultz if he had any money on the premises. Mr Schultz replied that there was no money there. During this exchange the weapon was pointing towards Mr Schultz' left shoulder. He heard two distinct clicks several seconds apart. After the second of the clicks he pushed past the felon and in doing so removed the table cloth from his face. Mr Schultz was within an arm's length and saw the felon's face clearly for about two or three seconds as he pushed past him, removed the cloth and looked back. Mr Schultz did not know the felon and had never seen him previously. Mr Schultz ran across the road to another shop and yelled out to call the police as he was being robbed and then returned immediately to his shop. The felon had gone. Mr Schultz provided a general description of the felon as a person between 24 and 28 years of age, olive to dark complexion, possibly Aboriginal, 5 ft 8 in to 5 ft 9 in tall with a darkish grey or blue shirt and long trousers. He did not know whether the felon was wearing shoes.

On 16 March 1992 Mr Schultz identified a crocheted yellowish white table cloth shown to him by the police as that worn over the felon's head at the time of the assault. On 17 March 1992 he identified a blue-grey shirt shown to him by the police as that worn by the felon. On each occasion he was shown one item not several.

On 16 April 1992 at the Condobolin Police Station he was shown a series of 12 photocopy photographs by Det Marsh. They were police "mug shots". Mr Schultz looked through the bundle in a slow and deliberate way. He was looking for a face. He identified the man in photograph No 7 as the felon. There was a frontal and in profile view.

The copy photographs showed the head, shoulders and part of the upper trunk of the man.

Each man was photographed with a plate bearing his name, date of birth and height, together with the date on which, and the police station at which, the photograph had been taken. Det Marsh had earlier endeavoured to render those particulars indecipherable by applying a black marker texta pen over the top of those particulars on the copy photographs.

Prior to being shown the copy photographs, Mr Schultz had heard, via the town gossip, a number of names mentioned as the felon, one of whom was the appellant. He had mentioned those names to the police.

Mr Schultz said that he could not see the name of the man on photograph number
All he relied on was the face of the man. Mr Schultz stated on 15 April that he still could not see the name on the photograph.

Despite a strong attack Mr Schultz adhered to his evidence and insisted that he was 100% sure that the person in photograph number 7 was the felon.

Det Marsh gave evidence that about 10pm on 14 March 1992 he attended premises at 17 Cunningham Street, Condobolin. The appellant and three other persons were in the premises. Det Marsh recovered a crocheted table cloth and said to the appellant that he matched the description of the person who attempted an armed robbery at the Shell service station. The appellant replied that he did not know what the officer was talking about. The appellant was arrested, taken to the police station and later released. On 16 March 1992 Det Marsh spoke to the appellant again. He said that on 14 March 1992 he was wearing the same clothes. They included a blue-grey T-shirt.

Det Marsh said that when he blanked out the name plates on the copy photographs he could not see any of the writing on those name plates. He agreed at the trial on 15 April 1996 the name "D A Marks" was then visible beneath the blacking out and was not too difficult to read.

Det Marsh said that Mr Schultz did not hold up any of the photographs to the light. Mr Schultz appeared to look at the faces but Det Marsh could not positively say that Mr Schultz did not look at the blackened name plates.

In cross examination a substantial attack was mounted on the evidence of Det
Marsh relating to copy photograph number 7 based on this question and answer from prior voir dire proceedings before Judge Saunders in August 1995: "Q: Detective, is that as it was, firstly in December 1992 and secondly in
April 1992.

A: Well today you can read it without showing it up to a particular light. In
December 1992 you had to have it at a particular angle to see it. Obviously it is clearer at one angle. In April 1992 you couldn't see it as clear as now." 
Counsel for the appellant contended that this meant that the name could be seen in April 1992. It appeared that in subsequent questioning in those prior proceedings Det Marsh had maintained that he could not see the name in April
Counsel for the appellant maintained at the trial and before this Court that in the answer quoted the truth had slipped out. The trial judge did not accept the meaning for which the appellant contended.

The accused gave evidence on the voir dire but not at the trial. He said that he had a motor bike accident about 2 or 3 days before 14 March 1992 in which he received injuries comprising abrasions to his hands, his forehead on the left hand side, on the inside of his left elbow and forearm and on the outside of his right elbow. He said that a purple disinfectant used for animals was sprayed upon the injuries. They were weeping and prominent on both 14 and 16
March 1992. He described the condition as Barcoo Rot. They did not show up in photograph No 7 taken on 16 March 1992 at Lake Cargelligo Police Station when he was arrested on other matters on which he was later discharged. It was suggested that his hair covered those on his face.

Mr Schultz did not see any facial abrasions or the injuries depicted in another photograph of the appellant said to have been taken shortly after he was sprayed with the disinfectant. Nor did Mr Schultz see any other injuries.
Mr Schultz said that he was looking mainly at the felon's face. Mr Schultz said that he looked the felon straight in the face.

Det Marsh did not observe any injuries to the appellant's face at Lake
Cargelligo Police Station.

From evidence given at the trial but not on the voir dire it appeared that the appellant declined to participate, on legal advice, in an identification parade after he was arrested on 14 March 1992. Perhaps the judge was told this during argument. I do not know. There was material on the trial suggesting that the arrest may have been unlawful as being for the purpose of participation in an identification parade.

In his judgment on the voir dire the judge stated that there was a challenge to the evidence of identification to be given by Mr Schultz. After briefly outlining the Crown case and noting that the 12 photographs were "mug shots", enlarged and in black and white and accepting Det Marsh's evidence that he had blacked out the names and other details on the name plates, the judge summarised the further evidence of the detective. That was to the effect that as at 16 April 1992 it was not possible to read any of the writing which he had obliterated and that the obliterating material had since faded so that some of the writing could be read. The judge referred to the answer given by
Det Marsh in the voir dire proceedings in August 1995 and quoted earlier.
Counsel contended that this answer was different from the evidence which Det
Marsh had given in the current proceedings.

Immediately after Det Marsh had been taken to the evidence quoted it was put to him that the names could be seen in April 1992. He replied in the negative and added in reply to counsel: "You questioned me further and I later indicated you could not see the names at all in 1992." 
Counsel stated that he did not dispute that the detective re-asserted in his evidence before Judge Saunders in August 1995 that the name could not be seen in April 1992.

Returning to the judge's reasons, he acknowledged that the appellant was entitled to read the answer as amounting, by inference, to a statement that the writing could be read in April 1992 but not as easily as at April 1996.
The judge did not read the statement as meaning that. Read literally, the statement "In April 1992 you couldn't see it as clear as now" would be true if the writing could not be read as at April 1992. The answer was not well expressed. Most tribunals, before coming to a conclusion, would have taken the whole of the witness' evidence on the point, as the judge did. The judge acknowledged that the jury could take the meaning contended for by counsel for the appellant.

The judge concluded: "...in these voir dire proceedings, I am the tribunal of fact and I have indicated the way I understood the answer and still understand it today.

In those circumstances there is no basis for me to exclude the evidence the
Crown seeks to bring under either s.135 or s.137 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and I allow the
Crown to present the evidence." 
There is no record of the argument put by counsel on the voir dire. From the evidence led by the Crown and the tenor of the cross examination it seems that the issue on the voir dire was whether the details on the name plate of photograph 7 could be read on 16 April 1992 when Mr Schultz saw the photographs. It would have been better if the issue were stated as whether Mr
Schultz read or could read the name on the name plate on photograph 7 as at 16
April 1992.

The argument on the voir dire seems to have been that if the appellant's name could be seen on the name plate of photograph 7, despite the marking ink, it would be unfair to admit Mr Schultz's identification evidence because that identification would be suspect and unreliable. Thus the danger of unfair prejudice would outweigh its probative value. On this basis, the best argument available to the appellant was the answer earlier quoted given on the voir dire before Judge Saunders in August 1995. This is why the matter was emphasised in cross examination and covered at some length in the judge's reasons.

The evidence on the voir dire, as might be expected, covered other matters.
These included the circumstances of the robbery, the opportunity Mr Schultz had to observe the felon and what he recalled. The general description of the felon given by Mr Schultz fitted the appellant. A few hours after the robbery, a crocheted table cloth was found in the house in which the appellant was staying. It was taken by the police and identified by Mr Schultz on 16 March , he being absent from Condobolin on 15 March 1992. On 16 March 1992 a blue-grey shirt was taken by the police and identified the following day by Mr
Schultz. Considerable time was spent in the evidence on Mr Schultz' examination of the 12 copy photographs and on his having become aware of the name of David Marks being mentioned amongst others as the possible felon and discussing it with the police.

The cross examination of Mr Schultz was to the effect that he knew that the appellant was a police suspect, that he looked at the name plates on the photographs, that the name of the appellant could be distinguished through the markings, that he did not see any injuries on the face of the felon and that his identification of the appellant as the felon was wrong. The appellant also relied on Mr Schultz not being 100% sure that the photograph allegedly taken after the appellant's alleged motor bike accident a few days before 14 March was that of the appellant. Mr Schultz refuted the suggestion the he chose photograph 7 because he saw the name of the appellant on it.

Mr Schultz was also cross examined as to the crocheted table cloth and the shirt in an effort to weaken the impact of his evidence on these items. At the end of the cross examination these remained questions for the jury. Mr Schultz made no significant concessions. Mr Schultz vigorously refuted the suggestion that he was lying.

It was not put to either Mr Schultz or Mr Marsh that photograph 7 was of such poor quality that it was difficult to identify the appellant from it.

The judge, in dealing with the admissibility of the identification evidence, was not required to decide whether on 16 April 1992 the name of the appellant could be seen or read through the black markings nor whether Mr Schultz could see that name through the black markings.

There was evidence that the appellant's name could not be seen and that Mr
Schultz could not and did not see that name and was looking at the faces and not the blacked out name plates. That evidence, as it turned out, was substantial. The material to the contrary comprised the photographs in their present condition and evidence as to what could be seen as from December 1992.
There was also the earlier quoted answer of Det Marsh and the evidence as to injuries sustained by the appellant.

Once the judge was satisfied that there was evidence to go to the jury and that it was not inconsequential it was a question of fact for the jury to resolve whether the appellant's name could be read and whether Mr Schultz read it.

In R v. Carusi, CCA, unreported, 17 January 1997, Hunt CJ at CL (with whom
Newman and Ireland JJ agreed) said at pp 21-22 of his judgment: "The power of the trial judge to exclude evidence in accordance with the `Christie' discretion does not permit the judge, in assessing what its probative value is, to determine whether the jury should or should not accept the evidence of the witness upon which the Crown case depends. The trial judge can only exclude the evidence of such a witness where, taken at its highest, its probative value is outweighed by its prejudicial effect; whereas this
Court may use its supervisory powers to set aside a verdict where, the issue having been left to the jury, this Court is satisfied - on the whole of the evidence - that the jury ought nevertheless have had a reasonable doubt." 
This approach was re-affirmed in R v.Singh-Bal, CCA, unreported, 10 April per Hunt CJ at CL at pp10-11.

The judge dealt with the narrow issue which was litigated before him. His approach was incorrect. The wrong question was posed and litigated. Even on the approach taken, the true question was whether Mr Schultz saw or, perhaps could see, the name. However, these issues were questions of fact for the jury. There was no basis for excluding the identification evidence on the ground put to the trial judge.

It is interesting to note that the grounds of appeal, settled and signed by counsel who appeared at the trial, contained no complaint about the admission of the identification evidence. Those grounds were: "1. That the trial judge's comments to the jury when they informed the court that they could not reach a verdict caused a miscarriage of justice.
That the evidence of Howard McDaniels was excluded in error." 
The first ground was pressed but the second was abandoned at the hearing of the appeal. I have dealt with ground 3 relating to the admission of the identification evidence.

Counsel who appeared for the appellant on the appeal but not at the trial took additional grounds which were not taken at the trial. These related to the admission of the identification evidence and were: "4. His Honour erred when he admitted the evidence of picture identification.
In the alternative to 4, above, the admission of picture identification caused a miscarriage of justice." 
Counsel relied heavily on the decision in R v. P D Meier, CCA, unreported, May 1996, contending that the judge had a duty in this case to consider the admissibility of the identification evidence on broader grounds.

The appellant contended that the copy photographs were highly prejudicial,
Alexander v. The Queen <case>; [(1980-1981) 145 CLR 395] per
Gibbs CJ at 400-401 but admissible per Gibbs CJ at 403. Section 137 of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) provides that where the danger of unfair prejudice outweighs the probative value the court must exclude the evidence. The appellant submitted that the danger of unfair prejudice was extremely high. There was a real risk that the jury would think from the "mug shot" that the appellant was a man with a criminal record or at least a person who had attracted the interest of the police.

The appellant contended that the probative value was undermined by these factors:
The suggestion inherent in the photo that the appellant has a record for like offences;
The photos were in black and white, of poor quality and showed the head and shoulders only;
Mr Schultz saw the felon for 2-3 seconds in circumstances of danger, stress and surprise. The felon was previously unknown to Mr Schultz;
Mr Schultz was shown the photographs of 16 April 1992, just over a month after the incident;
The issue whether Mr Schultz could see the name;
The appellant was not there to observe the process;
To attack the evidence, the appellant had to highlight the source of the prejudice.

I do not agree that the suggestion inherent in the photograph was that the appellant had a record for like offences. The suggestion was that he had a criminal record or had attracted police interest. Mr Schultz insisted that he saw the appellant head on at close quarters and was able to give a good general description of the felon. The dramatic circumstances and what he saw appeared to have stayed in his memory. Mr Schultz insisted that he had not seen the name on photograph 7. The quality of the photograph did not hinder Mr
Schultz in his identification and, it would seem, did not trouble the jury.

While there was a danger of prejudice, the probative value of the evidence was substantial. There was an issue to be resolved, although it was not raised by counsel at the trial. On the appeal, counsel for the appellant accepted that counsel appearing at the trial did not specifically request the judge to exclude the evidence on the basis now proposed.

The question arises whether this Court should order a new trial so that the trial judge can exercise his discretion on the point now raised or whether this Court can deal with it. The appellant contends that this Court should not deal with it and that it should go back to a trial judge. Questions of credibility were said to be involved.

It is now necessary to look more closely at R v. Meier (supra). There the appellant and the victim were at a small country police station at the same time, with the only other persons present being two police officers. The victim saw the appellant and identified him. There was an inadequately made challenge to the admissibility of the identification, counsel asking the judge to direct the Crown not to lead certain evidence. No voir dire was sought. The judge correctly rejected the application.

Gleeson CJ pointed out that a problem had been exposed which could not be ignored. During the trial there emerged some evidence from the victim about what a police officer had said to him which, if true, added considerable weight to an argument that the evidence should be excluded on discretionary grounds. A new and potentially important factual issue had emerged which was capable of putting a different complexion on the problem. It was in these circumstances that the Chief Justice held that, in the interests of securing a fair trial, the judge should have intervened and raised for the consideration of the Crown and counsel for the appellant the question whether the evidence of the police station identification should be excluded in the exercise of the judge's discretion. A decision on exclusion would have necessitated a voir dire examination.

The Chief Justice thought that a proper decision on the admissibility of the evidence would have necessitated a consideration of factual issues that were not explored, or explored in sufficient detail and a resolution of a clear conflict of evidence.

The Chief Justice held that the appellant had been deprived of having the trial judge's discretionary ruling on a matter that may have been of substantial importance and that there was a risk of miscarriage of justice.

The present case is not one in which a voir dire examination was not held. It was not suggested that further evidence would have been led or would be led on a new trial. The relevant facts on the exercise of the discretion under s.137 did not seem to be the subject of any material dispute which the judge had to resolve.

Prior to the trial in question there had been two aborted trials and a trial at which the jury could not agree. It is desirable to avoid a further trial if that is consistent with the interests of justice. In my opinion this Court is able to and should determine whether the danger of prejudice outweighed the probative value of the evidence. This court does not order new trials unless there was a risk of a miscarriage of justice in the trial under review.

The present case was not one where a trial judge acting reasonably could have held that the danger of unfair prejudice to the appellant outweighed the probative value of the evidence. It should not be overlooked that the jury accepted the evidence of Mr Schultz. He was extensively cross examined before the jury as was Det Marsh. As the judge explained to the jury (SU 44), the linch pin of the Crown case was Mr Schultz and unless they accepted Mr
Schultz, the Crown case fell to the ground. The judge had given the jury extensive directions on the identification evidence, warning them of potential weaknesses.

In my opinion ground 4 does not succeed.

In support of the 5th ground, the appellant submitted that even if the photo identification was properly admitted there remained a serious risk that a miscarriage of justice had occurred. It was contended that the identification evidence was very weak. I do not agree. It was open to the jury to regard it as satisfactory and it did so. It was further contended that the appellant was presented with a hopeless dilemma. If there was to be identification evidence, the appellant had to attack it and that meant focusing upon the very aspect of the photos by which the damage was done.

The admission of the photographs had the potential to cause prejudice to the appellant. The cross examination on whether the name could be seen on the blackened nameplate would keep before the jury that this was a "mug shot" with the connotations which that carried. However, the prejudice was not such as to cause a risk of miscarriage of justice in view of the extensive evidence on the issues, including that of the Powell sisters, the terms of the Summing Up, the warnings there given and the concentration on and discussion of the issues and the elements of the offence.

I would not uphold the 5th ground.

I return to the first ground that the judge's comments to the jury, when they informed the court that they could not reach a verdict, caused a miscarriage of justice.

The judge summed up on the morning of 19 April 1996. The jury retired to consider their verdict at 1.28pm. Shortly before 3.15pm the jury sent this note: "The jury cannot come to a unanimous decision. What is the result of this situation?" 
The judge decided to give the jury a "Black" direction after both counsel, at the judge's invitation, expressed the view that it was not too early to do so.
Before giving a "Black" direction the judge said: "...the High Court of Australia tells judges in my position what to do in this position and I will now do it. I will give you a direction that the High Court of Australia lays down in this situation. I will tell you when I finish that direction because I am going to say something else to you then." 
After giving the "Black" direction the judge said: "That is what the High Court of Australia prescribes trial judges like me say.

Now, what else I want to say to you is this, we have been here all the week and you know from what I have just said to you that I have the power to discharge you, but I would not discharge you, you being I think out since around about half past one or so and there is no fixed time about these things. The rule once used to be some years ago that jurors were discharged after six hours. That is no longer a fixed position, you may be glad to know, but I would not be disposed to discharge you now. I think that you should try more.

I might just raise another matter with you while you are in court. I know, and everybody knows, that you have a life away from being at the court doing jury service. There may be some things that are pressing on your individual minds.
I generally tell juries that the court facilities are available on the day they are sent out for as long as the jury wish to use them for the purpose of deliberating, but if after any decent interval, and I think you have had a decent interval, you will have had one by four o'clock anyway, you feel that you have got as far as you can go today and would like to be sent away to come back on the next day, which of course is going to be Monday, then I will give you that option. So I bring that to your attention. Perhaps that is the first matter you might like to discuss when you go out.

You see, I am not prepared to discharge you for the moment, I have made that clear. Perhaps the first matter you want to discuss in light of that is whether you want to continue now or me to release you now and perhaps at some later stage to come back on Monday. I do not want to give you unlimited time today and I will tell you candidly why I do not want to do that. My travel arrangements are for me to go back to my home at quarter past five and so far as I can I would like to do that. It is not imperative, but that is what the people I go home to expect of me. In so far as I can I would like to do it, but it may not be imperative. Can I ask you then to consider what I have said to you and if you wish me now to release you for the day write me a note and tell me that, otherwise attend to your deliberations and if you have not contacted me I will contact you a little after four." 
It was submitted that the additional comments placed pressure upon the jury and that they would have been keen to reach a decision by 4.15pm so the judge could catch the 5.15pm plane. Further, some of the jurors may have had commitments on the following Monday. It was submitted that the end result would have been to hurry the jury in their deliberations.

While the judge stated that it was not imperative that he catch the 5.15pm plane he preferred to do so as his family were expecting him. The judge offered to release the jury at that stage or sometime later that day with a view to coming back on Monday.

The judge left it up to the jury to decide what they would like to do. If they did not want to leave at that stage they were to attend to their deliberations and he would see them a little after 4.00pm. The jury understood that he would not discharge them at that stage and that they were to deliberate further. If they had not reached a decision by shortly after 4.00pm the situation would be reviewed and a decision made as to what would be done. What happened at that stage would depend largely on what the jury told the judge. I do not think that a jury would have felt under pressure to reach a decision by 4.15pm. Nor would the jury have so disregarded their oaths to avoid coming back on Monday.

It would be unusual for a jury in a 5 day trial to be discharged for disagreement until they have deliberated for at least 5 hours. Sometimes it is much longer. Experience has shown that a jury often benefits by an overnight break. It is also unusual for a jury to be kept past 4.30pm to 5.00pm especially when, as here, they started shortly after 9.30am on the Friday.
They would become tired by 4.30pm. The exception is when the jury tell the judge that they expect to reach a verdict within about an hour and that they would like to remain.

The jury would have formed the impression that the position would be reviewed by the judge shortly after 4.00pm and that if they had not reached a verdict by then it was likely that they would be released to return on Monday to continue their deliberations in an attempt to reach a verdict.

I do not think that there was any risk of a miscarriage of justice arising from the comments of the judge.

The appeal should be dismissed.

NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of Mr Justice Smart. I agree with both the reasons he gives and the order he proposes.
 
HIDDEN J: 
David Allan Marks appeals against his conviction upon a charge of attempted armed robbery, following his trial at the Dubbo District Court in April 1996. In the following month he was sentenced to five years penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of three years to date from 23 June 1994, and an additional term of two years. The offence is alleged to have occurred in March 1992, and the delay in the matter finally being dealt with arises from the fact that Mr Marks had been presented for trial on the matter on three previous occasions. The first two trials aborted, and in the third the jury could not agree.
 
It was the Crown case that the appellant tried to rob the Shell service station at Condobolin in the early evening of 14 March 1992. The proprietor of the service station, Mr Barry Schultz, gave evidence that he was approached from behind by a man who demanded money. The man's head was covered with a cotton crocheted tablecloth and he was holding either a shotgun or a rifle. Mr Schultz heard two clicks, suggesting that the offender was attempting to fire the weapon. He pushed past the man and, in the course of doing so, removed the tablecloth from his head. The lighting in the area was good and he saw the man's face clearly, although for a matter of seconds only. He had never seen the man before. He ran from the premises and called for help.
 
That same evening, Mr Schultz gave the police a description of the man which, it seems, was broadly consistent with the appearance of the appellant. He also described what the man was wearing, with reference particularly to his shirt. Later the same evening, Det Snr Const Marsh and other police went to premises where the appellant was and located a crocheted tablecloth. On 16 March, Det Marsh showed that tablecloth to Mr Schultz, who identified it as the one he had seen on the head of the offender. That same day police recovered from the appellant a shirt which he said he had been wearing on the night of the 14th. The following day Mr Schultz identified that shirt as the one worn by the offender.
 
On 16 April, a little over a month later, Det Marsh showed Mr Schultz twelve photocopied photographs of men which had been provided by the police Modus Operandi section. Among them was a photograph, frontal and in profile, of the appellant. All of them bore the customary identification of the person photographed on a board showing the person's name, date of birth and height, together with the date on which, and police station at which, the photograph had been taken. Det Marsh covered those particulars on each of the photographs with a black marking pen, before showing them to Mr Schultz. Prior to attending the police station on this occasion, Mr Schultz had heard the names of a number of people, including the appellant, bandied around in town gossip as the person who had tried to rob him. He selected the photograph of the appellant as the offender, and gave evidence that he could not see the personal particulars on the photograph which had been blacked out by Det Marsh. Det Marsh, himself, gave evidence that those particulars could not be seen on 16 April 1992 when the identification took place.
 
We have seen the group of photographs, which became an exhibit at the trial. There is no doubt that now the particulars on the photograph of the appellant, including his name, can be seen through the black marking ink. The same is true of all the other photographs in the selection. Whether that was so, to any extent, on 16 April 1992 was an important issue in the trial.
 
Det Marsh agreed that, by the time of the committal proceedings in December 1992, the personal particulars on the photograph could be seen if it was held at a particular angle to the light. At an earlier trial in August 1995, he agreed that they were even more easily seen. In the light of his evidence in the trial from which this appeal is brought, that those particulars could not be seen at all on 16 April 1992, he was taken to some evidence he gave in the course of that 1995 trial, which was as follows: "Q. Detective, the writing beneath the blacked out pen is not too difficult to read today, is it? 
A. No, it isn't, no.
 
Q. Detective, is that as it was, firstly, in December 1992 and, secondly, in April 1992? 
A. Well, today you can read it without showing it up to a particular light. In December 1992, you had to have it at a particular angle to see it. Obviously it is clearer at one angle. In April 1992 you couldn't see it as clear as now." 
I have underlined the last sentence of that answer as it appears to have been the centrepiece of argument before his Honour relating to the admissibility of the identification evidence.
 
The Identification Evidence.
 
One of the grounds of appeal was that the learned trial Judge should have rejected the photographic identification evidence upon the basis that its probative value was outweighed by the risk of unfair prejudice to the appellant: [s 137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act, 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). Objection to the evidence was taken at the trial and his Honour heard the evidence of Mr Schultz and Det Marsh on the voir dire. The appellant gave evidence on the voir dire which raised a further matter bearing upon the reliability of the identification. In the course of evidence before the jury, further material emerged touching upon the admissibility of the evidence. However, to determine this ground of appeal, it is sufficient to have regard only to the evidence called by the Crown on the voir dire, the effect of which is summarised above.
 
Before us, it was submitted that the evidence should have been rejected in the light of a number of factors, some of which are common to any identification from photographs: see Alexander versus The Queen <case>; [(1980-81) 145 CLR 395], per Stephen J at 409. Those factors were: . Mr Schultz saw the face of the offender, a man previously unknown to him, for a matter of seconds only in dramatic circumstances; . He saw the selection of photographs over a month later; . The photographs are in black and white, of relatively poor quality, showing only the head and shoulders of the men in them; . The appellant was not present to observe the identification process; . The evidence raised the question whether Mr Schultz might have been assisted in selecting the appellant's photograph by seeing his name upon it; . To a jury, the photo would convey that the appellant had a criminal record; . Given the issue whether the appellant's name could be seen on the photo, the defence could not be properly presented without the jury having it.
 
The significance of the last matter mentioned is that the principal attack upon the reliability of the identification evidence involved highlighting the very prejudice which the photo necessarily created: the personal particulars normally attached to a "mug shot".
 
In his judgment admitting the evidence, the learned trial Judge dealt only with the question whether the appellant's name could be seen on the photograph at the time of the identification. Whether that was the only matter argued is not a matter which we can determine. Neither counsel for the Crown nor for the appellant in this Court had appeared at the trial, and the submissions of counsel at the trial on the voir dire were not recorded. I can only say that counsel at the trial on both sides are experienced in the jurisdiction, and I would be surprised if none of the other matters argued before us had been agitated before his Honour.
 
However that may be, I must confess to some difficulty following the reasoning by which his Honour determined the one issue with which he did deal in his judgment on the voir dire. I have set out above the passage from the evidence of Det Marsh in the trial of August 1995, upon which counsel relied. From the concluding words of the detective's answer, it might be inferred that the name on the photograph of the appellant could have been visible at the time of the identification, although not as clearly as it was at the time the detective was giving the evidence. In his judgment, after setting out that passage of evidence, his Honour had this to say: "Now it is that answer that Mr Patch (counsel for the appellant at the trial) seizes upon, as he is perfectly entitled to, and says that evidence is different to evidence given in the voir dire proceedings before me by the detective.
 
It is not necessary for me to go to the specific evidence given yesterday. I indicated to Mr Patch that the effect of that evidence upon me when it was given yesterday, and I followed the cross examination closely, was that Mr Marsh was in fact answering what was seemingly a double question, and whilst I concede the accused is entitled to read the answer in the way that supports the submission as it is put, it is not the way that I understood the answer yesterday, nor is it the way that I understood it today." 
Having agreed that in the earlier trial he had said that in April 1992 the particulars which had been blacked out could not be seen "as clear as now", Det Marsh went on to say that, upon further questioning in that trial, he had reasserted his evidence that the writing could not be seen at all. He claimed that what he meant by that answer was, "you couldn't see it as clear as now because you couldn't see it at all ... ". I must say that that does not strike me as a convincing explanation for the earlier answer and counsel put it to him, with some force I would have thought, that that earlier answer was an inadvertent admission of the truth (a "Freudian slip", as it was put). Making all due allowance for the fact that his Honour had the advantage of seeing and hearing the witness, I remain unable to understand how the apparent inconsistency could be explained away as his Honour did. Certainly, it does not appear to me that the question in the previous trial which led to that answer was, in any relevant sense, "a double question" such as might have misled the witness at the time.
 
Be that as it may, the crucial question which his Honour had to determine was whether Mr Schultz himself was able to see the name on the photograph at the time he selected it in April 1992. As already observed, Mr Schultz gave evidence that he could not. This evidence was challenged and he was cross examined closely about it. Curiously, in evidence in chief on the voir dire, he claimed that he could still not see the name under the black marking, although there appears to be no doubt that it was then readily visible. His Honour's conclusion about the appearance of the photo in April 1992 was drawn from a consideration of the evidence of Det Marsh only, and he expressed no finding as to what Mr Schultz could, or could not, see in the photograph at that time. Before us, the Crown prosecutor submitted that it was implicit in his Honour's acceptance of Det Marsh's evidence that the name could not then be seen, that his Honour accepted also that Mr Schultz could not see it. This, however, is hardly an answer to the problem. Although looking at the same thing, one man does not necessarily see what another sees. It was essential that his Honour arrive at, and express, a conclusion about what Mr Schultz could see at the relevant time.
 
Accordingly, I am satisfied that his Honour fell into error in his approach to the matter. Counsel for the appellant submitted that [s 137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) creates a duty upon a judge to reject evidence, the probative value of which is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to an accused, so that the decision to admit or reject evidence in accordance with the section is not strictly the exercise of a discretion. In this respect, counsel contrasted the section with the common law discretion to reject evidence on the basis that its probative value was outweighed by its prejudicial effect. I find it unnecessary to determine this question because, even on the application of the familiar principles relating to appellate review of the exercise of the discretion, I am satisfied that his Honour's discretion here miscarried.
 
On the other hand, this is not a case where this Court should conclude that the evidence must have been rejected upon the proper application of the principles. While there was certainly a strong case for rejection, a judge, having seen and heard the witnesses and having had an opportunity denied to us to resolve the conflicts in the evidence, might have determined that it was safe to admit it. I referred earlier in this judgment to the evidence that Mr Schultz identified the tablecloth and the shirt shown to him by Det Marsh. I should record also that there was other evidence in the case of a circumstantial nature pointing towards the appellant's involvement in the offence. If it were not for the unusual history of the matter, I would have been inclined to direct a new trial. However, I would not do so now given that the appellant has already faced trial on four occasions and has served the lion's share of the minimum term imposed upon him.
 
I would propose that the appeal be allowed and the conviction quashed. I would decline to order a new trial.
 
Since dictating this judgment I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Smart J, with whom Newman J agrees, and I am aware that their Honours do not share my view of the matter. It is appropriate that I record my agreement with Smart J's disposition of the first ground of appeal, relating to the trial judge's comments to the jury.
 * * * 
