

J A O'Neill versus The Boorowa District Hospital [1996] NSWSC 255 (4 July 1996) 
Judith Ann O'NEILL versus THE BOOROWA DISTRICT HOSPITAL /94; CLD500069/91 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE JA, HANDLEY JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS: CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE-should not have been left to the jury - jury's assessment overruled.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: The appellant was injured on 22 August 1985 whilst employed by the respondent. She was employed as the craft lady at the Boorowa Hospital Day Care Centre which is nearby to the hospital. 
The injury she sustained was a disc rupture which occurred when she was attempting to manoeuvre an elderly patient into a position to go to the toilet. The staff at the Day Care Centre comprised a sister in charge, a trained nurse and the craft lady who was the appellant. In addition, some casual assistance was given by a Mrs Noakes, who was a person who attended the day care centre in the capacity of a client, as she had been called.

At the time of the appellant's injury neither the sister in charge nor the nurse was present. The patient, or client, Mrs Walk, was a person who was elderly being in her late seventies, was confined to a wheelchair and had one leg partially amputated. Mrs Walk told the appellant that she needed to go to the toilet. Rather than call to the sister in charge, or obtain the services of a nurse, the appellant sought to assist Mrs Walk with the assistance of Mrs
Noakes to take her to the toilet. There were no lifting devices in the centre and the appellant had not received any training in handling disabled patients as Mrs Walk was. She had not been instructed that if there was no trained nursing staff at the centre and a patient needed to go to the toilet she was either to ring the hospital and ask for a trained nurse or await the matron or nurse.

The jury found the respondent negligent and awarded damages in the sum of $320,000 but reduced that amount by 35% owing to the plaintiff's contributory negligence as found by the jury.

The appellant contends that there was no contributory negligence, that the trial judge should not have left it to the jury and, alternatively, that the apportionment of 35% was excessive to the point of perversity.

In submitting that Mr Justice Badgery-Parker erred in leaving the issue of contributory negligence to the jury, it was argued that the appellant was placed in an invidious position of having to take the lady to the toilet or try to find an available nurse in the hospital. It was said that being the craft lady, she should not have been left in that position.

As was made clear by the High Court in Bankstown Foundry Pty Limited v
Braistina[1]: "A worker will be guilty of contributory negligence if he ought reasonably to have foreseen that, if he did not act as a reasonable and prudent man, he would expose himself to risk of injury. But his conduct must be judged in the context of a finding that the employer had failed to use reasonable care to provide a safe system of wok, thereby exposing him to unnecessary risks. The question will be whether, in the circumstances and under the conditions in which he was required to work, the conduct of the worker amounted to mere inadvertence, inattention or misjudgment, or to negligence rendering him responsible in part for the damage... In Bodrebersek (Bodrebersek v
Australian Iron & Steel Limited <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 492] at 4930494), the court said: "The making of an apportionment as between a plaintiff and a defendant of their respective shares in the responsibility for the damage involves a comparison both of culpability, i.e of the degree of departure from the standard of care of the reasonable man and of the relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage ... It is the whole conduct of negligent party in relation to the circumstances of the accident which must be subjected to comparative examination."" 
Accordingly one must look to see what elements there were which might constitute contributory negligence. In that regard, as the High Court made clear, one must have regard to the question whether the employer has provided a safe system of work.

In this case the employer called no evidence. Accordingly, the only evidence relating to the system of work under which the appellant was employed as craft lady was that given by her.

As I have said, she worked at the day care centre where elderly persons, some obviously incapacitated, came for recreation and companionship and where they received attention from a sister, a nurse and from the appellant.

According to the appellant, whilst it was true that she had not been given any instruction regarding the treatment of or caring for disabled patients, she had not been given any instruction regarding tasks which she was not to perform. Thus the circumstances arose that she was left as the person in charge of a number of elderly persons including the disabled Mrs Walk, who wished to go to the toilet.

When asked what her tasks were the appellant gave evidence to the effect that: "It was my job at the time to be an assistant. To drive the bus, to help prepare the lunch, to move a wheelchair, to do what was needed to be done." 
She gave evidence that from time to time she pushed the wheelchair from one activity to another, pushed it across to the hospital, and she was then asked: 
Q. "It wasn't part of your function to provide personal care for the clients?" 
A. "It was never stated that I wasn't to do that." 
Indeed she gave evidence that on prior occasions when elderly or disabled persons such as Mrs Walk wished to go to the toilet she had in fact assisted nursing staff in standing behind the wheelchair, and assisting with clothings preliminary to the person being placed on the toilet.

Thus, as it seems to me, that was an ancilliary or subsidiary part which the appellant understood was comprised within her function in the absence of the sister-in-charge or the nursing staff, yet she had received no training in performing those tasks and there were no adequate facilities to assist her in doing so.

It was in those circumstances that faced with the request by Mrs Walk to go to the toilet the appellant had to decide what to do. As she said, in the case of elderly persons, one cannot expect them to wait.

It was put to her in cross-examination that there were alternatives which she may have undertaken. She might have sent Mrs Noakes to find the nurse or the sister but there was evidence that they could be in diverse places both throughout and without the hospital. It was not known whether they could be found, or if so when. It was said that she might have telephoned to the hospital for some assistance, and clearly that was an option, but again there was no evidence regarding when it was that any nursing assistance so summoned would arrive and, as she said, elderly people do not wish to wait.

It was said that she might have awaited the return of the nursing staff, but there was no evidence as to when they might return. In those circumstances she elected to assist Mrs Walk by taking her to the toilet. In so doing she invoked the assistance of Mrs Noakes, who did in fact in part assist her. It was during the endeavour to move Mrs Walk from her wheelchair on to the toilet that the injury to the appellant occurred.

Once it is appreciated that the only evidence before the jury was that the tasks which it was the function of the appellant to perform, as she understood them, included helping persons who were in some situation of emergency, be it great or small, to do whatever was required or needed at the time in the absence of nursing staff; and once it is recognised that there was in truth no system in place whereby the hospital ensured that there was adequate facilities or adequate assistance to enable the appellant to carry out those tasks, it seems to me that it cannot be said that there was in truth any question of contributory negligence to go to the jury.

In my respectful view, his Honour erred in leaving the matter to the jury. I note from his Honour's summing up that he expressed a view which could well be interpreted that any aspect of contributory negligence which he was prepared to leave to the jury was of a minimal extent.

In those circumstances it seems to me that error did occur at the trial in that the matter was left to the jury. There was not in my opinion any factual basis upon which a jury properly instructed, if the matter had been left to them, could sensibly have come to the view that the appellant was guilty of contributory negligence.

In those circumstances in my opinion the judgment regarding contributory negligence should be set aside and the parties should bring in short minutes of order to give effect to these reasons.

CLARKE JA: I agree.

HANDLEY JA: I agree.

CLARKE JA: Mr Doherty, there are some calculations need be done. I think the best thing to do is if you and Mr Ilwaine prepare short minutes as to what the substituted judgment should be and if you can send it up to Mr Justice Cole's chambers and his Honour will sign that order and it will become the order of the Court. Of course it doesn't include costs.
 <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 301] at 310.
 * * * 
