

Woolworths Ltd versus Campbells Cash and Carry P/L and Ors [1996] NSWSC 442 (19
September 1996) 
WOOLWORTHS LTD versus CAMPBELLS CASH & CARRY P/L & ORS /93 40311/93 40312/93 40313/93LEC40299/90;40294/90;40300/90;40304/90 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
SHELLER JA, COLE JA, BEAZLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS: CONSTRUCTION of Development Consents - meaning of "wholesale warehouse".

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED:Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED:Allowed 
The respondent held development consents under the Liverpool, Canterbury, Parramatta and Newcastle Planning Scheme Ordinances or environmental plans. Generally speaking the consents permitted the conduct of "wholesale warehouses". The appellant contended that the respondent operated in breach of the consents in that it engaged in retail sales and engaged in sales in bulk to institutions which, whilst not constituting retail sales, constituted sales not permitted by the development consents.

HELD
By the Court: that retail sales were prohibited by the development consents and were being engaged in by the respondent.
Sheller and Beazley JJA: the respondent should be given the opportunity to provide undertakings to the Court in lieu of injunctions being granted.
Consideration of the meaning of "wholesale warehouse' in the context of the consents.
Sheller and Beazley JJA, Cole JA contra: sales in bulk to institutions were permitted.
Decision of Bignold J set aside.
Respondent to pay the appellant's costs but is to have a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act, if qualified.
Matter adjourned to permit the respondent to consider giving undertakings 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
In this appeal from the decision of Bignold J in the Land and Environment Court, the primary question involves the meaning of the words "warehouse", "wholesale" and "retail" or their derivatives in development consents relating to four parcels of land on which the respondent, Campbells Cash & Carry Pty Limited, carries on its business. I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Cole JA where the material parts of the planning instruments and the consents are set out and the nature of the usage of the premises sufficiently summarised.

The Liverpool, Parramatta and Canterbury Planning Scheme Ordinances, in force when the consents were granted in respect of the Liverpool, Northmead and
Punchbowl premises, defined "warehouse" to mean "In the ordinance, except in so far as the context or subject matter otherwise indicates or requires - ....... a building or place used for the storage of goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade" (my emphasis). The definition of "warehouse" in the Newcastle interim development order (IDO) in force when the consent was granted in respect of the Hexham premises, the same words of definition were used with the addition of the words "but does not include a bulk store". The definition was introduced with the words "In this Order, unless inconsistent with the context or subject matter". In the Newcastle Local Environmental Plan of 1987, mutatis mutandis, the introductory words and definition conformed to the three
Planning Scheme Ordinances.

The words "pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade" gave the word "warehouse" a narrower or more restrictive meaning than the meaning it enjoys in common and everyday usage. According to the
Macquarie Dictionary, warehouse means "a storehouse for wares or goods; the building in which a wholesale dealer keeps his stock of merchandise". However, the words which introduced the definitions acknowledged that in the Planning
Scheme Ordinances and the IDO the narrower meaning should give way to the indications or requirements of context or subject matter or where there was inconsistency; see Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation Pty Limited versus Hunt <case>; [(1946) 46 SR 240] at 242. Consents granted under the Ordinances or IDO to the use of premises as a "warehouse", where the word was unqualified by context or subject matter, would interdict the use of the building for the storage of goods other than pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade.
But the consent authority could approve the use of a building as a warehouse as commonly understood or not so narrowly defined. Use by a wholesaler in the ordinary way of its business could be permitted by qualifying the word "warehouse" by a word such as "wholesale" or by stating the purpose for which the warehouse was to be used, as, for example, wholesaling. The definition clauses, assuming they applied to the consents, required that the meaning of "warehouse" be modified to accord with this context or subject matter.

NORTHMEAD, PUNCHBOWL AND HEXHAM 
In the case of the Northmead, Punchbowl and Hexham consents, the word "warehouse" was qualified by the word "wholesale" or "wholesaling" and must be read accordingly. The qualification served no other purpose. To accommodate it, "warehouse" must be given a meaning wider than the defined meaning. The definition clauses in the planning instruments were expressed to operate in this way. The consents permitted wholesale or wholesale warehouse operations.
However, in each case retail selling was expressly proscribed. Moreover the
Punchbowl consent referred to trade sales only being made from the premises.
The Hexham consent was to the "proposed erection of a grocery wholesale warehouse distribution centre" subject to conditions which by later modification included the following: "38. The major warehouse unit NO. 1 being used principally for the storage and wholesale distribution of goods to persons engaged in the retail trade, with the sale of goods otherwise being restricted to registered businesses only and the premises under no circumstances being used or promoted as a shop or retail outlet." 
In Permewan Wright Limited versus Attorney General [(1977) 36 LGRA 1], this Court considered whether the appellant's use of the subject land conformed to a consent "for the wholesale warehousing of foodstuffs and general consumer products of a non-electrical nature including wholesaling of half cartons of foodstuffs to retailers and consumers." Neither the relevant ordinance nor the consent contained a definition of warehouse. At 15-16 Reynolds JA adopted as the meaning in the community of "wholesale warehouse" and "wholesaling" the following definition of "wholesaler" taken from a United States publication: "A business unit which buys and resells merchandise to retailers and other merchants and/or to industrial institutional and commercial users but does not sell any significant amounts to ultimate consumers." 
At 27 Hutley JA said that "(t)o wholesale is to sell in a manner customarily adopted by wholesale enterprises, even though the purchasers can include ultimate consumers". At 34 Samuels JA said: "For my own part, I do not think that the meaning of the word `wholesale' or of its derivatives is to be wholly determined either by reference to the quantity of goods sold, or to the identity of the buyer. The essence of a wholesale business is the nature and purpose of the activity. The quantity sold and the character of those to whom sales are made are both determined by the kind of trading which a wholesale business ordinarily carries on, and not the other way about." 
His Honour quoted the definition from the United States publication, described it as "entirely appropriate in the present case" and continued: "With this definition in mind, I turn back to look again at the terms of the consent. They are by no means clear; but I read them in this way. The consent permitted the conduct of a wholesale warehouse, that is, a place in which goods (in this case only the goods specified) are stored for sale and delivery to retailers. I would have thought that in the ordinary way the conduct of a wholesale warehouse would include the sale and delivery, on the premises, to retailers, of any goods held there and in any quantity; although the quantity would usually be significant. Here the consent, curiously I think, makes a specific provision about sales to retailers which applies a restriction upon what I would regard as the ordinary course of business. The reference to half cartons imports a minimum and not an absolute; any other meaning would be absurd. It follows that sales to retailers, on the premises, of foodstuff, and foodstuff only, must be in quantities not less than a half carton. Sales to retailers of any goods other than foodstuff may be made in unrestricted quantities; because selling to retailers, in any quantity, is an ordinary incident of conducting a wholesale warehouse. But a wholesale warehouse is not a place to which members of the public - that is, consumers - ordinarily come or are invited to resort. And sales to consumers are not ordinarily made in a wholesale warehouse. Hence, the concluding words of the consent which permit sales to consumers of foodstuff - and foodstuff only - in quantities of not less than a half carton." 
In City of Brighton versus Eura Nominees Pty Limited [(1983) 56 LGRA 262] at 269
Gobbo J said: " `Wholesale' in its ordinary and common meaning is not restricted to the meaning comprised in the ordinance definition, namely `the selling of goods to be retailed by others'. In its ordinary and common meaning it covers sale in large quantities. It was at least open to the board to give wholesale its common meaning as referring to sale in large quantities. There is recognition of this meaning of the word wholesale in Permewan Wright Limited versus Attorney
General at 15-16, 33-34.

I do not accept the argument that retail should be taken as covering all not covered by wholesale in its restricted statutory meaning. Wholesale in its common usage meaning is in my view plainly capable of including sales in large quantities to persons who are not retailers. Such a use would not be a shop but it would be capable of amounting to an innominate use within col 4 as falling within the phrase `any purpose not specified or included in any other column of this Section of this Table.' " 
These cases show that, while usually a wholesaler sells in large quantities, * the meaning of the word `wholesale' or of its derivatives is not to be wholly determined either by reference to the quantity of goods sold or to the identity of the buyer; * a wholesaler, as part of its business, buys and sells merchandise to retailers and other merchants and to industrial, institutional and commercial users; * a wholesaler does not sell in significant amounts to ultimate consumers; * an ordinary incident of conducting a wholesale warehouse is the sale and delivery on the premises to retailers of any goods held there and in any quantity; and * sales to consumers are not ordinarily made in a wholesale warehouse nor is it a place to which members of the public - that is consumers - ordinarily come or are invited to resort.

By contrast retail sales usually are of goods in comparatively small quantities to ultimate consumers who are ordinary members of the public, although this may not always be so. In Collector of Customs versus Chemark <case>; [(1993) 42 FCR 585] at 591, the
Full Federal Court said: "The weight of authority seems to us to support a conclusion that the words `retail sale' have generally acquired a specialised meaning of a sale to an ultimate consumer. We do not think that the usage of the term limits such consumers to ordinary members of the public. The fact that in the present case almost all of the goods imported by the respondent were directly sold to professional horticulturalists and not ordinary gardeners as ultimate consumers is in our opinion irrelevant. Professionals can still be described as ultimate consumers. Thus in our opinion the learned primary judge erred in his interpretation of the meaning of `retail sale' within the meaning of heading 3808.

Likewise, although more often than not a retail sale will be both a sale to the ultimate consumer and sale of goods in a quantity not larger than necessary to satisfy the ordinary non-professional purchaser, some sales in larger quantities will also be retail." 
In the present case the combination of a consent to use buildings as wholesale warehouses and a prohibition against retail sales made the ambit of the consents fairly clear. They permitted sales from the warehouses to retailers and also in bulk quantity to industrial, institutional and commercial users but prohibited sales to ultimate consumers who were ordinary members of the public or professional people. In the case of the Punchbowl consent, the condition that trade sales only be made from the premises does not alter this conclusion. Nor, in the case of the Hexham consent, is it altered by the condition that the major warehouse unit be used "principally for the storage and wholesale distribution of goods to persons engaged in the retail trade with the sale of goods otherwise being restricted to registered businesses only and the premises under no circumstances being used or promoted as a shop or retail outlet." Counsel was unable to say what was meant by the phrase "registered businesses" but the appellant accepted that some wider category of sales was intended.

I do not agree with the proposition which finds some support in the decision of Lee J in Darling Enterprises Pty Limited versus Quinn (1979) 39 LGRA 202 at , that retail business is limited to the situation where goods are on offer to any member of the general public who is prepared to buy. In my opinion, sales of goods for their consumption to members of groups described as buying clubs or comprising the employees of a particular employer are retail, not wholesale, sales. Nor, with the greatest respect to Bignold J, is there any basis, as the respondent submitted, for adopting the definition in the 1983 edition of the Australian Standard Industrial Classification (ASIC) of "wholesale trade" which appears to extend the meaning of "wholesale" beyond the common understanding accepted by the majority of the Court in Permewan.
ASIC was prepared for use in the collection, compilation and publication of statistics by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, was designed to improve the comparability and usefulness of statistics generally and was not intended to have wider application.

LIVERPOOL 
The Liverpool consent requires separate consideration. The notice of determination of the development application dated 3 July 1987 stated that the application had been determined by granting of consent subject to conditions specified in the notice and continued: "PROPOSAL: ALTERATIONS TO AND USE OF EXISTING PREMISES FOR THE PURPOSES OF A
GROCERY WAREHOUSE (BEING THE STORAGE OF GOODS, MERCHANDISE OR MATERIALS
PENDING THEIR SALE AND DISTRIBUTION TO PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE RETAIL TRADE).

CONDITIONS
Development to take place generally in accordance with Development
Application dated 5th June, 1987 and plans submitted therewith, being Drawing
No 162/DA/02 and 162/DA/03, except as modified by the undermentioned conditions." 
One of "the undermentioned conditions" was as follows: "11. Premises not to be used for the display or sale of goods to the public (ie, as a `shop' which is a building or place used or intended for use for the purpose of selling, exposing or offering for sale by retail of goods, merchandise or materials)." 
The development application of 5 June 1987 described the development consent sought as: "THE SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF GROCERIES, LIQUOR AND GENERAL
MERCHANDISE BY WAY OF WHOLESALE AND TO AFFILIATES OF GROUPS, CLUBS, UNIONS OR
OTHER ASSOCIATIONS FORMED WITH A COMMON INTEREST." 
The appellant submitted that the consent was no wider than the form of the "proposal" in the notice of determination and that by setting out the "proposal" which it was approving, the Council indicated in a precise fashion the extent to which it was prepared to approve the uses sought in the development application. The respondent relied upon condition 1 which picked up the development application to describe the development to take place except as modified by the conditions which followed.

Development approvals operate for the benefit of subsequent owners and other occupiers of land and denote the consent authority's unilateral act, not a bilateral agreement between the parties. Generally, if the terms of the approval are clear, it is not permissible to look to the application or to other documents which accompany the application to qualify or contradict its terms. But if the approval incorporates the application, the two must be read together; see generally Parramatta City Council versus Shell Co of Australia
Limited [(1972) 2 NSWLR 632]; Stebbins v Lismore City Council <case>; [(1994) 85 LGERA 37] where, beginning at 43, Wilcox J has reviewed the cases.

The development application, according to the notice of determination, was determined by the granting of consent subject to the conditions specified. The conditions did not include the proposal and began by saying that the development was to take place generally in accordance with the development application except as modified by the undermentioned conditions. Condition 11 explained and delimited the scope of what was sought in the application. The condition would be otiose if the use of the warehouse was limited to a storage of goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade. Condition 1 incorporated the terms of the development application except to the extent that they were modified by other conditions such as condition 11. The result was that the consent permitted the sale and distribution of groceries, liquor and general merchandise by way of wholesale and to affiliates of groups, clubs, unions or other associations formed with a common interest but prohibited the use of the premises for the display or sale of goods to the public. Hence sales from the warehouse to retailers and also in bulk quantity to industrial, institutional and commercial users were permitted but sales to consumers who were ordinary members of the public were not.

CONCLUSION 
I agree with Cole JA that the evidence suggests that significant retail sales were made from each warehouse. To that extent, the premises in each case were used in a manner which was contrary to the conditions of the consents. In my opinion the consents permitted sales to industrial, institutional and commercial users but not sales to members of the public individually whether or not they were members of buying groups or employed by the same employer. I agree that the past breaches justify the grant to the appellant of injunctive relief. However before the Court makes any order itself or remits the matter to the Land and Environment Court the respondent should be given the opportunity to formulate an undertaking to the Court not to sell goods from the premises to ordinary members of the public. 
The respondent should pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/), if qualified.

COLE JA: Woolworths Limited has appealed from the decision of Bignold J who dismissed four separate Class 4 proceedings brought by it, with the support of the Liverpool City Council and the Parramatta City Council, against Campbell's Cash & Carry Pty Limited ("Campbells"). In those proceedings, heard together, Woolworths contended that Campbells conducted operations in breach of development consents. As each of the four appeals raised similar issues, by consent they were heard together. The two councils have filed submitting appearances. 
The Development Consents 
Campbells operate four warehouses at 80-82 Orange Grove Road, Liverpool (the Liverpool premises), the corner of Kleins Road and Boundary Road, Northmead (the Northmead premises), 30-44 Eva Street, Punchbowl (the Punchbowl premises), and 16 Galleghan Street, Hexham (the Hexham premises). The question in issue in respect of each premises is whether the nature of the operations there conducted by Campbells infringes the development consents obtained, and if so, whether in the exercise of discretion, orders should be made restraining any activity beyond that permitted by the development consent. It is thus important to determine with some precision the scope of the consents granted, and the activities which are permissible pursuant to those consents.

The Liverpool Premises Consent 
The land upon which these premises are erected is zoned under the Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance part Industrial Light 4(b1), and part Industrial Light (Restricted) 4(b2). In the Industrial Light 4(b1) and 4(b2) zones, any purpose other than a prohibited purpose is permissible only with consent. Shops, defined in the Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance as: "Means a building or place used or intended for use for the purpose of selling, exposing or offering for sale by retail, goods, merchandise or materials, but does not include a building or place elsewhere specifically defined in this clause where a building or place used or intended for use for a purpose elsewhere specifically defined in this clause or for a roadside stall." are a prohibited use, save for immaterial exceptions.

The application lodged on 5 June 1987 sought approval for alteration and use of existing premises for: "The sale and distribution of groceries, liquor, and general merchandise by way of wholesale and to affiliates of groups, clubs, unions, or other associations formed with a common interest".

However the notice of approval given by the Council stated: "The Development Application has been determined by granting of consent subject to conditions specified in this Notice.

PROPOSAL: Alterations and use of existing premises for the purposes of a grocery warehouse (being the storage of goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade).

CONDITIONS
Development to take place generally in accordance with Development
Application dated 5 June 1987 and plans submitted therewith, being Drawings number 162/DA/02 and 162/DA/03, except as modified by the undermentioned conditions ...
Premises not to be used for the display or sale of goods to the public (i.e. as a "shop" which is a building or place used or intended for use for the purpose of selling, exposing or offering for sale by retail of goods, merchandise or materials)." 
In the Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance pursuant to which the consent was granted, "Warehouse" is defined as: "Means a building or place used or intended for use for the storage of goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade." "Wholesale" is not defined.

Campbells argued that in construing this consent, because of the provisions of the introductory words and condition 1, it was legitimate to have regard to the terms of the development application, and thus take into account the wider scope of activities for which consent was sought in the application rather than being limited to construction of the consent by reference to the description of the proposal provided by Council in the consent document.

In my opinion that is not so. The law concerning the regard which may be had to either the application, or documents accompanying the development application, in construing a consent was summarised by Wilcox J, after reviewing the authorities, in Hubertus Schuetzenverein Liverpool Rifle Club
Limited versus Commonwealth of Australia[1]: `The authorities clearly establish that it is legitimate, in construing a development consent, to look at the plans that accompanied the application.
However, that may be done only where the consent document expressly or inferentially incorporates the terms of the application and only where this is necessary for the purpose of interpreting the consent. For example, where the
Council simply approves an application without describing the development, it is permissible to look at the application to determine what it was that the applicant sought to have approved (As in Szabo and Shell Co.). It is not legitimate to look at the documents that accompanied the application, or even the application itself, to contradict (whether by way of extension or contraction) the scope of a consent stated in clear terms. Stebbin is consistent with the last stated proposition. On the view of the case taken by the Court of Appeal, in order to learn the terms of the council's consent it was necessary for a person to read the notification of consent in conjunction with the copy plan endorsed by the council. When the documents were read together, it became apparent that the unrestricted consent suggested by the letter of notification was in fact given subject to the elimination of the new entrance." 
Here Council has stated the proposal to which it has given consent, subject to conditions. It is not necessary to have regard to the development application referred to in condition 1 to determine the use to which the premises, once altered generally in accordance with the plans referred to in condition 1, may be used.

Accordingly the consent requiring construction is: "Alterations and use of existing premises for the purposes of a grocery warehouse (being the storage of goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade)." 
In construing that consent, because of condition 11, it is clear that the premises must not be used for the display or sale of goods to the public; that is, as a shop.

The Punchbowl Premises 
The premises are located on land zoned Light Industrial 4(b) under the Canterbury Planning Scheme Ordinance. Within this zone, development is permissible with consent for purposes which are not prohibited. Shops, as defined, are prohibited (with irrelevant exceptions). "Shop" is defined in the same manner as in the Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance. 
Having granted subdivision approval of the subject land into Lot 1 and 2, development consent was granted by the Court in respect of Lot 1 as follows:
Development consent granted to the development of proposed lot 1 in the subdivision referred to in Order 2 by the warehouse building wholesaling groceries, liquor, general household merchandise, frozen foods and dairy products, fruit and vegetables as described in the development application dated 22 October 1982 subject to the conditions numbers B1-26 (inclusive) set out in the annexure hereto.

B. That the application to erect warehouse A on proposed lot 1 and to use the warehouse for the wholesaling of grocery items be approved subject to the following conditions:
The development being carried out substantially in accordance with plans dated 6th February, 1983, except where amended by the conditions of the consent.
 ...
No retail sales of goods being made to the general public.
Trade sales only being made from the premises." "Warehouse" is defined in the Canterbury Planning Scheme Ordinance in the same terms as in the Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance.

The development consent thus requiring construction is that applicable to Lot namely, use: "By the warehouse building wholesaling groceries, liquor, general household merchandise, frozen foods and dairy products, fruit and vegetables ..." 
The development application does not appear to be in evidence and no reliance was placed on its terms in the appeal. In construing the consent, conditions and 12 make clear that retail sales of goods being made to the general public are prohibited, and that from the premises only "trade sales" maybe made.

The Northmead Premises 
The Northmead premises comprise two units which are located on land zoned Industrial 4 under the Parramatta Local Environment Plan (Toongabbie Ward) 1990. Any use other than a prohibited use is permissible with consent. Prohibited are: "Commercial premises and shops (other than those ordinarily incidental or subsidiary to industry, or which are primarily intended to serve persons occupied or employed in purposes otherwise permitted in this zone, or which by virtue of their nature, the services provided, or the products produced, distributed or sold, are, in the opinion of the council, appropriately located in an industrial zone)." 
On 18 February 1986 Parramatta City Council granted a consent for the part demolition, refurbishment and occupation of Unit 1 in the following terms: "It is advised that the Council considered the company's development application at its meeting on February 17 1986 and resolved that it be approved subject to the following conditions: no retail sales are permissible from this site at anytime." 
Campbells development application sought approval for: "Demolition of part building and refurbish balance for use by Davids Holdings
Limited in accordance with their attached letter." 
The attached letter dated 14 November 1985 from the developer, the Copeland
Group Pty Limited, sought redevelopment of the existing buildings "together with the use of Unit 1 by Davids Holdings in accordance with their attached letter".

The attached letter of David Holdings dated 8 November 1985 set out "details of our proposed operation". It stated: "(1) David Holdings Pty Limited acquired the A.G. Campbell Grocery Wholesale
Group of companies in 1982 and since that date have introduced an overall corporate philosophy aimed at modernising the combined group's operations. As part of this philosophy, we have closed down a number of smaller older style wholesale warehouses and opened up a lesser number of larger, modern facilities that provide: ...

The proposed premises will only sell wholesale and there will be no retail sales to the public." 
The consent for use of Lot 1 was thus for use as a "wholesale warehouse", and no retail sales to the public were permitted.

On 13 May 1986 Parramatta City Council granted consent to the use of Unit 2.
The letter of consent stated: "Reference is made to your application dated February 27 1986 seeking approval for the use by David Holdings Pty Limited of the above mentioned premises, for the purpose of wholesale food warehouse.

The proposal was considered by Council at its meeting on May 12, 1986 and it was resolved that the application be approved subject to the following conditions: no retail sales are permissible from this site at anytime." 
The consent thus given was "for the purpose of wholesale food warehouse". That is so notwithstanding that the application sought approval for use "as per use of Unit 1".

In each of the consents given for Units 1 and 2, operating hours were specified. On 14 June 1986 a development application sought, presumably in respect of both Unit 1 and Unit 2, "alteration to operating hours to allow operations of the company's activities from 8.30am to 3.30pm on Sundays and until 8.00pm on Thursdays." By letter dated 2 September 1986 Parramatta City
Council advised: "With reference to your development application dated June 19, 1986 seeking consent for an extension of operating hours for the grocery wholesale outlet at the corner of Boundary and Kleins' Roads, Northmead, it is advised that
Council at its meeting on September 1, 1986, approved the application subject to the following conditions: ...

No retail sales are permissible from this site at anytime".

In my opinion it is clear that this third consent related only to hours and that the use of the expression "grocery wholesale outlet" was not intended to change such uses as were permissible under the preceding consents.
 "Warehouse" is defined in the Parramatta Planning Scheme Ordinance and in the
Parramatta Local Environmental Plan (Toongabbie Ward) 1990 in the same manner as in the Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance.

The consents thus requiring construction are in respect of Unit 1 use as a "wholesale warehouse", and in respect of Unit 2 "wholesale food warehouse". In respect of each consent no retail sales are permissible at any time.

The Hexham Premises 
The Hexham premises are located on land zoned 4(b) General Industrial under the Newcastle Environmental Plan 1987. Shops are not prohibited in that zone. However, at the date of the granting of the initial consent on 30 September 1982, the land was zoned 4(a) General Industrial under Interim Development Order No. 144 City of Newcastle. Permissible with consent was "Development other than that prohibited by Column IV". Shops, defined similarly to the Liverpool Planning Ordinance definition, with irrelevant exceptions, were prohibited.

The Newcastle IDO defined "warehouse" as follows: "Warehouse means a building or place used for the storage of goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade but does not include a bulk store." 
However the Newcastle Local Environmental plan 1987 adopted the Model
Provisions definition which excludes the words "but does not include a bulk store". It thus conforms with the definition of warehouse in the other planning instruments under which the various consents were granted.

On 30 September 1982 the Newcastle City Council granted consent to use of the land for the "proposed erection of a grocery wholesale warehouse distribution centre and (11) smaller warehouse/factory units for leasing purposes". The consent was subject to conditions including: "38. Warehouse Unit No. 1 being used as a Wholesale Grocery Warehouse
Distribution Centre only and in this regard no products are to be offered for sale by retail from the premises direct to the public." 
Condition 38 was subsequently modified by substituting the following condition:
The major warehouse Unit No. 1 being used as principally for the storage and wholesale distribution of goods to persons engaged in the retail trade, .... the sale of goods otherwise being restricted to registered businesses only and the premises under no circumstances being used or promoted as a shop or retail outlet." 
The consent requiring construction is thus use as "a grocery wholesale warehouse distribution centre," subject to the substituted condition 38.

The Construction of the Four Consents 
The construction of the Liverpool consent does not involve consideration of the effect of the use of the word "wholesale", as do the other three consents. Assuming the correctness of the view that it is the proposal as stated in the consent which is to be construed, meaning is to be attached to the words: "A grocery warehouse (being the storage of goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade)." 
The words in the brackets repeat the definition of "warehouse" in the
Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance thus making it clear that it is that meaning that the word "warehouse" bears. It inevitably follows, in my view, that the only activity permitted in the Liverpool premises is the storage of grocery goods, merchandise or materials pending their sale, and distribution, and that sale and distribution is only permitted from those premises to persons who are engaged in the retail trade. By virtue of the terms of the consent, and condition 11, goods may not be displayed for sale to or sold to the public. In consequence of the restriction on sale or distribution only to persons in the retail trade, sale or distribution to other organisations or associations not engaged in the retail trade in the sense that they are resellers either in the same or in a reconstituted form, of products purchased, is not permitted. Sales are thus not permitted to "affiliates of groups, clubs, unions or other associations formed with a common interest", unless such groups, clubs, unions or associations are themselves engaged in the retail trade.

It was contended by Mr Conti QC for the respondent that the Court should adopt a wider definition of the word "warehouse" than that contained in the model provisions. A wider definition incorporating notions of sales in bulk was argued to reflect the community understanding of the word warehouse, and it should be assumed that the Council in granting its consent adopted that wider meaning which would permit sales of bulk grocery goods to institutions such as clubs, associations, and the military services. I will return to a more detailed consideration of this submission later, but in my opinion, in the case of the Liverpool premises consent there is no scope for adopting a broader meaning than that in the Liverpool Planning Scheme Ordinance. That is so for two reasons. First, because the consent granted was a consent by the consenting authority under the terms of the Ordinance in which the expression "warehouse" is defined and the consenting authority must thus be understood to have used the word in the defined sense; and second because, immediately after using the word "warehouse" in the consent itself, the Council defined its meaning.

It will be necessary to return, in relation to the Liverpool consent, to consider the meaning of the expressions "retail" in order determine the category of persons to whom sales are permitted.

It was at one stage advanced by Mr McClellan QC for the appellants that the definition of warehouse, as it spoke of "pending their sale and distribution", did not permit a selling activity itself being effected on premises having a development consent for use as a warehouse. I understood, however, that that submission was not pressed, particularly having regard to the decision of
Holland J at first instance in Foodbarn[2].

Each of the three remaining consents use the words "wholesale" and "warehouse" in relationship. The difference in the expressions "warehouse building wholesaling groceries ..." and "warehouse for the wholesaling of grocery items" in the case of Punchbowl, "wholesale warehouse" and "wholesale food warehouse" in the case of Units 1 and 2 of Northmead, and "grocery wholesale warehouse distribution centre" and "warehouse ... used principally for the storage and wholesale distribution of goods" in the case of Hexham, are not, in my view, material. The essential concept conveyed by each consent is that the operation for which consent is granted involves both the notions of a warehouse and wholesaling. The consents did not purport to grant two separate or distinct consents one for wholesaling and one for warehousing. It follows, in my view, that it is necessary to give full weight to each of the concepts of a warehouse and wholesaling in construing these three consents.

There was a major difference of approach in this respect between the appellant and the respondent. Mr McClellan QC, for the appellant, relied on the definition of warehouse contained in the relevant planning schemes to contend that the final words of the definition of warehouse "to persons engaged in the retail trade" were restrictive so that once a consent was granted based on the use of the expression "warehouse", no matter how that expression may be qualified or expanded, the consent could never be construed to permit sales from the premises to any company, organisation, association or person who was not engaged in the retail trade. That flowed simply from the definition of warehouse in the planning schemes. That restriction flowing from the definition could not be removed by use of qualifying expressions. That was the initial primary argument. It prohibited any sales to a non-retailer. Sales to ultimate consumers were thus prohibited.

This interpretation was said to be reinforced by the prohibition in each consent of retail sales which were sales to the ultimate consumer. Whilst it was recognised that in some circumstances "wholesaling or to sell by wholesale" might encompass the notion of selling in bulk to persons who might not be retailers, such as residential institutions, the army, clubs etc, the use of warehouse in conjunction with wholesaling must be taken to restrict that usual meaning so as not to permit a sale which would breach the definition of warehouse found in the planning ordinances.

Mr Conti QC, for the respondent, argued that the expression "warehouse" should not be given its statutory meaning but its more usual meaning of a place where goods are both stored and sold in bulk to persons or organisations who are not necessarily retailers. The Court of Appeal's decision in Permewan Wright
Limited versus Attorney General[3] justified or required the word warehouse being given its commonly understood general meaning. The joint expression "wholesale warehouse" was to be interpreted by giving full weight to the undefined and usual meaning of "wholesale" and that word should be taken to restrict the statutory definition of warehouse to permit sales in bulk to institutions who were not retailers. The word "wholesale" must be given work to do in construing the consents: it could not just mean sales to persons who retailed because that would render the expression redundant in light of the definition of warehouse which so restricted sales. Accordingly, the consent must be construed as permitting sales in bulk to institutions who were not retailers.
"Wholesale" qualified and restricted the statutory definition of warehouse, rather than warehouse dominating and restricting the concept of wholesale.

In this debate the Court was referred to a number of authorities where the concepts of sales by retail, sales by wholesale and their relationship to the concept of warehousing have been discussed.[4] 
To my mind the most useful analysis of these concepts is found in the judgment of Samuels JA in Permewan Wright. That case involved a consent which permitted "the wholesale warehousing of food stuffs and general consumer products of a non-electrical nature including wholesaling of half cartons of food stuffs to retailers and consumers". It is thus distinguishable in point of fact from this case because it permitted sales to the consumers who are normally encompassed within the notion of a retail sale. Further, in the consent there being considered there was not an ordinance definition of warehouse as there is here. Samuels JA said: "For my own part, I do not think that the meaning of the word "wholesale" or of its derivatives is to be wholly determined either by reference to the quantity of goods sold, or to the identity of the buyer. The essence of a wholesale business is the nature and purpose of the activity. The quantity sold and the character of those to whom sales are made are both determined by the kind of trading which a wholesale business ordinarily carries on, and not the other way about. The definition settled in 1963 by the Committee on
Definitions of the American Marketing Association and submitted by Mr A M
Gleeson QC for the plaintiff is entirely appropriate in the present case. It is this: "Wholesaler: a business unit which buys and resells merchandise to retailers and other merchants, and/or to industrial, institutional and commercial users, but does not sell in significant amounts to ultimate consumers" 
With this definition in mind, I turn back to look again at the terms of the consent. They are by no means clear; but I read them in this way. The consent permitted the conduct of a wholesale warehouse, that is, a place in which goods (in this case the goods specified) are stored for sale and delivery to retailers. I would have thought that in the ordinary way the conduct of a wholesale warehouse would include the sale and delivery, on the premises, to retailers, of any goods held there and in any quantity; although the quantity would usually be significant. Here the consent, curiously, I think, makes a specific provision about sales to retailers which applies a restriction upon what I would regard as the ordinary course of business. The reference to half- cartons imports a minimum and not an absolute; any other meaning would be absurd. It follows that sales to retailers, on the premises of foodstuff, and foodstuff only, must be in quantities not less than a half-carton. Sales to retailers of any goods other than foodstuffs may be made in unrestricted quantities; because selling to retailers, in any quantity is an ordinary incident of conducting a wholesale warehouse. But a wholesale warehouse is not a place to which members of the public - that is, consumers - ordinarily come or are invited to resort. And sales to consumers are not ordinarily made in a wholesale warehouse. Hence, the concluding words of the consent which permit sales to consumers of foodstuff - and foodstuff only - in quantities of not less than a half-carton." 
Reynolds JA adopted a similar approach. After reciting the American definition of "wholesaler" which I have quoted in the passage from the judgment of
Samuels JA, his Honour said: "This in my view is the meaning of the word in this community and "wholesale warehouse" and "wholesaling" have a similar connotation.

The evidence which his Honour accepted showed that there was being carried on a retail food store and supermarket making sales by retail and the only point of difference between its activities and those of an ordinary supermarket was that some items were being sold in large quantities in their original cartons or in quantities corresponding to half of the original carton. The operation was essentially retail and not wholesale and single items were being sold." 
I respectfully agree with Samuels JA that the "essence of a wholesale business is the nature and purpose of the activity". Wholesaling normally does, but does not necessarily, involve the sale of significant quantities of goods. It normally does, but does not necessarily, involve sales to retailers. A wholesale warehouse is not a place to which members of the public are invited and it is not a place where retail sales occur in the sense that a sale is made to the ultimate consumer.

There is, as Samuels JA's analysis indicates, a difference in concept between retail sales and wholesale sales. Normally wholesalers hold goods in large bulk quantities and sell in large quantities to retailers. Retailers hold goods in lesser quantities and sell to ultimate consumers. Wholesalers normally operate from warehouses: retailers do not. However it does not follow that it is redundant, superfluous or anomalous to speak of a "wholesale warehouse" particularly where, as here, a consent is seeking to draw a sharp distinction between wholesale sales which are permitted, and retail sales which are not, as the specific conditions of the relevant consents make clear.

The notions of "wholesale" and "retail" adopted by Samuels JA and Reynolds JA accord in some but not all respects with the notions found in the Macquarie dictionary where "wholesale" is defined as "the sale of commodities, as to retailers or jobbers, rather than to consumers directly (distinguished from retail)". And "retail" is defined as: "The sale of commodities to household or ultimate consumers, usually in small quantities (opposed to wholesale)".

It also accords with the view of Holland J in E F Turnbull Pty Limited v
Wollonging Council[5] where his Honour said: `The definition of warehouse in the Model Provisions takes a limited view of that activity by confining it to the storage of goods pending their sale and distribution to "persons engaged in the retail trade". Bulk storage or storage for wholesaling to bulk buyers or retailers is not the criterion. When looked at overall, the applicants' business and methods of operating and pricing its goods do not present a warehousing operation of the defined kind. As demonstrated by the invoices and receipts tendered, sales to persons engaged in the retail trade are extremely minor. I do not believe that the sporting, social and other clubs and institutions to which bulk sales were made could in any ordinary use of the phrase be regarded as "persons engaged in the retail trade".

Approached in that way, it seems to me that the use of the expression "wholesale" in conjunction with the expression "warehouse" does not restrict or eliminate the requirement in the definition of warehouse that sales be only to retailers. Such persons are normally those to whom a wholesaler would sell.
Whilst it may be that, in general usage, a wholesaler may be regarded as a seller in bulk, that is because the bodies to whom it usually sells are retailers who purchase in bulk. Common usage may recognise that wholesalers now sell to institutions of various types which are not retailers but are bodies who may either reconstitute the products purchased or simply make them available to their constituent members otherwise than by retail. An example might be an educational institution where meals are provided pursuant to a general charge, as distinct from a particular charge for food. However, in my view, a sale in bulk to such an institution from a warehouse as defined would infringe a consent given pursuant to an ordinance which defines warehouse in the manner set forth in the model provisions.

It follows to my mind that sales in bulk to institutions such as clubs, the army, or institutions or associations are not permitted where the consent is for the use of premises as a wholesale warehous, unless those bodies are retailers. Sales from such premises to members of the public are clearly prohibited. Sales of individual items from the wholesale warehouse to retailers are permitted for it is unnecessary for a retailer to purchase from a wholesaler in bulk.

It follows in my judgment that Bignold J erred in his construction of each consent. That being so, his Honour's consideration of whether breach of those consents had been established was flawed, as was his Honour's exercise of discretion regarding relief. It follows that his Honour's judgment must be set aside and this Court should consider the nature of relief to be granted.
Before doing so however, it is necessary to briefly summarise the evidence concerning the actual usage of the various premises by Campbells.

Usage 
There is no material difference between the usage of the four premises. The nature of the operation was not in significant dispute. 
Each of the warehouse premises is set up in a manner not dissimilar to a retail supermarket. Goods for sale total some 19,000 product lines and are stored in shelving with aisles in between. Customer can obtain a limited number of supermarket trolleys but in addition there are larger trolleys for moving pallets. Items are priced and sold individually. Discounts for bulk purchasing are only by special arrangement with the store manager. There is no minimum imposed on the quantity of goods purchased.

To gain access to the store a "Campbells card" is required. Cards can be obtained by a person attending a Campbell's store with documentary evidence that the person is associated with an organisation of some sort. It is sufficient to produce a business card, a letterhead, a letter of authority, a business registration certificate or the like. Examples tendered showed that persons formed buying clubs and were accepted, such clubs having as few members as four, being two husbands and wives. An application form must be signed and now, although not previously, a fee of $25.00 is payable. More than one card will be issued on request, and they are in fact transferable. The obligation is to produce the card when purchasing the goods. Thus only physical possession of the card is required. The goods need not be purchased for the organisation to whom the card issued. Campbells has no means of knowing for what purpose the goods purchased will be used, and whether they are for retail except, at least in some instances, the small quantities of goods, and their nature make it improbable that they are otherwise than for ultimate consumer use.

Campbells undertook an extensive television advertising campaign known as "Delilah". Whilst Campbells contended that this campaign was directed to small retailers, in my view it is clear that it had a much wider target audience than that group. Persons encouraged to purchase included solicitors, real estate agents, councils, art studios, football clubs and social clubs. Persons were informed that anyone associated with a business could buy. Whilst the advertisements included statements such as: "You gotta tell us you're buying for a company (or have your own company), buying for a club, union, association, P & C - or start your own buying club - and right now you get this free Campbell's membership card." 
A fair viewing of a selection of the advertisements makes clear that the words chosen conveyed the notion that whilst it was necessary to say words to that effect to obtain a card, that need not necessarily be so. Advertisements included not only what was necessary to be done to obtain a card, but that once obtained a person could shop cheaply for "all your groceries and goodies wholesale forever". Goods were advertised individually, such as a packet of chips or can of soft drink with an individual price. It is true that the advertisements and advertising material had disclaimers such as "trade only".
But the impression given by the advertising material was to the contrary.

The result of the advertising campaign in 1990 and 1991 was significant with a vast increase in cards issued. Subsequently these were culled to some extent but principally because persons did not pay the $25 fee by way of renewal rather than on any other basis related to nature of trade.

Bignold J made a number of findings not challenged on appeal. They included that approximately 95% of sales were made to "resellers" and 5% of sales to persons called "trade customers". Resellers included small businesses such as supermarkets, service stations, milk bars, liquor shops, restaurants etc.
Trade customers included "medical practices, legal practices, registered play groups, self employed persons, social clubs and businesses generally". That 5% of overall sales represents sales of a significant sum as the turnovers for the year ended 30 June 1900 were $27 million at Hexham, $30 million at
Punchbowl, $45 million at Northmead and $27 million at Liverpool. Of the sales to the so-called "trade customers" an analysis in respect of the Liverpool store showed that in respect of sales "totalling nearly $1 million ... 50% of those sales were to the defence forces (located at Holsworthy) and 30% were to various clubs (sporting, ethnic and cultural)".

Whilst Bignold J was of the view that such sales to the army, and to clubs and associations was permissible in light of his construction of the consents, in my view it was not. Further there was evidence of advertising to attract such groups, as well as evidence of endeavours to encourage people to associate so as to achieve entitlement to a card and thus the right to purchase from
Campbells. The evidence disclosed that sales were made to persons of a retail nature going beyond any concept of "leakage" from a wholesale outlet. In my view the totality of the evidence sustains the appellant's contention that, in truth, Campbells engaged in "selective retailing".

Relief 
In my opinion once it has been established that there are significant breaches of the planning consents, as has been established, the respondent should be restrained from continuing such breaches. 
Significant matters were put in opposition to that. The Court was reminded that the application for relief was brought by a competitor, Woolworths. The proceedings had been commenced in December 1990, heard in March and April 1992 with a decision being given in May 1993. The appeal has taken three years to come on. Further it was said that the unauthorised activity was of limited nature, and had an insignificant effect on the planning system and its administration. Further it would affect in a significant way the respondent's business. It was contended that persons should not be forced to purchase goods from Campbell's competitors, including Woolworths.

These matters are entitled to appropriate weight. However, the extent of unpermitted use is significant, as is the breach of the planning laws. The planning laws are proclaimed and enforced in the protection of the public interest[6]. Where significant breach continues, as here it does, strong countervailing circumstances would be required before a court should fail to enforce the planning consent.

Campbells offered certain restricted undertakings but they did not address the extensive breaches of the consent which flow from the application of the undisputed trading circumstances to the consents as I have construed them. It is clear that error has been shown in the exercise of discretion flowing from the error in the construction of the consents.

In my opinion the relief sought by the appellant in the amended summons should be granted.

I would propose the following orders.

Liverpool /90
Declaration that the premises known as Campbells Wholesale Cash &
Carry at 80-82 Orange Grove Road, Liverpool being Lot 1 in the Deposited Plan and being the whole of the land in Certificate of Title Folio
Identifier 1/534632 (the "Premises") are being used for a purpose which constitutes a breach of the Conditions of Consent granted by the Council of the City of Liverpool on or about 3 July 1987.
Order that the respondent be restrained from selling to persons other than persons engaged in the retail trade.
Order that the respondent be restrained from using the Premises otherwise than as a grocery warehouse for the storage pending sale and distribution of groceries to persons engaged in the retail trade.

Northmead /90
Declaration that the premises known as Campbells Wholesale Cash &
Carry at Unit 1 and 2, Cnr. Kleins and Boundary Roads, Northmead being Lot 1 in Deposited Plan 414840 and being the whole of the land comprised in
Certificate of Title Folio Identifier 1/414840 (the "Premises") are being used for a purpose which constitutes a breach of the Conditions of Consent granted by the Council of the City of Parramatta on or about 13 May 1986 as amended on or about 18 February 1986 and 2 September 1986.
Order that the First Respondent be restrained from selling to persons other than persons engaged in the retail trade.
Order that the First Respondent be restrained from using Lot 1 of the
Premises otherwise than for the purpose of a wholesale warehouse for the storage pending sale and distribution of goods merchandise or materials to persons engaged in the retail trade, and Lot 2 of the Premises otherwise than for the purpose of a wholesale food warehouse for the storage pending sale and distribution of goods merchandise or mateirals to persons engaged in the retail trade.

Punchbowl /90
Declaration that the premises known as Campbells Cash & Carry at 30-44
Eva Street, Punchbowl being Lot 10 in the Deposited Plan 633725 and being the whole of the land in Certificate of Title Folio Identifier 10/633725 (the "Premises") are being used for a purpose which constitutes a breach of the
Conditions of Consent granted by the Land and Environment Court in proceedings no.10625/83.
Order that the Respondent be restrained from selling to persons other than persons engaged in the retail trade.
Order that the Respondent be restrained from using the Premises otherwise than for wholesaling groceries, liquor, general household merchandise, frozen foods and dairy products, fruit and vegetables for sale and distribution to persons engaged in the retail trade.

Hexham /90 . Declaration that the premises known as Campbells Cash & Carry at 16 Galleghan Street, Hexham being Lot 6 in the Deposited Plan 629865 being the whole of the land in Folio Identifier 6/629865 (the "Premises") are being used for a purpose which constitutes a breach of the Conditions of Consent granted by the Council of the City of Newcastle on or about 30 September 1982 as amended on or about 27 November 1989.
Order that the Respondent be restrained from selling to persons other than persons engaged in the retail trade.
Order that the Respondents be restrained from using the Premises otherwise than as a wholesale grocery warehouse for the storage and wholesale distribution of grocery goods to persons engaged in the retail trade, with the sale of goods otherwise being restricted to registered businesses only.

In each action the orders and judgment Bignold J should be set aside. The respondents are to pay the appellant's costs of the proceedings below and of the appeal, but are to have, if qualified, a certificate under the Suitors'
Fund Act in respect of the costs of the appeal. The respondents are to pay the costs of the Liverpool City Council in proceedings 40299/90 in the Court below and of the Parramatta City Council in proceedings 40294/90 in the Court below.
 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 <case>; [(1994) 85 LGERA 37] at 46 [2] Solicitor General for NSW In Relation of Franklins Stores Pty Limited v
Food Barn Pty Limited & Ors [(1975) 32 LGRA 130] at 135.
 [3] [(1977) 36 LGRA 1.] [4] Dolton, Bournes & Dolton Limited versus Osmond [[1955] 1 WLR 621]; A G
Campbell (Properties) Limited versus Parramatta City Council [(1961) 6 LGRA ]; [(1961) NSWLR 542]; Foodbarn Pty Limited & Ors versus Solicitor General [(1975) LGRA 157]; Permewan Wright Limited versus Attorney General [(1977) 36 LGRA ];
Dowling Enterprises Pty Limited versus Quinn & Anor (1979) 39 LGRA 202; The
Electricty Trust of South Australia versus Krone (Australia) Technique Pty Limited <case>; [(1994) 51 FCR 540]; E S
Turnbull Pty Limited versus Wollongong Council (Unreported) Land and Environment
Court, Holland J, 27 September 1988; City of Brighton versus Eura Nominees Pty
Limited [(1983) 56 LGRA 262.] [5] (unreported) 27 September 1988 p.17.
 [6] See Warringah Shire Council versus Sedevcic [(1987) 10 NSWLR 335] at 339 per Kirby P.
 * * * 
