

Wentworth versus Rogers [2002] NSWSC 921 (4 October 2002) 
Last Updated: 17 October 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Wentworth versus Rogers <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 13494/01  /01  
HEARING DATE{S): 10/09/02  
JUDGMENT DATE: 04/10/2002  
PARTIES: 
Katherine Wentworth - First Plaintiff 
Salvatore Russo - Second Plaintiff 
Gordon John Rogers - Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Barrett J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
First Plaintiff in person 
Mr D P F Officer QC/Ms V Culkoff - Second Plaintiff 
Mr P J Beazley, Solicitor - Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
First Plaintiff in person 
Russo & Partners - Second Plaintiff 
Beazley Singleton - Defendant  
CATCHWORDS: 
PROCEDURE - re-opening after judgment - whether first instance judge should permit re-opening  
ACTS CITED:  [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)  
DECISION: 
Refer paragraph 12  
JUDGMENT:  - 9 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
BARRETT J  
FRIDAY, 4 OCTOBER 2002  /01 - WENTWORTH versus ROGERS & ANOR  /01 - WENTWORTH & ANOR versus ROGERS  
JUDGMENT  In each of these proceedings, I heard on 1 August 2002 an application for leave to appeal under [s.208M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html) of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) 1987 against determinations made by a costs assessor. On 15 August 2002, leave to appeal was, in each case, refused and I published my reasons: see Wentworth v Rogers <case>
No orders have yet been entered. Subsequently, a notice of motion was filed in each matter seeking orders that the hearing be re-opened. I heard those applications on 10 September 2002.  Re-opening is sought by the plaintiffs so that they may make submissions on certain matters referred to in my reasons for judgment - specifically, the application of quantum meruit principles in relation to lawyers' remuneration and the effect of the provision of the Act referring to a new hearing - and to adduce evidence and make submissions relevant to the meaning of the expression "pro bono".  In coming to my decision on the question whether leave to appeal should be granted (and in concluding that it should not), I was guided by principles applied and adopted in Reynolds versus Whittens  <case> and Chapmans Ltd versus Yandell  <case> discussed at paragraph [50] of my judgment. Those tests involve an inquiry whether there is an obvious error on the face of the record such that there will be substantial injustice to the party seeking leave if the challenged decision is allowed to stand, with the court acting as a filter to forestall unsuitable appellate proceedings with consequent demands on the resources of the court, burden upon the other party to the litigation and delays caused to other litigants. On the assessment I made, there was no obvious error giving rise to a need for the attention of the court to prevent injustice.  In coming to that conclusion, I canvassed a number of issues for the purpose of testing the soundness and cogency of the decisions reached by the costs assessor. Among these (although by no means the only and not necessarily the most central) were  whether the absence of a written fee agreement between lawyer and client entailed the necessary consequence that the lawyer had no right to be paid - as to which I observed that recovery upon a quantum meruit should allow recovery of reasonable remuneration unless clearly excluded;  the nature of a [s.208M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html) appeal - as to which I took the view that, because it is a "new hearing" (which is the plain English version of a hearing de novo), the court must determine the whole matter afresh and is not bound (although it might be entitled) to accept some narrowed approach based on mutual concessions; and  what is conveyed by the expression "pro bono" in the context of legal fees - my general view being that it is a term of no fixed or accepted meaning but one which, in a context where costs might be awarded, could be understood as not precluding a payment obligation on the part of the client where that client was awarded costs against another party.  The plaintiffs say that they had no proper opportunity to make submissions on these matters and should be given such an opportunity upon re-opening, coupled with an opportunity to adduce evidence on understandings and practices relevant to the last matter.  There was, in fact, some exchange in the course of submissions on both the quantum meruit issue and the meaning of "new hearing". The first was dealt with briefly in an exchange between senior counsel for the second plaintiff and myself (transcript, page 17 line 46 to page 18 line 12), as well as being referred to by the solicitor for the defendant (page 30 line 21 to page 31 line 12). The second matter was also the subject of comment by the first plaintiff (page 11 line 48 to page 12 line 5 and page 43 lines 11 to 36) and an exchange between senior counsel for the second plaintiff and me (page 41 line 9 to page 42 line 41). I should add, by way of explanation, that the second plaintiff was represented by counsel at the hearing before me on 1
August 2002 and that the first plaintiff, who was unrepresented, both adopted the submissions made by counsel for the second plaintiff and added submissions of her own.  On the application for re-opening of the hearing, senior counsel for the second plaintiff referred to a number of the High Court decisions on re- opening after judgment but before entry of orders. The first plaintiff, who again appeared in person, made reference to a great number of authorities.
While cases on this subject as it affects appellate courts are no doubt instructive, the fact remains that treatment of the issue at that level is affected by considerations which do not apply when it is sought to have proceedings determined by a single judge at first instance re-opened after judgment. In R versus Nitin Giri (No 2) <case>, Heydon JA distilled from High Court authority (Wentworth versus Woollahra
Municipal Council (No 2) <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 672], State Rail Authority versus Codelfa Construction Pty
Ltd (No 2) <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 29], Autodesk Inc versus Dyason (No 2) <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 300)] the three issues central to the re-opening jurisdiction which the High Court regarded as exercisable by appellate courts in only "extremely rare" or "quite exceptional" circumstances and then only with "great caution":  * first, whether the appellant has shown that, without accident or fault on the appellant's part, he or she has not been heard on a relevant matter;  * second, whether the appellant has shown an error in the court's reasoning because of a misapprehension of the facts; and  * third, whether the appellant has shown an error in the court's reasoning because of some misapprehension of the relevant law.  (See also, in particular, Smith versus New South Wales Bar Association (No 2) <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 256] and De L v Director General, New South Wales Department of Community Services (No 2) <case>; [(1997) 190 CLR 207.)]  Principles of general application which are relevant to the question of re- opening by first instance judges where avenues of appeal are readily available were discussed by Santow J in Wentworth versus Wentworth [[1999] NSWSC :](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1999/638.html "View Case" )  "While appellate courts must have regard to whether and to what extent there is any prospect of any final appellate review and which in the case of the
Australian courts of appeal depends upon special High Court leave, the principles for exercise of the discretion as laid down in Smith versus NSW Bar
Association (No. 2) (supra) at 265 embrace all courts:  'The power is discretionary and, although it exists up until the entry of judgment, it is one that is exercised having regard to the public interest in maintaining the finality of litigation (Wentworth versus Woollahra Municipal
Council <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 672] at 684)). Thus, if reasons for judgment have been given, the power is only exercised if there is some matter calling for review (Marinoff v Bailey [(1970) 92 WN 280] at ; National Benzole Co Ltd versus Gooch [[1961] 1 WLR 1489] at -1494). And there may be more or less reluctance to exercise the power depending on whether there is an avenue of appeal (State Rail Authority of
NSW versus Codelfa Constructions Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 150 CLR 29] at 38-39, 45-46; Wentworth versus Rogers [No 9] [(1987) 8
NSWLR 388] at 394-395).'  
Per Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ in Smith versus NSW Bar Association (No 2) at 265.  
Their Honours went on to say (at 265) 'the power to review a judgment in a case where the order has not been entered will not ordinarily be exercised to permit a general re-opening'.  
Speaking in broad terms, the basis for review has been expressed thus (in
Yenald (supra) at 42,362):  'An order varying the terms of a judgment that has not been entered will be made to correct error or oversight or to give effect to a review of the contemplated order so that the orders made deal more adequately with the matter as litigated by the parties before the Court. (See: The Texas Company
Ltd versus FCT <case>; [(1940) 63 CLR 382] per Starke J at 457).'  
In appellate courts particularly, there is to be weighed the public interest in the finality of litigation against what would otherwise be irremediable injustice; State Rail Authority of New South Wales versus Codelfa Construction
Pty Limited at 38 per Mason and Wilson JJ. But that latter factor does not have the same weight where, as here, appeal is allowed as of right or as a matter of usual course.  
The discretion to re-open or vary a judgment is thus significantly qualified.
As is so often said, the power should 'be exercised with great caution';
Wentworth versus Woollahra Municipal Council <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 672] at 684. Examples where re-opening was denied serve to illustrate the constraint observed by the courts in exercise of the discretion:  
Where the ground was that the Court misconstrued a section of legislation this was said to be 'an attempt to re-argue the substantial question decided in the appeal after hearing full argument from counsel for the parties';
Wentworth versus Woollahra Municipal Council (supra) at 685.  
Where the grounds are an allegation of bias against the Court or allegations of mistaken findings of fact, the proper procedure is to seek special leave to appeal from the High Court. Wentworth versus Rogers (No 9) [(1987) 8 NSWLR 388] at 395.  
Where what is occurring is in truth the re-agitation of arguments already considered by the Court; as was said by Mason CJ in Autodesk (at ):  'It must be emphasised that the jurisdiction [to review or re-hear an issue] is not to be exercised for the purposes of re-agitating arguments already considered by the Court; nor is it to be exercised simply because the party seeking a re-hearing has failed to present the argument in all its aspects or as well as it might have been put'.  
Where the parties have been sufficiently heard on the impugned issue;
Autodesk Inc versus Dyason (No 2).  
Where even if there be the possibility of some misapprehension on the
Court's part as to the facts or relevant law, this misapprehension can be attributed solely to the neglect or default of the party seeking the re- hearing; for 'the purpose of the jurisdiction is not to provide a backdoor method by which unsuccessful litigants can seek to re-argue their cases'; per
Mason CJ in Autodesk at 303.  
Examples on the other hand where review has been allowed in the case of a judgment or order of a court of first instance include the following:  
Where the court's reasons for judgment inadvertently did not deal with important matters argued by counsel at the hearing where an appeal to correct this would involve inevitable delay; Twenty-First Australia Inc versus Shade (NSWSC, Young J, 31 July 1998, unreported) in Butterworths Unreported
Judgments at 18.  
Where the court's reasons involve 'infelicity of expression and ambiguous statements' which may be corrected by the trial judge upon the bringing in of short minutes; Fexuto Pty Ltd versus Bosnjak Holdings Pty Ltd (No 2) <case>; [(1998) 29 ACSR 290.]  
Where re-opening in respect of an order which was consequential upon a finding of error of law and the trial judge had no intention that the order have the effect that further evidence could be called on in the remittal to the tribunal below, and where the possible effect of the order had not been the subject of argument at hearing; AB versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation [(1998) 157 ALR 510. (While] the order arising out of this decision to re-open the matter and the previous decision which found an error of law were overturned on appeal in Glennan versus Commissioner of Taxation <case>, the decision to re-open was not itself canvassed in the appeal.)  
Where what was sought was further consideration of orders in respect of the nature and extent of equitable relief which had been earlier sought at trial (in the context of a complex litigation); Farrow Finance Company Ltd (in liquidation) versus Farrow Properties Pty Ltd (in liquidation) and Ors (SC(Vic), Hansen J, 16 April 1998, unreported).  
Where a party had misunderstood the basis of a pleading and failed to address the issue in its strike-out application; Hoad versus Nationwide News [(1996-1997) 37 IPR 407] [Anderson J SC(WA)]  
Where excision of a paragraph from a judgment was sought where the trial judge had mistakenly referred in his reasons to a situation which did not exist; Smits versus Buckworth (No 2) (NSWSC, Young J, 14 November 1997, unreported).  
Where the trial judge recalled his order after deciding it was wrong immediately after making it; Pittalis versus Sherefettin [[1986] 1 QB .]  
In the Court of Appeal, where further appeal would have depended on discretionary special leave from the High Court, the Court agreed to re-open its decision in order to permit a reconsideration of a particular issue, because the court had not originally been made aware of authority directly in point and which was to the contrary to that earlier decision; Wentworth v
Wentworth (NSWCA, 30 November 1998, unreported).  
While illustrations of where the courts have or have not re-opened a judgment not yet entered are of value, they can be subsumed more generally in what
Mason CJ said in Autodesk (at 301-2). He delimited the scope of the discretion by explaining that "the exceptional step" of reviewing an issue might occur where a court has good reason to consider that it had proceeded on a misapprehension as to the facts or the law and where the misapprehension cannot be attributed solely to the applicant's neglect or default".  It seems to me that the relevant principles, as they apply in a case such as the present, can be summarised in one basic proposition, namely, that a single judge whose decision is susceptible to appeal through readily available channels (with or without any preliminary need for leave to appeal) should allow re-opening after judgment where it is obvious to that judge that the decision has miscarried and that the miscarriage may be rectified and the situation retrieved by attention to the matter by that judge rather than by an appeal court. What is highly undesirable is that the first instance judge should be cast in the role of hearing what amounts to an appeal against his or her own decision. I adopt, in that connection, the following observation of
Rix LJ in Compagnie Noga D'Importation et D'Exportation SA versus Abacha <case>; [[2001] 3 All ER 513:]  "I do not wish to say anything against the usefulness of the reconsideration jurisdiction, within its proper limits. I have made use of it myself. However, it is in the nature of the legal process that, once judgment has been rendered, analysis thereafter becomes clarified and refined, and citation of authority is applied to the findings made at first instance so as to illuminate that clarification and refinement of analysis of which I speak. But that is the function of the appeal process. In my judgment, to grant this application that I reconsider my judgment would subvert the appeal process itself. In doing so, it would not answer the interests of justice, but would be the antithesis of justice according to law. There are of course cases where an error of fact or law may be too clear for argument. The best test of that is perhaps - but not necessarily - where the judge himself identifies the error which concerns him. In such a case, it is better that the error is corrected without imposing on the parties the need for an appeal. But no parallel to Noga's application has been cited to me. It is in my judgment wrong for a judge to be treated to an exposition such as would be presented to a court of appeal. If in such circumstances a judge should be tempted to open up reconsideration of his judgment, an appeal would not be avoided, it would be made inevitable. Every case would become subject to an unending process of reconsideration, followed by appeal, both on the issue of reconsideration and on the merits."  In the present case, the plaintiffs say that they had inadequate opportunity to address the issues of quantum meruit and the nature of the [s.208M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208m.html) appeal and also that they wish to adduce evidence relevant to views I expressed as to what would be appreciated by the expression "pro bono" in the particular context. I say four things about that. First and as I have already noted, the first two matters were the subject of exchanges in the course of the hearing. Second, the ways in which a particular expression in common usage in legal circles would be employed in a particular context is something on which evidence would not normally be useful. Third, this cannot, as I see it, be said to be a case in which the court is asked simply "to repair errors clearly demonstrated and readily corrected" (Raybos Australia Pty Ltd v
Tectran Corporation Pty Ltd (unreported, NSWCA, 8 July 1993, per Kirby P).
Third and as Lord Wilberforce observed in Saif Ali versus Sydney Mitchell &
Co [[1980] AC 198], "Judges are more than mere selectors between rival views - they are entitled to and do think for themselves." Fourth, if re-opening were permitted and further submissions were made, the fact that I had already expressed myself as I did in the original judgment would inevitably have the effect of casting me in a role somewhat akin to that occupied by a respondent upon appeal; and that is not, from anyone's perspective, a satisfactory base from which to seek to progress (or, if rectification is needed, to seek to rectify) the matters which are of concern to the plaintiffs.  The jurisdiction to re-open after judgment is discretionary and is to be exercised having regard to the public interest in maintaining the finality of litigation. An appeal against my original decision is available upon leave granted by the Court of Appeal: [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/), s.101(2)(q).
If that decision is affected by any error of the kind to which the plaintiffs have referred in seeking to have the matter re-opened - or, for that matter, any other error - such that the requirements of justice demand that the decision be reviewed, leave will be readily granted so that the question of error can be fully explored on appeal and the error set right. The leave to appeal needed in this case is quite different from the kind of leave that influenced thinking in Wentworth versus Wentworth (unreported, NSWCA, 30
November 1998), Taylor versus Lawrence <case>; <case> (ie, the form of leave which seeks to ensure that only cases of particular importance are appealed from an intermediate court of appeal to a final court of appeal). If the matters the plaintiffs seek to agitate further are to be pursued, they should be pursued in the Court of Appeal.  In 13492 of 2001, the plaintiff's notice of motion filed on 5 September is dismissed. In 13494 of 2001, the plaintiffs' notice of motion filed on September 2002 is dismissed.  
LAST UPDATED: 04/10/2002 * * * 
