

Regina versus Cacciola Matter No Cca 60337/98 [1998] NSWSC 531 (15 October )

Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
REGINA versus CACCIOLA 
CCA 60337/98 October 1998 
Priestley JA, Abadee J, David Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: When the argument began I said the appellant's submissions in this appeal had very usefully summarised the most material aspects of the appeal. In these reasons I propose to make substantial use of the way in which the appellant's submissions were set out. 
This is an appeal by the Director of Public Prosecutions against the sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Moore on the respondent in the District Court on May this year.

When he appeared before his Honour for sentence the respondent adhered to pleas of guilty which he had entered in the Local Court on 11 September 1997 on eight counts of supplying a prohibited drug, methylamphetamine, contrary to s 25(1) of the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act.

Also at the sentencing hearing the respondent asked the sentencing Judge to take into account an offence listed on form 1, namely, being in possession of a prohibited drug known as Ecstasy contrary to <case> of the Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act.

The counts on which the respondent pleaded guilty carried a maximum penalty of ,000 penalty units or 15 years imprisonment, or both, and the offence on the form 1 carried a maximum penalty of 20 penalty units or two years imprisonment or both.

The sentencing Judge did not sentence the respondent to a custodial sentence.
He deferred passing sentence upon condition that the respondent enter a recognisance, self in the sum of $1,000, to be of good behaviour for three years. He also ordered the respondent to pay $3,600 in compensation to the
Crown, that being the amount that undercover police officers had spent in buying drugs from the respondent.

Prompt notice was given by the Crown to the respondent of its intention to appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy.

The eight counts to which the respondent pleaded guilty involved dates commencing on 4 May 1997 and running through 21 May 1997, 27 May 1997, 3 June , 18 June 1997 and finally a number of counts applicable to 25 June 1997, when he was arrested.

The total amount of drugs supplied exceeded the indictable quantity.

The first offence committed on 4 May 1997 happened on board a cruise vessel on
Sydney Harbour where a dance party was going on. A man known simply in the proceedings as "Simon", who was an undercover police officer, bought one capsule of methylamphetamine for $50 from the respondent. Simon kept in touch with the respondent and, on 21 May 1997, the respondent sold Simon ten capsules of methylamphetamine for $350. Again, on 27 May 1997, the respondent sold Simon six capsules of amphetamine for $200. On 3 June 1997 the respondent gave Simon a sample capsule of amphetamine at no charge. Then, on 18 June , there was a sale of 102 capsules of amphetamine for $3,000.

On 25 June 1997, when Simon had arranged with the respondent to do a deal with him at or near the respondent's home, a series of events occurred, involving eleven capsules of amphetamine, which gave rise to five of the charges to which the respondent later pleaded guilty, as well the matter dealt with on the form 1.

Whilst this deal was in progress police from the Drug Enforcement Agency arrested the respondent. He was cautioned and immediately said he would tell the police anything they wanted to know, something, judging by the record of interview, which he went at least a long way towards carrying out. He was asked if he had any more drugs and told police there were more. Fifty capsules of amphetamine were found in the glove box of his girlfriend's car. Thirty-one capsules were found in his bedroom.

On the same day he gave a lengthy interview which was recorded electronically.
He admitted the offences and said he had obtained the drugs from a person named "Jason". This Court does not know what happened to Jason, if anything, following the respondent's arrest. From the material before the Court Jason appears to have been a person who could sell to the respondent significant quantities of drugs upon request and had a system where he could be contacted by his pager number being called and a meeting subsequently arranged.

According to the respondent he thought he had bought about 300 capsules from
Jason since he had first met him.

In his evidence before the sentencing Judge the respondent said he had first become involved in actually trying drugs towards the end of 1996, and that he then progressed to being a purchaser for a group of friends. His cousin had introduced him to Jason and he and his cousin became purchasers from Jason for the group of friends with whom the respondent was associating in the period between Christmas 1996 and his arrest in June 1997.

In evidence before the sentencing Judge the respondent said that by buying in bulk, as it were, from Jason when most of the buying was intended to enable him to pass the drugs onto his friends, he got a discount for putting in a group order, and he estimated that he had made purchases for his friends, in which Simon was included, between twelve and fifteen times.

He said the biggest order he had asked for for his friends, before meeting
Simon, was approximately twenty-three capsules.

He maintained that he never made any money out of his activities. A close reading of the record of interview suggests that this may not have been a completely accurate assertion. However, the sentencing Judge accepted the evidence he gave to that effect in the sentencing proceedings and there is no reason justifying this Court from departing from the sentencing Judge's findings of fact.

At the sentencing hearing there was, on my reading of it, an extremely well presented sentencing plea made by the respondent's counsel. He drew together both from the oral evidence of the respondent and his mother and also in his presentation of materials to the sentencing Judge a very strong case concerning the respondent himself, as distinct from the objective facts of what he had done comprising the charges.

What are often referred to as the subjective features concerning the respondent contained a number of matters which justify the description of the case as being a strong subjective case. These matters dealt with the psychology of the respondent and the fact that within his family, which was on the evidence a family whose members were all successful in their particular fields, he was less successful, and suffered from feelings of not meeting the expectations of the family and lack of his own worth, which had considerable impact on his behaviour.

He had had no previous convictions of any kind. The sentencing Judge accepted he had not taken any drugs since his arrest and had given up attending nightclubs and mixing with the groups of friends which had been the pattern of his nights it seems at least since Christmas of 1996 and until his arrest.

There was a favourable pre-sentence report, favourable in the sense that it emphasised in a fairly professional sort of way the subjective features that I have only briefly touched on.

There was also evidence which the sentencing Judge accepted that, following his arrest, the respondent had suffered feelings of anxiety, depression and hopelessness, and his whole way of living had been affected.

I might mention at this point that in saying these things I am not intending to give any foothold for the idea the subjective matters in the respondent's case were such as to constitute exceptional circumstances of the kind referred to in the leading decisions of this Court as being the sort of exceptional circumstances necessary to justify the non-imposition of a custodial sentence for offences of this kind. A distinction needs to be drawn between the strong subjective case and the exceptional circumstances which justify a non- custodial sentence.

Another factor taken into account by the sentencing Judge was that the respondent offered, and immediately upon being sentenced implemented the offer, to pay compensation to the Crown in respect of the money that had been spent in buying the drugs from him.

The basis of the Crown appeal was that the sentencing Judge had fallen into three errors. I will not go into any detail about the first of these because I think that it was not really a significant matter, of itself, in the judge's approach to sentencing. He made some observations about trafficking which may, on one reading, give a reader the impression that he was not treating this particular case as a trafficking case. Overall, on reading the whole of his remarks on sentence I think he undoubtedly was.

The two matters which seem to the Court to be of importance here as being errors on the part of the sentencing Judge are that he was wrong in finding the circumstances of this case were so exceptional as to warrant a non- custodial sentence and wrong also in taking into account hardship to the respondent's family.

In my opinion the sentencing Judge was wrong in both of these respects.

In regard to what amounts to the kind of exceptional circumstances spoken of in the cases, although there is no clear positive definition of exceptional circumstances to be found in the authorities that have been drawn to the
Court's attention today, the cases in which exceptional circumstances have been held by this Court not to have existed do provide a firm basis, in my opinion, for saying that there were no exceptional circumstances in this case.

The sentencing Judge took into account, and these matters were proper to take into account for purposes of sentencing generally, the respondent's youth, the fact he had no prior convictions, his pleas of guilty, his remorse, his prospects of rehabilitation which, on the evidence before the sentencing Judge were very promising and his readiness to assist the police.

For the respondent the point was made that, although it might be right to say that there are a number of cases in which some of these items had been held by this Court not to constitute exceptional circumstances, it was not a logical process to take them one by one and say, that since each one had on occasion been held not to constitute exceptional circumstances, therefore, the aggregate did not constitute exceptional circumstances. That argument is correct but it does not, in my opinion, lead in this case to the conclusion which the respondent's counsel wanted us to reach.

Each of the matters that the Judge apparently took into account in arriving at the decision to impose the non-custodial sentence is really a commonplace matter which frequently happens to people convicted of crime. A number of the cases do have an aggregation of circumstances similar to those in the present case, but a combination of subjective circumstances each strong in itself does not add up to exceptional circumstances unless the aggregate of all those circumstances point to the case being one of real difference from the general run of cases that come before the Courts. This case, in my opinion, did not fall into that class.

The rule has been in this Court since before 1990, and has been regularly repeated since 1990, that, as his Honour himself said: "Where there is trafficking in illicit drugs then there must be a gaol sentence except in exceptional circumstances." 
The Queen versus Clarke, delivered in this Court on 15 March 1990, said that at some length. A series of cases since then in this Court has repeated that proposition. It is one about which there is no room for debate.

It follows from what I have said about the Judge being wrong in finding there were exceptional circumstances in the present case that he was wrong in applying the exception which the rule as I have repeated it allows for.

Another matter I should mention before coming to the next aspect of this appeal is that the third of the three points the Crown made, namely, the error the Judge was said to have made by taking hardship to the respondent's family into account, is also made out.

The Queen versus Edwards [90 ACrimR 510], a case of this Court, makes the position very clear and I quote part of what appears in that decision in the reasons of Gleeson
CJ: "There is nothing unusual about a situation in which the sentencing of an offender to a term of imprisonment would impose hardship upon some other person. Indeed, as senior counsel for the respondent acknowledged in argument, it may be taken that sending a person to prison will more often than not cause hardship, sometimes serious hardship, and sometimes extreme hardship, to another person. It requires no imagination to understand why this is so.
Sentencing judges and magistrates are routinely obliged, in the course of their duties, to sentence offenders who may be breadwinners of families, carers, paid or unpaid, of the disabled, parents of children, protectors of persons who are weak or vulnerable, employers upon whom workers depend for their livelihood, and many others, in a variety of circumstances bound to result in hardship to third parties if such an offender is sentenced to a term of full-time imprisonment." (at 515) 
Gleeson CJ then referred to what had been said in South Australia in Worth's case in 1976 which gives some indication of the kind of circumstances that could be regarded as highly exceptional. Although this case did not directly relate to the general question of what are exceptional circumstances in a case of the present kind, nevertheless, I think it is a useful decision. It says in regard to highly exceptional circumstances that: "They are such where it would be, in effect, inhuman to refuse to take into account what the effect of the sentence would be." 
Although this does not directly apply to cases of the present kind it gives some guidance as to the sort of thing that must be shown before exceptional circumstances can be found in regard to cases of the present kind.

All of this leads to the conclusion that the Crown appeal was well based.
There was an error in sentencing. This was a case where a custodial sentence should have been imposed according to the authoritative statements of this
Court in Clarke and succeeding cases.

That, however, does not mean that the Crown appeal must necessarily be upheld.
When the Crown has shown error, as it has in this case, and when the question becomes whether the appeal should be upheld difficult questions sometimes arise and that has happened in this case.

There are two factors. One is that the Crown very properly handed up some sheets of statistics which took as their subject the total of 714 cases decided between January 1990 and May of this year where the charges and the convictions were for supply of prohibited drug under <case> of the Drugs
Trafficking, etc Act.

The statistics were broken down showing that within that largish sample there was a much smaller number of twenty-eight cases where there had been multiple counts under <case>, no previous convictions of the person convicted and a plea of guilty by that person.

This table showed that out of those twenty-eight cases, 36% had brought full custodial sentences. 36 percent of twenty-eight is something like ten and, once you start turning the percentages into numbers of cases, it becomes quite clear that the number is not sufficient for any firm conclusions to be drawn.

To the extent that the statistics may have any use for present purposes they do suggest that there may be amongst sentencing Judges at first instance a too frequent non-compliance with what has been said in this Court about the necessity for cases of this kind to be punished by custodial sentences unless in exceptional circumstances. Perhaps that has occurred by reason of a very broad understanding of exceptional circumstances. Perhaps it has occurred by reason of not paying sufficient regard to what this Court has said in Clarke and following cases. One thing we would hope would come from this present decision is that sentencing Judges will pay proper regard to what has so often been said in this Court on this point.

However, although I have said the statistics may be of some use at least in suggesting that what I have just been talking about is the case, I do not think they are really strong enough to draw any firm conclusions, even along those lines. Whatever their explanation may be, the fact remains that what has been said in Clarke is something that this Court continues to consider is the proper approach to sentencing, always bearing in mind the need to consider every convicted person's case on its own merits and in its own circumstances.

Another thing which the statistics suggest is that, even amongst the cases where custodial terms are imposed, the sentences are frequently quite low.
This brings me to the second matter which causes difficulty in this case in deciding what should happen to the Crown appeal, and that is the principle on which the Court continually operates, that because of the expectations engendered in a person who has been sentenced to a comparatively light sentence, and when an appeal is brought by the Crown against that sentence, the Court regards the respondent in such cases as being placed in a position akin to that of double jeopardy so that this Court, even when it re-sentences more severely than the sentencing Court has done, does not, as a rule, impose the sentence which the Court thinks should have been imposed by the sentencing
Judge, but a somewhat lesser sentence, to give effect to the feeling that it would be unfair because of the double jeopardy situation to do so.

If we were to re-sentence in this case that double jeopardy like principle would operate. Further, the sentence would need to be at the low end of the sentencing range, not because the case is one of exceptional circumstances, which is in a different area of consideration, but because of the strong subjective features of the case which were found by the sentencing Judge and upon the basis of which this Court would have to approach the question of re- sentencing.

The combination of these matters leads the Court to think that the appropriate decision in this case is to dismiss the appeal.

In doing so the intention is that the policy of the Court, as I have been saying more than once, as shown in Clarke and the long series of succeeding cases, should be followed. It should also be recognised that the Court regards that policy as a continuing one which the Court will continue to seek to enforce.

Speaking of policy I reiterate what I mentioned before that the sentencing rule which emerges from Clarke and later cases is a continuing rule, a rule in the sense that it must be taken into account and given serious consideration by sentencing Judges on every occasion when there is a case of this kind, although the sentencing Judge must, in the end, always exercise his or her own discretion, but the sentencing policy or rule is not to be neglected and put out of sight, nor should there be excessively liberal interpretation of the phrase "exceptional circumstances".

A final matter which was raised with counsel for the Crown rather obliquely in discussion in view of recent developments about guideline judgments, was that it may be useful for the Crown to keep an eye open for cases such as this where, if there are more than one or two of them and the Crown intends to appeal, they could be brought to the Court at the same time with a view to the
Crown seeking a guideline judgment, if that is what the Crown thinks is the appropriate way to go in light of the decision of Jurisic. However, in the way this case has developed, it did not seem to be suitable for that sort of treatment in regard to the continuing line of policy.

There was one other thing I meant to say in this connection, again discussed briefly with the Crown. I have mentioned the statistics which were shown to us during the hearing and have given some indication of the effect they have had on me at least, an effect which is very qualified because of the restricted use that could sensibly be made of them in light of the number of relevant cases and also the lack of information about each of those twenty-eight relevant cases in the sample. It may be something that is too expensive or too difficult for the Crown to prepare but unless that is so, if statistics of this kind are to be put before the Court they would be more useful the more information that can be given in regard to each of the particular cases in a sample.

Subject to the Crown's resources, statistics of an amplified kind such as I mentioned earlier in discussion with counsel would be of considerably more use than the statistics that we have had today.

In saying that I am not criticising the Crown for the state of the statistics.
It was the proper thing for the Crown to put those statistics before the
Court.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed.

ABADEE J: I agree with the reasons given by the presiding Judge, Mr Justice Priestley, and with his proposed order. That said I wish to add some additional remarks of my own. 
In my opinion the sentence was manifestly inadequate. In my view further, the sentencing principles as stated by this Court in R versus Clarke (15 March 1990,
CCA, unreported) and as further applied by this Court in later cases and more particularly in the case of R versus Day (23 April 1998, CCA, unreported) were not correctly applied by the sentencing Judge.

That said it does not, however, follow that the Crown appeal must succeed since the matter of double jeopardy is a matter that arises for consideration in this case for reasons that have been given by the presiding Judge. It is because of the application of the double jeopardy principle in the circumstances of this case that I would agree that the Crown appeal should be dismissed.

The principles relevant to a case of this nature, as I have said, have been referred to by this Court in Day's case. At p 4 Wood CJ at CL said as follows: "That proposition is generally in accordance with authority, although the policy has been more commonly expressed in terms that only in exceptional circumstances will a non custodial sentence be appropriate for those who engage in drug trafficking in any substantial degree...[the] objective criminality of an offender who traffics in drugs to feed a personal habit is somewhat less than that of a trafficker for greed, but that principle is not confined to those cases where a profit has been made: R versus Blanco (22 October , CCA, unreported)." 
In the instant case the Judge found there were exceptional circumstances. This appears to have been inter alia used as a justification for the imposition of a non-custodial sentence.

In my view there were no exceptional circumstances to be found in this case, whether individually or in combination. There is no necessity in this particular decision - and indeed nor is it desirable to state or catalogue what may or may not constitute exceptional circumstances which may attract in the result the imposition of a non-custodial sentence. As I have said there were none in the present case.

As Chief Justice Gleeson pointed out in another context, namely, a case dealing with hardship to third parties, that case being the one of R v
Edwards (13 November 1996, CCA, unreported): "Justice will not have been seen to have been administered even-handedly if exceptions are made [on this account] in cases which are not truly exceptional." (at 13) 
Those observations can be, in my view, applied with equal force to a case such as the present one. Inconsistency of sentencing is undesirable. It gives rise to actual, or potential, injustice. Weak or merciful sentences are equally undesirable. As such again they give rise to a potential injustice. Indeed, an inadequate sentence potentially affects the community's confidence in the even administration of justice and if a non-custodial sentence is imposed when, in truth, a custodial sentence is an appropriate one, then the community's confidence in the administration of justice is potentially affected. Indeed, a manifestly inadequate sentence may be seen to not only affect the public's sense of justice, it may, as in the instant case, attract a Crown appeal and thereby impact in an adverse way on a person who has had an inadequate sentence imposed, and, with that inadequacy then falling to be corrected on appeal.

Had the sentencing statistics not been properly handed to the Court by the
Crown I would have had some considerably reservations as to whether this was an appropriate case for the Crown appeal to be dismissed. As to the relevance of sentencing statistical material, or alternatively sentencing information, there has been some discussion of such by this Court in R versus Bloomfield, (15
July 1998, CCA, unreported), particularly at pp 7 and 8.

What the statistics that have been handed to the Court reveal is that it has not invariably been the case in respect of this type of offence, at least since 1990, that the Courts have even imposed full time custodial sentences.

Equally, the statistics also suggest, even where full time custodial sentences have been imposed for these type of offences or group of offences with which the Court is presently concerned, that lenient custodial sentences, or sentences towards the lower part of the range have been imposed by the Court, and even accepted by appellate courts.

I agree with the views of the presiding Judge in relation generally to the matter of the statistics and their relevance in the instant matter. For reasons given by the presiding Judge in relation to the matter of double jeopardy and why its application in the instant case should result in the appeal being dismissed, I would also agree that the Crown appeal should be dismissed.

That said, and before parting with this case, I wish to emphasise that his
Honour's decision not to impose a full time custodial sentence reflected error. I would also seek to emphasise that care should be taken not to find exceptional circumstances when none exist.

I agree with the proposed order.

KIRBY J: I likewise agree with the remarks of the presiding Judge and with the order proposed. 
PRIESTLEY JA: The order of the Court is that the appeal is dismissed. * * * 
