

Yoo versus Toppro Pty Ltd & Ors [2016] NSWSC 670 (26 May 2016) 
Last Updated: 27 May 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Order for rectification of share register of company and ancillary orders to be made in favour of Plaintiff. Cross-Claims dismissed. Second Defendant and
Fourth Defendant to pay costs of Plaintiff as agreed or as assessed.  
Catchwords: 
CORPORATIONS -- Application for rectification of company's share register under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s175.html) of the [Corporations Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) -- where plaintiff sought declarations that purported transfers of shares to second and fourth defendants are void - whether there was an equitable assignment of the plaintiff's equitable interest in shares by reason of delivery of the executed transfer form to the nominated transferee - whether plaintiff expressed an immediate intention to dispose of his equitable interest in shares so as to effect an equitable assignment - whether the plaintiff had revoked the offer, or any authority, to sell the shares to the nominated transferee before it was accepted or implemented - where the share transfer form was amended without being initialled by plaintiff and without communication with him - whether estoppel claims against the plaintiff established.  
JUDGMENT 
Introduction
The Plaintiff, Mr Il Nam Yoo, seeks a range of relief against the Defendants, Toppro Pty Ltd ("Toppro"), Mrs Ok Ja Joo, Mr Jae Joo Kim, and Wealth Wisdom Investments Limited ("WWIL"). Mr Yoo acquired an equitable interest in the shares in Toppro in April 2012 and there is a dispute as to whether he subsequently disposed of the shares, or the equitable interest in them, to Mrs Joo or WWIL.
The First Defendant, Toppro, is a distributor of electronic equipment which, during the relevant period, it acquired from a Korean company, Topfield Co Ltd ("Topfield") under a Distribution Agreement and then sold to retailers. The Second Defendant, Mrs Joo, is the wife of the chief executive of Topfield and the shareholder in a company which provides services to Toppro. The Third Defendant, Mr Kim, is currently a director of Topfield and was appointed by Mrs Joo as a director of Toppro. The Fourth Defendant, WWIL, is a company incorporated in the British Virgin Islands which is controlled by Mrs Joo, through another company also incorporated in the British Virgin Islands, Waymon Group Limited ("WGL"). WWIL was registered in the British Virgin Islands on 26 March 2012 (Joo 18.8.15, Annexure "C") and WGL was registered in the British Virgin Islands on 5 April 2012, with Mrs Joo as its sole director and shareholder (Joo 18.8.15, Annexures "A", "B"). WGL was the sole shareholder of WWIL and was appointed as director of WWIL, with a corporate director presumably being permitted under the law of the British Virgin Islands, on or about 10 April 2012 (Joo 18.8.15, Annexure "D").
By his Fourth Amended Statement of Claim ("FAS"), Mr Yoo seeks declarations that a transfer or purported transfer of shares in Toppro to Mrs Joo on 20 June 2014 and a further transfer or purported transfer of shares of Toppro to WWIL on 3 September 2014 are void and of no effect and consequential relief. Mr Yoo seeks to impeach Mrs Joo's or alternatively WWIL's ownership of the shares in several ways in the Fourth Amended Statement of Claim, alleging that an individual involved in the transaction, Mr Choi, lacked authority to transmit the executed share transfer form to Mrs Joo; Mrs Joo and WWIL lacked authority to make subsequent alterations to the share transfer form without Mr Yoo's consent; those alterations to the share transfer form were fraudulent; and lack of consideration.
Mrs Joo and WWIL in turn brought Amended Cross-Claims, in somewhat similar form, against Mr Yoo and, initially, against a solicitor who also had an involvement in the transactions, Mr Hong. By her Amended Cross-Claim filed on 21 April 2015, Mrs Joo seeks a declaration that a valid and binding agreement was formed on 20 June 2014 between Mr Yoo as transferor and Mrs Joo as transferee of all of Mr Yoo's shares in Toppro, and a declaration that she is the legal owner or equitable owner of all of the shares in Toppro. By its Amended Second Cross-Claim also filed on 21 April 2015, WWIL seeks a declaration that a valid and binding agreement was formed on or about 3 September 2014 between Mr Yoo as transferor and WWIL as transferee of all of Mr Yoo's shares in Toppro, and a declaration that it is the legal or beneficial owner of all of the shares in Toppro. There is a significant degree of overlap between the issues raised by Mrs Joo's Defence and her and WWIL's Cross-Claims, and several matters pleaded in the Defence appear to be directed to advancing the Cross-Claims, so I will generally deal with matters raised by the Defence and the Cross-Claims together. Fundamentally, the parties are at issue as to the effectiveness of the share transfer, so far as Mrs Joo and WWIL assert the effectiveness of that share transfer in their Amended Cross-Claims and those matters are denied by Mr Yoo.
Mr Yoo, and to a lesser extent Mrs Joo, conducted the large part of the case on the basis that he was the legal owner of shares in Toppro prior to the execution of the share transfer that is in issue in the proceedings. However, the transfer of shares in Toppro to Mr Yoo from their previous owner (or, more accurately, their equitable owner), Mr Yu, had never been recorded in Toppro's share register and, indeed, Toppro did not maintain a share register at the time it occurred. Mr Young, who appeared for Mr Yoo, accepted in his oral closing submissions that the fact that Mr Yoo was not registered as the holder of the shares in Toppro had the result that no question of the transfer of legal title to the shares arose, because Mr Yoo was not the legal owner of the shares, although he rightly emphasised that Mr Yoo was the beneficial owner of the shares, in terms of his rights as against the previous owner of the shares, who he acknowledged may also not have been their legal owner in the absence of a share register (T178). Mr Neil, who appeared with Mr O'Brien for Mrs Joo and WWIL, contended in oral closing submissions that the Court should proceed, consistent with the evidence, on the basis that the question in issue involved the validity of the equitable assignment of an equitable interest in shares (T188). Mr Young also accepted, in oral submissions in reply, that he could not contend that Mr Yoo at any relevant time had anything more than an equitable interest in the shares (T208).
The proceedings must therefore be determined on the basis that they concern, not a transfer of a legal interest in shares in Toppro to which [Part 7.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p7.11) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) has any application, nor the assignment in equity of a legal chose in action, but the assignment in equity of an equitable chose in action, being Mr Yoo's equitable right to the shares in Toppro arising from his ability to obtain specific performance of a contract for purchase of those shares from Mr Yoo. (In making that observation, I assume, without deciding, that specific performance could be ordered against Mr Yu and in favour of Mr Yoo although Mr Yu himself only had an equitable interest in the shares. It is not necessary to determine that question where the parties ultimately made their closing submissions on the common basis that Mr Yoo had acquired an equitable interest in the shares.)
I will generally first identify the parties' pleaded cases concerning the key events, then the relevant evidence, and then address the parties' submissions and reach conclusions as to each of those events. I will deal in less detail with those aspects of the parties' submissions that were not relevant to the question whether Mr Yoo had assigned an equitable interest in the shares in Toppro to Mrs Joo or WWIL. There are some difficulties in identifying the relevant issues and addressing them in any logical order, because of the form of the parties' pleadings and the parties' limited focus in opening submissions on the transfer of the equitable interest in the shares. However, the pleadings have already been amended several times and the parties have already spent several days in hearing and no doubt incurred significant costs. It seems to me to be consistent with the overriding objective of the just, quick and cheap resolution of the real issues in dispute in the proceedings for the Court to do the best it can with the pleadings, evidence and submissions as they stand.

The affidavit evidence and the witnesses
Mr Yoo relied on his affidavit dated 23 June 2014, a second affidavit dated 27 June 2014 and a third affidavit dated 27 July 2015.
The Defendants, and Mrs Joo and WWIL as Cross-Claimants, rely on Mrs Joo's affidavit dated 18 August 2015. Mrs Joo departed from substantial aspects of her affidavit evidence in her evidence in cross-examination, as I will note below. There were also some difficulties in Mrs Joo's evidence in cross-examination. Mrs Joo significantly departed, in cross-examination, from her affidavit evidence as to a discussion as to her shares in Toppro with her accountant in February 2012, although she then further amended her evidence in cross-examination in a manner that sought to reduce the inconsistency with her affidavit evidence (T66-67). She initially recalled Mr Choi delivering documents relating to WGL and WWIL to her in March or April 2012, some of which were not created until late April 2012, before retreating to the proposition that she did not recall the relevant dates (T70-71). Mrs Joo's evidence as to her investment in WGL and WWIL, to which I refer below, was contradictory and, in my view, at best incomplete. These matters lead me to conclude that I must approach Mrs Joo's evidence with caution. The findings that I have reached largely do not turn on whether evidence of Mr Yoo on the one hand or Mrs Joo on the other should be accepted. However, Mrs Joo's credit is relevant to her estoppel case to which I refer below.
Mrs Joo and WWIL also rely on a further affidavit of Mrs Joo and on the affidavit of Mr Kim. Mrs Joo's further affidavit and Mr Kim's affidavit both deal with a conference with counsel (to which I refer below) in identical terms (Joo 18.8.15 [19]-[22], Kim 1.10.15 [5]-[8]) including a common misspelling of the word "who's" in each of paragraph 20 of Mrs Joo's affidavit and paragraph 6 of Mr Kim's affidavit. Their evidence provided no real explanation of the identity between their respective evidence as to that conference and their solicitor also did not give evidence to explain that matter. Given the findings that I have reached on other grounds and the limited relevance of the conference with counsel to the proceedings as between Mr Yoo and the Defendants, as distinct from the Cross-Claims brought by Mrs Joo and WWIL against Mr Hong, it is not necessary to determine whether the substantial identity of those parts of Mr Kim's and Mrs Joo's affidavits had the consequence that their affidavit evidence was substantially devalued: compare Rosebanner Pty Ltd versus Energy Australia <case>; <case>-[91]. Mr Kim's evidence was also confusing as to whether he had seen his affidavit, at least in an English version, before he was cross-examined in the proceedings.

Events leading to the execution of the share transfer, its delivery to Mrs Joo on 1 May 2012
The events concerning Mr Yoo's acquisition of an interest in Toppro, and his execution of a share transfer in favour of WWIL, at the end of April and in or about May 2012 respectively, are addressed in paragraphs 1-5 of the FAS and the corresponding paragraphs of the Defence. Mrs Joo's and WWIL's Amended Cross-Claims also contain a somewhat discursive pleading that addresses the same events. Mr Yoo pleaded that, on 30 April 2012, he acquired all of the shares in Toppro (FAS [1]) and that allegation was admitted in paragraph 1 of the Defence filed by Mrs Joo and WWIL. That admission was made in error and, as I noted above, the parties proceeded in closing submissions on the basis that Mr Yoo had acquired only an equitable interest in those shares in the absence of registration of any interest in the shares in Toppro's share register.
Mr Yoo pleaded that, in May 2012, he was approached by Mr Choi, who was then a director of Topfield, with a proposal that he should sell his shares in Toppro and make a small profit in a short period of time (FAS [3]). Mrs Joo and WWIL admitted (Defence [3]) that Mr Yoo was approached by Mr Choi with a proposition that he execute a share transfer in favour of WWIL as purchaser of the shares and pleaded that: "(a) In or around April 2012 Yoo was selected by Topfield its servants or agents (including Choi) as transferee upon the sale of shares by the previous shareholder of Toppro. 
Legal fees incurred by Yoo in relation to the transfer of Toppro's shares to him were paid for out of Toppro's funds. 
In or around April 2012, Wealth Wisdom was selected as transferee of
Yoo's shareholding in Toppro by Topfield its servants or agents (including
Choi). 
At or around the time that Yoo acquired his shares in Toppro, Yoo agreed to sell his shares in Toppro to [WWIL] and signed the undated share transfer as a condition of the future supply of products to Toppro by
Topfield. 
The only profit to be made by Yoo at all material times was such profit as he might derive from the payment of US$12,000 consideration as s[t]ated on the executed undated share transfer."
Mr Yoo also pleaded (FAS [4]-[5]) that he agreed with Mr Choi to execute a transfer form partly in blank in favour of WWIL, which stated the consideration for the transfer of the shares to WWIL as USD12,000 and was undated but signed by Mr Yoo and that, also in May 2012, he gave the partly executed transfer document to Mr Choi, instructed Mr Choi that the document and its effect was to lapse in three months and instructed Mr Choi not to take any step in relation to the transfer document after the expiry of three months. Mrs Joo and WWIL relevantly plead that, on or about 30 April 2012, Mr Yoo parted with the possession of the undated share transfer to Mr Choi in his capacity as Topfield's agent and gave Mr Choi authority to transmit the undated executed share transfer to WWIL for completion (Joo Cross-Claim [3]-[4]; WWIL Second Amended Cross-Claim [4]-[6]). Mrs Joo pleads that the identity of the transferee of the shares was not material to Mr Yoo (Joo Cross-Claim [9]).
Mrs Joo in turn pleads the steps necessary for an equitable transfer of the shares (Amended Cross-Claim [10]) (on the premise that the shares, rather than an equitable interest in them, were in issue) namely that: "By signing the undated Share Transfer and parting with possession of it to
Choi:  a. Yoo permitted the Share Transfer and/or agreement to transfer the shares to be completed and registered at a time which was entirely at the discretion of Topfield, its servants or agents and/or the transferee, its servants or agents;  b. Yoo armed the transferee, its servants or agents, with all that was necessary to complete the Share Transfer and have it registered without further steps being taken by Yoo as transferor."
WWIL broadly pleads the same matters as Mrs Joo (WWIL Second Amended Cross-Claim [1]-[9]), then pleads matters as to the structure of WGL and WWIL (WWIL Second Amended Cross-Claim [10]-[11]); then advances allegations as to suspicious banking transactions in Toppro and an unusual stock transfer to Toppro (Second Amended Cross-Claim [13]-[14]) which were not established by evidence led in these proceedings and may be the subject of other proceedings between the parties.
I now turn to the evidence concerning these matters. The circumstances in which Mr Yoo acquired an interest in Toppro is addressed only in his evidence, since Mr Choi, who played a significant role in the transactions, had subsequently resigned from Topfield and was not called by either party. Mr Yoo's evidence in his first affidavit (Yoo 23.6.14 [3]) is that: "In around March 2012, I execute a transfer of sh[a]reholding form. The original form was a transfer to [WWIL] incorporated in the British Virgin
Islands. The form was not dated. I was required to sign as a director which I was not."
In his second affidavit dated 27 June 2014, Mr Yoo's evidence is that he purchased the shares in Toppro on 30 April 2012 (Yoo 27.6.14 [9]). As I have noted above, Mr Yoo then acquired only an equitable interest in those shares. Mr Yoo's evidence is that he was considering selling the shares in May 2012 and was then approached by Mr Choi (Yoo 27.6.14 [10]). Those events were connected in a manner that Mr Yoo's second affidavit did not make clear, which was addressed in his third affidavit.
In his third affidavit dated 27 July 2015, Mr Yoo gave an expanded account of events, and referred to an approach to him in March 2012 from Mr Choi, who had previously been his neighbour in Korea. Mr Yoo's evidence is that Mr Choi said he was looking for a person to acquire the shares in Toppro and, if Mr Yoo had USD10,000 to invest, he could buy all of the shares of Toppro and "sell them in a couple of weeks for USD12,000" (Yoo 27.7.15 [20]). Mr Yoo refers to a further meeting with Mr Choi at the office of Toppro's accountants where he gave USD10,000 in cash to Mr Yu, the previous shareholder (or, more precisely, the then holder of the equitable interest in the shares) for which he was given a receipt. Mr Yoo then refers to a meeting the next day, 1 May 2012, where Mr Choi said "I will now sell your shares for USD12,000 and you will make a quick USD2,000 profit" and produced a share transfer form to him and said that Mr Yoo must sign that form before Mr Choi could sell his shares (Yoo 27.7.15 [27]). The original transfer form signed by Mr Yoo recorded the name of the company which was the subject of the transfer, Toppro, referred to the consideration payable of USD12,000, identified the transferee as WWIL, left blank the address of the transferee, and was signed by Mr Yoo, albeit over a reference to "sole director" of the transferor rather than in the space provided for an individual transferor to sign.
Mr Yoo's evidence is that he sought an explanation of the share transfer form and the reference to WWIL in it, and Mr Choi advised that Topfield did not want to hold the shares in Toppro for reasons to do with Korean law and taxation and Mr Yoo said (Yoo 27.7.15 [32]): "This is making me slightly uncomfortable because British Virgin Islands is a tax haven but I guess if they are going to buy the shares quickly it doesn't matter to me. If they don't I might be quite happy to hold onto the shares since you told me [Toppro] was turning over $10m." 
Mr Yoo in turn refers to a further conversation with Mr Choi (Yoo 27.7.15 [33]) as follows: "[Choi] said to me, "They are going to act on buying your shares and they will do it quickly, trust me." I said to [Choi], "I need you to give me
USD12,000 within the next three months. I need that money." [Choi] said to me, "That is not a problem. It should all be fine."
In cross-examination, Mr Yoo accepted that he had signed the share transfer form shortly after he acquired the shares, although both the cross-examination and Mr Yoo's answers appeared to be based on an incorrect premise that there was then a dealing with a legal interest in the shares; he accepted, as he had accepted in his affidavit evidence, that he had been told by Mr Choi that Topfield required the signature of a share transfer as a condition of future supply; he accepted that he agreed to WWIL being shown as transferee because that was what Mr Choi had put on the share transfer form; and he accepted that the identity of the transferee did not matter to him; and that he gave possession of the share transfer to Mr Choi, knowing that Mr Choi would give that form to WWIL, and anticipating (reasonably enough) that he would be paid the promised consideration of USD12,000 when that occurred, and that he was content for Mr Choi to give that form to WWIL as soon as Mr Choi wished so that Mr Yoo could receive that money (T23-25).
The fact that Mr Yoo was permitted to buy the shares in Toppro (although, as I noted above, he in fact acquired only an equitable interest in them) and the proposal that he would then sell them to a nominee of Topfield within a relatively short time were plainly connected. However, none of the parties conducted the proceedings on the express basis that Mr Yoo was, to use a term used in the context of takeovers, "warehousing" the Toppro shares for Topfield for Korean tax or other reasons, although Mrs Joo referred in her cross-examination to shareholders "on paper" in a manner that hinted at that possibility. I do not proceed on that basis where the parties were not prepared expressly to put or acknowledge that possibility.
Mr Choi subsequently delivered the share transfer form executed by Mr Yoo and other documents to Mrs Joo. These matters are addressed only in Mrs Joo's evidence, since, as I noted above, Mr Choi was not called by either party. Mrs Joo referred to a previous conversation with Mr Choi in early 2012 about difficulties with the then chief executive of Toppro, Mr Yu, who advised her in February 2012 that he no longer wanted to be the shareholder in Toppro. Mrs Joo then referred in her affidavit evidence to a discussion with her accountant, in February 2012, who discouraged her from purchasing the shares in Toppro (Joo 18.8.15) by reference to auditing regulations which would be imposed and complicated taxation issues. As I noted above, Mrs Joo substantially abandoned that evidence in cross-examination.
Mrs Joo's affidavit evidence was that, with Mr Choi's assistance, she had previously caused WWIL to be registered in the British Virgin Islands in March 2012 and caused its holding company, WGL, to be registered in the British Virgin Islands in April 2012 (Joo 18.8.15 [9]). As I will note below, Mrs Joo substantially departed from that evidence in cross-examination. Mrs Joo's affidavit evidence was also that, on 30 April 2012, Mr Choi attended her offices and said to her that (Joo 18.8.15 [10]): "I have an agreement for the sale of shares in Toppro from In Sang Yu to Il
Nam Yoo. I also have another document, which is a share transfer form that Il
Nam Yoo signed. It is a share transfer form to [WWIL]. Since [WGL] is the owner of [WWIL] and you are the director of [WGL], if you sign the form then the transfer is complete. When you sign this form you become the owner of
Toppro." 
It is not necessary to express any view as to the correctness of Mr Choi's view as to whether Mrs Joo, as shareholder and director in WGL, could sign documents on behalf of WWIL, where WGL and not Mrs Joo was a director of that company. It is, however, important to note that Mr Choi's advice to Mrs Joo did not indicate any intention of Mr Yoo (or indeed Mr Choi, to the extent he was speaking on Mr Yoo's behalf) that the share transfer be immediately effective, but contemplated that it would in future be completed if Mrs Joo signed it, and that she would in future become the owner of the shares in
Toppro when she signed that form. In their opening submissions, Mrs Joo and
WWIL similarly characterised that conversation as having the effect that "when
Mrs Joo signs the form she becomes the owner of Toppro".
Mrs Joo's evidence in cross-examination (which she characterised as involving a "small difference in terms of meaning") was that she did not know for what purpose WGL and WWIL were established and that, around March 2012, Mr Choi brought documents in relation to those companies to her (T59-60). Mrs Joo's further evidence in cross-examination (T61), also inconsistent with her affidavit evidence, was that Mr Choi had "rocked up" to her office in March or April 2012 with the incorporation documents for WGL and WWIL and the transfer form from Mr Yoo to WWIL, and that there had been no previous discussion about these matters and she was not expecting these documents; he had given her the documents and she had made little or no further inquiry, and he had then left. Mrs Joo's evidence in cross-examination was also that she had not had a previous conversation with Mr Choi about a transfer of shares and that she did not have a discussion about the documents he brought with him (T73). Mrs Joo said that she did not ask further questions of Mr Choi because she did not consider that it was prudent to be involved in business in the British Virgin Islands (T79); that view was, of course, entirely inconsistent with Mrs Joo's acquiring ownership of two British Virgin Islands companies, WGL and WWIL, since any lack of prudence in that course was hardly reduced by making no further inquiry as to why it was occurring. Mrs Joo's evidence, later in her cross-examination, was again that Mr Choi had just left the documents with her and that there had been only a single conversation about the share transfer (T80-81).
I am conscious of the possibility of cultural differences and I also recognise that Mrs Joo referred in cross-examination to cultural matters that might have limited the extent to which she would seek or be given an explanation of these matters by Mr Choi. Having recognised those matters, it still seemed to me that Mrs Joo was a relatively sophisticated businesswoman and she obviously has sufficient experience to conduct a business in Australia. I am not satisfied that, even allowing for cultural differences, a relatively sophisticated Korean businesswoman would allow herself to become the proprietor of two British Virgin Islands companies, and be provided a transfer of all of the shares in an Australian business, without seeking any explanation of the basis of the transactions. I recognise that Mrs Joo's lack of inquiry as to these matters might have been more readily explicable if she had understood Mr Choi to be implementing the transaction at the direction of her husband, the chief executive of Topfield, and understood the transaction to have been organised by her husband, possibly for Korean tax purposes. However, that was not Mrs Joo's evidence. On balance, after allowing for cultural differences, I am unable to accept Mrs Joo's evidence of the conversations with Mr Choi and particularly of her lack of inquiry as to the basis of the transactions.

The extension of the time period for completion in August 2012 and the further conversation in late 2012
Mr Yoo pleads (FAS [6]-[7]) that, in August 2012, Mr Choi requested and he allowed an extension of three months to effect the share transfer and that Mr Choi's authority to act upon the share transfer had been revoked, and Mr Choi was or ought to have been aware of that matter, by the commencement of 2013. Mrs Joo and WWIL do not admit those matters in their Defence to the Fourth Amended Statement of Claim and affirmatively plead that Mr Yoo authorised, consented to or permitted Mr Choi to transmit the executed and undated share transfer to a transferee selected by Mr Choi on behalf of Topfield, and, on or about 30 April 2012 or 1 May 2012, Mr Choi transmitted the executed undated transfer to Mrs Joo (Defence [6]-[7]). I have addressed the latter claim above.
Mr Yoo's evidence (Yoo 27.7.15 [35]) is that he had a further conversation with Mr Choi, three months after his initial signature of the transfer form, in late July or early August 2015, in which Mr Choi indicated that Topfield was pressuring Mr Choi to keep the transfer form for a further three months until WWIL could sign the form; Mr Yoo indicated that he really needed the money and would have to borrow it from someone else; and he extended the time for execution of the transfer form and payment of the money for a further three months and said: "[Okay], but I can only give you another three months. If the deal is not going through, I am keeping the shares."
Mr Yoo's evidence (Yoo 27.7.15 [37]) is that he then had a further conversation with Mr Choi in late 2012, after he did not receive payment, when he advised Mr Choi that he was keeping the shares and was now the shareholder of Toppro and Mr Choi responded (in a conversation admitted with a limiting order under [s 136](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s136.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) as proof of what was said and not as proof of the asserted fact) that: "British Virgin Islands Company and Toppro understand that the deal about buying your share is finished. BVI Company and Topfield understand your position. I explained to them that the deal is finished and they understand that. I hope your shares in Toppro work out well for you."
Mr Yoo's evidence of these conversations was not falsified in cross-examination or by other evidence and is supported by the evidence that Mr Yoo thereafter took steps that are consistent with his believing that he had a real economic interest in Toppro that would be advanced by promoting its profitability. It seems to me that the revocation of Mr Choi's authority to effect a sale in late 2012 was sufficient to bring any authority of WWIL to act upon the executed transfer form to an end, notwithstanding that there is no evidence that it was communicated to Mrs Joo, on the basis of my finding below that Mr Choi was acting as agent for WWIL, as well as Topfield and (in a more limited capacity) Mr Yoo during that period.

Mr Choi's role
Mr Young submits that Mr Choi was Topfield's and WWIL's agent in obtaining the transfer form and securing Mr Yoo's participation in the transaction at the instigation of Topfield and WWIL. Conversely, Mr Neil submits that Mr Choi was acting only as agent for Mr Yoo, that Mr Choi acted within authority in passing the share transfer form to Mrs Joo on or about 1 May 2012 for the purpose of effecting the sale of the shares and that Mr Yoo is bound by that step. Mrs Joo and WWIL rely on the rule that a principal is bound by the act of its agent, in a dealing with a person who deals in good faith with the agent without knowledge of the limitation of his authority: Lysaght Bros & Co Ltd versus Falk [1905] HCA 7; (1905) 2 CLR 421 at 431, 433.
I am satisfied that Mr Choi was acting, at least in a limited capacity, as agent for Mr Yoo to the extent that he was authorised to act for Mr Yoo in attending to matters relating to the proposed sale of the shares in Toppro to WWIL. However, I am also satisfied that Mr Choi was acting as agent for Topfield and WWIL in a significantly wider role, which involved arranging for Mr Yu's transfer of his interest in the shares to Mr Yoo, who it was then contemplated (at least by Topfield and Mr Choi) would hold them for a period until they were transferred to WWIL. The fact that Mr Choi was acting as agent for Topfield is admitted by Mrs Joo and WWIL in several paragraphs of their Defence and Cross-Claims to which I have referred above. I infer that Mr Choi was acting as agent for WWIL from, inter alia, Mrs Joo's evidence that she had no involvement in the incorporation of WWIL and that he delivered the incorporation documents relating to WWIL to her, which can only have been done with its authority and took steps, on its behalf, to have it nominated as transferee on the share transfer form. That finding is consistent with, but does not depend on, the fact that Mr Choi also negotiated with Mr Yoo in August 2012 for an extension of time for the share transfer to WWIL to be executed and consideration paid, and spoke for WWIL (as well as Topfield) in acknowledging to Mr Yoo that the transaction was over in late 2012. (As I noted above, the evidence of the latter conversation was admitted on a limited basis.)
The fact that Mr Choi acted as agent for Mr Yoo (as proposed vendor of his interest in the shares), for WWIL (as proposed purchaser of Mr Yoo's interest in the shares) and for Topfield involved a fundamental conflict of interest on his part and the existence of that conflict of interest would likely have prevented a third party such as Mrs Joo from relying on any ostensible authority which Mr Choi otherwise had as Mr Yoo's agent: Lysaght Bros & Co Ltd versus Falk above; Combulk Pty Ltd versus TNT Management Pty Ltd <case>; <case>. However, Mr Young did not put a submission that the circumstances of the dealing between Mr Choi and Mrs Joo affected the extent of Mr Choi's ostensible authority (see particularly T184). I place no reliance on that conflict or its effect on ostensible authority where it was not addressed by the parties in submissions.

The parties' submissions as to the effect of execution of the share transfer and its delivery to Mrs Joo
The Defendants' opening outline of submissions proceeded on the basis that Mr Yoo was initially the legal owner of the shares, in contending that Mrs Joo had become the owner of the shares, or alternatively WWIL had become the owner of the shares, by reason of the execution of a "proper instrument of transfer" by Mr Yoo, and on the basis that there was nothing further to be done by Mr Yoo to effect the transfer of shares by registration. The Defendants also made detailed submissions as to the regime for transfer of shares by registration under [Pt 7.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p7.11) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) and pointed out that Toppro did not have a constitution and [s 1072F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1072f.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) therefore applied as a replaceable rule, with the consequence that Mr Yoo would not acquire legal title to the shares that Mr Yu had sold to him until a transfer to him was registered and his name was entered in the register of members in respect of the shares. As Mrs Joo and WWIL point out, no register of members was kept by Toppro until late September or early October 2014 (Joo 18.8.15 [42]). This had the consequence, later acknowledged by counsel in closing submissions, that Mr Yoo did not become the legal owner of the shares and held only an equitable interest in them.
The Defendants also made detailed submissions as to the concept of a "proper instrument of transfer" for the purposes of [s 1071B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1071b.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/). The question whether the share transfer executed by Mr Yoo, as later amended by Mrs Joo and further amended by WWIL, could constitute a "proper instrument of transfer" does not arise because no question of a transfer of a legal interest in the shares arises. The Defendants also made submissions as to the circumstances in which Toppro would have the right to refuse to register Mrs Joo or WWIL as holder of the shares in Toppro under [s 1073F(4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s1073f.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/), by reason of any objection to the form of the share transfer lodged with Toppro. That issue also does not arise, because the share transfer could not take effect under [Pt 7.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p7.11) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) where Mr Yoo was not legal owner of the shares at any relevant time.
In their opening submissions, the Defendants submitted that equitable title in the shares passed irrevocably on 30 April or 1 May 2012 and referred to authorities that dealt with the equitable assignment of a legal interest rather than the equitable assignment of an equitable interest: for example, Anning versus Anning <case>; (1907) 4 CLR 1049, Corin versus Patton <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 540] ("Howard-Smith") in that respect, to which I will refer below. They submit that WWIL disposed of its equitable interest in the shares to Mrs Joo by means of the share transfer form as amended on 20 June 2014 or alternatively to Mrs Joo on 9 September 2014.
In their closing submissions, the Defendants submitted that, on or about 1 May 2012, there was an equitable disposition of Mr Yoo's equitable interest in the shares in Toppro to WWIL by reason of his having provided the undated share transfer form to WWIL (or, more accurately, to Mr Choi who provided it to Mrs Joo); his having provided that undated share transfer form because he had been told by Mr Choi that it was a condition of future supply by Topfield to Toppro; his having agreed to WWIL being shown as transferee on the share transfer form; and his evidence that he was content for Mr Choi to give that form to WWIL as soon as he wished so that he could receive that money. The Defendants relied on Howard-Smith to contend that, on 1 May 2012, there was an equitable disposition of Mr Yoo's equitable interest in the whole of the shares in Toppro to WWIL as a result of Mr Yoo signing the share transfer naming WWIL as transferee and Mr Choi, as Mr Yoo's agent, delivering the share transfer to "Mrs Joo on behalf of WWIL". There is, however, more than a degree of unreality in the proposition that Mrs Joo was acting as agent of WWIL on 1 May 2012, where her evidence in cross-examination was that she had no knowledge of that company until Mr Choi "rocked up" on that date and advised her of its existence.
In his oral closing submissions, Mr Neil accepted that the essential premise of that submission was that Mr Yoo had an immediate intention to dispose of the equitable interest of the shares on 1 May 2012 and relied on the signature of the transfer, the handing over of the transfer form to Mr Choi, knowing that Mr Choi would hand it on, and Mr Yoo's affidavit evidence in that respect (T195). Mr Neil also submitted that, irrespective of whether Mr Choi was Mr Yoo's agent, or Mr Yoo had held him out as having authority, Mr Yoo himself had evinced the relevant intention to transfer the equitable interest in the shares, by providing the signed document to Mr Choi and knowing that Mr Choi would action it (T196). Mr Neil submitted that Mr Yoo's conduct, and the delivery by Mr Choi of the share transfer to WWIL, amounted to an intention immediately to dispose of the shares, and not a revocable mandate, and that any revocation after the share transfer form was provided to Mrs Joo was too late and that, in any event, no revocation occurred (T198-199). Mr Neil also put WWIL's primary case on the basis that it ultimately did not need to rely on events after 1 May 2012, on the basis that WWIL had acquired its equitable interest in the shares on that date (T199). Mr Neil fairly accepted that Mrs Joo and WWIL were, at least at that time, volunteers who had not given consideration for any transfer of the equitable interest in the shares to them (T204).
In closing submissions, Mr Young referred to matters that might have supported the conclusion that there was no equitable transfer of a legal interest in the shares, had that been relevant. Mr Young also submitted that there was no equitable assignment as at 30 April or 1 May 2012, since the arrangement at that time contemplated that, at some future time, there would be a payment made to Mr Yoo and, implicitly, a transfer of shares (or, more accurately, the equitable interest in those shares) at that future time (T169). Mr Young also submitted that it had not been established that Mr Yoo had an immediate intention to dispose of the equitable interest on 1 May 2012 and that all that could be established was a revocable mandate, with the possibility that Mr Yoo would retain the shares if the transaction did not proceed (T208-209).

The principles applicable to an equitable assignment of equitable property
I turn now to the principles applicable to an equitable assignment of equitable property. In Re Casey's Patents; Stewart versus Casey [[1892] 1 Ch 104] at 118, Fry LJ observed that: [A]n agreement which does not exhibit the intention of the parties that the property shall pass at once does not take effect as an equitable assignment at once, but only when, from the terms of the agreement, it can be gathered that the intention of the parties is that the equitable property shall pass." 
In Re Williams; Williams versus Ball [[1917] 1 Ch 1] at 8,
Warrington LJ observed that an equitable assignment could be effected by "any form of words which expressed a final and settled intention to transfer the property to the assignee".
In Howard-Smith above, Starke J similarly observed at 619-620 that: "A man may voluntarily dispose of his equitable estates or interests if he chooses to do so. No particular form of words is required for the purpose, but he must make clear his intention that he divests himself of the property and gives it over to another, or that he creates a trust in the property in favour of another. A mere mandate from a principal to his agent gives no right or interest in the subject of the mandate." 
In closing submissions, the Defendants relied primarily on the principles as stated by Dixon J in Howard-Smith above at 621-622. Dixon J there observed that a voluntary disposition of an equitable interest may take one of at least three forms. The first and third forms, which are not presently relevant, are a statement that the donor will hold the equitable interest upon trust for a beneficiary and a direction given to a trustee to hold equitable property upon trust for the intended donee. The second form of disposition, which is relevant, was described by Dixon J as follows: "the disposition may consist of a sufficient expression of an immediate intention to make over to the persons intended to benefit the equitable interest vested in the donor, or some less interest carved out of it. In that case communication to the trustee or person in whom the legal title to the property is vested is not required in order effectually to assign the equitable property ... Nor does it appear necessary that the intention to pass the equitable property shall be communicated to the assignee. What is necessary is that there shall be an expression of intention then and there to set over the equitable interest, and, perhaps, it should be communicated to someone who does not receive the communication under confidence or in the capacity only of an agent for the donor." 
It is also necessary to have regard here to the distinction between an immediately effective assignment of property and a mandate or authority that has effect only unless and until it is revoked, to which Dixon J referred in
Howard-Smith at 623-624, in identifying the question whether the instruction in that case was merely an "authorisation having no dispositive effect until the trustee acts upon it".
In Re McArdle (dec'd) [[1951] 1 Ch 669] at 673, Evershed MR approved the summary of the relevant principle in Snell's Principles of Equity (22nd ed, pp 57-58) that: "[value] would seem to be unnecessary ... for an assignment of an equitable [chose] in action ... provided that the assignment is complete [and] perfect; there is no reason why a man should not be able to give away an equitable interest as freely as he can give away a legal interest" (emphasis added).

The Master of the Rolls went on to observe that (at 674): "The sentence in that passage, 'provided that the assignment is complete and perfect', is important; also the further sentence, 'there is no reason why a man should not be able to give away an equitable interest'. What the writer is saying there, and I accept it, is this: if what is done amounts to a gift, complete and perfect, of a subject-matter which is an equitable chose in action, then there is no reason in principle or in authority why the donee should not take the benefit just as much as he will if the giver gives him a pound note and puts it in his hand. Since the transaction is thus perfect, the question of consideration becomes irrelevant, for consideration is only necessary to support the assertion of a right to have made perfect something which is not yet perfect - for example, a contractual right." 
Jenkins LJ similarly observed at (676-7) that: "I am further prepared to accept the proposition that an equitable assignment of an existing interest in property of a character capable of being assigned may be a valid and binding assignment notwithstanding that it is made voluntarily - that is to say, notwithstanding that it has no consideration to support it and is in the nature of a mere gift ... 
But I accept that last proposition with this reservation: a voluntary equitable assignment, to be valid, must be in all respects complete and perfect ... with no further act on the part of the assignor remaining to be done to perfect the assignee's title. Failing these conditions, the voluntary assignment suffers the fate of other incomplete gifts: the donor has a locus poenitentiae and can change his mind at any time. 
No question of conscience enters into the matter, for there is no consideration, and there is nothing dishonest on the part of an intending donor if he chooses to change his mind at any time before the gift is complete." 
That decision is cited without criticism in the discussion of equitable assignment in ELG Tyler et al, Fisher & Lightwood's Law of Mortgage, (3rd ed 2014, LexisNexis Butterworths) at 252.
In Norman versus Federal Commissioner of Taxation <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 9], Bryson J in turn addressed the distinction between an assignment and a revocable mandate and held that the provision to a donee of a signed blank withdrawal form, together with permission to access money in an account whenever he needed it, was only an authorisation, not an assignment, and was capable of revocation by the donor's death before it was acted on.
Professor Worthington in turn summarises the effect of the case law in Personal Property Law ((2000, Oxford) at 262) as follows: "Since promises to give cannot be enforced, if the donor acts before either legal or equitable title to the property has passed to the donee, then recall is possible." 
In JD Heydon et al, Meagher, Gummow & Lehane's Equity Doctrines and
Remedies, (5th ed 2015, LexisNexis Butterworths) at [6.425] the learned authors also observe that, unless there is an intention to divest the assignor's rights and vest them in the assignee, there is not an assignment and merely a revocable mandate or authority.

Whether an equitable assignment was effected by the execution and delivery of the share transfer form
It seems to me that Mr Yoo's acceding to Topfield's requirement that a transfer be signed, referred to in his first affidavit dated 23 June 2014, did not indicate any intention immediately to dispose of his equitable interest in the shares. To the contrary, the course required by Topfield seems to have contemplated that WWIL could take a transfer of Mr Yoo's interest in the shares at some future point that would be convenient to it and, implicitly, would leave Mr Yoo holding the equitable interest in the shares until that occurred. Mr Yoo's second affidavit dated 27 June 2014, indicating that he signed the share transfer, does not take matters further. Mr Yoo's account of his conversations with Mr Choi set out in his third affidavit dated 27 July 2015 seems to me to be inconsistent with any immediate intention on his part to dispose of the equitable interest in the shares, or to effect a completed transfer of the equitable interest in those shares, so far as Mr Choi suggested that the form be signed so that he could, implicitly in the future, sell Mr Yoo's shares. Mr Yoo's statement that he might be quite happy to hold onto the shares if WWIL did not buy them quickly is also wholly inconsistent with his having an intention immediately and completely to dispose of his interest in the shares on 30 April or 1 May 2012, which would necessarily exclude a possibility of continuing to hold them if WWIL did not acquire them thereafter.
Assuming, without deciding, that Mrs Joo's evidence as to her conversation with Mr Choi were to be accepted, that conversation also would not indicate any immediate or complete disposition of the equitable interests in the shares by Mr Choi acting with Mr Yoo's actual or ostensible authority. At best, Mrs Joo's evidence is that Mr Choi advised her that she could in future bring about a transfer of the shares by executing the transfer form. I have referred above to paragraph 10 of Mrs Joo's affidavit evidence which indicated that Mr Choi's advice to her was directed to the share transfer having future effect, if she signed it, not immediate effect.
Mrs Joo confirmed that evidence in cross-examination, indicating that Mr Choi had told her that "if I sign this document, so any time Toppro will be, will belong to me" (T73) (emphasis added). That evidence is consistent with both conditionality, in the reference to "if I sign", and futurity, in the reference to "any time" and "will belong". Mrs Joo's evidence in cross-examination (T80) was also that Mr Choi told her that: "this document could be signed by me any time that I wanted and the company will become mine" (emphasis added).

That formulation also indicates that Mr Choi's advice to Mrs Joo was not that
Mr Yoo had, at that point, transferred his interest in the shares to her, but that she could bring about such a transfer if she chose in the future. That is also the effect of Mrs Joo's evidence in cross-examination that, when Mr Choi brought the share transfer documents to her, he advised that "if I sign it the shares will be transferred to me" and that the shares "will be transferred to me once I sign it" (T81) (emphasis added). Mrs Joo reconfirmed her understanding of Mr Choi's advice in cross-examination (T86) as having been that, at any time she signed the share transfer form, the
Toppro shares would be transferred to her. Mrs Joo also confirmed in cross- examination (T96) that Mr Choi had told her, on bringing the share transfer form to her that, "this document as soon as it is signed by you will transfer the shares to you" (emphasis added). A representation by Mr Choi in that form indicated that a transfer would become effective, not immediately, but sometime in the future upon a further act by Mrs Joo.
In these circumstances, the requirements identified in the case law to which I have referred above, including Howard-Smith, for a disposition of equitable property were not satisfied as at 30 April or 1 May 2012, either by any communication by Mr Yoo to Mr Choi or by any communication by Mr Choi to Mrs Joo. The conversations to which I have referred above do not indicate an "immediate intention" in the part of Mr Yoo to convey the relevant equitable interest to WWIL, still less to Mrs Joo.
Alternatively, the Defendants submit there was an equitable assignment to Mrs Joo on or about 1 May 2012, relying on the proposition that Mr Yoo agreed to transfer the shares to whomever Mr Choi selected as transferee. I do not accept that submission. That submission fails because, for the reasons noted above, it has not been established that Mr Yoo intended to bring about an immediate disposition of the equitable interest in the shares. Mr Yoo's acceptance that he agreed to transfer the shares to whomever Mr Choi selected as transferee does not take the matter further, where that agreement was without consideration and was revocable and Mr Choi had selected WWIL (rather than Mrs Joo) as transferee by inserting its name on the share transfer form executed by Mr Yoo.
In closing submissions, Mr Young also drew attention to several decisions that are relevant to circumstances in which an instrument may be delivered subject to a condition or in escrow, including Spalla versus St George Wholesale Finance Pty Ltd <case>; (1999) FCR 359, Neonbrook Pty Ltd versus Thusi Pty Ltd <case> and Saba versus Moit Projects <case> It is not necessary to determine any question referable to those cases, given the requirements for an equitable assignment of equitable property without consideration, to which I have referred above. Mr Young also submitted that the share transfer form was not itself an agreement to transfer the shares and any agreement was made between Mr Yoo and Mr Choi. It is not necessary to address that submission since the Defendants ultimately did not rely on a contractual claim, at least as at 30 April or 1 May 2012. There would also have been no consideration for such an agreement since WWIL had not then paid or made any enforceable promise to pay the amount recorded in the share transfer. Mr Young also submitted that Mr Yoo would not have involved himself in subsequent activities with Toppro in 2013 and 2014 if he believed that the shares in it were about to be transferred to WWIL. While that proposition is plausible, the characterisation of the initial transaction does not depend solely on Mr Yoo's subjective intent, and I give little weight to this matter.

The alteration to the share transfer form in favour of Mrs Joo in June 2014
As I noted above, Mr Yoo seeks declarations that a transfer or purported transfer of shares in Toppro to Mrs Joo on 20 June 2014 is void. By her Amended Cross-Claim filed on 21 April 2015, Mrs Joo conversely seeks a declaration that a valid and binding agreement was formed on 20 June 2014 between Mr Yoo as transferor and Mrs Joo as transferee of all of Mr Yoo's shares in Toppro, and a declaration that she is the legal owner or equitable owner of all of the shares in Toppro.
In her Amended Cross-Claim, Mrs Joo pleads (Amended Cross-Claim [11]-[12]) that, on or about 20 June 2014, she signed the share transfer as transferee and paid an amount of USD12,000 to Mr Yoo. That was, of course, nearly two years after Mr Yoo had executed the share transfer and 18 months after he had advised Mr Choi that the transaction would not proceed. Mr Yoo attacks the execution of that document in the Fourth Amended Statement of Claim, pleading (FAS [9]-[12]) that Mrs Joo fraudulently and without authority altered the share transfer in several respects and that Mrs Joo did not seek Mr Yoo's consent to those alterations and, in pursuit of the alleged fraudulent intention, submitted the altered transfer document to the Australian Securities & Investments Commission. Paragraphs 13-16 of the Fourth Amended Statement of Claim plead matters relating to the cheques forwarded by Mrs Joo which I will address below and paragraph 16A pleads a claim for conversion in respect of the amendment of the share transfer form in June 2014.
Turning to the evidence as to events in June 2014, Mrs Joo's affidavit evidence is that she became a permanent resident of Australia in May 2014, that she was unable to obtain access to bank accounts of Toppro in June 2014 and that she attended a conference with a barrister retained by Mr Hong, a solicitor who appears to have been acting for Topfield rather than Mrs Joo, on 19 June 2014 at which the share transfer was discussed. Mrs Joo then refers in her affidavit evidence to the circumstances in which the share transfer form was executed, Mr Hong crossed out the reference to WWIL and her name was inserted in the share transfer on 20 June 2014 (Joo 18.8.15 [23]-[28]). The share transfer form was also dated with that date and Mrs Joo's address and her signature were inserted on it. It seems to me that, at this point, Mrs Joo intended to become the sole shareholder of Toppro in place of WWIL, as she accepted in cross-examination (T138). That course would have assisted in seeking to regain control of Toppro, for herself or possibly indirectly for Topfield, which she then took steps to do. Also on 20 June 2014, Mrs Joo instructed Mr Hong to send Mr Yoo a letter enclosing the altered and executed transfer form and a bank cheque for USD12,000 which was described as being made out to the "transferor" but was in fact made out, in error, to Mrs Joo. Little turns upon that because, at least by 25 June 2014, a replacement cheque made out to Mr Yoo was sent by Mr Hong and returned by Mr Yoo's solicitors.
Mrs Joo and WWIL rely on observations of Gleeson CJ in Wright versus Gasweld Pty Ltd [(1991) 22 NSWLR 317] at 323 to the effect that, if one party signs a document leaving it in blank and hands it over to the other party in that condition: "It may readily be inferred that there is authority in the other party to fill in the blanks in accordance with the prior agreement ... There may also be cases in which, even though there has been no express agreement between the parties upon the particular matter in respect of which the document remains blank at the time it is signed and handed over, nevertheless it is proper to conclude that the party handing it over had impliedly authorised the other party to fill up the blank." 
His Honour also there noted that the question whether authority to complete blanks in such a document had been conferred was ultimately a question of fact.
Mr Young accepted, in closing submissions, that at least in some circumstances, there may exist implied authority to complete blanks in a document so that it conforms to the parties' common contractual intention: Vaughan versus Duncan <case> In oral closing submissions, Mr Young submits that the change which Mrs Joo, or the solicitor, made to the identity of the transferee on 20 June 2014 was not authorised by Mr Yoo, and emphasises the express requirement in the share transfer form that any changes to that document be initialled by the seller and buyer, and submits that the change was material and altered the document contrary to, or at least outside, the authority given by Mr Yoo (T174). Mr Young also submitted, in oral closing submissions in reply, that any authority given by Mr Yoo did not extend to a change in the transferee shown on the share transfer form, inconsistent with the requirement of that form that Mr Yoo must approve any alterations to it (T211).
It does not seem to me that the case law relating to completion of blanks in documents assists the Defendants. The identity of the transferee in the share transfer form had been completed before it was signed by Mr Yoo, showing the transferee as WWIL, and the share transfer form expressly limited the manner in which alterations to it could be made. It does not seem to me that any authority to WWIL to complete any blanks in the share transfer form would authorise the changes to the identity of the transferee made by Mrs Joo or on her behalf. The question whether the identity of the transferee was subjectively significant to Mr Yoo, on which WWIL and Mrs Joo place some emphasis, does not seem to me to be of assistance in determining the extent of authority conferred on Mrs Joo and WWIL, so far as Mr Yoo had provided the share transfer form to Mr Choi and Mr Choi had provided it to Mrs Joo. The authority given by Mr Yoo, and any ostensible authority given by Mr Yoo to Mr Choi, was confined by the terms of the share transfer form to a transfer to WWIL or such other transferee as was reflected in an amendment executed by Mr Yoo or, possibly, by Mr Choi on his behalf.
Mr Young also submits, and I accept, that that change did not reflect any existing contractual intention reflected in the share transfer form executed by Mr Yoo in favour of WWIL. To the extent that Mrs Joo presses a contractual claim arising out of the events in June 2014, it does not seem to me that the agreement alleged by Mrs Joo to have arisen in June 2014 can be established, where the offer made by Mr Yoo under the share transfer form was for the transfer of the shares to WWIL, and that offer had been revoked and that matter communicated to Mr Choi as WWIL's agent well before any acceptance of that offer by Mrs Joo. That revocation terminated the revocable mandate that had previously been conferred on Mr Choi and, once WWIL was on notice that Mr Choi's actual authority to complete the transaction had been terminated, there was also no room for the application of principles of ostensible authority: Lysaght Bros & Co Ltd versus Falk above at 431; Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd versus Frenmast Pty Ltd <case> at <case>.
Mrs Yoo and WWIL also submit that, by authorising Mr Choi to effect the sale of the shares pursuant to the share transfer form naming WWIL as transferee, Mr Yoo impliedly consented to the completion of the transfer of shares by Mrs Joo, where WWIL was the alter ego of Mrs Joo. Mr Neil referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in Tszyu versus Fightvision Pty Ltd; Fightvision Pty Ltd versus Onisforou <case>; (1999) 47 NSWLR 473 at <case>-[83] to support the proposition that the Court could treat Mrs Joo as acting through the corporate entities which she controlled (T199-200). Mr Neil also referred to the decision in Whitlam versus Australian Securities and Investments Commission <case>; [(2003) 57 NSWLR 559] in respect of the completion of proxy forms, but it seems to me that the issue in that case is too distant from the issues in this case to provide any assistance. Mr Young responds that, even if it could be said that in some circumstances the shareholder in a holding company was the alter ego of its subsidiary, that could not be said of Mrs Joo and WWIL given her evidence that she had no knowledge of the circumstances in which she acquired an interest in those entities prior to Mr Choi delivering the relevant documents to her on 1 May 2012 (T167). Mr Young also submits, in oral submissions in reply, that the suggestion that Mrs Joo was the alter ego of WGL and WWIL cannot be reconciled with her own evidence as to the circumstances in which she acquired an interest in those entities (T209).
It also does not seem to me that it has been established that WGL and WWIL were Mrs Joo's alter ego. So far as WWIL is concerned, Mrs Joo was the shareholder in and director of its holding company, WGL, and there is no reason to think that the law of the British Virgin Islands does not respect the distinction between a corporate entity, its holding company and the shareholder of its holding company. I am reinforced in that view where Mrs Joo, or at least those who set up WGL and WWIL in the British Virgin Islands, presumably adopted that structure because they did not wish Topfield or Mrs Joo to hold interests in Toppro directly, as distinct from through two corporate entities incorporated in that jurisdiction. I also do not accept that the completion of a share transfer to WWIL amounted to consent to the completion of a transfer of shares at any time in any form by Mrs Joo.
The Defendants also relied on the observations of Brereton J in Beck versus Tuckey Pty Ltd [[2007] NSWSC 1065] at [[18]](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b2007%5d%20NSWSC%201065#para18) that a valid assignment may vest an equitable interest in shares in a transferee, notwithstanding formal defects in the share transfer or a prohibition on registration of that transfer. It also does not seem to me that that principle assists the Defendants, where the relevant intention to effect an equitable assignment is not established, and the alteration of the transferee, without Mr Yoo's agreement as contemplated by the share transfer form, would be more than a mere formal defect.
Mr Young pointed, in submissions, to the absence of any explanation in Mrs Joo's affidavit evidence as to why no action was taken in relation to the share transfer form from April 2012 until June 2014. It may be that such an explanation is to be inferred from Mrs Joo's evidence that she became a permanent resident of Australia in May 2014, or from the fact that difficulties arose in respect of her wish to access Toppro's bank accounts at that time. Mrs Joo's evidence in cross-examination was that, prior to June 2014, she did not seek advice as to what she should do in relation to the documents she had been given by Mr Choi, because she had "forgotten about them" (T77) and that "perhaps [she] was a fool", but she did not "calculate the value of the documents" (T77). Given the findings that I have reached, the adequacy of Mrs Joo's explanation for that delay is not material to the determination of the proceedings.

The fraud claim against Mrs Joo
As I noted above, Mr Yoo also pleads (FAS [9]-[10]) that, on or before 20 June 2014, Mrs Joo's alteration to the share transfer form was fraudulent. The relevant pleadings are as follows: "9 On or before 20 June 2014, [Mrs Joo] fraudulently and without the authority of [Mr Yoo] altered or caused to be altered the transfer document.
[particulars of alterations made omitted]  In relation to the obtaining of the document by [Mrs Joo] and the alterations made to the document, [Mrs Joo] acted to give effect to a fraudulent purpose to deprive [Mr Yoo] of his shares in circumstances where [Mrs Joo] knew that [Mr Yoo] had never contemplated a transfer of shares to [Mrs Joo] and where further, [Mrs Joo] was aware that any authority which had been given by [Mr Yoo] in 2012 to [Mr] Choi in relation to the possible transfer to [WWIL] had long expired."
The elements of the pleaded claim are, first, that Mrs Joo had a fraudulent intent in altering the share transfer form in June 2014, and that she did so without authority; second, that she had a fraudulent purpose of depriving Mr Yoo of his shares; third, that she knew that Mr Yoo had not contemplated a transfer of shares to her; and, fourth, that she knew that any authority previously given by Mr Yoo in relation to the transfer to WWIL had lapsed. Although the parties did not direct substantive submissions to the legal content of this allegation, I understand it to involve at least a claim that Mrs Joo acted with something in the nature of personal dishonesty or moral turpitude or knowingly disregard of Mr Yoo's rights. In determining the allegation of fraud, I must apply the standard of proof as set out in [s 140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), which is consistent with that recognised in the general law in Briginshaw versus Briginshaw  <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] [Section 140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) provides that, in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities and that, without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account the nature of the cause of action, the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding and the gravity of the matters alleged. In Briginshaw versus Briginshaw above at 361-362, Dixon J observed that: "... [A]t common law no third standard of persuasion was definitely developed. Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved. 
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal." 
In Neat Holdings Pty Ltd versus Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd above at 450, the plurality similarly observed that: "The ordinary standard of proof required of a party who bears the onus in civil litigation in this country is proof on the balance of probabilities.
That remains so even where the matter to be proved involves criminal conduct or fraud. On the other hand, the strength of the evidence necessary to establish a fact or facts on the balance of probabilities may vary according to the nature of what it is sought to prove. Thus, authoritative statements have often been made to the effect that clear or cogent or strict proof is necessary 'where so serious a matter as fraud is to be found'. Statements to that effect should not, however, be understood as directed to the standard of proof. Rather, they should be understood as merely reflecting a conventional perception that members of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct and a judicial approach that a court should not lightly make a finding that, on the balance of probabilities, a party to civil litigation has been guilty of such conduct."
I am not satisfied to the requisite standard that the allegation of fraud made against Mrs Joo has been established. The first aspect of that allegation is that Mrs Joo had a fraudulent intent in altering the share transfer form in June 2012. The evidence to which I have referred above indicates the alterations to the share transfer were made after a conference with counsel, although there is no suggestion that the particular alterations were discussed with counsel. Mrs Joo had also consulted with Mr Hong, the solicitor who seems then to have been acting for Topfield, in respect of those alterations and he was involved in making them. Several of the alterations, including the insertion of an Australian Company Number for Toppro, an address for Mrs Joo (if she was properly named as transferee) and a date of purchase, arguably fall within an implied authority to complete blanks in the document to which I have referred above, although I have held that the change of the identity of the transferee did not. It does not seem to me to have been established that Mrs Yoo knowingly disregarded the limitation on alterations in the share transfer form, so far as the change of transferee was concerned, with any wrongful intent. It seems to me that the conduct of Mrs Joo in respect of the share transfer is equally consistent with a lack of understanding of the process for shares to be transferred and with error.
The second aspect of the pleaded claim for fraud is that Mrs Joo had a fraudulent purpose of depriving Mr Yoo of his shares. This claim seems to be derivative of the other allegations, but to the extent that it is an allegation that Mrs Joo had a knowingly dishonest state of mind, it does not seem to me to have been established to the requisite standard. The third aspect of the pleaded claim for fraud is that Mrs Joo knew that Mr Yoo had not contemplated a transfer of shares to her. Plainly, Mrs Joo knew that the share transfer form provided for a transfer of the shares to WWIL. However, it also does not seem to me that it has been established to the requisite standard that Mrs Joo had actual knowledge that she was not able to alter the name of the transferee, at least without Mr Yoo's authority, as distinct from holding an erroneous belief that she could do so.
The fourth aspect of the pleaded fraud claim is that Mrs Joo knew that any authority previously given by Mr Yoo in relation to the transfer to WWIL had lapsed. It also does not seem to me that that allegation has been established to the requisite standard, although it is plain that she made little or no inquiry as to the circumstances of the transfer. That matter undermines the claim for fraud, although it does not assist Mrs Joo in establishing an interest in the shares where no offer to transfer the shares to her (as distinct from WWIL) had been made by Mr Yoo by the share transfer form, which was not capable of acceptance by her at that time, and the only offer that had been made, to WWIL, had been revoked to WWIL's knowledge (by communication of that matter to its agent, Mr Choi) by that time. Accordingly, the claim in fraud is not established.

Other matters in respect of the execution of the transfer in June 2014
As I noted above, Mr Yoo pleads (FAS [16A]) a claim for conversion in respect of the amendment of the share transfer in June 2014. There was a debate between the parties as to whether a claim for conversion could be brought in respect of shares. That debate was not to the point, once it had been recognised that the interest in issue in these proceedings was an equitable interest in the shares rather than a legal interest in them. Mr Young rightly submitted that it would not be necessary to deal with this claim if the purported share transfer was invalid. It is not necessary to determine any question as to conversion.
In paragraph 16A of the Defence, in response to the claim in conversion, the Defendants plead that the share transfer was a deed as defined in <case> of the Conveyancing Act 1909 evidencing a contractual intention of Mr Yoo to transfer the shares and that, under <case> of the Conveyancing Act, any alteration made to the share transfer after Mr Yoo parted with it did not invalidate the share transfer, render it voidable or otherwise affect Mr Yoo's obligation to transfer his shares on payment of the stated consideration. It is also not necessary for me to deal with this defence, since I have held above that the transfer did not give rise to an assignment in equity at the time it was executed by Mr Yoo; WWIL cannot establish a claim in contract, since it knew, by its agent Mr Choi, of the revocation of any offer by Mr Yoo in late 2012; Mrs Joo cannot establish a claim in contract, since any offer was made to WWIL, not to her, and anything said by Mr Choi would have to be understood in that context; and no other basis for WWIL's or Mrs Joo's acquisition of an interest in the shares is established. In these circumstances, no question as to the validity of any alteration to the share transfer form or its impact arises.
In oral closing submissions, Mr Young raised a possibility of inconsistency between <case> of the Conveyancing Act and [Part 7.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p7.11) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/), so far as it deals with share transfers. It is also not necessary to address that question, since [Part 7.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/index.html#p7.11) has no application in this case to the transfer of an equitable interest in the shares.

Mrs Joo's estoppel case
In paragraphs 8(c)-(f) of their Defence, the Defendants plead a representation by Mr Yoo to the transferee that Mr Choi was authorised to transmit the share transfer form for completion by the transferee, plead that Mrs Joo completed the share transfer on 20 June 2014 in reliance on the representation, and that Mr Yoo is estopped from denying Mr Choi's authority to transmit the share transfer to Mrs Joo, or alternatively to WWIL, for completion of the share transfer. In cross-examination Mrs Joo referred to a belief which she held in June 2014 that "all the rights had been transferred to me" (T97).
The parties did not address substantive submissions to the matters that would need to be established to support an estoppel case. It is not clear whether the estoppel claimed was a proprietary estoppel, by encouragement or by acquiescence, involving a claim that Mrs Joo or WWIL had been led to alter her or its position to her or its detriment in a belief that he or she would have an interest in property of Mr Yoo, if an equitable interest in the Toppro shares would constitute property for that purpose. The elements of a representational estoppel were summarised in Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd versus Maher <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 387] at 328-429, where Brennan J observed that: "In my opinion, to establish an equitable estoppel, it is necessary for a plaintiff to prove that (1) the plaintiff assumed that a particular legal relationship then existed between the plaintiff and the defendant or expected that a particular legal relationship would exist between them and, in the latter case, that the defendant would not be free to withdraw from the expected legal relationship; (2) the defendant has induced the plaintiff to adopt that assumption or expectation; (3) the plaintiff acts or abstains from acting in reliance on the assumption or expectation; (4) the defendant knew or intended him to do so; (5) the plaintiff's action or inaction will occasion detriment if the assumption or expectation is not fulfilled; and (6) the defendant has failed to act to avoid that detriment whether by fulfilling the assumption or expectation or otherwise." 
In Commonwealth versus Verwayen [1990] HCA 39; (1990) 170 CLR 394 at 444, Deane J in turn observed that the law does not permit an unconscientious departure by one party: "from the subject matter of an assumption which has been adopted by the other party as the basis of some relationship, course of conduct, act or omission which would operate to that other party's detriment if the assumption be not adhered to ... ."
There is some authority that the principle of estoppel may, in an appropriate case, allow the completion of an imperfect gift: Riches versus Hogben [[1985] 2 Qd R 292] per Bathurst CJ at [113]ff. In that case, Bathurst CJ (with whom McColl and Meagher JJA agreed) also observed (at [123]) that: "It may be accepted ... that for a proprietary estoppel to arise there does not need to be complete certainty in the promise or representation said to give rise to the assumption or expectation. However, where the estoppel said to arise is not a proprietary estoppel, but one which precludes a person from denying that a contract came into existence, the certainty of the mutual promises said to constitute the contract seems to assume particular importance."
In Ashton versus Pratt above, the Chief Justice also noted, with reference to authority, that the relevant detriment is that which the party asserting the estoppel would suffer, as a result of her original change of position, if the assumption which induced it was repudiated by the party estopped. His Honour also noted (at [147]) that the detriment or harm required to ground an estoppel can be any material disadvantage, and that "[s]uch material disadvantage must be substantial, although it need not be quantifiable in the same way as an order of damages."
It is not necessary to address these complexities further in order to determine this matter and it seems to me preferable not to do so where the parties did not address them in submissions. It does not seem to me that the factual basis of Mrs Joo's estoppel claim has been established. I accept that the pleaded representation (that Mr Choi was authorised to transmit the share transfer form for completion by WWIL as the named transferor) was likely made by Mr Yoo's providing the share transfer form to Mr Choi, but such a representation does not extend, in the relevant circumstances, to a representation that that authority would continue indefinitely into the future or could not be revoked, as it was, by communicating that revocation to Mr Choi as WWIL's agent. It does not seem to me that any wider representation that Mr Choi was authorised to transmit the share transfer form for completion by Mrs Joo can be established given the terms of the share transfer form, and such a representation would also not have had an indefinite duration. I do not accept Mrs Joo's evidence as to the circumstances in which she obtained the relevant share transfer form and she has therefore not established any reliance on or any detriment suffered by reason of any representation made by Mr Yoo or by Mr Choi with Mr Yoo's actual or apparent authority.
Even apart from the difficulties with Mrs Joo's evidence of the circumstances in which she obtained the share transfer form, it seems to me that the statements made by Mr Choi, as set out in Mrs Joo's evidence and cross-examination, would have had to be understood by reference to the terms of the share transfer form that recorded the transferee as WWIL and required that any amendment to it be initialled by the transferor. It also seems to me that the balance of the evidence indicates that, when Mrs Joo executed the share transfer form, she gave no thought to any representation by Mr Choi or by the share transfer form, which could be attributed to Mr Yoo, but relied instead on the advice given and steps taken by Mr Hong, then acting for Topfield. The pleaded representation would also not provide a basis for the wider belief that Mrs Joo claimed to have in cross-examination that "all the rights had been transferred to me" (T97).
It also does not seem to me that Mrs Joo has established any relevant detriment arising from the alleged representation, since there is no evidence that she took any steps in reliance on it other than, on her case, the act of execution of the transfer form, and she was promptly informed after she had executed the transfer form that Mr Yoo denied its effectiveness so that subsequent steps were taken with knowledge of that matter. Mrs Joo is not in a worse position, by having executed the share transfer, if (which I have not accepted) she had done so in reliance on the representation than she would have been in had no such representation been made. This is not a case where she has, for example, undertaken substantial steps or incurred expenditures in reliance on the alleged representation, prior to being placed squarely on notice of Mr Yoo's position.

The amendment to the share transfer in favour of WWIL in September 2014
In the Fourth Amended Statement of Claim, Mr Yoo pleads (FAS [17]) WWIL's amendment and re-execution of the same share transfer form, on which it and then Mrs Joo had previously been identified as transferee, in September 2014, and this matter is admitted by WWIL. Mr Yoo also pleads (FAS [18]) that WWIL knew or was wilfully blind to the fact that Mr Yoo did not assent to or authorise the share transfer in September 2014, by reason of the passage of time since Mr Yoo had agreed to give the share transfer to Mr Choi, the circumstances of the alterations that had been made to it prior to its purported execution by WWIL, and the fact that WWIL made no inquiries of Mr Yoo in circumstances of a material alteration to the share transfer form. Mr Yoo also pleads (FAS [19]-[20]) that the alterations by WWIL were made fraudulently and without authority, and these allegations are denied by WWIL which repeats the matters specified in paragraph 18 of its Defence in that respect.
By paragraph 18 of their Defence, the Defendants respond to paragraph 18 of the Fourth Amended Statement of Claim, "only in the event that the Court finds the share transfer dated 20 June 2014 void and of [no] effect which is denied" that (omitting particulars): "(a) On or about 30 April 2012 or 1 May 2012, Yoo agreed to transfer the shares to [WWIL] and signed the share transfer naming [WWIL] as transferor. 
In executing the undated share transfer and giving it to Choi for the purpose of transmitting it to the transferee for completion, Yoo authorised, consented to or otherwise permitted the completion of the share transfer by [WWIL] its servants or agents (including Joo) as a condition of the future supply of Toppro by Topfield. 
From about 30 April or 1 May 2012 (and no later than the commencement of 2013) Yoo was aware that Choi transmitted the executed undated share transfer to Joo who was at all material times the sole director and shareholder of WGL and WGL the sole director and shareholder of [WWIL]. 
After handing the executed undated share transfer to Choi for transmission to [WWIL] its servants or agents, no further step was necessary to be taken by Yoo for [WWIL] to complete the share transfer. 
Yoo knew that upon receiving the executed undated share transfer, [WWIL] would be in a position to complete the transfer of title to the shares at any time. 
No revocation of the share transfer was communicated by Yoo to [WWIL] prior to completion and execution of the share transfer by [WWIL] on 3
September 2014. [WWIL] says further that on or about 27 June 2014 Yoo affirmed the agreement to transfer the shares to [WWIL]. 
On 3 September 2014 [WWIL] crossed out the name Joo and re-inserted its name as transferee, crossed out Joo's address and re-inserted its address, re- inserted its BVI registration number, crossed out the date of 20 June 2014 and inserted 3 September 2014, and executed the transfer by common seal as witnessed by its sole director [WGL]. 
In or about late September or early October 2014 the shareholding of [WWIL] was entered into the company register of shares kept by Toppro." 
That paragraph contains several factual propositions, as to which I will reach findings, to the extent that it is necessary to do so, below.
I now turn to the evidence as to this matter. On or about 3 September 2014, further alterations were made to the share transfer document, which sought to replace Mrs Joo as transferee with WWIL, the original transferee stated in the transfer as completed in April 2012, but only for the purposes of these proceedings. The previous date of the transfer of 20 June 2014 was also crossed out and a date of 3 September 2014 was inserted, and the address of Mrs Joo was crossed out and the address of WWIL was included. The common seal of WWIL was placed on the document and Mrs Joo signed as director and company secretary of WGL. By letter also dated 3 September 2014, WWIL's solicitors stated that, if amendments previously made to the share transfer form to provide for the transfer to Mrs Joo were ineffective, WWIL tendered payment of USD12,000 and claims title to the shares under the transfer form. No further alteration was then made to records maintained by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission at that time. Mrs Joo's evidence is also that Toppro began keeping a register of members and share scrip register between late September and early October 2014, her name (rather than that of WWIL) was entered on the register of members at that time and, on 23 October 2014, she received a share certificate from Toppro. It appears that any question as to a legal interest in the relevant shares could only arise from that point.
I have referred above to the several factual allegations made in paragraph 18 of the Defence. Several of those allegations have not been established. First, it seems to me that Mr Yoo's conduct on 30 April 2012 or 1 May 2012 amounted to an offer, not to an agreement, in the absence of consideration given by WWIL. The premise of the allegation that Mr Yoo knew that, upon receiving the executed undated share transfer form, WWIL would be in a position to complete the transfer of title to the shares at any time is not established. As I have noted above, where the transfer was not immediately effective in equity, WWIL would only be in a position to complete it if it did so before Mr Yoo revoked its authority to do so. I also do not accept that the revocation of the offer was not communicated by Mr Yoo to WWIL prior to completion and execution of the share transfer form on 3 September 2014, since that revocation was communicated to Mr Choi as WWIL's agent in late 2012. The suggested affirmation by Mr Yoo on 27 June 2014 is not established, because it relies on a passage of Mr Yoo's affidavit which was not read, and in any event it was plain, from the commencement and conduct of these proceedings, that that passage could not be understood as affirming any agreement to transfer the shares to WWIL. I recognise that Mrs Joo's shareholding was entered into a company register which Toppro commenced to maintain in late September or early October 2014. However, that does not establish the correctness of that entry, which is in issue in these proceedings.
Mr Young, in closing submissions, sought to characterise the amendment to the share transfer form made on 3 September 2014 as a "sham". In ordinary legal usage, a sham is a transaction where the parties did not intend their respective rights and obligations to derive from what appears to be a legal instrument or, possibly, and less negatively, where the relevant arrangement did not have legal effect based on an examination of the whole of the relevant circumstances: Sharrment Pty Ltd versus Official Trustee in Bankruptcy <case>; <case>-[36]. It does not seem to me that the amendment to the share transfer form had that character, at least within the narrower meaning, since there is no basis to think that Mrs Joo did not intend that transfer to have legal effect. However, it also does not seem to me that that transfer was effective in equity, both by reason of the matters to which I have referred above in respect of the earlier transactions, and because by this point both Mrs Joo and WWIL had notice of the revocation of any authority to Mr Choi and the withdrawal of the offer previously made by Mr Yoo to transfer the shares to WWIL, given the correspondence between Mr Yoo's solicitors and Mrs Joo's solicitors which had occurred after the 20 June 2014 share transfer.
Mr Yoo again pleads (FAS [24A]) a claim for conversion in respect of the further alterations to the share transfer form at this time, to which WWIL responds relying upon <case> of the Conveyancing Act. It is not necessary to address these matters for the reasons noted above in respect of the June 2014 amendments to the share transfer.
As I noted above, by its Amended Second Cross-Claim also filed on 21 April 2015, WWIL seeks a declaration that, on or about 3 September 2014, a valid and binding agreement was formed between Mr Yoo as transferor and it as transferee of all of Mr Yoo's shares in Toppro, and a declaration that it is the legal or beneficial owner of all of the shares in Toppro. WWIL pleads (Second Cross-Claim [15]-[16]) its execution of the share transfer and tender of a bank cheque in payment on 3 September 2014. Mr Neil confirmed in the course of his oral opening that, to the extent that Mrs Joo and WWIL relied on a contract, that contract was formed in 2014 when the consideration was paid (T6). That claim, if pressed, seems to me to fail on the basis that the offer previously made by Mr Yoo was not then open for acceptance, because no offer had been made by Mr Yoo to Mrs Joo (to the extent that WWIL relies on her claim) and the offer made to WWIL had been revoked and that revocation had been communicated to WWIL by its agent Mr Choi well before 3 September 2015.

WWIL's estoppel case
In paragraph 8(g) of the Defence, the Defendants plead that, if the Court finds the share transfer dated 20 June 2014 to be void and of no effect, in reliance on the representation pleaded in paragraph 8 of the Defence, WWIL completed the share transfer of 3 September 2014 and Mr Yoo is estopped from denying Mr Choi's authority to transmit the share transfer form to WWIL for completion. In their opening submissions, the Defendants submitted that, if the Court finds that Mrs Joo is not the owner of the shares, Mr Yoo is estopped from denying that he intended to transfer the shares to WWIL up until the execution of the share transfer form by WWIL on or about 3 September 2014 by reason of various matters including the signature on the share transfer form naming WWIL as transferee, the giving of authority to Mr Choi to transmit a signed transfer form to WWIL for completion, and Mr Yoo's alleged silence in failing to communicate to WWIL a revocation of the transfer (such revocation being denied) prior to its completion by WWIL on or about 3 September 2014, and WWIL changing its position to its detriment in transferring the shares to Mrs Joo on or about 12 September 2014. In oral closing submissions, Mr Young responds that the share transfer form, at least prior to its alteration by Mrs Joo, contained no representation that rights had been transferred to Mrs Joo (T174).
This claim cannot succeed, where I have accepted Mr Yoo's uncontroverted evidence that he communicated the termination of the authority to effect the share transfer to Mr Choi, and I have held that Mr Choi was acting as agent for WWIL in respect of the transaction, and that occurred prior to completion of the share transfer by WWIL or any act of WWIL in transferring the shares to Mrs Joo.

Relief sought by Mr Yoo under [s 175](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s175.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/)
Mr Yoo seeks relief, consequential upon declarations that the transfer of shares dated 20 June 2014 and 3 September 2014 are void and of no effect, by way of orders under [s 175](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s175.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) or in the Court's equitable jurisdiction to correct Toppro's share register. I do not understand Mrs Joo and WWIL to contend that registration of Mrs Joo as the shareholder in Toppro, in late September 2014, would have conferred legal title upon her, unless there had previously been at least a transfer of the equitable interest in the shares to her. If that submission were put, I would not accept it, because the Court has power to rectify the register where it does not accurately record the ownership of the shares.
Mr Young relies on my judgment in Chidiac versus Bhatt <case> at <case>- <case> at <case> as follows: "That section provides, relevantly, that a person aggrieved may apply to the court to have a register kept by a company corrected and, if the court orders that company to correct the register, it may also order that company to compensate a party to the application for loss or damage suffered and to lodge notice of the correction with ASIC. That section operates in parallel to, and arguably assumes the existence of, the court's equitable jurisdiction to rectify a register: Grant versus John Grant & Sons Pty Ltd <case>; [(1950) 82 CLR 1] at 51; Peninsula Gold Pty Ltd versus Sunbeam Victa Holdings Ltd [(1996) 20 ACSR 553] at 558-559. The authorities recognise that the applicant for rectification must show a personal equity that the court will protect; prima facie, such an equity is shown if a person's name is wrongly omitted from the register; however, the court has a broad discretion whether to order the correction of the register of members and may decline to order rectification if there is some reason why that should not occur: Grant versus John Grant &
Sons Pty Ltd above at 51."
As I noted above, the parties ultimately proceeded on the basis that Mr Yoo has acquired the equitable interest in the shares in Toppro from Mr Yu, I have held that and that the execution and delivery of the share transfer form on 30 April or 1 May 2012 were not intended to have immediate effect, and were in the nature of a revocable mandate rather than an assignment, and that mandate was revoked by notice to WWIL by its agent Mr Choi, before WWIL or Mrs Joo sought to act upon it. Accordingly, that interest was not transferred to WWIL or Mrs Joo. That may seem a harsh result, so far as WWIL or Mrs Joo are concerned, if the shares in, or control of Toppro, had a greater value than the amount that Mr Yoo paid for them. It is unclear whether that is the case, since it appears that Toppro had substantial revenue but was loss-making, although the weight to be given to that matter is also uncertain since there is evidence that it had unusual accounting practices. In the result, where Mr Yoo was and is the equitable owner of the shares in Toppro, and a share register for Toppro has been brought into existence, an order should now be made to rectify that register to record him as legal owner of the shares.
Mr Yoo also seeks declarations that appointments of directors made consequential upon the purported transfer of shares to Mrs Joo, and by her exercise of corporate power, are declared void and an order that Mr Kim (who was appointed by Mrs Joo as a director of Toppro on 20 June 2014) and Mrs Joo be restrained from executing documents in Toppro's name other than to correct the records of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission. It seems to me that those orders should also be made unless Mrs Joo now offers appropriate undertakings to Mr Yoo and to the Court.
I should note, for completeness, that Mrs Joo offered, for the first time in closing submissions, to pay interest in respect of the lengthy period for which Mr Yoo had not been paid the amount provided in the share transfer. It seems to me that, had Mrs Joo or WWIL otherwise been successful, it would have been necessary for Mrs Joo to pay such interest in order to do equity, at least for the period from late 2012 (the point to which Mr Yoo had extended the time for payment) until that payment was tendered in June 2014. The parties had also agreed the basis on which interest should be calculated, if Mrs Joo or WWIL were ultimately successful in the proceedings. I need not address that question further, where Mrs Joo and WWIL have not been successful in the proceedings for the reasons noted above.

Orders and costs
I will make an order for the rectification of the share register of Toppro in favour of Mr Yoo and any appropriate ancillary orders. The Cross-Claims should be dismissed. Mrs Joo and WWIL should jointly and severally pay Mr Yoo's costs of the proceedings, as agreed or as assessed. I will not make an order for costs against Mr Kim, who appears to have had a limited role in the relevant events and in the proceedings, or against Toppro, where that could have the result that Mr Yoo is left to bear the costs of the proceedings that he brought to vindicate his interest in that company. The parties should bring in agreed short minutes of order to give effect to this judgment within 7 days.
 * * * 
