

Kelly and Ors versus Ford t/as Matthews Folbigg Blacktown and Baulkham Hills and Ors Matter No 1948/98 [1998] NSWSC 297 (28 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 28 August 1998 `RUSSELL LESLIE KELLY & ORS versus MARK ANTONY FORD T/AS MATTHEWS FOLBIGG
BLACKTOWN & BAULKHAM HILLS & ORS` `1948/98` `28 July 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT. 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between former partners in a solicitors' practice as to the construction of part of an agreement made to deal with certain details of the dissolution of their partnership. If the construction which the plaintiffs seek is not adopted by the court they seek to have the agreement rectified so that it does say what they submit the parties agreed upon. 
The parties' practice was Matthews Folbigg, Solicitors with offices at
Parramatta, Blacktown and Baulkham Hills. The firm ceased trading as at 30
September 1997, except for the purpose of winding up. After that date the plaintiffs (to whom I will refer as the "Parramatta partners") practised as
Matthews Folbigg Parramatta, and the defendants (to whom I will refer as the "Blacktown partners") practised as Matthews Folbigg Blacktown & Baulkham
Hills.

The present proceedings, which were commenced on 6 April 1998, deal with various disputes between the parties. The matter made its way into the expedition list and one aspect of the matter was expedited, and I have heard it yesterday and today. That matter covers the orders in paras 1 to 3 and 5 and 6 of the amended summons.

Because I am only dealing with a limited aspect of the case I do not have the same background that I might have had had I been hearing a matter involving the whole partnership dissolution.

The core matter of the dispute I am dealing with is work in progress which is denoted in the agreement by the acronym "WIP". Just what this connotes is not completely clear to me.

Work in progress is an accounting problem for solicitors' firms because the retainers that are accepted by them in different classes of work operate differently. The client is sometimes not bound to pay the solicitor until the entire retainer is fulfilled, yet in the case of a partner dying or leaving the partnership quite serious problems can emerge in valuing the departing partner's share. For this purpose, and some times for other purposes as well, including taxation purposes and making sure that partners and staff are fully accountable for their time, different firms of solicitors institute different systems for dealing with work in progress.

I have not really been able to work out just what the WIP system was, but it would seem to be directed at making partners and staff accountable for their time, as well as providing a balance sheet figure of work in progress. What appears to happen is that at the end of each day each professional person, referred to in the evidence as authors, makes up a diary or enters into the master computer the units of work that he or she has done in each matter.
Units then appear to be valued at ten cents each and a dollar figure appears in the appropriate WIP ledger.

The accuracy of the ledger as an indicator for what moneys are due to the partnership depends on various factors. One is that the client may not be liable to pay the solicitor on the basis adopted in the WIP ledger. For instance there may be an agreement with the client for a set fee or the fee may be controlled by legislation, or by a court in a particular type of matter.

However, it would seem that the WIP ledger to a degree takes care of this, because some units appear to be time value units, whereas others are task related. Notwithstanding, there would be some discrepancy between what is properly billed and what appears in a WIP ledger. There would also be situations where the author accounts for time where the client cannot actually be charged, such as, for instance, the time taken for photocopying documents, or the time taken for research to bring an author up to scratch where he or she did not have the expected skill in the area and had to acquire that skill.

Mr Matthews, who was the managing partner of the firm for some time and is now one of the Parramatta partners, said that his view was that ninety percent of the WIP ledger was fairly close to the recoverable amount from the clients, and that the "bumps and lumps" as he at one stage put it, in the system for the sort of matters to which I have referred, tended to even themselves out.

Some of the Blacktown partners, and witnesses in their camp, suggest that the figure was not quite that high and, indeed, when individual files were costed they were on an average found to be less than eighty percent of WIP in the ledger. All this is really by way of background. The essential task is to construe the agreement in question.

The agreement is called by both parties "the Greenwood Memorandum". It was signed by all relevant persons on 17 July 1997. The reason for so naming the agreement is that the Parramatta partners appointed a Mr Truda as their accounting representative, the Blacktown partners a Mr Merrell as their representative and Mr Greenwood, accountant of Robertson Greenwood, was appointed as mediator on the basis that he would deal primarily with Messrs
Truda and Merrell. By this process Mr Greenwood produced the first draft of the Greenwood Memorandum about 23 April 1997.

The part of the Greenwood Memorandum which is the subject of the present litigation before me is cl 1, which is as follows: "1. Work in Progress
All WIP at Balance date will be retained in the existing partnership.
WIP will be valued at 90% of carrying value as has been done historically for Balance Sheet purposes.
Fees will be issued by the new firms and as collected the amount of 90% of
WIP for that matter will be paid to Matthews Folbigg irrespective of amount of fee rendered.
Each partner will review the WIP ledger at date of active conclusion of the business and will have the opportunity to write down the WIP ledger to a recoverable amount.
In the event that a post Balance date event occurs external to the firm which makes the balance of the WIP account uncollectible this amount will be borne by Matthews Folbigg, eg, the client becomes insolvent." 
The passage I have set out contains five bullet points but for ease of reference I will call these 1.1, 1.2 etc in these reasons.

The first draft, which is document "R" in Exhibit DX01, contained 1.1 and 1.2 of the final document with certain insignificant verbal alterations, and only one other paragraph, namely: "Fees will be issued by the new firms and as collected the amount of 90% of
WIP for that matter will be paid to Matthews Folbigg irrespective of amount of fees rendered or if the debt becomes bad." 
The Blacktown partners substituted new words for the third paragraph in the first draft in the document that appears as "S", and this was not agreed to by the Parramatta partners in the document that appears as "T" in DX01.

There was then a meeting on 8 May 1997. The people present were Mr Greenwood,
Mr Truda, Mr Merrell, Messrs Matthews and Doust, who were Parramatta partners and Messrs Margiotta and Ford, who were Blacktown partners.

There was a short discussion as to work in progress and there is no doubt at all that Mr Doust and Mr Ford discussed an example of how cl 1 would operate in practice, and that Mr Greenwood said something like: "Each partner is to perform with the authors a write down at the date of active conclusion of the business." 
Exhibit DX03 is a copy of document "S", on which Mr Matthews has made some notes, probably at the meeting of 8 May. Mr Ford also made some notes, which are in evidence. Somewhere between 8 and 13 May Mr Greenwood created document "U" and apart from immaterial verbal alterations, which were brought about by the fact that negotiations took so long that the partnership had to cease as at 30 September 1997 rather than 30 June 1997, the provisions in cl 1 of the document remained the same through to the final document which was executed in
July.

However, other provisions in the agreement did undergo revision. Mr McNally, who appeared for the Blacktown partners, told me that there were seven drafts.
I have not checked this, but I accept it. The document, accordingly, was one which was initiated by Mr Greenwood, but had then been the subject of discussion not only by Mr Greenwood, but the parties' accountants and also the parties themselves, for a period of almost three months.

The Greenwood Memorandum is headed: "SUMMARY PAPER ON DEMERGER OF PARTNERSHIP PREPARED BY IAN GREENWOOD ON 13 MAY ." 
The first line of the document then says: "The objective of this paper is to summarise the issues discussed and agreed to date." 
The document, accordingly, is one which does not purport to contain the whole agreement of the parties. This troubled me for a little while because it seemed to me that what I was really dealing with was an oral agreement which was evidenced by a note or memorandum in writing, so that it was necessary to go back and work out what the underlying oral agreement was, with, of course, the consequence that rectification no longer became relevant.

However, on more consideration, and in light of the way in which the case has been conducted, I think I must assume that the words which are chosen in the
Greenwood Memorandum do represent the agreement that the parties made on that particular matter.

It would have been open to either party to have adduced evidence to show that the agreement was not properly summarised by the five bullet points in cl 1.
Neither has done so, and so the exercise for the court must be to construe the words as if they were the written contract; see Air Great Lakes Pty Ltd versus K
S Easter (Holdings) Pty Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR 309], 319.

Those words are to be construed ignoring subsequent happenings which disclose that one or other or both parties construed them in a particular way, and are to be construed without looking at drafts or negotiations. The factual matrix may be looked at, I think, despite Mr McNally's submissions that there are some ambiguities in the clause especially, 1.4. But this examination does not take one very far as the matter is one of construing the words used by the parties as an objective observer would consider the parties to have used them.

The scheme envisaged by cl 1 is that work in progress has been recorded in the
WIP ledger. A figure of ninety percent of WIP is to be taken as the amount due to the old firm. When one of the new firms collects fees from the client, not only for work done by the old firm but also for work done by the new firms, then it is to pay over ninety percent of WIP to the old firm. That comes from the first three bullet points.

The matter dealt with in 1.5 addresses what happens if there is an uncollectable amount, such as if the client becomes insolvent. The parties have agreed that if there is such an event then the old firm will bear the loss. This then leaves us with 1.4.

The Parramatta partners say that so far as 1.4 is concerned, the writing down of the WIP ledger to a recoverable amount was only to be done when there was a special reason to do so, such as where the WIP ledger far exceeded that which could be collected from the client, and that unless this happened the ninety percent of WIP was to be the figure used for accounting between the new firms and the old firm.

The Blacktown partners say that the words have one meaning and that is that it is possible for each file to be looked at by the appropriate partner and author and for the WIP to be written down to a recoverable amount.

During the discussions between the respective parties it was expressed, at least on 8 May, that accountants could cost each file to see the appropriate amount that should be allowed for work in progress. The general consensus was that such a procedure would be too time consuming and expensive and the parties were looking for a simpler method.

The Parramatta partners say that a method was then agreed upon. The method proposed that there would be this ninety percent of WIP notional figure and, apart from (a) special circumstances, and (b) factors external to the firm, that figure was to govern. They say that otherwise there is no need to put in a provision such as 1.4 and, indeed, it completely reverses the whole effect of what was agreed to in 1.2. This is because if one only put some files in the mix then one does not even out the bumps and lumps as one does if all the files are put in the accounting.

Mr Cashion SC, who appeared for the Parramatta partners, says that there are three principal reasons why the Parramatta partners' construction must be correct.
If the Blacktown partners are correct, there is no utility in adopting in .2 the ninety percent write down figure.
The factual matrix shows that the parties did desire to avoid costing each file, yet the Blacktown partners' method brings that back in again. Not only that, but a file by file write down creates arguments because of the subjective elements involved by the person who writes down the WIP.
The factual matrix also shows the desire by the parties to minimise write downs and this is frustrated if each file is written down.

The argument of Mr McNally is that the words mean what they say. I think there is an ambiguity there, but I appreciate the argument that the words mean what they say.

The natural meaning of the words is that each partner is to review the WIP ledger. That appears to be mandatory. That is then contrasted with what appears in the second part of 1.4, that each partner will have the opportunity to write down the WIP ledger. It does not say on the actual wording "has the opportunity to write down, which opportunity is only to be availed of in special circumstances, or if the WIP ledger far or significantly or substantially exceeds the recoverable amount", as the plaintiffs would have.

Secondly, the fact that the partners have the opportunity to write down, to my mind, counters the argument that the provisions of 1.4 negate 1.2 if the write down is to be on a wholesale basis.

Each partner has the right and duty to review the WIP ledger, but then may (a) leave it alone; (b) adjust it in only obvious cases; or (c) adjust it in every case. It is true that the Parramatta partners did not think that this third option was one which anyone would exercise, and it is true that the parties wanted to avoid unnecessary work, but it does not seem to me that these factors outweigh the actual words.

Again, as Mr McNally says, the words are not just the words of Mr Greenwood, they are words which the solicitors for each party have looked at and many of the solicitors involved were persons who were very familiar with commercial documentation. Although Mr Matthews gave evidence that he and the Parramatta partners had to accept the best deal they could get because they did not think that the defendants would change their minds, this does not show why other amendments were made, or why no attempt was made to include in 1.4 the sort of matters that the plaintiffs are now raising.

The construction of any document is a matter which depends considerably on how words affect a particular mind. I just cannot see sufficient evidence there to take away from the natural meaning of the words, that is that any partner has the opportunity to write down the WIP ledger to a recoverable amount whether or not there are any special factors involved.

Accordingly, I find the issue of construction for the defendant Blacktown partners.

So far as rectification is concerned, I can look at a wider range of facts to work out the true intention of the parties. However, this is a document which, as Mr McNally says, was closely scrutinised through seven drafts and, furthermore, the solicitors involved knew that they could make suggestions, but did not do so, either because the point did not occur to them or, alternatively, because they were taking the commercial position that this was the best agreement they could get.

In those circumstances, it is very difficult indeed to say that the words used were as a result of some common or mutual mistake. The words that are there appear to be the words the parties intended. There is no strong or convincing or irrefragable evidence that there is a mistake.

Furthermore, it is at least doubtful what words could be inserted which would both make the Greenwood Memorandum meaningful and also reflect the common intention of the parties. The red light shone when the plaintiffs did not, until their closing address, suggest the words that had been omitted by common or mutual mistake. When Mr Cashion SC did do that he said that the words were similar to the words in para 1(c) of the amended summons, that is one would have to add to 1.4 something like the words: "In relation to those matters where the time recorded far exceeded what could reasonably be recovered at the conclusion of the matter and by reference to only those factors known by the relevant partner at that date." 
It is difficult to see how those words represent any common agreement. At the very most they would amount to the expectation of one side.

Thus, in my view, the claim for rectification should also be dismissed.

Accordingly, the essential result is that the claims in paras 1 to 3 and 5 and of the amended summons fail.

Both counsel consider that it might be prudent to make a declaration as to the construction of the document, so all I will do is to stand the matter over to a date convenient to counsel for short minutes to be brought in. Those short minutes, of course, will deal with costs and I assume also that they will provide for the balance of the proceedings to stand into the general list.

I stand the matter over to 9.30 am on 25 August 1998 for short minutes on the usual basis that at least a week beforehand counsel can contact my Associate and change the date if it is not suitable.
 * * * 
