

Mossman versus The Nominal Defendant Matter No 19217/93 [1997] NSWSC 414 (18
September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Mossman versus The Nominal Defendant /93 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /93 - Julie Ann Mossman -v- The Nominal Defendant 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The plaintiff has a claim pursuant to the provisions of the Compensation to Relatives Act, 1944. It arises out of a motor vehicle accident that took place on 1 January 1990. Notice of the claim was given to the insurer (FAI) in May 1990. 
A Statement of Claim was filed on 11 August 1993. These proceedings were commenced out of time and without the leave of the Court. [(Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s52.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) (the
Act).) 
On 5 October 1993, the solicitors for the defendant made a request for particulars. The particulars sought included "Details in respect of all persons on whose behalf this action is brought".

An application was then brought for the dismissal of the proceedings. On 29
November 1993, the proceedings were dismissed by order of this Court and leave was given to commence fresh proceedings by the filing of a Statement of Claim within 14 days.

A fresh Statement of Claim was filed on 3 December 1993. These are the proceedings presently before the Court. The Statement of Claim was served by letter dated 3 February 1994.

On 2 March 1994, the solicitors for the defendant wrote a reminder letter requesting the supply of the particulars that had been sought in October 1993.
The letter further advised that if the particulars were not provided the defendant may approach the Court for an order that they be supplied.

On 8 March 1994, a defence was filed. It joins issue with various allegations made in the Statement of Claim and pleads contributory negligence.

By letter dated 10 March 1994, the solicitors for the plaintiff advised that they would be shortly providing the replies to the outstanding request for particulars. In June 1994, they further advised that they were "unable to say when the requested particulars would be provided".

Thereafter, more than three years gently drifted by without any agitation of the question of the supplying of the particulars.

By letter dated 7 July 1997, the solicitors for the defendant advised that they still had not received the outstanding particulars. The letter further advised that failure to provide the particulars by 8 July 1997 would lead to the filing of the Notice of Motion "to have this matter struck out for want of prosecution".

A Notice of Motion seeking that relief was filed on 13 August 1997. The outstanding particulars were provided on 21 August 1997. It seems to be common ground that the particulars supplied satisfy the defendant's request.

The Notice of Motion was referred for hearing on Friday 12 September 1997 as a short matter (in reality, it was a matter which should have been dealt with by way of special fixture). Subsequent to the referral, the defendant made application for leave to amend the Notice of Motion. The purpose of the application was to enable the defendant to apply for relief founded on an alleged non-compliance with the provisions of section 48 of the Act. Such question of non-compliance had been first raised by the defendant on the preceding day. The opposed application was granted and an amended Notice of
Motion was filed.

As the question of non-compliance had not been raised as an issue by the defence, it was accepted by the defendant that leave was needed to amend the defence so as to enable this issue to be agitated (See Remedi. V Stratford (5 June 1997)). Accordingly, that was the first application to be looked at by the Court.

Upon the taking of the evidence adduced by the defendant, it became glaringly obvious that the allegation of non-compliance with the provisions of section was both devoid of merit and hopeless. As the hearing progressed, from time to time, the difficulties confronting the defendant were brought to the attention of counsel. Indeed, a short adjournment was granted to allow counsel the opportunity to obtain instructions to abandon the application. After the adjournment, the Court was informed that the instructions of the insurer were to press on with the application. Following the resumption of the hearing, a further half hour of court time was taken up in concluding submissions.

Counsel for the defendant has sought to draw a distinction between particulars sought of the claim made under the Act and further and better particulars sought in the course of proceedings brought in respect of the claim. It is said that the particulars sought in October 1993 were merely particulars of the claim. Whether or not much turns on the distinction that is sought be made, the defendant's assertion is manifestly untenable. The particulars were sought after the commencement of the first set of proceedings and the request itself makes express reference to those proceedings ("this action"). Notice of the claim had been given some three years earlier (in May 1990). Until recently, both parties have conducted themselves on the basis that the particulars had been sought in the context of proceedings being on foot. The application for dismissal had initially been founded on the failure to give the particulars.

I now turn to the defendant's application for leave to amend. The Court has a judicial discretion to grant that relief. The defendant bears the onus of showing an entitlement to it.

The discretion is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case and so that justice is best served between the parties. The relevant circumstances are usually inter alia delay in seeking of the relief, the explanation for any delay and prejudice. The Court will not grant relief where it is futile to do so.

Section 48 imposes a duty to co-operate. The defendant relies on the following provisions;- "The duty under this section applies only until court proceedings are commenced in respect of the claim but if the claimant fails without reasonable excuse to comply with this section, court proceedings cannot be commenced in respect of the claim while the failure continues." 
The onus of demonstrating non-compliance with section 48 rests with the defendant. On the material placed before me, an endeavour to discharge that onus would be doomed to failure.

The duty under section 48 is expressed to apply "only until court proceedings are commenced in respect of the claim" (it has a role in the processes preliminary to the commencement of court proceedings). However, in the circumstances where a claimant fails without reasonable excuse to comply with the section, subsection (3) operates to disentitle the commencement of proceedings in respect of the claim "while the failure continues".

The duty of co-operation is imposed for the purpose of ensuring that sufficient information is given inter alia to the insurer (see sub-section ) so as to enable the performance by it of the functions referred to in , (b) and (c) thereof.

Subsection (3) provides the sanction contemplated by the legislature to facilitate compliance by a claimant with the duty to co-operate. It must be viewed in its context. It was not intended that it be used as a vehicle for cynical summary dismissal applications. It was intended as part of the process to achieve the object expressed in subsection (1).

Subsection (3) cannot have application in the circumstances of this case. The particulars were not sought in pursuance of performance of the functions specified in (a), (b) or (c) of subsection (1A). If a different view were to be taken, there is an abundance, of material to support the view that the plaintiff had reasonable excuse for any non-compliance.

Questions of waiver have also been mentioned during argument. For present purposes, these questions need not be pursued. However, if the doctrine of waiver does have application in this context, the right to raise the question of non-compliance has been clearly lost.

Before I leave this matter, I should refer to one other circumstance. The defendant did not raise the question of non-compliance at the time of the hearing of the application for leave which enabled the present proceedings to be brought. Whilst it has not been fully argued there is much substance in the suggestion that the defendant is now estopped from raising the question of non-compliance.

The futility of granting the relief sought by the defendant suffices to lead to its refusal. However, in addition to this matter, there are also the matters of delay and explanation for that delay. There has been gross delay.
Largely, that delay has been left unexplained.

It would seem that this belated attempt to ventilate the allegation of non- compliance is little more than an opportunistic exercise on the part of the insurer calculated to bring about summary disposition of the plaintiff"s claim. It is lacking in bona fides. It is brought in a context of both parties being guilty of gross delay. and after the proceedings have been on foot for a period approaching four years. It has unnecessarily wasted valuable court time. It has put the parties to further expense.(the insurer has already used section 52 to have one set of proceedings dismissed). It may be seen as an abuse of the processes of the Court.

I refuse the application for leave. The Amended Notice of Motion is dismissed.
The defendant is to pay the costs. The exhibits may be returned.

The defendant asks for the proceedings to be transferred to the District
Court. The plaintiff says nothing in opposition to that application. I order that the proceedings be remitted to the District Court.
 * * * 
