

Citicorp Australia Ltd versus O'Brien and Ors [1996] NSWSC 514 (25 October )

CITICORP AUSTRALIA LIMITED versus O'BRIEN & ORS /93; ED 4679/88 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MEAGHER, SHELLER JJA, ABADEE AJA 
CATCHWORDS: CONFLICT OF INTEREST - acting for multiple parties to the same transaction - meaning of `informed consent' - SOLICITOR'S DUTY - whether duty to give advice beyond terms of retainer - whether duty to provide client with investment advice - [CONTRACTS REVIEW ACT 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) - extent of explanation required by [s9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) (2) (i).

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Appeal against third respondent dismissed 
Appeal against first and second respondents allowed 
Cross appeal dismissed 
On 30 November 1982, the first and second respondents, Laurence and Roslyn
O'Brien (the O'Briens), contracted with the third respondent, Hooker Homes Pty
Limited, to purchase a house. A real estate agent employed by Hooker Homes suggested that the O'Briens obtain legal advice from the fourth respondent, Mr
Eliades. He also told the O'Briens that Mr Eliades would be able to arrange finance for them for the purposes of the purchase.

On 5 November 1982, Mr Eliades met with the O'Briens. He told them that he had calculated their capacity to meet Citicorp's repayment guidelines for a loan of $60,000, and assisted them to prepare a Citicorp Real Estate Finance
Application. On 10 December 1982, the O'Briens mortgaged the property to the appellant, Citicorp Australia Limited, as security for a loan to be used in the payment of the purchase price.

In 1984 the O'Briens were unable to meet the mortgage repayments and sold the property in order to discharge the mortgage. The O'Briens commenced proceedings in the Equity Division. They sought to have the finance agreement and mortgage declared void, an order that Mr Eliades and Citicorp pay compensation for loss suffered, and damages for negligence or breach of duty against Mr Eliades who had acted for Hooker Homes and the O'Briens on the purchase, and for Citicorp and the O'Briens on the mortgage.

Bryson J found that there was a negligent omission by Mr Eliades of the performance of his professional duty, in that he encouraged the O'Briens to carry out the transaction including the finance agreement and the mortgage in circumstances where it was unwise and unsafe for them to do so. His Honour also found that the finance agreement and mortgage were unjust, having taken into account the matters mentioned in [s9(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), and that it was appropriate to grant remedies against Citicorp pursuant to [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of that Act.  Citicorp appealed, and Mr Eliades and the O'Briens cross appealed, from that decision.
 
HELD: . There is no rule of law prohibiting a solicitor from acting for multiple parties to the same transaction as long as that solicitor has obtained informed consent from all parties involved.
In determining whether a client has given informed consent for a solicitor to act for another party to the transaction, it is necessary to consider the precise nature of the services that are to be provided by the solicitor.
A solicitor, retained to act on a purchase or mortgage for their skill in the law, is not under a duty to inform every client of their views about the financial prospects of the purchase or mortgage where they felt or ought reasonably to have felt that there was a risk of loss. To impose such a duty would be to require solicitors to give opinions which they are not qualified to give, with the result that they would be liable in negligence if their views were incorrect and their client had acted upon the basis of those views.
Given the nature of the retainer in this case, there was no obligation for the solicitor to provide investment advice; Hawkins versus Clayton (1988) 164 CLR at 578.
A contract is not unjust within the meaning of the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) unless there has been conduct depriving the claimant of a real or informed choice to enter into the contract.

ORDERS Dismiss the appeal against the third respondent, Hooker Homes Pty Limited;
Allow the appeal against the first and second respondents, Laurence
Anthony O'Brien and Roslyn O'Brien and the cross appeal by the fourth respondent, James George Eliades;
Dismiss the cross appeal of the first and second respondents, Laurence
Anthony O'Brien and Roslyn O'Brien;
Set aside the orders made by Bryson J on 4 June 1993;
In lieu thereof judgment for the second and third defendants in the proceedings No ED 4679/88;
The first and second respondents, Laurence Anthony O'Brien and Roslyn
O'Brien, to pay the costs of the appellant, Citicorp Australia Limited, and the fourth respondent, James George Eliades, of the appeal and cross appeals but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if so qualified.

JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
On 30 November 1982 Laurence Anthony O'Brien and Roslyn O'Brien contracted to purchase a house at 10 Bottlebrush Close, Wyoming from Hooker Homes Pty Limited (Hooker Homes) for $67,000. Citicorp Australia Limited (Citicorp) agreed to provide finance and on 10 December 1982 the O'Briens mortgaged the property to Citicorp as security for a loan of $60,000 to be used in the payment of the purchase price. Pursuant to the mortgage, the O'Briens covenanted to pay the principal, together with interest at the rate of $18.96 per centum per annum calculated on monthly rests, by twelve consecutive calendar monthly payments of $746.81, twelve consecutive calendar monthly payments of $886.81, twelve consecutive calendar monthly payments of $960.81 and two hundred and four consecutive calendar monthly payments of $1,063.49, the first of such payments to be made on 10 January 1983. 
The O'Briens went into possession of the property on 10 December 1982 and lived there for about three years. They were unable to keep up the payments to
Citicorp under the mortgage and late in 1984 sold the property for $70,000 and discharged the mortgage by paying $70,497.87 to Citicorp. In 1984 the O'Briens began proceedings in the Common Law Division against Hooker Homes, James
George Eliades, a solicitor, and Citicorp, claiming relief of various kinds against each defendant. The proceedings were transferred to the Equity
Division and, in November 1988, an amended statement of claim was filed seeking, inter alia, an order that the finance agreement and mortgage be declared void, an order that Mr Eliades and Citicorp pay compensation to the
O'Briens for the loss they had suffered by reason of entering into the finance agreement and mortgage, and judgment for damages for negligence or breach of duty against Mr Eliades, who had acted as solicitor for Hooker Homes and the
O'Briens on the purchase, and for Citicorp and the O'Briens on the mortgage.
The terms and scope of his retainer by the O'Briens will require closer definition.

Bryson J heard the proceedings and gave judgments on 4 June and 22 October
By the date of the hearing, Hooker Homes, which had changed its name, was the subject of a scheme of arrangement approved by the Court on 28
February 1991, which meant it was no longer possible or effective for the
O'Briens to proceed against Hooker Homes. Bryson J made no orders against
Hooker Homes but * ordered Citicorp to pay the O'Briens the sum of $29,139.40 with interest thereon from 1 January 1985 until 22 October 1993, and Mr Eliades to pay the O'Briens $2; * pursuant to subs 7 (1) of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), varied the finance agreement and mortgage so as to contain a provision obliging Citicorp to pay the O'Briens the sum of $29,139.40 on 1 January 1985, and thereafter to pay the O'Briens interest on that amount until repayment; and * ordered Mr Eliades and Citicorp to pay the O'Briens' costs of the proceedings.

Citicorp appealed from the decision and Mr Eliades and the O'Briens cross appealed. Although Hooker Homes was named as a respondent to the appeal, it took no part and no order was sought against it. The appeal against it should be dismissed.

LAW SOCIETY COUNCIL'S SUBMISSIONS 
The Law Society Council (the Council), claiming to be exercising "its rights to be heard in the appeal pursuant to [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s54.html) (d) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)", filed written submissions. It stated that it did not wish to participate in the oral argument.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s54.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), so far as material, provides: "In addition to its other functions, the Law Society Council may: appear by solicitor or counsel before, and be heard by, any court in any matter affecting the Law Society or its members or in which the Law Society is concerned or interested ......" 
I very much doubt whether this paragraph confers upon the Council a right to be heard in a matter, such as the present, to which it is not a party. In many cases, and probably this is one, where a solicitor is sued for negligence, the defence is funded by Lawcover or some other insurer. In such a case it is especially inappropriate that a plaintiff, who claims to have suffered by a solicitor's negligence and has sued the solicitor, should be opposed not only by the solicitor's legal representatives but also by representatives funded by the Council. If the Council has a right to be heard it should be sparingly exercised and confined, as the paragraph suggests, to matters in which the Law
Society or its members as a whole are concerned or interested. In part, the
Council's submissions are directed to attacking his Honour's findings about Mr
Eliades' retainer.

However these questions can be left open. We were informed that the Council filed submissions in accordance with directions given by the Registrar. Its representatives did not attend at Court. The written submissions were adopted by counsel for Mr Eliades. In future if the Council wishes to put submissions pursuant to [s54](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s54.html) (d) in any matter to which it is not a party, its representatives should be available at Court to support its right to do so.

SUMMARY OF FACTS 
When they bought the house at Wyoming the O'Briens had two sons, aged nine and about eighteen months, dependent on them. Mr O'Brien had been involved in the purchase of two other homes; one at Commercial Road, Leichhardt for about $21,000; and the other, in which they were living at the time of the purchase, at Pendant Avenue, Blacktown for about $48,000, which was subject to a first mortgage to NSW Permanent Building Society Limited. The O'Briens had had considerable financial difficulty in meeting their mortgage payments and other obligations but repaid their debts with money from the sale of the Blacktown house. An aspect of their financial difficulty was the increase over a period of about three years in the loan payments required by the building society from $250 to $450 and finally $469 per month. 
Mrs O'Brien had significant experience working as a pharmacy assistant but was able only to seek part time employment because of her family responsibilities.
She had played a part with Mr O'Brien in buying the house at Blacktown, but neither she nor Mr O'Brien had ever had any training or shown any capacity for business or finance and they had not made a success of their personal finances at Blacktown.

Mr O'Brien attended school until he obtained the Intermediate Certificate. He had been in employment as a clerk with Telecom for fifteen years and was working as a registration clerk. He turned thirty-one on 4 November 1982.
Bryson J described his earnings as very modest in relation to his responsibilities to those dependent on him. He regarded the O'Briens' economic position as a very poor one, strongly characterised by lack of flexibility and limited choices and opportunities. They lacked economic sophistication and, in his Honour's opinion, were very strongly in need of guidance from a professional person with some insight into the nature of their business when they entered into their transaction with Citicorp.

The O'Briens were attracted to the Central Coast by television advertisements.
Mrs O'Brien and later Mr O'Brien visited the area and spoke to Alexander Roma, an employee of Hooker Homes, at its office on the new estate at Wyoming. Mr
Roma suggested that if they used Mr Eliades as their solicitor it would be cheaper and more convenient as he was in Gosford. At Mrs O'Brien's second meeting with Mr Roma he told the O'Briens that Mr Eliades would be able to get finance on terms that they could afford and that the loan repayments could not be raised by fluctuations in the current rates for the first three years. They were told that the loan would be a "step loan". They would know that their repayments were going to be the same and that they did not have to worry about the interest rates. It was not clear from the evidence or his Honour's findings who first suggested Citicorp as a possible lender. On 5 November , Mr Eliades saw the O'Briens at his office at Gosford. Bryson J made no findings about the express terms, if any, upon which Mr Eliades' services as a solicitor were retained.

In his written statement of 15 March 1993, Mr Eliades said that when the
O'Briens attended his office on 5 November 1982, he told them that Mr Roma had given him details of the property they wished to purchase, and of their income and said "I would like to confirm these with you." He explained the outlay on the purchase to cover stamp duty and legal fees and the need to borrow about $6,000 to cover the sale price and other expenses. Mr Roma had told him that
Mr O'Brien had a net weekly wage of $246 and a net amount of $60 that he earned by a second job cleaning, making a total of $306 net per week. Either
Mr or Mrs O'Brien agreed with this and Mr Eliades said: "If you move up the coast will you still be able to carry on the second cleaning job?" 
Mr O'Brien said: "I think I should be able to but in any event, I don't plan to keep that job up. Once Roslyn gets work here and I apply to Telecom for a transfer I will leave that job." 
According to Mr Eliades, Mrs O'Brien said she previously worked as a barmaid and had "got a lead to the pub on the Pacific Highway at Wyoming". Mr Eliades said: "I also understand that you've got two children, is that right?" Either
Mr or Mrs O'Brien said: "Yes". Mr Eliades said: "It is up to you to make sure that you can handle the repayments." Bryson J said there were passages in Mr
Eliades' evidence which he thought very improbable. A striking example was what he said he was told by Mrs O'Brien about her having had experience working in hotels and her prospects of employment in one.

Mr Eliades had with him a schedule of the monthly repayments required for various loan amounts in respect of loans from Citicorp and what the repayments would be over the three year period in which Citicorp allowed the step up to operate. He was aware of the amount of the instalments which would be required to repay the loan and calculated "the plaintiffs' capacity to repay a loan of $60,000". He wrote on the Hooker Sales sale advice "$829.25 capacity". He was not able to say whether this amount represented the results of his own calculations or something he had been told by a Citicorp officer. He recalled that the O'Briens met Citicorp's repayment criteria. He told the O'Briens that by his calculations they satisfied Citicorp's guidelines, that for a mortgage of $60,000 the instalments were reduced for the first three years and that during this time the instalments were fixed. The instalments for the first year should be $746.81. He told them that after the third year the instalments would only fluctuate according to the interest rate. He said: "The purchase price is $67,000. The contract is conditional upon you being able to obtain finance, that is, there is no contract unless you can obtain finance. You will be applying to borrow $60,000 from Citicorp. You do not qualify for building society finance which would have had a lower interest rate. I will also be acting for Hooker and Citicorp on the sale to you." 
According to Mr Eliades, Mrs O'Brien said words to the effect that: "It is good that you are acting for the other parties because if you are handling everything the sale should go through by 10 December." Mr Eliades assisted the
O'Briens to prepare a Citicorp Real Estate Finance Application in which their total net income was shown as $306 per week and their assets as $39,600. This was signed by the O'Briens. No liabilities were disclosed. The document showed
Mr Eliades as their solicitor.

The O'Briens also signed the contract for sale. Bryson J accepted that Mr
Eliades gave the O'Briens a short explanation of the contract before they signed it, which, in the circumstances, was adequate and did not lead them into any difficulty. Mr Eliades knew from documents he already held what
Citicorp's repayment criteria were, and satisfied himself that the O'Briens met those criteria. Bryson J found that he probably gave the O'Briens advice about the monthly instalments under the mortgage from tables he then had.

A Citicorp mortgage loan worksheet for the loan to the O'Briens, which noted that their application had been received on 8 November 1982, was in evidence.
It included a calculation of "total capacity" in an amount of $592 per month.
Below this was handwritten "minimum required $580". The amount for total capacity was derived by deducting $887, the amount of monthly loan repayments shown for the second twelve months of the loan, from $1,479, the total net income per month, which was the sum of $1,066 per month net wage after tax, $260 per month part time job after tax and $153 per month tax rebate.

According to Mr O'Brien's income tax return for the year 1982 - 1983, his income net of tax from Telecom was $14,856 or $285 per week and from Sydney
Hospital about $86 per week, while it was earned, or $37.90 if spread across the whole year. Although his Honour did not comment upon it, this exceeded the monthly income, leaving aside the amount of tax rebate, used in Citicorp's worksheet to calculate the "total capacity" of $592 per month.

A two page document, addressed to the O'Briens from Citicorp, dated 11
November 1982 and advising that the loan had been provisionally approved subject to certain conditions, was also in evidence. On the morning of 3
December 1982 Mr Eliades, accompanied by Mr Roma, attended the O'Briens' home in Blacktown and showed them both pages of the Citicorp loan approval. The second page contained the following: "11. The loan shall be repayable by: equal monthly payments of $746.81 followed by, equal monthly payments of $886.81 followed by, equal monthly payments of $966.81 followed by, equal monthly payments of $1,063.49.
The above repayment schedule is subject to the `variation of interest' clause as detailed in the mortgage." 
Mr Eliades told the O'Briens that the amount of the advance was $60,000. He said: "The loan is for twenty years. The repayments will increase in accordance with the schedule in clause 11. If you are satisfied with this please sign the loan approval." In relation to the mortgage he told the
O'Briens the interest rate, the repayments for the first three years and thereafter. The O'Briens did not ask him any questions or raise any queries or worries about their capacity to repay the loan or meet the repayments. They looked through the mortgage and signed it, together with the acknowledgment, the undertaking and the authority to complete blanks. The O'Briens notified their acceptance of the loan approval, which was referred to as the finance agreement, by signing at the bottom of each page.

Bryson J found that Mr Eliades gave the O'Briens a short explanation of the terms of the loan and the mortgage and subsidiary documents which he had with him. His Honour accepted that Mr Eliades had pointed out and at that time the
O'Briens saw and understood what the finance agreement and the mortgage provided about monthly instalments and their escalation, and the rate of interest. Bryson J said that the probabilities to his mind were overwhelming that, well before they took the loan, the O'Briens found out that in the first year they would have to make monthly payments of $746. Mr O'Brien told the trial Judge that he had no interest in the next year's figures and that he did not understand that, but for the step loan, the monthly repayment would be in excess of $900. He said that he was never actually given a figure for monthly repayments and that he was surprised when he learnt it. However he agreed that he knew that the repayments in years 2 and 3 would be more and said that he was not concerned to ask what they would be. That was not of interest to him.

Despite the O'Briens' claim, his Honour was not able to find and did not find that Mr Eliades was instructed that it was important that there be no risk of repeating their experience at Blacktown where they had been forced to sell their home because they were unable to afford the repayments under the mortgage. His Honour was not prepared to find that Mr Eliades was given any instructions which stressed or made a particular concern of his need to avoid the kind of difficulties that the O'Briens had encountered in respect of meeting their obligations while in the Blacktown house. Bryson J said: "It seems to me, as a matter of probabilities, that the O'Briens could well have looked forward optimistically to a future in which they had to grapple with only one repayment commitment. They have not satisfied me that they made any particular point of asking Mr Eliades to avoid further difficulties of this kind for them." 
Mr O'Brien said that Mr Eliades did not tell him that he acted for Citicorp but said also that the O'Briens would have gone on with the transaction even if they had been told this. His Honour did not accept that on 5 November Mr
Eliades told the O'Briens that if they had difficulty in making the repayments on the loan to Citicorp he would be able to obtain a loan for them at a lower rate of repayments with NSW Permanent Building Society. Nor did Mr Eliades give them any assurance that work would be available on the Central Coast.
Bryson J found that Mr Eliades probably gave the O'Briens advice about the monthly instalments from the tables which he had and added: "A much more significant and reliable indication that the O'Briens clearly knew of the amounts of the mortgage instalments required was furnished by documents which they signed a month later on 3 December." 
His Honour said: "The O'Briens could hardly have failed to see the provisions on the second page of the finance agreement about the monthly instalments; they are set out in a fairly prominent way an inch or two above their signatures. It is hardly possible that they would have failed to interest themselves in that subject.
Similar considerations affect their knowledge of the provisions of the mortgage. Further it would be a truly remarkable piece of carelessness and a huge deviation from common prudence if Mr Eliades had obtained their signatures without pointing out the most rudimentary and important provisions of the finance agreement and mortgage. In the presence of these probabilities, and after reflecting on the evidence of all persons concerned, I accept Mr
Eliades' account of this interview as substantially correct in its salient features.
 ..........

In my view the O'Briens must have realised that the monthly repayments which
Citicorp would require would be much more than their monthly payments to NSW
Permanent Building Society had been, because the loan was to be for a much greater sum. The O'Briens knew by 30 November 1982 when they were committed to the purchase what the mortgage payments in the first year would be. They expected the rebate to reduce this. This expectation was based on something Mr
Roma had said which they did not pursue further. If they had taken it up with
Mr Eliades they would probably have got the benefit of his calculations performed with a view to the requirements of Citicorp; or, if he did not make calculations, of the knowledge that he obtained by inquiring of Citicorp about the view Citicorp took about the O'Briens' capacity, an element in which was that they were to receive a rebate at the rate of $153 per month. I find that
Mr O'Brien understood that the continuation of the rebate depended on
Government policy. Further, he was not under any misapprehension as to how the rebate would be claimed or the manner in which it would be received." 
Even so, his Honour accepted the O'Briens' allegation that by reason of their limited education it was beyond their capability to understand the respective documentation which they signed, and that the meaning and import of the documents and the terms and conditions therein were not explained or not adequately and accurately explained to them before they were executed. These facts, his Honour said, were of great importance for his conclusion that the contract was unjust. His Honour accepted the allegation that Mr Eliades encouraged the O'Briens to carry out the transaction including the finance agreement and the mortgage when, given the circumstances of the transaction and of the financial position of the O'Briens, it was unwise and unsafe for them to engage in such a transaction. His Honour said this was important for his conclusions relating to the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). In the circumstances he concluded that in their dealings with the O'Briens "all defendants", including Citicorp, engaged in a course of conduct which was unjust.

Bryson J did calculations which showed that, unless the O'Briens' income increased, the likely surpluses available to them each month for all other expenses after paying mortgage instalments were: " $ 
First year - 579.19 
Second year - 439.19 
Third year - 359.19 
Fourth year - 262.51" 
He said: "The view that the O'Briens would be able to pay the mortgage instalments depended heavily on the expectation that their income would increase. They were unlikely to find a way to reduce their rate of expenditure below the narrow circumstances allowed for a family of four persons by a net income of about $579.19 per month in December 1982. For them to have the same amount of money available in the fourth year as they would have in the first year, their monthly income net of tax would have to increase by about $316.68 or about $73 weekly or about 24%. Then too, there would have to be no adverse circumstances preventing Mr O'Brien from earning money or limiting his earning capacity, such as sickness or unemployment. If Mr O'Brien's earnings increased at a rate like that, they would probably increase as part of a general inflation, so that he would need much more than the number of dollars he had at the end of for his family to live on. If inflation including inflation of Mr
O'Brien's net income after tax continued at the rate of 8% per annum, the number of dollars available for them to live on would not fall; if inflation continued at a significantly higher rate, the number of dollars they had available to live on would rise and give them some hope of keeping up with the inflation. If they were not deprived of earnings by adverse contingencies, and if they found a way to increase their income greatly, or if inflation continued for a long time at a high rate, the O'Briens might hold on to their house long enough to see the day when their instalments start to reduce the principal. Their position was not hopeless, in the same way as the position of a roulette player is not hopeless, as the ball sometimes drops on the right number. If there were continuing high inflation for many years, and the
O'Briens were able to maintain their real income in the face of it, they could eventually get to own their house. Otherwise they had no real prospect of ever paying off the mortgage.

As I have said, the O'Briens are rather unsophisticated people. This is clearly shown by the fact that they entered into this transaction, and the facts shown how much they stood in need of a careful review and advice about their transaction and its likely outcome from someone with an understanding of the venture they were entering into." 
Things did not turn out as foreseen in November and December 1982. As soon as the sale had been settled Mr O'Brien left his job at Sydney Hospital, hoping to obtain another second job on the Central Coast. He made conscientious and reasonable efforts to find other employment but was unable to do so. In May he became sick, was hospitalised with appendicitis and had some weeks off work. The family's finances were upset and did not recover at any time significant for the case. Mrs O'Brien made conscientious and reasonable endeavours to find part time employment as a pharmacy assistant for which she had experience. She obtained such part time work for Saturday mornings in 1983 and further part time employment late in 1984. She also applied some of her energies to attempts to earn money by homes sales of jewellery and Tupperware, without significant results.

His Honour said that consideration of the O'Briens' capacity to obtain finance and, in relation thereto, to obtain it on a realistic basis which they could expect to meet was at the heart of the professional task which Mr Eliades undertook for them. The contract of sale contained special conditions 29 and which took Mr Eliades directly to consideration of the O'Briens' capacity to obtain finance. By special condition 29 the vendor undertook to procure the issue of approval to an application by the purchaser for first mortgage finance on the security of the property from a permanent building society in a sum of not less than $60,000 at an interest rate not exceeding 20.5 per cent per annum reducible for the term of not less than twenty years. Special condition 30 made the contract and completion thereof subject and conditional upon the issue and approval to the purchaser's application for first mortgage finance upon the security of the property sold from a permanent banking society, bank or other lending institution in the sum of not less than $60,000 at an interest rate not exceeding 20.5 per cent per annum reducible for a term of not less than twenty years. Neither party seems to have relied on special condition 29 or to have acted under it, apparently in recognition that it was not likely that a permanent building society would approve of such finance if it were applied for. However special condition 29 would, in his Honour's view, have furnished the O'Briens or their solicitor with a ready avenue out of the agreement, had they ever wished for one. His Honour said: "There was a need for Mr Eliades to consider the O'Briens' financial position, to protect their position and to advise them in relation to it having regard to these contract terms, and this made the terms on which they could obtain finance, the carriage of an application for finance and the feasibility of any proposal for finance matters within his retainer for which Mr Eliades incurred professional responsibility to the O'Briens. It could not be a reasonable view of his professional duty that he should only see that they got finance on some basis which enabled them to complete their purchase; the terms on which they obtained finance had to be related to the overall objective of owning and keeping the house, or the retainer would be futile. The professional responsibility incurred did not involve skill of any high order; simply a grasp of mathematics, and ordinary business experience in dealing with mortgage transactions which a solicitor must be expected to have. There was a need to be able to perceive and spell out patiently, to the point where the clients achieved comprehension, what the proposed finance by Citicorp involved in terms of obligations to pay money, not merely in absolute figures but in relation to the available money and how much of that available money would be left over. It would have been very easy for Mr Eliades to do these things because he considered and came to a conclusion about their capacity to repay when looking to Citicorp's interests. A solicitor acting reasonably in the discharge of his professional duty to the O'Briens would also be under an obligation to spell out to them the workings of their interest obligations under the mortgage and the impact of the provisions relating to reduced instalments in the first three years and the calculation of interest with monthly rests. A solicitor acting reasonably would also be under an obligation to point out to his clients the contingencies and difficulties which might prevent them from meeting their obligations. Unless Mr Eliades' responsibilities extended to these things, his professional responsibility with respect to tasks he actually did set about performing was futile. It is not enough for a solicitor to act out his instructions in a formal way as if in a dumb show; when dealing with clients whose involvement in business has been very little, he has to spell out the obvious.

It is plain enough that if either the O'Briens or Mr Eliades had taken the initiative to go in detail to the impact of the rebate on their monthly repayments, the figure of $153 would have been passed on to the O'Briens for their consideration, and its implications would have been borne in on them.
But they did not have this advantage.

Mr Eliades thought about the relevant considerations, adopting the methods of calculation and the point of view of Citicorp in doing so; that is, he did it in the interests of Citicorp. In the position in which he had placed himself of acting for both Citicorp and the O'Briens, it became his duty to make his insights about their capacity, and the basis of the, available to the
O'Briens. Having obtained information or come to the realisation or understanding about a commercial situation in the interest of one client, he was not in the position to withhold the advantages of that information or understanding from another of his clients, but came under an obligation to make that information and its basis available to the O'Briens for their consideration, if making them available would serve the O'Briens' interests.
This would still be true even if the performance of a retainer to them would not have required him to make the calculation or pass it on to them in a different set of circumstances where he had no instructions for anyone but them. His duty may be compared with his duty had he come by accident on a piece of information which it would be useful for the O'Briens to know; he would have to make the benefit of that information available to them, even if he had not been required by his retainer to obtain the information." 
Bryson J found that the O'Briens both knew from an early stage that Mr Eliades was to act for Hooker Homes and also knew he was acting for Citicorp. The bare fact that he acted for Citicorp was not of itself a breach of professional duty or a cause of loss but, according to his Honour, it made a significant contribution to Mr Eliades' conduct and the outcome of the transaction. In answer to counsel's contention that it would be an intolerable burden for a solicitor to have to find out whether all clients fully understood their transactions, his Honour said: "As counsel said, no further duty beyond the precise retainer arises. Yet the retainer must be carried out to a reasonable standard of professional care, skill and responsibility. In the O'Briens' circumstances it ought to have been very obvious to a reasonable solicitor acting for them that, putting together the facts of their income, prospects and the amounts of the obligations incurred, that the chances of their carrying their projects through to a successful outcome in which they owned the house and paid off their debts were very small. The difficulties which the O'Briens faced were so great, and to professional persons, so obvious that a solicitor could not reasonably leave them unstated.

In my finding the terms of the documents were not adequately explained, in that this effect of the workings of the documents was not brought home to the
O'Briens. The deficiency in explanation was not a deficiency in explaining the detail in what the documents said, or in explaining the broad nature of the documents. The deficiency was in explaining how the obligations undertaken would operate in the O'Briens' circumstances. It is not a matter of explaining anything obscure or subtle, requiring a deep knowledge of their affairs to understand. A superficial knowledge of their affairs was quite enough to show that there was a need to spell out where they would stand as they attempted to pay the instalments and meet the interest obligations. Mr Eliades gained quite enough knowledge to show this from the exercise of completing the application for finance, and from what he learnt about Citicorp's assessment of their repayment capacity.

Counsel contended that it should be found that if such advice had been given, it would have made no difference because Mr O'Brien had his mind focused on reduction of repayment obligations in the short term; I was asked to infer that Mr O'Brien was content to get by in the first year and see how he managed and was content to take his chances for the second and subsequent years. It was pointed out that Mr O'Brien is a man who takes risks. Indeed he is, but to my mind the manner in which he would have responded had the true situation which he was entering into been made known to him in plain language can be clearly inferred. Dealing with rational people, the probable response to their achieving a real understanding of a situation such as the O'Briens were entering into is plain. I do not accept the submission that a solicitor acting reasonably and faced with the information which Mr Eliades had, would regard it as appropriate not to be discouraging in offering his advice." 
After stating by reference to a number of cases the principles applicable under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), his
Honour dealt with what he described as Citicorp's position in conscience. He noted a submission that he should not visit on Citicorp any consequences of shortcomings in the performance of Mr Eliades of his responsibilities as solicitor for the O'Briens. He observed that it was not correct to approach either [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) or s[9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) with an initial assumption that it was the duty of a financier to give any advice. His
Honour continued: "A decision on those sections ought not to be based on some measure of the financier's performance against any such supposed duty, but should be based on the highly general expressions found in those sections, within the workings of which it is well conceivable that the fact that the financier did not point out some fact or circumstance or practical consideration to an intending borrower might have a bearing on a decision under either section. In particular, the matter in para (i) of subs 9 (2) directs attention to the extent, if any, to which the practical effects of provisions of the contract were accurately explained by any person, leading at once to consideration of who were the persons who conceivably might have given such an explanation, and in each case whether that person did so. To my mind it is of telling importance that there were really only two people who, in the facts as they were, were in a position to explain accurately the legal and practical effects of the contract, namely Mr Eliades and Citicorp, and that neither of them did so. To test the implications of this in terms of duty and to treat the absence of an accurate explanation as lacking significance if there were no duty would be to fail to have regard to para (i).

The O'Briens encountered and dealt with a working system of which Hooker
Homes, Mr Eliades and Citicorp were interacting parts. A continuing relationship, not well defined but well enough understood to be named as the relationship with a panel solicitor, existed between Mr Eliades and Citicorp.
In this relationship, Mr Eliades could be expected to act and give consideration to important questions from Citicorp's point of view even before he had instructions; he had information in his office relating to Citicorp's requirements and he in fact reviewed the prospects of the application from the point of view of the likelihood that it would be acceptable to Citicorp, and he gave consideration to testing it by reference to Citicorp's criteria even before the application was submitted. Citicorp's relationship with Mr Eliades and willingness to appoint him as its solicitor were factors influencing his conduct towards the O'Briens, in as much as they tended to inhibit his perception of any need to point out to them disadvantages of entering into the proposed transaction with Citicorp. Citicorp were advantaged by Mr Eliades' not embarking on any exercise of pointing out disadvantages of the proposed transaction to the O'Briens, and this is true whether or not I am correct in my view that he incurred a professional duty to the O'Briens to point them out." 
Bryson J applied the principles stated in his unreported decision in Official
Trustee in Bankruptcy versus Tooheys Limited, 24 June 1991, which the Court of
Appeal affirmed without reference to those principles. His Honour held that in equity a person is affected in conscience not only by conduct of agents acting within authority, but also by the actions of a wider group of whom it was not possible to give any better definition than that, in the circumstances of the relationship and the conduct of those concerned, responsibility in conscience was incurred for their conduct. With respect to his Honour, this proposition appears to be circular, but may be explained by his statement in the earlier case that obligations in conscience can arise from the conduct of purported representatives who actually act as the representatives of the party charged.
His Honour said: "In my view the facts that no retainer was given by Citicorp specifically in relation to this loan until Citicorp's letter of 11 November 1982, and that the things which Mr Eliades was retained to do were quite limited in scope do not draw limits around the position in conscience of Citicorp, or around its susceptibility to remedies under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) in relation to acts of Mr Eliades. In the circumstances the relationship between
Mr Eliades and Citicorp is such that Citicorp is liable to be affected in conscience by his conduct. In my opinion Citicorp ought not to be exempted from any association with shortcomings of Mr Eliades on any principles relating to persons who are innocent and ignorant of unjust circumstances." 
Bryson J was of opinion that it was not just Mr Eliades performing or not performing his professional duty as a solicitor which affected Citicorp. If the true position was that it was not part of his professional duty as a solicitor to explain fully to the O'Briens "what was going on, and what they were letting themselves in for, and their chances of getting out", the fact that there was an opportunity for him to do this and that he did not do it was still of great importance in appraising whether the contract was unjust and what remedy ought to be formulated in respect of that injustice. His Honour said: "The part actually played by Citicorp's own officers appears to me to be quite enough to justify the imposition of remedies under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) against
Citicorp, even without imputing any responsibility to Citicorp for any conduct or omission of Mr Eliades. The scant knowledge of the O'Briens affairs revealed by Citicorp's own papers and the assessment made of their capacity to pay, when taken with an understanding of Citicorp's own requirements for payment of instalments and the workings of its own mortgage with respect to interest, are quite enough to justify the remedies which I propose to award against Citicorp in this case. The use of the expression `Hooker Step Loan', obviously a common expression in Citicorp's office, is a small but significant part of the material in evidence which depicts a working system into which the
O'Briens were drawn, and from which Citicorp cannot divorce itself and claim to be innocent and ignorant of the operations of other persons who took part in the working system." 
Under the heading "The O'Briens enter the system", his Honour said: "The O'Briens became paper fodder to a working system that produced sales for
Hooker Homes, first mortgage secured loans for Citicorp, a plenitude of instructions for Mr Eliades but no realistic results for the O'Briens. A lot of papers were shuffled about and paid for but very little result was produced for them, only a very small chance that they might find their way through a formidable tangle of circumstances to repayment of their loan and unqualified ownership of their house.

Citicorp should not be treated as innocent and ignorant of the unjust circumstances or otherwise not susceptible to remedies in respect of the functioning of the working system to which I have referred, even though it was functioning in respect of the plaintiffs before Citicorp itself knew of their existence or had received any application from them; the working system then existed and tended to produce advantages which Citicorp has actually received and enjoyed." 
TRIAL JUDGE'S CONCLUSIONS 
Bryson J found that, if Mr Eliades had given the O'Briens appropriately full and clear advice about the interest which they were incurring, their obligation to pay instalments and the relation of these things to their income, they would probably not have gone on with the purchase or the loan. There was a negligent omission by Mr Eliades of the performance of this part of his professional duty. In his Honour's judgment, applying the test in [s9](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), the finance agreement and the mortgage were unjust and under [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) it was appropriate to grant remedies against Citicorp. The appropriate remedy was related to the elements in which those contracts were unjust. His Honour said: "Citicorp saw (or was in a position to see and did not trouble to observe) that the O'Briens were proceeding to enter into a transaction which had only small prospects of a successful outcome for them. It was not altogether impossible that it would have a successful outcome for them, but I have compared the possibilities with roulette and a gamble on the ball falling on one of 36 numbers. On the other hand Citicorp entered on to what appeared to be and proved to be good business for it, an investment at a very good rate of interest with first mortgage security and a small equity investment by the borrower, small but as events turned out sufficient, and although there were a number of difficulties in the administration of the loan and the need presented itself to consider and allow concessions to the O'Briens when they fell into financial difficulties, the piece of business ended when the
O'Briens sold the property and paid all the principal and interest in full, without Citicorp's having to exercise any of its powers as mortgagee. There was extreme inequality in the likelihood of successful outcomes for the two parties, and Citicorp was in a position to see that this was so quite clearly, having regard to the nature of its business and the experience which it must have. It was unjust for Citicorp to enter into a loan agreement on these terms with the O'Briens at all. The just and fair thing to do was to tell the
O'Briens that they were not in a position to get a loan of $60,000." 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
Bryson J said that an aspect of Mr Eliades' position of acting for three parties was that it made him less able to give the O'Briens firm advice adverse to their going on with the transactions, if that advice were appropriate. His own financial interests and the financial interests of his other clients were adverse to his giving such advice, and a solicitor should not have been in such a position. 
In Clark Boyce versus Mouat [1994] 1 AC 428, Lord Jauncey of Tullichettle giving the judgment of the Privy Council at 435 said: "There is no general rule of law to the effect that a solicitor should never act for both parties in a transaction where their interest may conflict.
Rather is the position that he may act provided that he has obtained the informed consent of both to his acting. Informed consent means consent given in the knowledge that there is a conflict between the parties and that as a result the solicitor may be disabled from disclosing to each party the full knowledge which he possesses as to the transaction or may be disabled from giving advice to one party which conflicts with the interests of the other. If the parties are content to proceed upon this basis the solicitor may properly act." 
At 436 his Lordship said: "In determining whether a solicitor has obtained informed consent to acting for parties with conflicting interests it is essential to determine precisely what services are required of him by the parties. In this case Holland J was satisfied that Mrs Mouat was not concerned about the wisdom of the transaction and was: `merely [seeking] the services of the solicitor to ensure that the transaction [was] given proper and full effect by way of ascertaining questions of title and ensuring that by appropriate documentation the parties [achieved] what they [had] contracted for.' " 
With respect it seems to me that what his Lordship said correctly states the position. The first question is what services the O'Briens required and Mr
Eliades agreed to provide. Unfortunately Bryson J made no clear finding about this.

SOLICITOR'S DUTY 
Bryson J quoted from Hogan versus Howard Finance Limited [(1987) ASC 55-594], inevitably led to a reappraisal of the isolation of a solicitor from the reach of the ordinary law of negligence in relation to his professional dealings with a client. "The clear trend of modern authority is to support the approach that the duty of care owed by a solicitor to a client in respect of professional work prima facie transcends that contained in the express or implied terms of the contract between them and includes the ordinary duty of care arising under the common law of negligence." 
In Cousins versus Cousins (unreported) Court of Appeal 18 December 1990,
Priestley JA said: "Whether it is yet possible to express in general terms the duty that arises at common law from the relationship, as distinct from the contract, between client and solicitor, is not clear. Deane J in Hawkins stated the position in terms of a general rule, but neither Brennan J nor Gaudron J, the other members of the majority (Mason CJ and Wilson J having dissented) appear to have fully agreed with him. Brennan J stated the specific duty that arose on the circumstances of that case, without stating the position for solicitors generally." 
His Honour referred to Waimond Pty Limited versus Byrne [(1989) 18 NSWLR ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2018%20NSWLR%20642 "View LawCiteRecord" ), for the proposition that this Court has not yet committed itself to adoption of the views of Deane J. Priestley JA continued: "Notwithstanding that the view of Deane J was not in a formal sense part of the ratio decidendi of Hawkins, it seems to me to be very much in accordance with the trend of development in the law of negligence in the High Court in recent years, and I will assume for the purposes of the present case that it accurately states the law for Australia. What Deane J said was: `The relationship of solicitor and client is ...... a relationship of proximity which ordinarily involved the combination of those elements with respect to foreseeable loss which may be caused to the client by the performance of professional work. It is a relationship of proximity of a kind which may well give rise to a duty of care on the part of the solicitor which requires the taking of positive steps, beyond the specifically agreed professional task or function, to avoid a real and foreseeable risk of economic loss being sustained by the client. Whether the solicitor-client relationship does give rise to a duty of care requiring the taking of such positive steps will depend upon the nature of the particular professional task or function which is involved in the circumstances of the case.' (at 579) 
The sentence particularly relevant here is that stating that there may be proximity `which may well give rise to a duty of care' requiring the solicitor to do something more beyond what he has been specifically retained to do.
Deane J was contemplating both that some case would and other cases would not require a solicitor to do more than he was specifically retained to do." 
MR ELIADES' CROSS APPEAL 
Mr Eliades was retained, as his memoranda of fees stated, to act on behalf of the O'Briens on the contract for sale and on the mortgage of the property. In addition he assisted the O'Briens in preparing the application to Citicorp for finance. As a matter of contract, such a retainer would not, by inference or implication, extend to require him to provide financial advice to the
O'Briens. Nothing in the surrounding circumstances found by his Honour allowed such a term to be inferred or implied. Furthermore, applying the decision in
Hedley Byrne to which Deane J referred, the existence of any duty not found in the express, inferred or implied terms of the retainer would depend upon the solicitor's assuming responsibility to the plaintiff and the plaintiff's relying upon the solicitor to perform diligently and skilfully the services for which the solicitor so assumed responsibility: Hawkins versus Clayton at 578;
Henderson versus Merrett Syndicates Pty Limited <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ] at -1 and 205-6; White versus Jones <case>; [[1995] 2 AC ] at -70.

The O'Briens failed to establish that their retainer of Mr Eliades contained a term obliging him to furnish financial or investment advice or advice about the viability or desirability of the financial agreement with Citicorp or the mortgage. The only evidence that Mr Eliades assumed some wider responsibility was contained in the following interchange when cross examined by Mr McInnes
QC for the O'Briens: "Q. Did it not occur to you that enthusiasm may have been carrying the
O'Briens away a little bit and that they needed financial advice? A. Yes.

Q. Did you ever suggest to them that they go and see another solicitor? A. No,
I don't believe I did.

Q. Well, wasn't this a situation that clearly called for independent advice?
A. You must remember they also had a solicitor engaged at the time and they could have gone to him, but --- 
Q. Did you tell them that they should go and see someone else to discuss their financial affairs? A. No, no. I didn't.

Q. Couldn't you see a substantial danger to them by undertaking this mortgage?
A. That's why I placed so much emphasis on explaining the documents and making sure even to ask the effect -- 
Q. Mr Eliades, did you tell them that there was a danger in taking out this mortgage? A. I told - I explained all the terms of the mortgage to them.

Q. Did you tell them that there was a danger in taking it out? A. I don't think I said a `danger' in taking it out.

Q. Did you tell them that the finances that they would need would have to increase? A. Yes." 
A little later he was asked: "Q. ......... What I am suggesting to you was not this a situation where given what you knew about the O'Briens' finances and the fact that you had some doubts as to whether Mr O'Brien could continue to earn the $60 a week and the fact that they were excited and enthusiastic and possibly looking at the thing through rose-coloured glasses, didn't you think that all out for someone independent of yourself to give them advice? A. When you say their finances, you mean just their incomes because I had no idea of their difficulties.

Q. And their ability to repay? A. I had no idea of their difficulties. When you say about their finances, you just mean their incomes. No, I saw their incomes, I sat down and explained their mortgages. I would have whether I acted for Citicorp or not? I asked about whatever fears I had, that was that second job. They were satisfied. Mrs O'Brien is a very clever woman and she said, you know, they were quite satisfied with the repayments and they told me that they could handle it.

Q. You have said all that, Mr Eliades, but didn't it occur to you that this was a situation, given the O'Briens' earnings, the likelihood of there being a drop of $60, the fact that the mortgage repayments were going to increase? A.
Yes, you said that, but there wasn't a likelihood of the $60 dropping in the immediate term. It was going to be replaced. It's not dropping. You are indicating they are going to be handling higher repayments and coping on a wage of $246 when the intention when they spoke to me was that, yes, it may drop the $60, but it will be supplemented by a greater wage which would be Mrs
O'Brien's.

Q. Where? A. Well, when they obtained another job." 
In re-examination by Mr Simpkins, who appeared for him, Mr Eliades gave the following evidence: "Q. You I think agreed with the proposition that the O'Briens were optimistic when you first saw them and you felt they needed some financial advice? A.
Yes.

Q. What was the financial advice you thought they then needed? A. When I first saw them? 
Q. When you first saw them. A. I had always - the policy was to get the best finance you can. They had been introduced to a Citicorp loan and I wanted to establish with them that building society finance wasn't available otherwise and I would try to get building society finance. I said, `You realise you can't get building society finance on your income,' and Mrs O'Brien responded to that. Also setting out the financial advice as to the repayments they would have to make on the scheme and generally how the scheme worked. What a stepped loan did and that, although the interest rate may be 18.96 per cent overall, or whatever the interest rate was for the finance company, that the step had the effect of dropping it down in the later years with the basic principal.
While people don't understand the intricate part of finance, I would say it's a stepped loan and the way they get their money back in dropping the interest in the first years is to add a little bit in the fourth and successive years until the 20 year term." 
There was no evidence that the O'Briens looked to Mr Eliades to advise them about the financial wisdom of buying the house or of the finance agreement or mortgage. The O'Briens' evidence was that they had decided they could afford the proposed loan before meeting Mr Eliades for the first time and retaining him. At the time of the first meeting on 5 November 1982, Mr O'Brien was not concerned to ask Mr Eliades about the amounts of the repayments for the second and third year because at that time they were not of any interest to him.

Mr Eliades assisted the O'Briens in the completion of the application for finance form upon the basis of information provided by them. The O'Briens did not ask him to calculate the capacity figure. He did it to satisfy himself that there was some prospect of finance being obtained if the application was made. Mr Eliades did not inquire into the full financial circumstances of the
O'Briens, nor were those circumstances volunteered. No information was provided to him to enable him to perform the different exercise of determining the feasibility of the O'Briens' being able to meet the repayment obligations to Citicorp in the event that finance was approved. He told the O'Briens it was up to them to make sure that they could handle the repayments in the event that finance was approved. He was not cross examined about this. Mrs O'Brien gave contrary evidence but Mr O'Brien did not.

Furthermore there was no evidence that, if Mr Eliades had given warnings, such as those suggested on the Court's invitation by Mr McInnes, to get financial advice or not to go ahead with the loan, this would have resulted in the
O'Briens following a different course from the one they did follow. The
O'Briens had already agreed to sell their house at Blacktown and decided to move to the Central Coast.

Bryson J said that the probable response to the O'Briens' achieving "a real understanding" of the situation they were entering into was plain. This raises the question of what it was of which the O'Briens did not have "a real understanding". In the course of cross examination Mrs O'Brien gave the following evidence: "Q. Well, I take it that the one thing you did appreciate when you first spoke to Mr Roma about the possibility of purchasing a property was that if the purchase required the borrowing by you and your husband of something like $60,000 you and your husband would be at risk of defaulting under that mortgage? A. No, I didn't think we would be at risk because we at that time had eleven and a half thousand dollars or approximately in our hand and no other debts. We had paid out all our debts and it was like a fresh start, and we had no other debts at the time, and the maintaining of the mortgage, I didn't think, would be a problem.
 ......

Q. Well, you realised, didn't you, that even with the pay out of a couple of thousand dollars off a higher purchase commitment, that you hadn't been able to meet the repayment under the $30,000 mortgage, chances were that you wouldn't be able to meet them under a $60,000 mortgage? A. No, I didn't, as I said because we only had a mortgage to pay, we had nothing else to pay out." 
Later Mrs O'Brien was asked: "Q. And if you were talking to Mr Roma in late 1982 about borrowing $60,000 you would have realised, would you not, that was twice the amount that had been borrowed by the New South Wales Permanent Building Society for Blacktown?
A. Yes.

Q. And you knew, didn't you, in late 1982 that you and your husband had not been able to meet the obligation to pay regular instalments under that
Blacktown mortgage? A. Because of other debts, yes." 
These were the perceived effects of refinancing. But there were other factors such as the sale of the house at Blacktown, and the desire to move to the
Central Coast and to complete the purchase of a new home by Christmas 1982.
The O'Briens considered there would be more work or more work opportunities on the Central Coast. Mr Simpkins submitted it was inherently improbable that if
Mr Eliades had relayed to the O'Briens matters about which Bryson J had found they already knew, this would have interfered with the course they had decided upon of moving to the Central Coast.

Mr McInnes centred his argument on the terms of the finance application and the calculations Mr Eliades and Citicorp made of capacity. The finance application disclosed a total net income of $306 per week. It was said that
Citicorp took it upon itself to add in as income the tax rebate of $153 per month for the purpose of determining capacity. That Citicorp had done so was not conveyed to the O'Briens. If one were to disregard the amount of $153 and adopt Citicorp's minimum requirement of $580 as the total capacity after deducting the monthly payment from the total net income, the amount remaining of $746 would have been barely sufficient to meet the instalments for the first twelve months. It was submitted that it should have been brought to the
O'Briens' attention that, in Citicorp's view, a loan should not have been made unless the borrower had a capacity measured by $560 per month left to the borrower after paying monthly repayment instalments. Furthermore it was submitted that, even if one were to accept the amount of the tax rebate as part of the O'Briens' income, the accepted minimum amount of $580 on their disclosed income would have left insufficient funds to pay monthly instalments for the third and following years.

It is not clear what Bryson J meant when he said that the O'Briens did not have the advantage of knowing the impact of the tax rebate on their monthly repayment and that, because the figure of $153 had not been passed on to them for their consideration, its implications were not borne in on them. Bryson J found that the O'Briens expected the mortgage payments in the first year to be reduced by the tax rebate and Mr O'Brien understood that the continuation of the rebate depended on Government policy. Moreover Mr O'Brien was not under any misapprehension as to how the rebate would be claimed or the manner in which it would be received. The point seems to have been that the O'Briens were not told that the rebate was taken into account by Citicorp in determining their eligibility for a loan.

With due respect, in my opinion, the argument overlooks the purpose of
Citicorp's formula. For reasons not disclosed in the evidence, Citicorp chose to determine whether the loan should be granted by reference to a formula calculated by using the amount of the second years' monthly instalments and requiring a minimum, after deducting that monthly amount from the O'Briens' income, of $560. The O'Briens satisfied this criterion. They met Citicorp's requirements. The appropriateness of using this formula was not challenged.
The only challenge was directed to the inclusion in it of the tax rebate.
However, at the time, all parties, including the O'Briens, anticipated that this rebate would be available to them in part at least in respect of the year ended 30 June 1983, that is to say before the second year instalments commencing in December 1983 came to be paid, and thereafter from year to year.
There is nothing inappropriate in Citicorp taking account of this in determining the O'Briens' eligibility for a loan. I am not persuaded that either Citicorp or Mr Eliades was under any duty to tell the O'Briens upon what basis their eligibility was determined or that, if they had had this information, it would have made the slightest difference to the course they followed. There is no evidence to suggest that it would. I do not accept that the fact that Citicorp brought into account the tax rebate, in determining the
O'Briens' eligibility for the loan, was a matter of the significance that
Bryson J thought. The O'Briens knew what the instalment payments would be and knew what their income was. They knew also that they could obtain the benefit of a tax rebate. That Citicorp used this information in determining their eligibility is not surprising and of no consequence in this case.

Mr Emmett QC, who appeared for Citicorp, and Mr Simpkins pointed out that his
Honour's income surplus figures not only ignored the amount of the tax rebate but also the evidence Mrs O'Brien gave of her intention to re-enter the workforce part time, which she did. The benchmark of $580 reflected Citicorp's lending criteria, not the O'Briens actual requirements for non-loan related expenditure about which they gave no evidence and told Mr Eliades nothing.
Moreover the net income figure of $306 per week used by his Honour was less than the after tax income revealed by Mr O'Brien's 1983 income tax return, the only one in evidence.

His Honour found that Mr Eliades' own financial interests and the financial interests of his other clients were adverse to his giving advice to the
O'Briens for their not going on with the transaction if that advice were appropriate. But it was never suggested to Mr Eliades and not found by his
Honour that, but for these financial interests, he would have given such advice.

With respect to Bryson J, I am unable to accept that the terms of Mr Eliades' retainer or the general principles discussed in Hawkins versus Clayton placed at the heart of the professional task Mr Eliades undertook for the O'Briens the need to consider their capacity to obtain finance and to obtain it on a realistic basis, which they could expect to meet. Nor do I understand how the fact that the contract for sale contained special conditions making it subject to the O'Briens' obtaining finance could produce this result. His Honour's approach imposed a duty upon Mr Eliades outside the terms of his retainer to act for the O'Briens on the contract for sale and on the mortgage and outside any responsibility assumed by him or relied upon by the O'Briens. Such terms were not discussed between the parties and the only evidence of any separate assumption of responsibility was that which I have quoted and which was explained in the re-examination of Mr Eliades. His Honour made no findings as to the terms of the retainer or assumption of responsibility based on evidence which could support the conclusion he reached. In my opinion it was not open to him.

His Honour said that there was a need to be able to perceive and spell out patiently, to the point where the clients achieved comprehension, what the proposed finance by Citicorp involved in terms of obligations to pay money, "not merely in absolute figures but in relation to the available money and how much of that available money would be left over." In terms of the absolute figures the O'Briens knew no less than Mr Eliades. In terms of what available money would be left over Mr Eliades knew less than they. He was told no more than that their net weekly income at the time of the transaction was $306 and, as his Honour found, that Mr O'Brien knew of the future repayment instalments but that they were not of interest to him.

In my opinion the difficulties faced by the O'Briens which his Honour considered were so great and, to professional persons, so obvious that a solicitor could not reasonably leave them unstated, did not impose the duty his Honour held Mr Eliades to be under. Stated bluntly, such a duty would require solicitors, retained to act on a purchase or mortgage for their skill in the law, to inform every client for whom they so acted of their views about the financial prospects of the purchase or mortgage where they felt or ought reasonably to have felt that there was risk of loss. One consequence of this would be to require solicitors to give opinions, which they were not qualified to give, with the obvious consequence that if they were wrong and the client had acted on the basis of those views, they would be liable in negligence. For good reason such a proposition is contrary to authority. The solicitor's duty is found in the terms of the retainer and the ambit of any additional assumed responsibility relied upon.

Moreover, in order to make such a case in negligence, the O'Briens were bound to prove that, if Mr Eliades had advised them for the reasons suggested not to go on with the contract for purchase or finance, they would have acted on that advice. They gave no such evidence and in my opinion it was not open to his
Honour to infer in the absence of any such evidence that the O'Briens would have taken some course other than the course they did in fact take.

In my opinion Mr Eliades' cross appeal should be upheld and he is entitled to judgment in the proceedings.

CITICORP'S APPEAL 
The Court's power to make an order under [s7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) (1) of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) requires a finding that a contract or a provision of a contract was unjust "in the circumstances relating to the contract at the time it was made". As McHugh JA pointed out in West versus AGC (Advances) Limited [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610] at 621, it is not the transaction but the contract which must be initially examined. The Act regulates contracts not investments. "If a defendant has not been engaged in conduct depriving the claimant of a real or informed choice to enter into a contract and the terms of the contract are reasonable as between the parties, I do not see how that contract can be considered unjust simply because it was not in the interest of the claimant to make the contract or because she had no independent advice." In the present case there was no suggestion that the terms of the finance agreement or the mortgage were not reasonable as between the parties. I find it hard to see how Citicorp could be said to have engaged in conduct depriving the O'Briens of a real or informed choice to enter into the agreement or the mortgage. 
Bryson J made particular reference to s9 (2) (i) which requires the Court to have regard to the extent (if any) to which the provisions of the contract and their legal and practical effect were accurately explained to the party seeking relief and whether or not that party understood the provisions and their effect. Since his Honour found that the significant features of the finance agreement and the mortgage were made known to and understood by the
O'Briens, his Honour could only have been referring to the failure to communicate the basis upon which Citicorp determined that the O'Briens were eligible for a loan and, in particular, the failure to draw attention to the fact that the tax rebate had been taken into account. His Honour referred to a working system of which Hooker Homes, Mr Eliades and Citicorp were interacting parts and to the fact that at some stage, apparently before this transaction,
Mr Eliades became a panel solicitor on the Citicorp panel. His Honour regarded it as significant that Citicorp was advantaged by Mr Eliades not embarking on any exercise of pointing out disadvantages in the proposed transaction to the
O'Briens. In my opinion it was not open to his Honour to find Mr Eliades guilty of any shortcomings in his relationship with the O'Briens so that, in this sense, nothing that he did affected the conscience of Citicorp.

With respect it is difficult to discern from what his Honour said how, in accordance with principle, he came to conclude that the contract was unjust so that he had power to make an order under the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). His
Honour said that Citicorp saw (or was in a position to see and did not trouble to observe) that the O'Briens were proceeding to enter into a transaction which had only small prospects of a successful outcome for them and on the other hand Citicorp entered on to what appeared to be and proved to be a good business for it. "There was extreme inequality in the likelihood of successful outcomes for the two parties, and Citicorp was in a position to see that this was so quite clearly, having regard to the nature of its business and the experience which it must have. It was unjust for Citicorp to enter into a loan agreement on these terms with the O'Briens at all. The just and fair thing to do was to tell the O'Briens that they were not in a position to get a loan of $60,000." In my opinion this approach was erroneous.

A contract is not unjust within the meaning of the Act because one party has made a good bargain and believes the other party has made a bad one. To say that, in such a situation, the first party must not enter into the contract is to stifle commerce. Moreover, with respect, there seems to be a good deal of hindsight built into his Honour's conclusions. Citicorp were prepared to lend money to the O'Briens where apparently, on the evidence, others, such as permanent building societies, were not, but on a higher ratio of loan to security and at a higher rate of interest. As it happened, even though the borrowers were unable ultimately to meet their commitments, Citicorp suffered no loss. But that is not to say there was no risk that it would not suffer loss. Other money lenders were not prepared to take that risk. Provided the terms of the contract are reasonable and the parties have a real or informed choice to enter into the contract, I do not think the Act should be used by the Court as a means to prevent them from doing so. In my opinion there is no basis at all upon which it could be said that either the finance agreement or the mortgage was unjust within the meaning of the [Contracts Review
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) and accordingly no orders under that Act could be made.

THE O'BRIENS' CROSS APPEAL 
The O'Briens cross appealed on the ground that Bryson J should have held that
Mr Eliades was liable for the whole of the damages awarded and not merely the sum of $2. It follows from the conclusion that there should be judgment for Mr
Eliades that this cross appeal should be dismissed.

ORDERS 
I propose the following orders: Dismiss the appeal against the third respondent, Hooker Homes Pty Limited;
Allow the appeal against the first and second respondents, Laurence
Anthony O'Brien and Roslyn O'Brien and the cross appeal by the fourth respondent, James George Eliades;
Dismiss the cross appeal of the first and second respondents, Laurence
Anthony O'Brien and Roslyn O'Brien;
Set aside the orders made by Bryson J on 4 June 1993;
In lieu thereof judgment for the second and third defendants in the proceedings No ED 4679/88;
The first and second respondents, Laurence Anthony O'Brien and Roslyn
O'Brien, to pay the costs of the appellant, Citicorp Australia Limited, and the fourth respondent, James George Eliades, of the appeal and cross appeals but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) if so qualified.

ABADEE AJA: I agree with the reasons for judgment of Sheller JA and the orders proposed by him.
 * * * 
