

Lek and Ors versus Wong and Ors Matter No 50112/97 [1998] NSWSC 475 (27 July )

Last Updated: 6 November 1998 
SUANG LEK & ORS versus MAY CHAN WONG & ORS /97 July 1998 
Rolfe J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Commercial Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by way of a Summons filed on 24 May 1997. On 20 February 1998 Giles CJCommD specially fixed them for hearing to commence on 15 April 1998. On 7 April 1998 his Honour, on the basis of the material appearing in the affidavit of Mr Annis-Brown, the solicitor then appearing for the defendants, vacated the hearing date and subsequently, on 17 April 1998, fixed the hearing to commence to-day. 
On 14 July 1998 a letter purporting to have been written by the first and second defendants, on the letterhead of the third defendant, was forwarded to the Registrar of the Court seeking, in effect, an adjournment because of the "current economic slow down in Asia", which it was asserted had "badly affected our company".

On 16 July 1998 I caused my Associate to forward a letter to the defendants at the facsimile number shown on the communication from them, with copies to the solicitors for the plaintiff and the solicitors for the defendant advising, inter alia, that the matter would be listed to-day when I would deal with any application which may be made "including any application by the plaintiffs to proceed in your absence".

On 14 July 1998 a further facsimile transmission was received on the letterhead of the third defendant addressed to the Deputy Registrar headed "Without Prejudice" and "Request for Settlement Out of Court". It stated, firstly, "that the case against Suang is scheduled for hearing on 27 July ". The letter went on to deal with various financial problems the defendants are allegedly encountering and stated they were prepared to make an offer in an unspecified amount. The penultimate paragraph read:- "If she is not agreeable" (that is to accept the amount offered whatever it may have been) "then we have no choice but to allow her to carry on the proceedings in our absence and have the Judgement passed against us. She can then proceed to make us a Bankrupt. This will not be beneficial to any parties." 
I have not caused any response to be sent to that facsimile transmission. The matter was called on for hearing at 10 am this morning and the three defendants were called three times outside the Court and did not appear. Mr
Annis-Brown appeared as a matter of courtesy to the Court, he having previously filed a Notice of Ceasing to Act, and I handed to Mr Coleman of
Counsel, who appears on behalf of the plaintiffs, and Mr Annis-Brown a copy of the facsimile transmission of 24 July 1998. Mr Coleman has stated that his clients are desirous of proceeding, and in the circumstances I see no reason why that should not occur, nor do I see any reason why I should not excuse Mr
Annis-Brown from further attendance and I thank him for attending and indicating the position to the Court including his statement that as at 10 o'clock this morning he had no further instructions. It will be obvious from what I have said that Mr Annis-Brown has been in Court since the matter was called and remains in Court whilst I have given these reasons.

I have stated already, albeit briefly, the background of these proceedings. I am satisfied that the plaintiffs are entitled to a total judgment of $437,183.08 and I propose to order judgment in favour of the second plaintiff in that amount forthwith. The reason I am doing that, and before I publish my reasons, is that there is a possibility that there may be a fluctuation in the exchange rates and I do not think that the defendant should be further prejudiced if there is any such fluctuation. I propose, however, to give my reasons for the ordering of judgment in some little detail and a little later this week.

The orders of the Court are that there be judgment in favour of the second plaintiff against the defendants in the sum of $AUS437,183.08 and that the defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings. I have given some thought to whether it should only be the second plaintiff's costs of the proceedings but it seems to me that the costs will be essentially the same.
When I publish my reasons I will make an order that the exhibit be returned.
 (At 12 noon) I vacate the orders I made this morning. I will be entering judgment in favour of the plaintiffs later this week but having regard to the figures provided to me to-day by Mr Coleman. * * * 
