

Cepus versus Industrial Court of New South Wales and Anor Nos. Ca 40235/94; Ic
Ct-1056/92; Ic Ct-1132/93 Administrative Law - Industrial Law - Law Reform [1995] NSWSC 95 (24 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), PRIESTLEY(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 10 May 1995 #DATE 30:6:1995 #ADD 24:10:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant:    P M Kite 
Solicitors for the Claimant:   Grahame Goldberg
Partners 
Counsel for the 1st Opponent   Submitting appearance (Industrial Court): 
Solicitor for the 1st Opponent  I V
Knight, (Industrial Court):        Crown Solicitor (submitting) 
Counsel for the 2nd Opponent   J R Sackar QC and :
J V Murphy 
Solicitors for the 2nd Opponent Mallesons Stephen Jaques :
ORDER
Summons dismissed with costs
JUDGE1
KIRBY P This Court has before it a summons for judicial review directed to the Industrial Court of New South Wales (the first opponent). That Court has submitted to the orders of this Court and has been excused. The real contest lies between Mr
Robert Cepus (the claimant) and Heggies Transport Pty Limited (the second opponent). The claimant contends, in two ways put alternatively, that the Full Court of the Industrial Court exceeded its jurisdiction in unanimously dismissing an appeal to it from orders earlier made in the
Industrial Court by Maidment J.
The first argument of the claimant is that, by certain procedures which were followed by the Full Court of the Industrial Court, he was deified procedural fairness. Alternatively, he contends that, from the reasons of the
Full Court it is apparent that their Honours constructively failed to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon them by the
Industrial Relations Act 1991 (the
Act).
Standing in the way of the provision by this Court of relief to the claimant is the privative provision of <case> of the Act. Like the earlier provisions of <case>(a) of the Industrial Arbitration Act 1940, this provision imposes limits on the granting by this Court of remedies in the nature of judicial review. Such limitations are in keeping with the high standing of the Industrial Court, recognised by express statutory provision, the specialist nature of its jurisdiction and the often sensitive, urgent and difficult matters with which it must deal. No appeal lies to this Court from decisions of the
Industrial Court, whether at first instance or of a Full
Court. Nevertheless, it was not disputed that, if the claimant could establish departure from the rules of procedural fairness or such a manifest misconstruction of the law as to constitute a constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction, orders of judicial review might be made. See Ex parte Blackwell;
Re Halley and Anor (1965) 83 WN (Pt 1) ; Reischauer versus Knoblanche and
Anor [(1987) 10 NSWLR 40 (CA)], 717; Svecova versus Industrial
Commission of New South Wales and Anor [(1991) 39 IR 328 (NSWCA)], 330, 342.
 
Disputed application of an industrial determination
The facts were not really in dispute. In June 1992, the claimant sought an order from the Industrial Court that the second opponent was liable to pay him the sum of $284,150.58. This sum was the difference between what the second opponent had paid the claimant and what the claimant asserted he was entitled to receive under the provisions of the Transport Industry - Quarried Materials etc Carriers Contract Determination (the Determination).
In July , the claimant amended his application pursuant to <case> of the Act. In August 1992, the second opponent filed its grounds of defence. The proceedings were heard before Maidment J. The claimant's case was that between July 1986 and 11 June 1992, he had performed contracts of carriage for the second opponent regulated by the Determination and had been underpaid. The materials carried by the claimant, pursuant to the contracts, were zinc concentrate, lead concentrate, copper concentrate, gypsum, iron ore, serpentine and limestone. Before Maidment J, the second opponent conceded that cartage by the claimant of sand and road base was regulated by the
Determination.
In the way of these things, the dispute took five hearing days at trial. I do not pause to comment upon the apparent inefficiency of a dispute resolution system which runs up costs so disproportionate to the stake. On 7 May 1993,
Maidment
J delivered his judgment. He held that the Determination did not apply to the contracts of carriage of the materials which were disputed.
He concluded that the Determination, in subclause 2(2), providing alternative means of calculating the indebtedness of the second opponent to the claimant, namely payment at an appropriate quantity/distance rate or payment at the appropriate hourly rate. in his reasons, Maidment J did not doubt the sincerity of the belief of the claimant that he was offered work on a quantity distance basis.
However, he concluded that the evidence led him to the opinion that the trips were offered to him on a price per tonnage basis.
From this decision, the claimant appealed to the Full Court of the
Industrial Court pursuant to <case>(d) of the Act. Among the grounds of appeal were objections to Maidment J's construction of cl 22 of the
Determination and to the action of his Honour in "admitting and relying upon extrinsic material to aid the construction" of the clause ... "in the absence of any ambiguity or want of clarity in the relevant words".
These grounds of appeal were addressed to the action of Maidment J in relying upon certain extrinsic material in giving meaning to the disputed provision of the Determination. Thus, his Honour relied upon: .
The record of proceedings before Liddy J in the former Industrial
Commission of New South Wales, which led to the making of the Determination;
Copies of two <case> agreements which were replaced by the Determination;
Evidence of a former honorary officer of the
Quarry Masters' Association of New South Wales (Mr Ron Pike) describing the history of negotiations which led to the making of the
Determination and relevant to the suggested subjective intentions of the parties concerning the proposed scope of the
Determination;
Evidence of a metallurgist (Mr Peter Tillyard) about the nature and composition of the metals carried by the claimant; and
An inspection of the metal concentrator at Woodlawn Mine from which the claimant collected the product for carriage.

In taking the course he did, in referring to such extrinsic materials in order to construe the scope of the Determination and the meaning of the provisions relating to its scope, Maidment J appears to have followed a long established practice of the Industrial
Court and its predecessor which it is no business of this Court to disturb. See In re Racecourse Totalisators
Employees' Association of New South Wales [(1948) AR 43 (IC)], 517.
 
Decision of the Full Industrial Court
The Full Industrial Court, as constituted to hear the appeal from
Maidment J's decision, comprised Glynn, Cullen and Marks JJ. See Robert Cepus v Heggies Transport Pty Limited [(1994) 52 IR 123 (NSWIC] - FC). The proceedings before that Court were heard over three days in October 1993.
Thus, the relatively small amount at stake in these proceedings consumed no fewer than seven days in the Industrial Court.
On 11 February 1994, the judgment of the Full Court was handed down. It is that judgment, and the circumstances immediately preceding its delivery, which occasion the summons in this Court.
The Full Court unanimously dismissed the claimant's appeal. The decision of Maidment J was upheld insofar as it concerned the scope of the
Determination. In joint reasons, Glynn and Cullen JJ upheld the decision of
Maidment J as to the availability of alternative methods of calculating payments under the Determination. Their Honours remitted the matter to
Maidment
J for final decision in relation to the sand and road base which had been reserved in Maidment J's earlier decision. Marks J, on the other hand, held that, as the basis of agreement reached between the claimant and the second opponent "most easily equates with the quantity/distance rate", the hourly hire rates under the Determination were not available to the second opponent as a means of satisfying its obligations under the Determination. The opinion of Glynn and Cullen JJ, being in the majority prevailed. Their proposed orders became the orders of the Full Industrial Court.
In the course of their reasons, Glynn and Cullen JJ recorded that the second opponent had: "... submitted that the materials relied upon by Maidment J in making the determination 'comprised objective historical facts and evidence of practice within the quarry industry. Upon that footing it was admissible for purposes other than the construction of the Determination."
They recounted the course which the proceedings had taken, in the making of the Determination before Liddy J in March 1986. In particular, they referred to the restricted coverage of the industrial organisations, which had been engaged in years of negotiation leading to the making of the
Determination. Their Honours then concluded at 136, relevantly: "It seems clear from the proceedings before Liddy J that the two Agreements upon which the Contract Determination application was based and the discrete nature of the industry in which the applicants belonged were definitive of the scope of the 
Determination. Section 91B(3) of the 1940 Act prescribes: 
A group or Organisation that has made an application under this section is registered when the registrar causes its name to be entered in the register of associations of employing contractors kept by him together with particulars of the class of contracts in relation to which it is registered and such other particulars as may be prescribed.' 
Consequently, the constitutional rule of the Association of employing contractors so registered is relevant to determining the class of contracts for which the Association is entitled to seek to be covered by a contract
Determination.
Membership of the Quarry Master's Association of New South Wales requires that (at 136f): "Applicants for admission as members shall satisfy the Committee that they are engaged in the hard rock quarrying and crushed gravel industry, have sound financial resources, proven technical or administrative standing and established reputation and integrity.
 (There followed the relevant membership rule of the Sand and Soil Producers
Association of New South Wales which was likewise restricted). 
The
Assocations thereby require the right to enrol and represent such classes of persons in accordance with the provisions of the
Act. The other organisation with an interest in the making of the Determination was the Road Transport Association confined to the defined area of quarry materials etc. Accordingly, its participation was as stated, a minor one. The transport of the material covered by this award by local government shires and councils was exempted from its coverage. The qualification which was later written in to the document (other than coal and/or oil shale mine) does not thereby enlarge the coverage to include any materials and/or biproduct of any type of mining operation whether underground or open cut. The key to the definition relates to the words 'quarried materials for use in manufacturing and/or for use in civil or building construction' and that such material is carried from the site.
The quarry materials refer expressly to those materials produced by members of the two organisations which made the application. The only extension of such meaning of the words, 'quarried materials' is to slag and slag by-products used for similar purposes as quarry materials. To the extent that
Liddy J confined the Determination to the confines of this class of carriage then the Determination was a valid one." 
It can be seen from the foregoing that in reaching their conclusion, Glynn and
Cullen JJ obviously considered that it was relevant to take into account the membership rules of the industrial organisation which had relevant coverage and thus had the legitimate right to be seeking a Determination on behalf of its members. They used this consideration to exclude the wider ambit of the words of the Determination itself which, on their face, were sufficiently broadly expressed, without more, to embrace the carriage of a broader class of material of the kind carried by the claimant here.
 
A subsequent decision questions this one
I now digress. Placed before this Court, without objection of the parties, was the published decision of another Bench of the Full Court of the
Industrial Court of 20 April 1995. In Lynch v G C Schmidt Pty Limited and Ors, unreported, 20 April 1995, Hill, Peterson and Schmidt JJ had to consider a reference to the Full
Court by Hill J pursuant to <case>(c) of the Act. The
Court had before it applications for the recovery of moneys allegedly due to applicants who were contract carriers. The unanimous opinion of the Full Court in Lynch recounted: "Similar issues also arose before the Court in an application by one Robert Cepus against the principal contractor, Heggies
Transport Pty Limited. That matter was dealt with by Maidment J.
... From his Honour's decision an appeal was taken by Mr Cepus to the Full Court (Glynn,
Cullen and Marks JJ). The majority of the Full Court (Glynn and Cullen JJ) concluded that the
Determination did not apply to the carriage of 'mined' minerals the subject of the claim. They also determined that, contrary to an argument based on the circumstances of its making, the Determination had been properly made and was valid to the extent that it purported to apply to work of the kind to which the principal contractor associations rules were directed. This involved a reading down of the incidence of the Determination to exclude 'mined' products such as serpentine, iron ore, gypsum, lead, copper and zinc concentrates and lime stone'.
 ...

From those judgments, Mr Cepus has sought relief in the nature of prerogative relief in the NSW Court of Appeal. Those proceedings are yet to be heard. ...

When these matters came before Hill J, the parties formed a view that the decision in (Cepus versus Heggies), particularly the judgments of the Full Court, required reconsideration.
Thus it was that the parties requested that Hill J referred certain questions to the Full Court and now seeks to reargue the
Principles and conclusions underlying the (Cepus versus Heggies) judgments. It is, of course, not possible in these proceedings for anything the Full Court now might do in these matters to have any effect on the actual outcome in (Cepus versus Heggies)."
In accordance with the practice of the Industrial Court, the parties had to seek that Court' <case> to reargue some of the issues which were the subject of the decision in Cepus versus Heggies: "As we have said, it is obvious that any decision of the Court in these matters cannot affect the result achieved in (Cepus v
Heggies). The view of the Determination taken by the Full
Court in those proceedings binds the parties to that matter, subject only to the further proceedings which are presently before the
Court of Appeal." 
In the result, their Honours decided to grant the leave sought and to reconsider the point. They dealt with certain common questions which are not material to the proceedings in this Court. On the question of construction of the
Determination, they concluded: "We should state at the outset that we are, with respect to their Honours, unable to agree with this interpretation of the Determination; nor are we able to agree with the decision of Marks J that in a case where the parties have fixed a rate or method which is neither the hourly hire nor the quantity/distance rate or method, then the rate or method applicable is that provided in the Determination which 'most closely equates' with that which was agreed ...
We have ...
reached the firm conclusion that cl 2(ii) of the Determination, when construed in the context of other relevant provisions, the Determination as a whole and having regard to its purposes, does not preclude for two minimum or alternative rates or methods or of remuneration in relation to the contracts of carriage thereby covered We have come to this view, although not without considerable difficulty, because of the seeming ambiguity and uncertainty of the provisions of cl 2 and the prima facie expression arising from a literal reading of the opening words of cl 2(ii). In our opinion the Determination, on its true meaning and effect, requires that payment for contracts for carriage to which it applies shall be at the quantity/distance rate prescribed in the schedules, except in two particular circumstances (not material hereto). The alternative construction adopted by the various members of the Court in (Cepus versus Heggies) lead, in our view, to manifestly unreasonable or incongruous results to which we later advert in the course of our reasons." 
There followed more than ten pages of critique of the construction adopted by the Full Court of the Industrial Court in the decision now under this Court's review.
The result is that, within the Industrial Court, there are now two conflicting opinions of the Full Court. How that conflict would be worked out in later cases is not entirely clear nor, in my opinion, is it properly the business of this Court. Obviously, the stage reached is rather unsatisfactory.
Mr Cepus can see the later development of the law in the Industrial Court which cannot apply to his case.
Had it obtained in his proceedings, it would have upheld, substantially or wholly, his submissions and claims. The formal relationship between this Court and the Industrial Court, established by
Parliament in <case> of the Act may require that the decision so strongly disapproved in Lynch be affirmed. That may be the result of the limited powers which this Court has to intervene in the proceedings in the Industrial Court.
But it would not be a very happy or just result. Nor (I should think) would it be one conducive of the purposes of the Act. Alerted by the developments in this case, it would be no bad thing if the Act were amended to provide, at the least, a mechanism within the Industrial Court for the resolution of differences between differently constituted Full Courts. The spectacle of different judges of a court not subject to appellate review, persisting with fundamentally different approaches to the construction of statutes or industrial Determinations, is not conducive to the maintenance of respect for judicial tribunals.
 
The suggested departure from procedural fairness
I now reach the first ground of attack on the decision of the Full Court in these proceedings.
Whilst the matter stood for judgment in the Full Court of the Industrial Court, the Presiding Judge caused a letter to be sent to counsel who had appeared for the parties. The letter was transmitted on 6
December 1993 and read: "We refer you to a statement made by Mr Murphy of Counsel (for the second opponent) on pages 141 and 142 of the transcript relating to the Constitutional
Rules of the Quarry Master's
Association and Sand Mining Association.

We propose to refer to these Rules in the course of our judgment in this matter unless either Counsel indicates the contrary within seven (7) days.

If we do receive such indication from either counsel we shall arrange for the matter to be relisted for the purpose of taking submissions on this aspect only."
Counsel for the claimant responded to this letter on 9 December 1993: "I refer to your letter dated 6 December and respectfully make the following response.

I have read pages 141 and 142 of the transcript and can find no statement made by Mr Murphy of Counsel relating to the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) Rules of the Quarry Masters' Association and the
Sand Mining Association.

I note that Marks J asked at p 141.7 whether the Bench could 'take judicial notice of the description of the operations of the Quarry Masters' Association and the Sand
Mining
Association'. (my italics).

The response from Mr Murphy does not directly answer that question but refers back to the 's 88E Report' about which he had been making submissions.

The appellant has persistently argued that material of the kind now referred to is irrelevant and should not be received in evidence. I maintain that position." 
Counsel exchanged this submission with his opponent, Mr Murphy.
It was common ground that there was no further contact by the Court with either counsel before the judgment was handed down. Nor, once judgment was handed down, were any steps taken by the claimant in the Industrial
Court to protest about the matter now brought to this Court.
The argument for the claimant is that the letter from the Judge presiding in the Full Court made the position of the Court clear. If an indication was received from either Counsel to the contrary of the expressed proposal to refer to the rules of the two industrial organisations mentioned, there was a promise to "arrange for the matter to be relisted for the purpose of taking submissions." This was not done. Yet the rules of the two named Associations were indeed referred to. Moreover, they were an important ingredient in the reasoning of Glynn and Cullen JJ. They thus contributed to the steps taken to reach the order of the Full Court of the Industrial Court. In that sense, the claimant had not been heard upon them, contrary to the promise made. This constituted a denial of observance of the rules of procedural fairness to which the claimant was, by law, entitled and which he had been promised. See
The Queen versus Watson; Ex parte Armstrong <case>; [(1976) 136 CLR 248], 257 263. Mahon v
Air New Zealand Limited and Ors (1984) 1 AC 808 (PC) 820f. An error in failing to accord procedural fairness was one which. deprived the "Determination" of the Full Court of legal effect. See Anisminic Limited versus Foreign Compensation
Commission <case>; [(1969) 2 AC 147 (HL)]; Svecova, 342. Upon that footing the purported "Determination" was not protected from judicial review, in the nature of the prerogative writs, issued from this Court. This Court should therefore provide relief not only to uphold fair procedures as between the parties but to uphold the high standards required of all courts. See Incitec Limited and Anor v
Industrial Court of New South Wales and Ors IR 155 (NSWCA), 157;
Rothmans Distribution Services Limited versus Full Court of the Industrial Court of
New South Wales [(1994) 53 IR 157 (NSWCA)], 160. In the theory of the law, no proper and lawful Determination has been made. The purported Determination was not a lawful exercise of the jurisdiction of the Full Court of the Industrial
Court. The only grounds upon which relief would be denied, such jurisdictional error having been established, would be that this Court, in the exercise of its discretion to provide relief, withheld the remedy for appropriate and relevant discretionary reasons.
 
Jurisdictional error is shown - relief ordered
The second opponent resisted the claimant's submission with a number of telling arguments: 
To find that a court has denied procedural fairness involves a serious conclusion, not lightly arrived at. That is true. But every judge understands that supervision of procedural fairness is an essential part of the system of justice in which we all operate. Any judge who sits for a time in a busy court is bound to take a course or make orders which strike others, with power of review, as involving a relevant procedural unfairness. This is not a personal criticism of the judge. It is simply the operation of our system of judicial review and appellate reconsideration. In most cases, at least, the criticism is not personal to the judge. The High Court of Australia, when it was subject to supervision by the Privy
Council, was reversed (as recently as 1980) for having decided an appeal in favour of a party on a point expressly disclaimed during argument upon which the opposing party was not heard. See Port Jackson
Stevedoring Pty Limited versus Salmond and Spraggon (Australia)
Pty Limited <case>; [(1980) CLR 300 (PC)], 303. I have myself been reversed for taking a course which, although well meaning, was held by the High Court to have involved the risk of procedural unfairness to a party having regard to the way that party had conducted the trial at first instance. See Coulton and Ors versus Holcombe and Ors <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 1], 7. Every judge understands that such decisions are simply designed to protect the integrity of the procedures of the courts which are the ultimate foundations for the community's acceptance of court decisions; 
The second opponent then argued that the claimant had failed expressly to request the relisting of the proceeding for argument. He did so even after the judgment was handed down, resorting instead to the proceedings in this Court.
However, given the letter which was very properly sent to the parties by the
Judges comprising the Full Court of the Industrial Court, it was, in my view, reasonable for the claimant and his advisers to assume that, having indicated to the contrary ie against the reference to the rules, the matter would be relisted for argument on that aspect, as promised. It was not. The claimant was then entitled when the judgment was handed down, to assume that, in the light of his protest, no reliance would be placed by the Judges upon the rules of the named industrial organisations. Although it is possibly true that the claimant could have sought an immediate reopening of the matter in the Full
Industrial Court, once judgment was delivered, the powers of that Court to reopen and redetermine matters were not explored in argument before this
Court. Invoking of the jurisdiction of this Court was therefore, in the circumstances, prudent;
The second opponent then argued that the claimant's counsel had effectively put all of the contentions which he wished to advance against the proposed use of the rules. He simply reverted to the primary argument which he had put both before Maidment J and in the Full Court, namely that reference to extrinsic materials was irrelevant. There was not point in relisting the matter to hear that argument again. It had been fully put, as the submissions of the parties indicate. I do not agree. The Full Court was obviously concerned about the use of the constitutional rules of the industrial associations named. It does not appear that those rules were formally in evidence before the Industrial Court. Presumably they were available from the
Court's Registry. The Court thought sufficiently of the utility of the new material to draw it to notice of the parties. Counsel for the claimant fulfilled the stated condition which warranted relisting of the matter for argument. Contrary to the majority in this Court, it seems to me that the terms of the letter from the claimant's counsel is not what matters but the terms of the promise made by the Judges to the parties. The Judge's letter, in its terms, did not require counsel to ask for relisting.
Whilst it might have been wise for counsel to have done so, the terms of the communication from the
Judges did not raise that option.
Quite properly, the Court kept it to itself to determine (argument having concluded) whether the matter would be relisted.
But it indicated that if it received word "to the contrary" within the specified time, it would take that course. The contrary was then clearly indicated within the specified time. Yet the course promised was not taken. I am not critical of the Judges. It would be easy in such an exchange for a mistake or a misunderstanding to arise. The course which they took was perfectly proper. But a slip has occurred and it falls to this Court to correct it; 
Then it was said for the second opponent that relisting could not have affected the outcome of the Full Court's deliberations. This argument was put upon alternative grounds. It was said that the reference to the rules of the industrial associations were something of a judicial afterthought. Thus, the
Court had already indicated its essential conclusion at p 13 of its reasons, referring only to the rules at a later stage (p 24). I do not agree. As I read the passage on p 13 of the majority opinion, their Honours are merely recounting the arguments of the parties. Their essential conclusions are found at p 23 and 24 in the very passage in which they refer to the rules. Then, it was said that no new ground would have arisen for the exclusion of the rules, as distinct from other extrinsic materials which had already been ruled upon in a way conformable to the practice of industrial tribunals. Again, I cannot agree. By correcting the reference to what his opponent had been putting at p -2 of the transcript, the claimant's counsel was clearly indicating that, in his suggestion, the Full Court had a misunderstanding of the submissions being put relevant to the rules of the named industrial organisations.
Furthermore, in this Court, the claimant urged the argument that the coverage of the rules of the named industrial organisations was not relevant to the construction of the
Determination. It is inappropriate for this Court to determine that point. By the privative provision in the Act interpreting such
Determination is a matter reserved to the Industrial Court. It might be a good point or it might not. But it is a point which the claimant was entitled to put for consideration by the Industrial Court. In the procedure which was followed, he was denied that point.
Only if I considered the point to be manifestly one without substance would I pass this argument by. I am not prepared to categorise the claimant's argument in that way;
Next, it was urged that the matter upon which the claimant had been denied the chance of oral argument was immaterial or at least not so substantial as to have occasioned the kind of injustice that would invite the discretionary intervention of this Court. There is a controversy concerning the extent to which a discretion exists and should be exercised to refuse relief although jurisdictional error is established resulting in an order which, in legal terms, is void or voidable.
Cf Walker versus Industrial Court of
New South Wales and Anor [(1994) 53 IR 121 (CA)], 139. I will assume in this case that a discretion exists. Why should relief be denied? The second opponent said that, given the basic Determination of the Full Court concerning the use to be made of extrinsic materials, it was extremely unlikely that oral argument, however eloquent on the meaning of the rules of the industrial organisation would have persuaded the Court to change its mind. I do not agree. First, it is important to remember Lord Denning MR's statement that no cause is lost until the judge has found it so; a Judge cannot find it so without a fair trial, nor can we affirm it. See Jones versus National Coal Board <case>; [(1957) 2 QB 55 (CA)] In Australia, the opportunity of address to persuade a court, or to dissuade it from its early inclinations, has always been regarded as very important. See eg Stead versus State Government Insurance
Commission <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 141], 55. Many of the foregoing are cases of appeal where somewhat different considerations arise, depending upon the charter of the appellate court. In proceedings for judicial review, the court might deny relief where, eg, it concludes that the party has waived its complaint or that the complaint is trivial or could not have affected the outcome. I would not be prepared to reach that conclusion in this case; and 
Finally, the second opponent urged that relief would, in the discretion of the Court, be denied because the quashing of the order would require the complete rehearing of proceedings in the Full Court of the Industrial Court. I entirely agree that this is an unpalateable prospect in litigation already so prolonged. However, it might be expected that the parties could, in the circumstances, adopt an economical and sensible course in the Industrial
Court, eg by the tender of written and transcript arguments.
The consideration of additional costs cannot determine the outcome of these already costly proceedings. It is important to remember that the procedure for judicial review is concerned not only with the protection of the interests of the parties to the application but in upholding the integrity of the procedures of the courts in which the public has its own interest. It is because, inevitably, different judges have different perspectives of the importance of this last-mentioned consideration, that views frequently differ in the provision or denial of orders of judicial review. I apply a stringent standard. I consider that that is what the law requires and it is what I favour. See Re Australian Railways Union; Ex parte Public Transport Commission <case>; [(1993) 67 ALJR 904 (HC)], 910. "Flimsiness" of grounds is in the eye of the judicial beholder.
The result is that I would provide relief to the claimant.
By chance, in the events which have subsequently occurred, this will permit the claimant to seek to reopen the arguments of principle which were resolved against him in the Full Court of the Industrial Court in terms which have since been so strongly disapproved, in the unanimous judgment of that Court, different constituted, in Lynch. That will produce a proper result. It will avoid this
Court's affirming an order which, in light of later developments in the
Industrial Court, the claimant would be forgiven for regarding as manifestly unjust to him. Formalism has its limits.
 
Constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction
The claimant had a further argument that the Full Court, by its decision, had manifestly misconstrued the Determination. It had thereby involved itself in a misapplication of <case> of the Act which requires a principal contractor to pay in full to the carrier all remuneration due under a contract in accordance with a Determination. The power of the Industrial Court to make an order directing the payment of such remuneration arises by <case>. The claimant's argument went that the misconstruction of the Determination being so clear, it could only be inferred that the Full Industrial Court had failed to exercise the jurisdiction of the Industrial Court under the aforementioned sections as the law required. Such an error, it was put, was a jurisdictional error attracting the entitlement to relief from this Court.
For reasons which I explained in Walker versus Industrial Court of New South
Wales and Anor [(1994) 53 IR 121 (NSWCA)], 138 (and earlier in Sevoca), my understanding of the authority of the High Court of Australia in Public
Service Association of South
Australia versus Federated Clerks' Union of Australia,
South Australian Branch and Anor <case>; [(1991) 173 CLR 132], 143 is such that serious misunderstandings in the application by the Industrial Court of the relevant law can involve a departure by the court from the lawful performance of its jurisdiction, as the Act envisages. My broader view was disapproved by the majority in Walker. See ibid, 140, 149f. See also Rothmans Distribution
Services Limited versus Full Court of the Industrial Court of New South
Wales [(1994) 53 IR 157 (NSWCA)], 158. The mere fact that this Court is of the opinion that the Full Court of the Industrial Court has erred, even in a matter of law, is not of itself sufficient to permit the Court's intervention. In both
Walker and Rothmans, members of this Court expressed the opinion that the
Industrial Court had erred. But, as Meagher JA explained in Rothmans, at 162: "they had jurisdiction to err".
Were it not for the procedural fairness point,
I would not have been persuaded that the suggested errors of the Full Court of the
Industrial Court (including those expressed by that Court differently constituted in Lynch) amounted to jurisdictional error. Had those arguments stood alone, I would have been in favour of dismissing the summons.
 
Orders
But they did not stand alone. A procedural error occurred which deprived the claimant of the chance to put his case in full on a matter which affected the outcome of the appeal. He should have had that chance. This Court should make orders to ensure that he is given it.
The orders which
I favour are: 
Bring up the record of the Full Court of the Industrial Court of New
South Wales in matter number CT 1132 of ; 
Quash the decision and orders of that Court given on 11 February 1994; 
Order that the proceedings be returned to the Fun Court of the Industrial
Court with the direction that the appeal to that Court by Mr Robert Cepus, be heard in accordance with law; 
Order that the second opponent Heggies Transport Pty Limited, pay the costs of the claimant, Robert Cepus, of the summons but have, in respect thereof, if so qualified, a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/); and
Order that the costs of the parties in the Industrial Court be reserved to the Full Court of that Court conducting the rehearing of the appeal.
JUDGE2
PRIESTLEY JA The claimant Mr Cepus asked this court to quash the decision and orders of the Industrial
Court upon two grounds. Both grounds and the relevant circumstances are set out in the reasons of Kirby P.
The claimant's second ground is dealt with by Kirby P under the heading "Constructive failure to exercise jurisdiction". I agree with what he has said under that heading. Walker versus Industrial Court of New South Wales [(1994) 53 IR ], a decision of this court, lays it down that it is only what I will call for short jurisdictional error in the Industrial Court which this court has jurisdiction to deal with. This court itself has no jurisdiction, upon the view taken in that case, to rule upon errors of law which can not be classified as jurisdictional errors, important though the matter sought to be argued under the heading of error of law may be.
The result is that the relevant criterion divides Industrial Court cases into one part upon which this court may make binding rulings and another part upon which it may not. As a matter of substance, there is no very coherent distinction between the subject matters which find themselves relegated to one part and those relegated to the other.
However, the position seems to be established and for the reasons given by
Kirby P I do not think jurisdictional error has been shown in the present case.
As to the procedural unfairness ground, if I were to agree with Kirby P, a sensible result would follow, in one way of looking at the matter, because it would then be likely that the Industrial Court would avail itself of the opportunity of resolving a clash between its decision in the present case and in Lynch versus G.C. Schmidt Pty Limited (unreported, 20 April 1995). However, it does not seem to me that there was any procedural unfairness in the matters relied upon by the claimant in support of this ground. My opinion depends upon my reading of the letter from the court of 6 December 1993 and the claimant's reply of 9 December 1993, both set out in Kirby P's reasons.
It seems to me it would have been quite reasonable for the Industrial
Court upon reading the claimant's letter of 9 December 1993 to take it as saying that the claimant's position was that the material to which the
Industrial Court was proposing to refer was irrelevant should not be received in evidence and that was all the claimant wished to say about the matter.
In my opinion it would be implicitly communicated by such a reading that the claimant did not wish to be further heard on that aspect of the case. The material was irrelevant and that was that.
Although I would reach the foregoing conclusion without taking into account the next consideration I mention, it nevertheless further seems to me that the reader in the Industrial Court of the letter of 9 December would have had the kind of reading that I have suggested confirmed by the additional thought that if the claimant had been expecting that anything further might happen in regard to the rules in question, then the writer would have said so.
Although the letter is not actually impolite, to me it has a whiff of a somewhat curt rebuff. As if the writer was saying "I've told you once, do I have to tell you again, these rules are irrelevant".
I can understand that the letter is not so clear that other readers may not read it differently from me, but I find it difficult myself to think that the claimant can justifiably regard himself as unfairly treated if the
Industrial Court understood the letter in the way that I have done, and as I think, in view of the course of events which followed its receipt of the letter, it must have done also.
A possible further consideration is one mentioned by Kirby P, that no steps were taken by the claimant in the Industrial Court to protest about what was later claimed to be procedural unfairness. If it were open to the claimant to ask the Industrial Court to withhold any action on its decision until the claimant had been heard on the matter referred to in the Industrial Court's letter of 6 December, then the fact that no such step was taken would be a further indication to me that the claimant was not concerned substantively with the alleged procedural unfairness, but saw it only as possibly useful in the present proceedings.
However, as I earlier said, I have formed my opinion on this ground on my reading of the two letters. What the claimant relies on for this ground seems to me to be too flimsy to justify a conclusion that there was a denial of procedural fairness by the Industrial Court to the claimant.
My opinion therefore is that the claimant's application should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA I agree with Priestley JA * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/95.html  
