

Whyte versus Brosch and Ors Matter No Ca 40122/98 [1998] NSWSC 621 (25 November )

Last Updated: 10 December 1998 
PETER JOSEPH WHYTE versus HANS JOERG BROSCH & ORS 
CA 40122/98 November 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Mason P, Sheller JA, Stein JA, Fitzgerald AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: This matter is brought before a Bench of five, after first being mentioned in the normal course, before a Bench of three of the members who are now assembled, this morning. 
An issue arises by reason of the failure of the appellant to comply with the provisions of part 51 rule 47 with respect to the filing of submissions and chronologies, which is required to be done by the appellant not later than nine days before the date fixed for hearing. That was not done, in circumstances which are the subject of two affidavits filed in accordance with a direction given by the Bench as constituted this morning. Each is dated
Wednesday 25 November 1998. One is by Geoffrey Knox, the solicitor for the appellant, and one is by Anthony Monaghan, the barrister for the appellant.

The basic facts are that no written submissions were filed until yesterday when a document was filed about which I do not wish to say too much, by reason of the fact that the matter still has to be heard by the Bench as originally constituted. Suffice it to say that the submissions, as filed, do not constitute submissions which identify, with any degree of precision, the issues that will be sought to be agitated before the Court. Nor do they constitute submissions on the basis of which the Court would be able to proceed with an understanding of the issues in the case, before the matter is heard, so that the Court may prepare to deal with the matter, if appropriate, in ex tempore reasons.

The ability to delivery ex tempore reasons in cases of this character is a matter of considerable significance for the efficient use of judicial resources. Accordingly, compliance by the parties with part 51 rule 47 is of importance for the efficient use of judicial resources in the administration of justice in this State.

The Court has been informed that one of the reasons why the submissions were late was because of difficulties in contacting the appellant to confirm the instructions to prosecute the appeal. That constitutes an explanation of part of the delay, but by no means does it constitute an excuse for the delay, or for the other matters to which I have referred.

The matter has been listed before a Bench of five in order to emphasise, not only to the members of the profession appearing in this case, but also more widely, that the Court regards compliance with these Rules to be a matter of considerable significance. Legal practitioners, both solicitors and barristers, owe duties to the Court. That is what distinguishes the practise of a profession from a business or a trade or a job, insofar as the legal profession is concerned. Those duties include a duty to ensure that proceedings before the Court are conducted efficiently and expeditiously.

Rules of the Court, such as part 51 rule 47, constitute an attempt by the
Court to ensure that everyone knows requirements that are designed to ensure that proceedings are conducted efficiently and expeditiously and with an appropriate use of judicial resources.

On this occasion, an explanation has been proffered and, more significantly perhaps, an apology has been proffered to the Court.

In my view the Court should, on this occasion, accept the apology of Mr
Monaghan on his own behalf and the explanation offered by Mr Knox in his affidavit, to which I have referred.

It is important for the profession to understand that other sanctions are available to this Court and may be exercised.

In a case where the opposing party seeks an adjournment of proceedings by reason of the late filing of submissions, if the Court grants the adjournment in accordance with its usual approach, the profession ought be aware that the
Court can order that costs thrown away by any adjournment should be paid by the legal practitioner responsible for the failure.

Other possible sanctions include a reference to one of the professional associations to investigate whether any breach of professional obligations has occurred.

The Court has reserve powers to exercise discipline over members of the profession insofar as conduct before the Court, and in proceedings before the
Court, is concerned. That jurisdiction is not exercised in deference to the well-established systems of professional discipline, operated by the two professional associations. Nevertheless, the Court holds the jurisdiction in reserve, to be exercised if and when the Court finds it appropriate to do so.

I mention these matters only to indicate the range of sanctions that are available, without indicating in any way that the Court has formed a view that any such step could have been appropriate on this occasion.

In my view, in the circumstances as they now appear to the Court, we should accept the apology and move on.

MASON P: I agree. 
SHELLER JA: I also agree. 
STEIN JA: I also agree. 
FITZGERALD AJA: I agree. * * * 
