

Regina versus Wanna Matter No Cca 60554/97 [1998] NSWSC 30 (6 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
REGINA versus ANWAR SABRY WANNA /97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Beazley JA, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a Crown appeal against a sentence imposed by Rummery DCJ in the District Court in October of last year. The respondent was convicted, following a trial, of a number of offences against [s281](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s281.html) of the [Migration Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) . That section provides: "A person who is not a registered migration agent must not ask for or receive a fee or reward for giving immigration assistance".

The maximum penalty prescribed for that offence is imprisonment for ten years.

Before proceeding with details of the present case, it is convenient to make some observations about that statutory provision, and about sentencing for contraventions of the statute.

The essence of the offence is asking for or receiving payment for giving immigration assistance in circumstances where the person who does the asking or receiving is not a registered migration agent. An offence of that character is capable of being committed in a wide range of circumstances affecting the level of criminality of the conduct of the offender. At one extreme, such an offence might constitute little more than a technical breach of the law by someone who is unaware of the system of registration established by the [Migration
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/).

However, the fact that the legislation provides a maximum penalty of imprisonment of ten years demonstrates that, at the other extreme, an offence might be committed in circumstances where the criminality of the conduct of the offender is very serious.

In R versus Wanna [(1997) 148 ALR 244], a decision given at another stage of the present proceedings, reference was made to the purpose of the legislation as explained at the time of its enactment.
The Minister who introduced the legislation referred to the Government's concern about complaints against incompetent or unscrupulous agents, and the vulnerability of many people who engaged the services of such persons. The
Minister referred to cases of agents having been paid to lodge applications and then failing to do so, lodging applications without paying the prescribed fees, or lodging the applications tardily in a way which adversely affects the entitlement of applicants.

The Minister's reference to "incompetent or unscrupulous agents" itself demonstrates the range of moral culpability that might exist in the case for contraventions of the statute. For example, a sentencing judge dealing with an offence against [s281](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s281.html) might have before him or her the person whose conduct manifests only inadvertence, or a relatively minor degree of incompetence. Again, the offender might be a person who has demonstrated major incompetence, which has had devastating consequences for the victims of such incompetence. Again, a contravention of the section might be part of a scheme of unscrupulous and predatory behaviour reflecting serious dishonesty.

In a typical case involving a breach of [s281](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s281.html), all that it be may be necessary for a jury to decide in order to determine that an offence has been committed might be certain facts concerning asking for or receiving payment and failure to obtain registration. These facts , considered apart from other circumstances of the case, may not go very far towards reflecting the real criminality of the conduct involved, and, considered on their own, may be of relatively little assistance in determining what is an appropriate penalty within the extensive range provided by the legislation.

In such cases a sentencing judge acting consistently with the principles stated in The Queen v. De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383], might be confronted with a task that requires careful evaluation and findings of fact in order to determine what, if any, circumstances of aggravation accompany the offence for which punishment is to be imposed.

One of the difficulties in the present appeal is that it is far from clear what findings were made by the learned sentencing judge about the circumstances of aggravation that applied in the present case.

The respondent came for sentence, together with a co-offender who had pleaded guilty, and who had given evidence for the Crown that the trial of the respondent. The activities which led to the conviction of the respondent were undertaken by the two men in conjunction with one another. The respondent was found guilty on twelve breaches of [s281](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/s281.html) occurring over a period between September 1994 and March 1995. The respondent and his co-offender both became involved in a business called Network
Consulting. Part of the business related to immigration matters. A number of
Irish nationals, who desired to apply to become immigrants, had dealings with the respondent and his co-offender, and paid, either the respondent or the co- offender, substantial sums of money, on the understanding, induced by representations made to them, that they would be given assistance with their immigration applications. In the events that occurred, in all but one case no applications were actually made.

Rummery DCJ said, in the course of his remarks on sentence: "Matheson was described on the business card as an associate; Wanna described as a liaison officer. Wanna was a consultant to Network Consulting. Matheson was not a migration agent under the Act and knew nothing about the subject. He secured the services of Wanna who was to provide the expertise which, according to Matheson he had, and also make use of contacts he had with the
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. Wanna was not a migration agent either. He manifested no noticeable expertise in matters pertaining to migration".

Rummery DCJ ultimately sentenced the respondent to perform community service for a period of five hundred hours. In imposing that non custodial sentence, he attached some significance to the fact that the respondent, a person without previous criminal history, was a man aged fifty seven who suffered serious medical problems, including ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, depression and oesophagitis. The evidence established that, because of his medical condition, the respondent was unsuitable for periodic detention. The practical choice that confronted the sentencing judge was between imposing a sentence of full time imprisonment and imposing a sentence of community service. It was useless to fine the respondent, because the unchallenged evidence was he was financially worthless.

The Crown submits that the non custodial sentence imposed upon the respondent was lenient, and lenient to such a degree as warrants the intervention of this court. The basis for that submission is what is argued by the Crown to be an important circumstance of aggravation in relation to the offence committed by the respondent.

The principal difficulty which this court has had in dealing with the present appeal is the uncertainty which exists as to the finding of fact made by
Rummery DCJ in relation to what is said to be the circumstance of aggravation.

The Crown alleges that the conduct of the respondent disclosed by the evidence in the case was seriously fraudulent, not merely in that he overstated and misrepresented his expertise in relation to immigration matters, but more importantly in that he never genuinely intended to give any significant form of immigration assistance to the persons from whom he procured the payments, either to himself or to his associate already mentioned.

As appears from the passage quoted above, it is clear enough that Rummery DCJ found that the respondent misrepresented and overstated his expertise. There is, however, no finding, or at least no finding with any degree of clarity, expressed in the remarks on sentence, to the effect that the respondent never in truth intended to give any significant immigration assistance to the people who turned out to be the victims of his conduct.

Twice in his remarks on sentence, Rummery DCJ referred to a "scam", but nowhere did he attempt to identify the elements of the scam to which he was referring. It might have involved conduct of the kind alleged by the Crown; or it might not. The verdict of the jury certainly did not necessarily involve a finding of such conduct, and the judge did not expressly find it. Expressions such as "scam", or "rort", or "rip off" are frequently used in everyday conversation, or in commentary about public or private affairs, but more often than not they are terms of obfuscation rather than clarification. Often they have the effect of avoiding the necessity of stating with precision the essence of the conduct to which they are being applied. Sometimes they are used with that deliberate intention, although there is not suggestion that they were so used in the present case.

The description by the learned sentencing judge of the respondent's conduct as being part of a "scam" undoubtedly suggests the existence of circumstances of aggravation, and, potentially, of circumstances of serious aggravation.
However, nowhere in the remarks on sentence is there any finding, with any degree of specificity, as to what the circumstances of aggravation were. It seems to me that this court must deal with the appeal upon the basis that
Rummery DCJ made no findings of fact in relation to matters of aggravation other than the findings which are expressly made in his remarks on sentence.
This is not a case where it can be said with confidence that the judge must have meant to find what the Crown now says he should have found. In the result, we should not deal with this appeal on the basis that the sentencing judge found against the respondent that he never intended to give to the victims of his conduct the immigration assistance for which they were paying.

That may be unduly generous to the respondent. If it is, that generosity is the consequence of the manner in which the learned sentencing judge dealt with the task of fact finding.

On that basis, whilst I consider that the sentence imposed by his Honour was very lenient, I am not prepared to hold that it was so lenient as to be outside the range of proper sentencing discretion, and such as to require an appellate intervention in a Crown appeal.

In reaching that conclusion, I bear in mind the consideration that, in cases where this court allows a Crown appeal against sentence and resentences an offender, considerations of double jeopardy ordinarily mean that, in resentencing, this court imposes the least possible penalty that would have been appropriate at first instance. In the present case the difference between that penalty and the penalty imposed by the sentencing judge is not, in my view, sufficient to warrant appellate intervention.

For those reasons I would propose that the Crown appeal should be dismissed.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree. 
BARR J: I also agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be as I have proposed. 
REGINA versus Anwar Sabry WANNA 
SENTENCING - Crown Appeal - offences against [Migration Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ma1958118/) - community service ordered - Crown alleged sentence inadequate because of serious circumstances of aggravation - such circumstances not implicit in jury's verdict and not the subject of any clear finding by the sentencing judge - HELD - the court should not assume the alleged serious circumstances of aggravation were found - not a proper case for appellate intervention. 
O R D E R S 
Crown appeal dismissed. * * * 
