

Regina versus A J King [1996] NSWSC 573 (27 November 1996) 
REGINA versus ANDREW JOSEPH KING /95 NOVEMBER 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STUDDERT J, HIDDEN J 
RESULT: ALLOWED 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: I agree with Hidden J.

HIDDEN J: Andrew Joseph King seeks leave to appeal against sentences imposed upon him in the District Court at Lismore in respect of two episodes of criminality:
Robbery at Lismore on 11 February 1995;
Stealing from the person and assault with intent to rob, also at Lismore, on 2 July 1993, together with related offences of attempting to steal a motor vehicle and receiving, which were taken into account on a Form 2 document.

The 1993 offences were originally before Patten DCJ who, on 13 April 1994 at
Gosford District Court, deferred passing sentence in respect of them upon the applicant's entering into a recognisance to be of good behaviour for three years. When the applicant appeared in the District Court at Lismore in respect of the later offence of robbery, he had also been called up for breach of that recognisance, the breaches being the robbery and an assault for which he had been sentenced to a fixed term of three months imprisonment at the Grafton
Local Court on 2 May 1995.

At Lismore District Court on 13 November 1995, the applicant was sentenced as follows:
As to the 1993 offences, a fixed term of penal servitude for two years and three months to date from 2 May 1995 on the charge of assault with intent to rob, taking into account the matters on the Form 2, and a concurrent fixed term of penal servitude for six months on the stealing from the person;
On the later offence of robbery, a cumulative term of 4 years penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of two years, to commence at the expiration of the fixed term in respect of the earlier charge of assault with intent to rob, and an additional term of two years.

In arriving at the commencement date of the series of sentences, his Honour had regard to discrete periods of pre-sentence custody aggregating a little over six months. Effectively, the applicant was sentenced to penal servitude for six years and three months, being a minimum term of four years and three months and an additional term of two years.

The learned sentencing judge set out the facts in relation to the 1993 incident in his remarks on sentence: "The facts in relation to that matter were that on 2 July 1993 a young man named Gough was walking to his home via Keen Street Lismore at approximately .30 pm. At the corner of Woodlark and Keen Streets he was confronted by 3 aboriginal males who demanded his wallet and money. He refused. The offenders then ripped his wallet from his jeans pocket, tearing the pocket off the jeans, searched him and removed his car keys from his pocket. He was then questioned by these men as to where his car was located and he was taken hold of and forcibly led back to his car in Woodlark Street. He heard the offenders discussing their intention to steal his car. One other offender joined them at that stage. He was able to escape from the car and run to the police station, which is only a block away. The police immediately attended Woodlark Street and located the prisoner who was just alighting at that stage from a light coloured Holden Commodore sedan parked in the centre parking area of Woodlark
Street. A woman waved police down to report that she had found him in the process of trying to start her car. As the prisoner alighted from his car he dropped a set of car keys on the ground. He denied any knowledge of entering the vehicle or having any keys in his possession. He was arrested and at the police station a search was conducted and a 2nd set of keys was found in his track suit pants. He claimed that he had been drinking with the victim Mr
Gough and stated that Gough must have taken him and placed him in the car.
This was untrue. After some further questioning he admitted that he was one of those present when the victim was rolled.

On that occasion he asked that the court take into account two further matters on a Form 2 document. Those matters related to an attempt to steal a motor vehicle and the receiving of the keys." 
At that time, the applicant was on parole in respect of a charge of manslaughter which had been dealt with at Lismore District Court in November .

The facts in relation to the 1995 robbery were also set out in his Honour's remarks: "The facts of the case are disturbing. There is no statement of facts tendered here but the statement of the victim Troy Jonathon Sten is that at approximately 3.00 am on Saturday 11 February 1995 he left the Powerhouse
Nightclub and was walking towards the Worker's Club in Keen Street to get to his motor vehicle. He was slightly affected by liquor. He said that he was minding his own business when he heard a voice call out `hey he called you a fuckhead'. He then turned his head and saw a person wearing a black shirt pointing at him. He also saw 7 or 8 other young male persons near that person.
He said nothing and kept walking but he was accosted by these people who came running across the road towards him. He was then confronted by a person he described as an aboriginal male about 23 to 25 years old wearing red shorts with a goatee beard with curly black hair. He was the only person in the group who had no shirt on and the biggest in the group. Mr Sten said he went to walk around this person but he stood in front of him and pushed him with both hands pressing him backwards. The person then reached out and grabbled hold of the necklace that Mr Sten was wearing and jerked it from his neck. The victim said `I've done nothing to you, do you want a cigarette?'. He said he was very concerned about the other people behind him. This person then said `give me your money or I'll bash you' Sten said `I haven't got no money'. He did in fact have money but didn't want to give it to them. This person then struck Mr
Sten with his left fist on the right side of his jaw and with his right fist in the mouth, causing it to bleed. At the time the necklace was still clenched in the right fist that hit him. A third blow was attempted but he managed to avoid that. He felt somebody pulling his shirt from behind and others were punching and kicking him about the ribs, stomach and head. He had put his arms over his head and stayed crouched over after he had ducked down to avoid the third blow. His shirt was then pulled over his head and off his body. The same person in the red shorts then reached into his right pocket and pulled out his money. About $82.00 in cash was taken. He twisted around and looked as he stood up and he saw one person running across the road towards the park with his shirt. He was about to run after him and the person with the red shorts on stopped him and said `Do you want to have a go now mate?'. He said that he didn't say anything and he started to walk towards his car with the intention of going to the Lismore Police Station. He said the shirt had cost him $100.00. He said a short time later he (sic) the police and he went with them in the police vehicle and was driven around looking for the people who had accosted him. He couldn't find them. On a subsequent occasion he identified the person in the red shorts as being the prisoner." 
His Honour went on to comment, rightly, that "so far as robberies go this was quite a serious one." 
SUBJECTIVE MATTERS 
The applicant was 18 years old at the time of the 1993 offences, 19 at the time of the robbery, 20 at the time he was sentenced at Lismore District Court and is now 21. He first appeared before a Court at the age of 12, when he was placed on a recognisance at Lismore Children's Court on a charge of break, enter and steal. The manslaughter charge to which I have referred arose from a drunken incident of violence when he was 14 years old and, at the time he was dealt with for it at Lismore District Court, he was sentenced to a concurrent fixed term for what I take to be a related charge of robbery. In January 1995, he was fined at Narooma Local Court for malicious damage and in the same year he was sentenced at Grafton Local Court on the assault charge to which I earlier referred.

The applicant's record is consistent with his disturbed background. He gave evidence before the sentencing judge, as did his mother. Before his Honour also were a psychological report and a letter from a prison Chaplain.

The applicant is Aboriginal and spent his early years in Sydney. His parents' relationship was characterised by fights and arguments and they separated when he was 7. He remained with his mother and had no meaningful contact with his father thereafter. There were frequent moves over the next couple of years, which disrupted his schooling. Ultimately, he left school in Year 8 at the age of 13.

When he was 9, he and his mother moved to Lismore, where the family had originated. She formed a de facto relationship with an Aboriginal man, who was a heavy drinker. She took to excessive drinking herself. The applicant had a poor relationship with his step-father, who he considered had dragged his mother down. He himself began drinking from the age of 11 with relatives and his peers. He would drink beer and wine with companions in a park at Lismore and he committed offences in the context of this drinking pattern.

He has had two de facto relationships which produced three children.

In October 1993, whilst at liberty on remand in respect of the matters dealt with by Patten DCJ, he entered the Denooch Aboriginal Drug and Rehabilitation
Centre on the south coast. He was apparently making good progress at that centre at the time he was dealt with by Judge Patten in April 1994. He stayed off alcohol until the end of that year. It was difficulties in his second de facto relationship which led to his resuming drinking and it was in those circumstances that he committed the offence of malicious damage (breaking a window) to which I earlier referred and, more importantly, the assault upon his de facto wife dealt with at Grafton Local Court.

The applicant had been close to his grandmother, who was a non-drinker and a practicing Christian. He was deeply affected by her death in August 1995. He was also moved by the fact that, not long before he stood for sentence, his mother had given up drinking and become involved with a church in the Lismore area. He told his Honour that he had been seeking help in prison from the Drug and Alcohol Counsellor and the Chaplain, and the letter from the Chaplain confirmed this. It was clear that he looked forward to a further opportunity to deal with his alcohol problem on his release.

In the light of this material, it must be said that the applicant made out a subjective case which elicited considerable sympathy for him and engendered some confidence in his prospects of rehabilitation. His Honour had regard to it, and found special circumstances warranting a departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms in the light of the applicant's "need for careful and prolonged supervision upon release".

THE APPLICATION 
Mr Strickland, for the applicant, challenged the effective sentence on a number of bases. Firstly, he submitted that a sentence of six years and three months with a minimum term of four years and three months was manifestly excessive for the criminality involved. He took us to SIS statistics relating to persons older than this applicant, who had pleaded guilty to more than one count of robbery or a count of robbery with matters on a Form 2. Certainly, the total sentence passed by his Honour and, more particularly, the effective minimum term are greater than any of those in the figures. However, the SIS figures must always be approached with some circumspection in applications such as this, particularly where, as here, the sample is very small: only five cases over a five year period. Furthermore, although the figures do not disclose this, I rather think that each of those five cases involved two or more offences committed at or about the same time. This applicant was dealt with for episodes of criminality separated by more than a year and a half, the first of them engaged in whilst he was on parole and the second whilst he was subject to a recognisance.

Mr Strickland further submitted that the sentences failed to give adequate weight to the applicant's subjective case: his youth, his background and his prospects of rehabilitation. Whilst acknowledging the seriousness of the offences, he submitted that it was important not to lose sight of the applicant's youth: Gordon [(1994) 71 A Crim R 459] at
He noted that the offences were committed whilst the applicant was intoxicated and were the product of a longstanding pattern of alcohol abuse, a pattern shared by his family and associates. He referred to the valuable remarks on sentence of Wood J in Fernando [(1992) 76 A Crim R 58], in which his Honour discussed the sentencing of Aboriginal offenders. In the course of that discussion, in a passage (at 62) upon which Mr Strickland relied, his Honour said: "While drunkenness is not normally an excuse or mitigating factor, where the abuse of alcohol by the person standing for sentence reflects the socio- economic circumstances and environment in which the offender has grown up, that can and should be taken into account as a mitigating factor. This involves the realistic recognition by the court of the endemic presence of alcohol within Aboriginal communities and the grave social difficulties faced by those communities where poor self-image, absence of education and work opportunity and other demoralising factors have placed heavy stresses on them, reinforcing their resort to alcohol and compounding its worse effects." 
These are matters of which the learned sentencing judge in this case was not unmindful. Having referred in his remarks on sentence to the applicant's background and, in particular, his alcohol abuse, his Honour said: "This is not an unfamiliar picture for people of his background but due allowance must nevertheless be made for the disadvantages suffered by many
Aboriginal people." 
On the other hand, his Honour emphasised the need for general deterrence in sentencing for offences such as these, particularly when committed by an offender at conditional liberty of one form or another. In all the circumstances, I am not persuaded that the total sentence of six years and three months is manifestly excessive. The effective minimum term of four years and three months however is another matter.

I consider that there is force in Mr Strickland's final submission that, whist his Honour found special circumstances, those circumstances are inadequately reflected in the length of the additional term.

The fact that the four year sentence on the robbery charge was accumulated upon the sentences in respect of the 1993 offences warranted of itself some departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms. More importantly, at the time of sentence the applicant was well motivated to strive towards his rehabilitation, particularly in the light of the death of his grandmother and his mother's achievement in dealing with her own alcohol problem. True it is that an earlier attempt at reform had failed but, given his youth, I consider that this heightened the need to structure the sentences on this occasion so as to foster his rehabilitation upon release. I acknowledge that this was his Honour's expressed purpose in specifying the additional term of two years. However, for an offender so young and with such a disturbed background I have concluded that the opportunity for a longer period of supervised liberty was called for. I am fortified in that view by the fact that the applicant's previous attempt to deal with his drinking problem endured for over a year before he relapsed into his old lifestyle.

In Fernando, Wood J passed a sentence comprising a minimum term of less than twelve months and an additional term of more than three years. Whilst acknowledging the obvious differences between the subjective cases of Fernando and of this applicant, there are parallels which lead me to the conclusion that a similar approach to the determination of the additional term is warranted in this case.

The applicant was dealt with by a very experienced judge, who faced a difficult and sensitive sentencing task. It is only after considerable reflection upon the matter that I have concluded that this Court should intervene.

For the purpose of resentence, we received into evidence at the hearing some material from the Department of Corrective Services from which it appears that the applicant has continued to undergo psychological counselling, has undertaken various educational courses and has responded favourably to prison discipline.

I consider that the total sentence of six years and three months should stand but that the minimum term should be reduced by one year. Accordingly, I propose that the application be granted and the appeal allowed; that the sentences in respect of the 1993 matters should stand but that in respect of the robbery, there should be accumulated a sentence of penal servitude for four years, comprising a minimum term of one year and an additional term of three years. Accordingly, the applicant would be eligible for release on parole on 2 August 1998.
 * * * 
