

S A Wood versus Scone Abattoir P/L and Anor [1996] NSWSC 506 (18 October 1996) 
STEVEN ALLEN WOOD versus SCONE ABATTOIR PTY. LIMITED AND ANOR /90 
Friday 18 October 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - GROSS INJURIES SUPER-ADDED TO PERSON ALREADY AFFECTED BY SERIOUS MALADY - DAMAGES ASSESSED 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: At about 11 am on 14 July 1988 a collision took place on Orange Grove Road Liverpool between a motorcycle ridden by the plaintiff and a large meat van owned by the first defendant and driven by the second defendant. A reference to the accident occurring at 2 pm which appears in Exhibit C is an obvious error. It is common ground that the weather conditions were fine and dry and the accident occurred in broad daylight. For reasons which will appear the plaintiff is incapable of contributing any information about the facts and circumstances of and leading up to the event. 
The plaintiff's case is supported by the evidence of Brett Whyte. He had driven another man to make a job application in the administrative offices of the Viscount Caravan factory which was located on the eastern side of Orange
Grove Road. Mr Whyte was waiting for his friend and seated on the bonnet of his motor vehicle which was parked on an apron in front of the administration building. From this position he had a clear view of Orange Grove Road. At the time roadworks were in progress to convert the carriageway into four lanes.
The work had progressed to the extent that the area upon which southbound lanes were being constructed consisted of unsealed road base. Traffic was using the two western most lanes which had a conventional bitumen surface.
Between the bitumen surface and the road based area was a temporary barrier consisting of orange coloured plastic mesh. The western lanes were being used so that one carried northbound traffic and the other southbound traffic. A dividing centre line was painted between the lanes. Immediately opposite Mr
Whyte's position was the southern end of a golf course and adjoining that end was a row of houses facing Orange Grove Road. Mr Whyte noticed a motorcyclist (the plaintiff) ride south down the gradient in Orange Grove Road at a slow speed and when the rider reached the level section he saw it decrease speed and come to a halt. Mr Whyte did not notice any indicator light but he gained the impression that the rider was waiting to turn into one of the houses just south of the golf course. He also noticed the defendant's truck which was travelling about four car lengths behind the cycle. He drew the inference that the truck may have difficulty in stopping (in time to avoid imminent collision). I am satisfied that he was able to draw this inference and that it was a reasonable inference given that he had seen the initial slow speed of the cycle and its coming to a complete halt and his ability to observe the speed of the truck. As he apprehended, the truck collided with the rear of the cycle. An additional observation was that there was northbound traffic on the carriageway at the time the cycle came to a halt.

The second defendant testified that he had first noticed the cycle when it turned left out of Cabramatta Road (as he did) at the intersection which is located near the northern end of the golf course. He assessed that the cycle was being driven erratically so he determined to keep it under observation. He claimed that the cycle pulled to a halt on the left hand verge of the carriageway and that as he approached it the rider suddenly rode westward immediately across his path. Mr Toulson who was the driver of a vehicle heading north in Orange Grove Road at the time gave a broadly similar description of the events. A police officer was called to the scene. The recording of detail by then Probationary Constable Wyld was considerably less than ideal but he did notice some debris on the southbound lane of the carriageway about one third of the distance from the centre line to the eastern edge.

The theory was advanced by the defendants that the plaintiff probably pulled to the side of the road and then decided that he needed to return to his grandmother's home and was in the process of executing a U-turn when he moved his cycle in front of their truck. This is of course speculation as is any theory about why the plaintiff would have come to a halt and whether it was in fact his purpose (as Mr Whyte presumed) to make a turn into one of the houses on the western side of Orange Grove Road. I am satisfied that at the time the plaintiff suffered from chronic schizophrenia and, for that and other reasons, it would be impossible to determine what his thought processes might have been. However, as presented by the parties, the case has been argued on the basis that if the version advanced on behalf of the plaintiff is correct then the facts manifest a simple rear end collision and the plaintiff will be entitled to judgment. On the other hand, if the plaintiff has not proved the probability of his version or the version of the defendants is accepted it is tacitly conceded that there is nothing that the second defendant could have done to avoid the accident and there should be judgment for the defendants. No submissions were advanced in relation to contributory negligence.

I prefer the evidence of Mr Whyte and therefore conclude that the version of the accident contended for by the plaintiff is more probable. I note the criticism of Mr Whyte's evidence that he was unable to be specific as to the position (on an east-west axis) of the cycle but the critical observation was that it was travelling slowly and came to a complete halt before following truck collided with it. I consider the second defendant was in breach of his duty to keep his speed and control of the truck so in hand that he could safely stop in the event that an emergency or some unusual event intervened.
In a statement made to police he said he was travelling at 60 kms per hour.
His truck was unladen but nevertheless had a weight of about eight and half tons. He was descending a hill. There were road works in progress and the amount of available carriageway was narrow. On his own version he was aware of the existence of the cycle and purportedly keeping it under observation. I do not accept that he was as attentive as he now claims and although he was not exceeding the prescribed general speed limit I regard his speed as excessive given the combination of circumstances just mentioned. I hasten to add that I do not think that the second defendant has deliberately set out to give false evidence. I think he was generally unaware as to how the accident and probably (and even subconsciously) explained the happening of the accident to himself by adopting a version which he now adheres to. I am sure that the tragedy of this accident has passed through his mind many times and that this version has now transcended into his memory but having regard to the ideal location of Mr
Whyte and his manifest independence I think it probable that the second defendant's version is wrong. It is notable that the second defendant has clearly forgotten a lot of detail. He claimed that there was no northbound traffic and if this were the fact then his witness Mr Toulson could not have been there. He made reference to a "fog line" (presumably along the eastern boundary of the trafficable portion of the carriageway) but I am satisfied that there was no such line then to be seen.

Mr Toulson testified that the whole event took place in a split second. I have given careful thought to the coincidence between his version and that of the second defendant. I note that they had some conversation with each other although the content of it remains a matter of speculation. I think the likelihood is that Mr Toulson did not register any observation of the cycle until virtually the moment of impact and that he has reconstructed the event and concluded that the cycle must have come from somewhere on the eastern side because he had not noticed it in front of the truck.

In the course of their helpful submissions counsel on both sides offered detailed analyses and extrapolations of distances, speeds and relative movements. Such estimates are notoriously vulnerable to honest error. There is considerably less chance of error in making an observation which distinguishes between a vehicle moving at all and being stopped. As I have indicated I regard the observation by Mr Whyte that the cycle had stopped as dependable.
No potential distraction such as navigating his vehicle past the roadworks could have affected him as it may well have affected Mr Toulson.

There will be judgment for the plaintiff who has, on the basis of Mr Whyte's evidence, made out his case.

The plaintiff was born on 20 February 1967. His life has virtually comprised an unrelenting tragedy and it is necessary for some of it to be chronicled.
The plaintiff is now unable to contribute intelligible evidence and history must be gleaned from doctors and some recounting substantially given by his father Mr Karl Wood. Mr Wood Snr is a qualified pharmacist. He presented his testimony in a fashion which caused me to doubt his objectivity (which is easy enough to understand) and also his accuracy. I record these matters because I should disclose what has affected my judgment and findings and I emphasize that I do not seek to give offence to Mr Karl Wood or to anyone else. He vigorously asserted that his own psychiatric history was limited to diagnosis of obsessive traits which were detected about twelve years ago during bitter divorce proceedings between himself and the plaintiff's mother. Other material persuades me that in his fourth decade Mr Karl Wood manifested symptoms of schizophrenia himself and he was treated accordingly. There is evidence that he was hospitalized in respect of some of these episodes. His testimony demonstrated some eccentricities and most marked was his perceptible and dogged faith in the benefit of psychotherapy to the plaintiff despite overwhelming contrary opinion which I am satisfied has been tendered to him over a very long period of time. Added to this are indications that his professional qualifications as a pharmacist have provoked him to intervene in relation to regimes of drug therapy which have been prescribed for his son. I note that upon separation of his parents the plaintiff remained with his father (but for a very temporary change in the ensuing years) and his sister has remained with her mother. Much emphasis was placed by counsel for the defendant upon a letter before the motorcycle accident by Mr Karl Wood to his daughter in which he asserted, amongst other things, that Steven was then certifiably insane.

The plaintiff's present circumstances are really not open to debate. He has gross clinically demonstrable brain damage. He will never be employable. He is in need of constant care and supervision. He is independent in no practical sense. It is distressing to observe that the combination of his deficits is such that he does not seem to fulfil the qualifying criteria for admission to any suitable institution and no witness could suggest one that was likely to accept him. Having established an entitlement to damages there is no alternative provided by the evidence to structuring a care group for him on an individual basis.

The critical dispute at trial revolved around what would have been the plaintiff's circumstances if the accident had not occurred. The defendant contends that the care requirement would have approached that which is now needed in any event. Thus some assessment must be made of the likelihoods concerning the plaintiff's future if he had not been injured in the motorcycle accident.

The plaintiff's disturbance and departure from normalcy was apparently first noticed when he was in primary school. He was seen by a psychologist and commenced psychotherapy in 1974. He would have then been aged about seven. A letter dated 2 October 1984 confirms that the plaintiff had been being seen at
Mr Goard's psychology practice "due to various family and educational problems" over the preceding ten years. The then attending therapist Mrs
Campbell is now deceased. By 1987 Dr Humphrey Beckett a psychiatrist (who no longer practises in Australia) was called in for consultation by someone in the Goard practice. I am satisfied that by that time the plaintiff was diagnostically psychotic and in need of treatment. So much is clear from Dr
Beckett's letter to Mrs Campbell dated 16 April 1987 from which I will quote this self explanatory content: "I have now had a letter from Steven's father saying that he is not prepared to accept my advice that Steven should be hospitalized for treatment of his psychosis and that he, Karl, feels that his own care and psychoanalysis are the appropriate management at the present time.

I think it is clear from what I have already written that I personally believe that Steven is quite sick, that he needs a comprehensive approach to management, including medication, and that to provide a solely psychotherapeutic intervention is to seriously neglect his needs. I think it is impossible to predict what Steven may do if his psychosis remains (as I would see it) untreated. It is quite conceivable that he might do himself or someone else a serious injury while he is under the influence of his hallucinations and distorted thinking.

Clearly there is nothing more that I can myself do to help Steven. I think I must leave it to you and Mr Bill Goard to decide how you will manage the situation with Steven and Karl." 
Between 5 January 1988 and 5 February 1988 the plaintiff was a patient of the
Macquarie Clinic. Not all of the history recorded is entirely accurate, in particular the absence of previous psychiatric contact is contradicted by the advice of Dr Beckett (although his advice was rejected). But the content of the discharge summary is informative. It reads: "This 20 year old male was brought to the Casualty Department of Liverpool
Hospital by police officers, who stated that he had been behaving violently at home that morning. Apparently he had attacked his father with a chain and then with a chair and had then smashed up his father's two motor vehicles. History from parents revealed that the patient had been exhibiting bizarre behaviours for at least two years. He had been isolative and withdrawn, often talked to himself and occasionally spoke of `hearing things'. He had been seeing a psychologist for `psychoanalysis' three times a week for the past two years.
He had no previous psychiatric contact or admissions. He lived with his father, who had been separated from his mother for 12 years.

On examination, patient was uncooperative and sat in a chair staring straight ahead. He often giggled for no apparent reason. His speech tended to be a mumble and a monotone. Affect was flat and he displayed a gross thought disorder with circumstantiality, over-inclusion and concreteness. He could not give the date and was uncooperative with cognitive testing. He failed to sustain serial sevens. Physically, Pulse was 100, Blood Pressure 130/70 and no physical abnormalities could be detected.

Patient was sedated with parenteral Diazepam and Haloperidol. He was Scheduled in the Emergency Department and admitted to Macquarie Clinic as an involuntary patient. He was commenced on Chlorpromazine 600 mg a day in divided doses. On
January 8th, Steven was presented to the Visiting Magistrate and an 8 week temporary order was granted under the provisions of Section 12(9)(a) of the
New South Wales Mental Health Act. He presented little management problem in the ward, though he remained isolative and his inappropriateness of affect and his thought disorder showed little sign of any improvement. His dose of
Chlorpromazine was reduced to 400 mg per day on January 19th. Steven's father contacted the unit frequently urging that his son be transferred to a private hospital (e.g. at Royal Prince Alfred) so that `he can continue with his psychoanalysis'. Our attitude was that if Mr Wood was able to make suitable arrangements with the psychiatrists at R.P.A. and if Steven was prepared to be transferred there, then we would have no objection to such transfer. However, no arrangements eventuated before Steven's discharge. He successfully completed two periods of weekend leave, returning voluntarily to the ward. Mr
Wood and Steven were interviewed by Dr Law on February 8th. Both were asking for discharge and had made arrangements for follow up with a psychiatrist in
Burwood. Steven would also continue seeing his psychologist, Ms. Campbell.
Significantly, the patient was intending to move out of the paternal home to stay with his grandmother. These arrangements appeared quite satisfactory and
Steven was discharged. He was offered continuing medication with
Chlorpromazine, but declined." 
The hospital record has an endorsed diagnosis of "chronic schizophrenia - disorganized subtype". Whilst the plaintiff was an inpatient he was subjected to cerebral CT scan and EEG. Both were reported as being within normal limits.

Against that background the plaintiff was gravely injured in the subject accident. For obvious reasons there must be some concentration on the effects of the brain damage but the physical injuries should not be overlooked. The plaintiff suffered fractures of ribs, clavicle and scapula and complicated fractures involving his right tibia and femur. The knee joint is deleteriously affected by malformed union as a result of these. There is debate among orthopaedic specialists concerning whether it is desirable to fuse the knee into a fixed position. In addition the ankle is also deformed. These deficits would constitute major disabilities in any person but in the case of the plaintiff they are subordinate (inappropriate though the concepts usually conveyed by that word are) to hemiparesis with the accompanying handicaps in speech, vision, continence and the multitude of items detailed in the medical reports.

I accept, of course, the virtual unanimity of medical opinion that the plaintiff's health and indeed his life are permanently devastated. The matter of contest centres upon differences of opinion concerning what ought to be predicted as the plaintiff's likely progress in life and disability if the accident had not intervened.

Professor Broe reported, gave evidence and was cross examined. I found his testimony impressive and I accept it. An adequate reflection of his views for present purposes can be drawn from this extract of his report of 7 March 1996: "The major sequelae of the head injury and accident are:
A gross disorder of language communication and initiation. Mr Wood describes Steven as having only a primitive and limited ability to communicate verbally with such statements as `I want a drink', `can we go for a drive', `I want a smoke' and little beyond this. In terms of overall initiation, Steven does very little apart from pushing himself around the house on his bottom and lying on a carpet on the verandah smoking about 40 cigarettes a day. He does not read, rarely watches television, does not use his computer, and drinks thickened milkshakes. He initiates no other activities than those outlined in the inverted commas.
Mr Wood describes Steven over the period of his `recovery' as developing a severe disorder of emotional control. Steven has violent outbursts of physical aggression which are preceded by a clear build up of tension and distress. In his worst outbursts, he has attacked his father while driving the car, bitten the end of his grandmother's thumb off, but does not physically attack inanimate objects or use physical abuse. When Steven becomes obviously hostile, and angry, this is often ameloriated by offering him a cigarette, a drink or on some occasions offering him a drive in the car.
Steven remains severely physically disabled with a fixed deformity in extension of his right knee and a fixed equinus verus deformity of his right foot, so that he is unable to use his right leg for mobilisation.
In terms of activities of daily living, Steven has the following disabilities: .1 Personal Care Activities 
He does not bathe or dress himself independently and is not capable of doing so. In terms of bathing, his level of hygiene, due to frontal disorder of insight, is grossly impaired. He is happy to urinate in his pants and remain in wet clothes. His father therefore does all bathing, and partly because of his inertia and partly because of his physical disability, he carries out all dressing. Steven is able to feed himself, but takes only nutritious fluids, milkshakes and coffee cake. He apparently does not eat any other solid foods.
 .2 Instrumental activities of daily living 
Steven is completely unable to cook or prepare food for himself, although he can get food out of the fridge. He would certainly be unable to shop, budget, drive a car or carry out any housework.

Steven is totally and permanently incapacitated for personal care activities of bathing and dressing; domestic care activities of cooking, housework and shopping; paid employment of any type.
In terms of his premorbid diagnosis and functional and personality and cognitive status: As previously outlined and is noted in W. Goard's reports,
Steven required significant counselling for psychological problems up to 20 years of age, when he was diagnosed with acute schizophrenia in Liverpool
Hospital Psychiatric Unit. However, there is no doubt that he was fully independent and functionally intact in terms of all personal care activities and domestic care activities. For significant times prior to the motor bike accident on 14th July, 1988, Steven had lived alone in a flat and had cared for himself. He had not had a significant period of paid employment however.
On psychological assessment prior to the motor bike accident, Steven was in the superior range as outlined in William Goard's report and confirmed in the school report of 29 August, 1983. However as clearly described by his father, and the report, he was a poor student, and did not do better than average at school apart from coming 1st in computer studies and having very strong computer abilities.

In terms of his present personality and behaviour, Steven presents as someone with gross frontal lobe brain damage. Brain damage alone would explain his severe inertia, apathy and would contribute to his marked disorder of control and temper. It is clear that Steven remains psychotic, although this is difficult to assess. During the interview however, he produced a rapid series of perseverative statements `21Q,4RQUARE' and when asked to interpret these, his only intelligible remark was `the full cross'. His father states that this is similar to his mumbling and pressure of speech prior to the head injury and represents the ongoing schizophrenic disorder.

On neurological examination, Steven presents as an apathetic and inert, very obese young man who communicates poorly and with extreme difficulty. He has a marked dysarthria and significant motor incoordination, ataxia and balance disorder due to post traumatic brain damage.

As a result of the traumatic brain damage and unconnected with his schizophrenia, Steven is disabled completely in most personal care and all domestic care or instrumental activities of daily living and will need permanent full time and continuous care 7 days a week and 24 hours a day.

I would agree with W.S. Goard's view that his major deficit at this stage is traumatic brain damage, and that this has grossly impaired frontal lobe function and rendered any attempt at controlling his schizophrenia extremely difficult.

It would appear that he is on maximal therapy with his present antipsychotic regime, supervised by Dr Hansen. This consists of Resparidone - 4 mgs b.d.,
Rivotril - 2 mgs b.d. or t.d.s., and Serenace 5-15 mgs for storms of hyperactivity and fatuous giggling behaviour. He rarely needs Cagentine - 2 mgs for movement disorder.

Finally, I do not see any significant prospect for further functional improvement. Steven is likely to show mild and ongoing improvement in subtle motor function, but will not change in terms of his functional status in domestic care and instrumental activities of daily living and his incapacity for work or social contact. He has limited insight into these disabilities, but does appear to be distressed by them. "  
I do not regard the circumstances that Professor Broe was not specifically briefed with information from Macquarie and Lidcombe Clinics as rendering his opinions unacceptable. As I have pointed out, he was called to give evidence.
There is a limit to the advance information which can be sent to experts when seeking their opinion. He was cross examined. He did not resile from his opinions and I see no reason advanced for my not continuing to accept them. As noted by Professor Broe the plaintiff is presently under the care of Dr Hansen in respect of psychiatric matters. Dr Hansen was also called. I note that in his report of 20 December 1995 he remarked that (the plaintiff) "is now totally and permanently incapacitated and this is entirely in my view the result of the head injuries which he has sustained." 
The contrary view advanced by counsel on behalf of the defendant went so far as to contend that - having regard to the likely progression of the plaintiff's psychosis in any event - he was now substantially at the same stage in terms of care need as he would have been had the accident not intervened. In this submission, of course, the physical injuries were treated as merely super additions.

As I have indicated I prefer opinions like those of Professor Broe and Dr
Hansen. I am fortified in so doing by noting the less than assertive language chosen for example by Associate Professor Jones in espousing the view promoted on behalf of the defendant when he wrote: "I would be prepared to accept the proposition that his psychiatric illness was leading in a seriously downward pathway prior to the accident and that care and attention would have been required on the basis of his psychotic illness perhaps similar in nature to that which now exists following his motor vehicle accident." 
Indicative of the genuine dilemma confronting those who have needed to contemplate the puzzle of what the plaintiff would have been is that senior counsel for the plaintiff in his final address commended the views of Dr J.
Sidney-Smith (an examiner and witness retained by the defendants) as expressed in his evidence as giving a balanced view of the "before and after" accident situation. I agree with counsel's assessment of that evidence.

As I have observed there is no real issue about the plaintiff's need for full time care and supervision.

In this regard, a lot of time at trial was occupied exploring an alleged event in which the plaintiff was left by his father in a car - disabled by disconnection of the spark plug leads - yet he started it, collided with something and then found his way home. I am sceptical of the evidence that the car was disabled in the way attested but the plaintiff's "ability" to move the car is not inconsistent with his state and the damage done is demonstrative of his incompetence to control it. Arriving at home is perhaps surprising but I do not know what navigation was involved and, for all I know, the "homing" was substantially instinctive. I do not find this peripheral matter qualifies the absence of real issue.

At the moment care is provided by his father who has substantially abandoned his pharmacy business or employment to look after his son. Karl Wood is himself receiving continuing psychotherapeutic treatment of some sort from Mr
Goard. He and the plaintiff are residing in the house owned by the plaintiff's grandmother. The evidence of Mr Kennedy-Gould, a social worker who is experienced in being retained by the Protective Commissioner is telling. His observation that the household is dysfunctional is a charitable understatement.

In the assessment of damages it is necessary for me to compensate the plaintiff only for the consequences of the tort and necessarily I have therefore to take into account the pre-existing situation. I am guided to the approach I should take by the well established principles adumbrated in cases such as Watts versus Rake <case>; [108 CLR 158];
Purkess versus Crittenden 114 CLR 165; Wilson versus Peisley [50 ALJR 207]; Malec versus Hutton <case>; <case>; [184 CLR 485.] 
The most practical approach is to deal with the ingredients of damage claimed seriatim. In so doing I am assisted by the cooperation of the parties and in particular by the production of the schedule which has become Exhibit G. The first item claimed is for non economic loss. Pursuant to the applicable statute the award appropriate to a most extreme case is $235,000. I consider the plaintiff is within that category and that sum will be included in the damages. I do not believe it is necessary to repeat my earlier observations concerning the devastating effect of the accident upon him.

Claim is made for interference with earning capacity and a submission has been made containing ingredients calculated for past and future lost earnings based upon average weekly earnings statistics as well as capitalized losses for superannuation and long service leave. Pre-accident the plaintiff had not engaged in employment save a short time in an unsuccessful experiment working as a messenger for his father's pharmacy. It was observed that when he was aged apparently about fifteen years he had made some helicopter flights. As the recent fatality of a child attempting to fly a light aircraft across the continental United States poignantly demonstrated, maturity is not required to perform the mechanics necessary for basic aerial activity. It is necessary for survival as an aviator. None of the history persuades me that the plaintiff would have had an exercisable earning capacity. As Professor Broe unequivocally stated, the plaintiff would never have had paid employment and was unemployable before the accident. I reject the submission that I should hypothesize some fractional possible capacity and make a partial award of the sum claimed. I find that the plaintiff has failed to prove any of the ingredients on this part of his claim.

I turn to the cost of caring for the plaintiff. The first ingredients relate to services which have to the present time been voluntarily provided by Karl
Wood and his mother. Section 72 of the Motor Accidents Act "caps" the available damages. The provisions therein are taken as read.

I am satisfied that in these regards the plaintiff's actual need for assistance far exceeds the provision of such care for forty hours per week.
The defendant's contention is that it should not be liable for care which is derived from psychiatric need only. Because of the operation of the statute, I do not think that discrimination matters for present purposes. The effect of the statute is to "cap" not to require proportioning. In my assessment the most liberal discount - as against the actual cost of commercially providing for the plaintiff's needs - to cater for the potential of the plaintiff's pre- existing condition would no more than reduce the cost to a figure which itself would remain well over the "capped" costs of forty hours per week at average weekly earnings.

Therefore I include in the damages the calculated amounts which appear at p4 of Exhibit G, namely $210,429 for services to date and $228,060 for such services in the future until Mr Karl Wood attains the age of sixty five. I have on this aspect been discussing gratuitous services, the needs for which have been tort induced and would be reasonable otherwise to obtain at cost.

There is a second aspect of the claim made on behalf of the plaintiff for the provision of carers. The method of calculation for this item of claim is specified on p6 of Exhibit G and I will not repeat what can be referenced from there. Item 1 therein not only involves the concept of a paid carer as supplementary to Mr Karl Wood but provides for respite for him. There is some potential for overlap when his hours are reduced because I have estimated the excess over forty hours per week for the purpose of award reflecting gratuitous services just made. As total care is now being considered it also becomes apt to allow for the underlying potential of the plaintiff's pre- existing condition. Item 2 as set out invites similar allowance as just mentioned although, by its terms (after Mr Karl Wood has turned sixty five) the former consideration would not apply. I would adopt the rates which have been used as factors but for the reasons given I consider the capitalized sums should be discounted and in the case of Item 1 I will reduce it by 25 percent to allow for both factors and Item 2 by 20 percent to allow for the single remaining one.

For future paid care until Mr Karl Wood turns sixty five I award $542,535 and thereafter for the balance of the plaintiff's expected life $596,428.

The third item for separate supervision is derived from an estimate made by Mr
Kennedy-Gould. In my view this additional provision is beyond what would reasonably be obtained at cost, given that the other aspects of need are being fulfilled and I decline to include the amount claimed under Item 3.

The next ingredient sought is a sum for the provision of transport. I accept the evidence that travelling by car is a pleasurable experience for the plaintiff. His physical defects make passive transportation necessary. Had he not been injured in the motorcycle accident, I do not consider that the progress of the underlying psychosis would have rendered it necessary to provide him with transportation as is now the case. I include the sum of $85,076 in accordance with the calculation in Exhibit G.

A claim is made for "additional holiday expenses". This raises a matter which appears to be of some novelty. No doubt, as senior counsel for the plaintiff observed, a holiday should be regarded as an ordinary concomitant of life and on an annual basis ought not be categorized as luxurious. Ordinarily however,
I apprehend that a person funds a holiday from his or her earnings. In the case of a tort injured plaintiff, that person will either retain earning capacity or be compensated for economic loss which has been produced by its diminution or extinction. Hence the funds of earning are available. In this case the plaintiff will not receive that element of damage because he had no pre-existing earning capacity and in the event he has the resource of neither damages nor residual earning capacity. The question arises then whether he should receive compensation as claimed as an additional ingredient of damage.
To answer this by recitation of the axiom that a defendant must take a plaintiff as he finds him, requires an extension of it from personal characteristics to pecuniary resources. I consider that it adheres more to principle to postulate that the plaintiff should provide for this aspect of life's activity as he would have done if the accident had not happened. That is, he would need to draw upon whatever resources were available to him. Post trial there will be a capital for non economic loss and I find it difficult to perceive holiday expenses as a separate tort induced loss when balancing between the parties. I reject this claim. I add that, if other opinion about this were to prevail, I would not regard the proposed holiday packages as without some colour of extravagance in the whole of the circumstances, bearing in mind the basic principle is restitution rather than enhancement.

Items are claimed under a general heading of "home modifications". A discrete group of expenses relating to the building and establishment of a swimming pool are set out. Whilst I accept that hydrotherapy is generally congenial to health, I am unpersuaded that the evidence in this case establishes that the provision and maintenance of a pool for the plaintiff is a reasonable tort derived requirement. I do not overlook that the plaintiff's incontinence would make it impractical for him to use a public facility. There is however no acceptable evidence that the plaintiff has been swimming or desires to swim - there is in fact evidence of a reluctance to bathe - nor that it is intended that he regularly and routinely will do so. I decline to include an element in the damages for these claims.

An architect's report from Mr Watts is included in Exhibit D. He expresses the view that the plaintiff's needs are so specialized that modifying a house even if it was specifically selected is not recommended and he has costed a new house on vacant land following demolition of an existing house. The defendant tendered an architect's report from R.D. Booth. Mr Booth stated: "It is my understanding the issue of this claim is the need for special housing being the extra requirements above a typical house".

I would assess damages along the lines of Mr Booth's formulation which in my view adequately epitomizes the relevant principle. For that reason I prefer his evidence.

Mr Booth has provided alternatives with relevant costings at $57,850, $73,270, and $58,300 (additions to a project house) respectively. As the plaintiff has no precise project in mind, but accommodation for carers will be essential I consider the second figure which specifically accounts for them should be adopted. As well there are annual costs which are set out on p9 of Mr Booth's report (Exhibit 7). Excluding the swimming pool the annual costs of these matters (and I have taken the mid point where ranges are given) are as follows: 
Air conditioning renewals  $575.00  
Air conditioning maintenance  $313.00  
Air conditioning contract  $165.00  
House maintenance  $572.00  
Plumbing and electricity  $250.00  
Total:  $1,875.00  
I treat this expenditure as requiring $36 per week and using the relevant factor representing the plaintiff's life expectancy (961.5) a capital sum of $34,614 is derived. That will be included in the damages. A separate item for furnishing the carer's flat finds insufficient justification in the evidence.

A calculation is offered in respect of the supply of "computer needs" which apparently include a personal computer, modem, printer and softwear together with some updating costs. At p17 of his report Mr Radbron, occupational therapist describes the purpose of this equipment as "recreational use". I consider the evidence shows it to be referrable to general rather than special damage. I note that the history given to Professor Broe includes non-use of a computer which the plaintiff presently has.

There is however a schedule of other equipment identified by Mr Radbron which
I do regard as appropriate to be included in such damage. The calculation at p9 of Exhibit G should be adopted and $27,403 will be included on account of those items.

Next I turn to past out of pocket expenses. The inclusion of all fees for the
Goard psychology practice was vigorously opposed by the defendant. I am sympathetic to that posture. It would appear however that the claimed sum is not simply representative of all the charges made and it has been reduced to $9,060 (see Exhibit H and 8) to relate solely to psychotherapy given to the plaintiff. That therapy was given upon implicit representation that it would assuage some of the consequences of accident. Although I accept the evidence of psychiatrists (for example Dr Pettigrew of Lidcombe Hospital) that this therapy is futile and probably even counter productive I do not find that the plaintiff has been in any position to make an informed judgment. The claim ceases in 1993 by which time the futility was apparently accepted by the therapists. The plaintiff sought (or was taken to seek) treatment from a legitimate source. That conduct should not be categorized as unreasonable even if in the light of information available to me, it was manifestly incorrectly sought. I conclude that I should include in the damages the amount claimed together with the amounts expended on behalf of the plaintiff by the Health
Insurance Commission ($6,703.75) and Transcover ($9,379.69). The inclusive sum for out of pocket expenses will be $25,343.

A schedule of claims for future treatment expenditure is tabulated on p10 of
Exhibit G. There should be some minor adjustment for the delay before the postulated surgery to the knee and ankle is undertaken and the possibility that it may not be undertaken at all. Psychiatric management and future medication in respect of it, (omitting the Chlozapine trial) should take account of the potential that in any event that form of treatment would have been rendered necessary by the progression of the plaintiff's underlying condition. Estimating that approximately one half of the psychiatric attendance and medication would have been needed in any event and taking into account the matters mentioned I would reduce the capital sum of $238,880 arrived at as specified in the exhibit to $165,000 and will include that sum for this ingredient of damage.

Finally I turn to the cost of fund management. The total of the ingredients which I have specified to the present is $2,223,158.00 but it is necessary to establish what part of that sum is appropriate to be used for the purpose of calculation of the cost of fund management. So doing is not an uncontroversial task as a reading of the judgments in GIO versus Rosniak [27 NSWLR 665] abundantly demonstrates. Despite the divergence of view therein, special leave to appeal was refused by the High Court of Australia. This leads to a present problem.
Exhibit G, to which I have made profuse reference and for the utility of which
I express my gratitude to counsel, is silent on the question of what items should constitute the notional investment fund. At whatever figure the fund is established I have no difficulty in adopting the submission that the initial establishment charge is a recoverable ingredient. The extended submission implicit in the equation offered by the exhibit however is not so acceptable.
The information derived from the letter from the Public Trustee contained in
Exhibit D shows that the annual management fee is presently 5.25 percent on gross income. The average return rate on Public Trustee investment is currently 9.67 percent. The submission proposes that I determine an income by using that rate of return and reduce the charge of 5.25 percent of it to a weekly equivalent and then project that (at the prescribed discount rate) over the balance of the plaintiff's life expectancy.

That process assumes that the investment sum remains intact which is, at the very least, contrary to its purpose as well as inconsistent with the approaches manifest in Rosniak. I note that when that case was decided, the evidence was apparently that the Protective Commissioner (whom I will treat as a parallel of the Public Trustee) earned between 14 and 15 percent upon funds as distinguished from 9.67 percent. The reason for the reduction in the years since is notorious and obviously reflects in a large part the absence of high inflation in the Australian economy over the period. Meagher JA (whose views on this topic Kirby P accepted @ 678D-F) recognized that a selection of 5 percent which he made as an assumed return was an exercise of a form of judicial legislation along the lines that could be observed in the preface to judgment in Todorovic versus Waller <case>; [150 CLR 402] but, whatever the philosophy, I treat myself as bound by the authority of
Rosniak.

I must therefore do two things; first, establish the quantum to represent the investment fund and then formulate and solve an equation consistent with the abovementioned authority. I recognize that some early capital expenditure is likely for items such as transport provision and house modification (or as may well happen in this case, house purchase). The arbitrary rate of 5 percent was, of course, selected with an eye to, inter alia, the erosion of the fund by expenditure.

In my view, the fund should include all the ingredients of damage with the exception of the out of pocket expenses and the representative sum for past services already delivered to the plaintiff. The calculated total before mentioned would thereby be reduced to $1,987,386.

The initial establishment fee will amount to $9,000 on the first $300,000 plus $16,874 being 1 percent of the remainder.

Although it has been observed that the rate of management fee may not be immutable I have no evidence in this case of potential for change. The equation that I formulate for this potential cost is as follows: $1,987,386 x (5/100) x (5.25/100) x (961.5/52) = $96,462.

The total inclusion for the ingredient of funds management therefore will be $122,336.

For ease of reference, I repeat in tabulated form the above elements.

Non economic loss  $235,000.00  
Past gratuitous services  $210,429.00  
Future gratuitous services  $228,060.00  
Future paid services until Mr Karl Wood's retirement  $542,535.00  
Future paid services after Mr Karl Wood's retirement  $595,428.00  
Provision of transport  $85,076.00  
Home modification cost  $73,270.00  
Maintenance of domestic items  $34,614.00  
Items as identified by occupational therapist  $27,403.00  
Out of pocket expenses to date  $25,343.00  
Future treatment expenses  $165,000.00  
Fund management  $122,336.00  
Total:  $2,345,494.00  
I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $2,345,494.00. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of action. Liberty to apply forthwith in relation to orders and directions concerning dealing with the judgment sum.
 * * * 
