

The Trust Company (PTAL) Limited versus Berry [2012] NSWSC 1260 (19 October )

Last Updated: 10 January 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
The Trust Company (PTAL) Limited versus Berry  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): May 2012, 13 July 2012  
Decision Date: October 2012  
Jurisdiction: 
Common Law  
Before: 
Schmidt J  
Decision: 
Motion dismissed.  
Catchwords: 
PROCEDURE - motion - real property - caveats against dealings - order seeking removal of caveats - two caveats lodged - <case>(b) notice invalid - whether second defendant was entitled to maintain her caveat - orders refused - costs - motion dismissed  
JUDGMENT
The plaintiffs seek orders under [s 74MA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s74ma.html) of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) for the removal of a caveat which the second defendant, Lynette Anstee, placed on the title of a property located at Mittagong. She is the registered proprietor of the land, over which the second plaintiff holds a registered mortgage, securing a loan of some $1,583,000. It is the mortgagee in possession as the result of orders made in earlier undefended proceedings. The loan was also secured by a mortgage over another property formerly owned by Mrs Anstee's father, Harold Berry. There is no issue that the loan is in default. 
There were two caveats lodged, one on 5 December and another on 22 December 2011. They each rest on a claim that no valid [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice was served on Mrs Anstee. At the hearing it was common ground that the notice served in June 2009 was invalid and that in the absence of the service of a valid notice, there was no power of sale. The order sought is pressed, nevertheless, on the basis of the operation of the principle of laches discussed in Websdale versus S & JD Investments Pty Limited [(1991) 24 NSWLR 573], where it was observed at 581-2: "It is accepted that the general principle of laches is as expressed in two cases during the last century and summarised by Deane J in Orr versus Ford <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 316] at 341 in these terms: '... whether the plaintiff has, by his inaction and standing by, placed the defendant or a third party in a situation in which it would be inequitable and unreasonable 'to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted'."
In issue between the parties is whether, in the circumstances which have arisen, the conclusions reached in Websdale are of assistance to the plaintiffs. There it was concluded at 582-3: "In the circumstances of this case whether the first appellant deliberately refrained from challenging the notices until after the power of sale had been exercised or failed to do so because he had overlooked the extension seems to me to be of little moment. What is important is that having participated in actions which would reasonably lead the first respondent to believe that the appellants were aware at all relevant times that the term had not expired the appellants acted in a manner which encouraged a reasonable belief in the respondents that the notice would not be challenged. The case is not unlike estoppel - the appellants' inaction constituting a representation upon which the respondents acted to their detriment. In my opinion it would be inequitable to uphold the appellants' claim in these circumstances. I would conclude, therefore, that the claim in the notice of contention should be upheld."
In this case there is no question that the notice given was not valid. That has been conceded. There is also no question that when the plaintiffs sold the property they were aware of the 5 December caveat. What is in issue is whether, given the terms of the caveat and the time that the question of the validity of the notice was drawn to the plaintiffs' attention, the conclusions reached in Websdale are available to them. 
Their case is that Mrs Anstee is not entitled to maintain her caveats, because of her laches, acquiescence and delay. Mrs Anstee's case is that she put the plaintiffs on notice of the invalidity of the [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice and that despite being on actual notice of the difficulty, they proceeded with a sale of the property by auction, knowing they had no power of sale. This relevantly distinguished the circumstances in this case, from those which arose to be considered in Websdale, where the invalidity of the notice was raised only after the mortgagee had exercised its power of sale, in circumstances where the mortgagee had been led to believe that the invalidity would not be relied on. In this case while the plaintiffs had acted to their detriment, that was not the result of any laches on Mrs Anstee's part. 
The plaintiffs also relied on the fact that there had been no payment into court of any amount which was outstanding and not in dispute. It was submitted that the result of the caveat was that Mrs Anstee had effectively achieved injunctive relief. It was acknowledged that she had given an undertaking as to damages, but it was submitted that this did not address the failure to repay any part of the outstanding loan, in respect of which nothing had been paid since September 2009. That was submitted to be a relevant consideration, in circumstances where the complaints which she sought to advance in these proceedings, were ones in respect of which damages were an adequate remedy.
The plaintiffs also relied on the various advices earlier given to Mrs Anstee as to payout figures and pointed to Khalid versus Perpetual Limited <case> where it was observed at [34] - [35]: "[34] In Bunbury Foods, a statutory demand to pay monies due had failed to specify the amount owing. In considering the validity of the notice in that case, the High Court (Mason, Murphy, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ) stated at -504: 
It is of some materiality to note that it is not essential to the validity of a notice calling up a debt that it correctly states the amount of the debt.
Even a notice given to the mortgagor by the mortgagee as a condition precedent of a power of sale is not rendered invalid because it demands payment of more than is due ... the interests of the parties will be more adequately protected by the principle that the debtor must be allowed a reasonable opportunity to comply with the demand before the creditor can enforce or realize the security than by the adoption of the suggested proposition that the notice of demand must specify the amount of the debt. In determining whether the debtor has had such an opportunity it will be relevant to take account of the debtor's knowledge, lack of knowledge and means of knowledge of the amount due and of the information which the creditor has provided in that respect, including the response which he has made to any inquiry by the debtor. (emphasis added) [35] Bunbury Foods did not involve a [s (2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice, but rather a demand in respect of monies due under a debenture.
Nonetheless, the principles stated in the decision have been accepted as applying to the validity of a [s (2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice: see Websdale versus S & JD Investments Pty Ltd [(1991) 24 NSWLR ]
at 578-9; Wongala Holdings Pty Ltd versus Mulinglebar Pty Ltd (1994) 6 BPR 13,527 at 13,529 and 13,532-3; and Notaras versus Sly & Weigall <case> ; [12 BPR 23,765."]
The plaintiffs also relied on the fact that in earlier proceedings they obtained possession of the property on the basis of the same [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice which is now disputed. No point was taken in relation to the inadequacy of the notice in those proceedings, in which Mrs Anstee did not appear or take any steps. 
For Mrs Anstee it was not conceded that she had received the benefit of any part of the loan in question, even though it was conceded that some $500,000 had been advanced to her. There was no concession that she was liable to repay any part of the loan. Her case was that the property was being sold for a gross undervalue in circumstances where the plaintiffs were simply trustees for investors. It was submitted that in the circumstances, damages would not necessarily be adequate. There would be significant prejudice potentially flowing from removal of the caveat. Her case was that what had occurred in the earlier proceedings was not of assistance to the plaintiffs, given the way in which they had obtained possession of that property. 
The circumstances in which the property came to be sold, even though the plaintiffs were aware of the caveat
There are issues lying between the parties as to what they actually each did in respect of the notice, the caveat and the sale, which must be resolved. Evidence was given by those involved in various discussions and negotiations. None was given by Mrs Anstee. On the evidence, Mr Stoyles had in the main dealt with Mr Barry Anstee, Mrs Anstee's husband and in respect of some matters with Mr Matthew Anstee, her son. 
The Mittagong property was sold at auction on 22 December 2011. Ms Anstee's first caveat was dated 5 December 2011. It provided: "THE MORTGAGEE HAS FAILED TO SERVE ON THE MORTGAGOR A VALID 57(2)(b) NOTICE AS
REQUIRED BY [SECTION ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s58.html) OF
THE [REAL PROPERTY ACT ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/). THE
MORTGAGEE IS PURPORTING TO SELL WHEN IT DOES NOT HAVE A POWER TO SELL FOLIO
IDENTIFIER XXX/XXXXXX. THE MORTGAGOR DENIES THE VALIDITY OF MORTGAGE AE 560041
FOR THE REASON SET OUT IN THE DEFENCE FILED BY THE MORTGAGOR IN SUPREME COURT
PROCEEDINGS 2011/280129 BETWEEN MORTGAGOR AND MORTGAGEE."
The loan fell into arrears in 2009. There is a dispute between Mr Barry Anstee and Mr Stoyles, a director and the general manager of the second plaintiff, as to whether Mr Anstee advised Mr Stoyles in August 2009, that the notice which had been served in June 2009 was invalid. It is common ground that there had been an earlier notice served in May 2009, which was also invalid. Mr Anstee drew this to Mr Stoyles' attention, with the result that the second notice was served. 
It is necessary to resolve this conflict. It seems to me that Mr Stoyles' evidence must be preferred. It was in the plaintiffs' interest to ensure that a valid notice had been served. He took steps to have a second notice served, when the problem with the first notice was drawn to his attention. He sought legal advice in relation to the caveat in December 2011, when that came to his attention. There was no reason for him not to have pursued the difficulty with the second notice, if it had then been drawn to his attention and every reason for him to have done so. 
Mr Matthew Anstee gave evidence that he had had a conversation with his father about the second notice in June 2009. It was Mr Barry Anstee's evidence that he told Mr Stoyles on 14 August 2009 that the second notice suffered from the same deficiency as the first, in a conversation where an agreement was reached as to payment of outstanding interest. He sent an email which on his evidence confirmed that agreement, but it made no mention of the defective notice. 
Mr Barry Anstee also claimed that there was a further discussion in September 2011, in which Mr Stoyles insisted that being the mortgagee in possession entitled the plaintiffs to sell and in which Mr Anstee insisted that a new [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice had to be served, with Mr Stoyles saying that he would obtain legal advice. 
In cross-examination, Mr Barry Anstee's evidence was that he had mentioned to Mr Stoyles on several occasions that the second notice was invalid, but he agreed that he had never communicated this in writing. Mr Stoyles denies Mr Anstee having given him such advice. No-one thereafter acted in a way which might be expected, had that conversation taken place. There was no reference later made to such a conversation in subsequent correspondence. In the circumstances, it must be concluded that Mr Barry Anstee is mistaken in his recollection of his conversations with Mr Stoyles about the second notice. 
The evidence shows that over a considerable period of time there were ongoing negotiations over steps being pursued to bring the loan repayments up to date; to refinance the loan; as well as active steps being pursued by the plaintiffs in relation to a DA in respect of the property, which it was expected would have considerably increased its value. In evidence is a myriad of communications between the parties as to these matters, as they developed.
In September 2009, Mr Matthew Anstee paid some $58,611 to bring the arrears up to date, following service of the statement of claim in the earlier proceedings. Those proceedings were not defended. It is disputed that an agreement was then reached in a discussion between Mr Stoyles and Mr Barry Anstee, that this would rectify the default and bring the proceedings to an end. That was also Mr Matthew Anstee's understanding. In cross-examination, he said that his understanding of the amount of the arrears on the loan came from Mr Stoyles. He had discussed the amount with his father and there was a family discussion, but he had also gone through it with Mr Stoyles on the telephone. Mr Matthew Anstee's evidence, that he would have taken further steps, had he understood that his payment left the plaintiffs free to pursue the notice which had earlier been given, must be accepted.
Mr Stoyles' evidence was that despite the payment, the loan remained in arrears. It was in February 2010 that the plaintiffs obtained a writ of possession in relation to the two properties, on Mrs Anstee's case, contrary to the earlier agreement reached. On Mr Barry Anstee's evidence they did not become aware of this until around August 2010. On his evidence the writ of possession referred to a different sum outstanding, to that appearing in the second [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice. 
In May 2011, consideration was given by the plaintiffs to mounting a challenge to the Council's refusal of consent to a second DA. The plaintiffs did not further pursue their rights under the mortgage for a considerable period, while steps designed to obtain approval of the DA were taken. Those endeavours failed. 
These proceedings were commenced in August 2011 and in October 2011 the second property securing the loan was sold. The real estate agent, Mr Green, gave evidence that an auction of that property scheduled for 25 June did not proceed, because there were no registered bidders. The marketing campaign then continued and an offer for that property was accepted in September, at a price of $320,000. 
Mr Matthew Anstee then offered to purchase the property here in question for $350,000 with funds which he had available. The offer was not accepted. The plaintiffs had obtained a valuation of the property for some $550,000 in August 2007. Mr Stoyles' evidence was that at the time of his offer Mr Matthew Anstee was also in default on a loan made to him by the plaintiff and he considered that there was a strong prospect of default on completion of such a purchase had Mr Anstee's offer been accepted and so it was rejected. There were then further unsuccessful attempts undertaken for Mrs Anstee at refinancing the loan.
A defence was filed by Mrs Anstee in October 2011, making relevant admissions in relation to the loan and making no reference to the invalid [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice. It was in November 2011 that the plaintiffs listed the second property for sale. Mr Matthew Anstee saw the property being advertised with a price guide of $100,000. The auction was listed for 6 December. On Mr Stoyles' evidence later in November he was advised by the real estate agent that the auction had excited an unusual level of interest. The evidence of Mr Carpenter, the real estate agent acting on the sale, was that he had received 83 enquiries and issued 30 contracts. Mr Stoyles decided to postpone the auction. Mr Carpenter then contacted the people to whom he had issued contracts, advising of the postponement. 
There was a further defence filed by Mrs Anstee without leave in April 2012 which also made certain admissions, but which effectively withdrew others. It referred to the [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice. The amended defence also advances claims of undue influence, misleading and deceptive conduct, and mistaken belief induced by her husband Mr Barry Anstee. It was signed by Mrs Anstee's solicitor. Mrs Anstee swore an affidavit verifying that defence. No cross-claim has been filed. There is an issue between the parties as to whether Mrs Anstee requires leave to rely on that defence, which is yet to be determined. 
Mr Stoyles sought advice from junior counsel as to the impact of a decision given by the Court of Appeal in May 2011 and took advice as to the likely cost of bringing proceedings in the Land and Environment Court in relation to the property. Advice was received on 28 November and on 5 December, Mr Stoyles instructed the real estate agents to postpone the auction. Mr Carpenter's evidence was that Mr Stoyles instructed him on the morning the auction was due to proceed, 6 December, that it was in order to proceed with the auction. Mr Carpenter advised it would be impossible to ensure that potential purchasers were renotified and he was then instructed to reschedule the auction for 13 December. He again contacted the interested parties to advise of the revised date. 
It was on 5 December that the caveat was lodged. Mr Stoyles received a copy of the caveat on 8 December and sought legal advice. In cross-examination, he agreed that he was aware that the caveat claimed that the plaintiffs had no power to sell, because of non-compliance with [s 57(2)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) He took advice and then instructed that the auction should proceed, despite being aware that Mrs Anstee was claiming that the plaintiffs had no power to sell. Mr Stoyles did not agree that Mr Anstee had earlier told him that the notice was invalid, but he agreed that he was familiar with a vendor including a special condition in a contract for sale of land, whereby the vendor is not obliged to proceed with the sale, if there is an impediment which cannot be cured. There was no such condition placed in the contract for the sale of the property. 
Mr Stoyles also agreed that the $500,000 initially advanced to Mrs Anstee in 2007, was paid to her father, to help him out. He said that he had then dealt with Mr Anstee and Mrs Anstee's solicitor. He also agreed that the plaintiffs' loans to Mrs Anstee and her father were later amalgamated, so that her property secured the entire indebtedness of some $1.583million. Again, he then dealt with Mr Anstee. He could not recollect then dealing with Mrs Anstee's solicitor. Mr Barry Anstee agreed in cross-examination that it was he who had arranged these loans and mortgages and was pursuing attempts to refinance in 2009 and 2010. Mr Berry, Mrs Anstee's father, died in 2011. 
In re-examination, Mr Stoyles said that when he received the caveat on 8 December, he thought that there had been a problem with service of the notice and that he had sought legal advice about that, not about the contents of the notice given.
Mr Matthew Anstee said in cross-examination that he advised his mother to lodge a caveat in December 2011. There had been discussions about protecting her, but he had not prepared the caveat and he was not sure if she had received legal advice about its terms. The second caveat was lodged on 22 December.
On 12 December 2011, Mr Stoyles received junior counsel's advice about the DA, as well as correspondence from Mrs Anstee's solicitor, about the Council's refusal of the DA. There it was also advised that the plaintiffs' recent valuation of the property at $100,000 was a mistake. The letter also referred to the caveat, which it was said had been lodged to prevent any sale and advised that Mrs Anstee would hold the plaintiffs responsible for loss and damage, if the sale proceeded for a value that was not a proper market price. 
On 12 December, Mr Carpenter also received a letter from Mrs Anstee's solicitor, threatening to join him in the proceedings, if the auction proceeded. The letter referred both to the disputed valuation and to the caveat which had been lodged. He decided that he required advice and that it was necessary to postpone the auction. Again, he contacted interested parties to advise them of the further postponement, in this instance advising that the postponement was the result of a dispute between the mortgagor and mortgagee and that it would take some time to resolve. On Mr Stoyles' evidence, this occurred without his knowledge or approval. 
On 15 December, the plaintiffs' solicitors wrote to the real estate agents, directing that the property be relisted for auction. Having received advice and having made certain enquiries, Mr Carpenter rescheduled the auction for 22 December and again advised interested parties. 
There was further correspondence from Mrs Anstee's solicitor to Mr Stoyles on 21 December, noting that the auctionWorks website had earlier indicated that the auction on 20 December had been cancelled and rescheduled for 7 February 2012, but that on 21 December the website indicated the auction was to proceed on 22 December. Mrs Anstee complained that a proper sales process had not been pursued and sought an undertaking that the sale not proceed, until these proceedings had been concluded. 
The auction proceeded on 22 December, the property being sold for $200,000. About 20 people were present and the successful bidders, Mr and Mrs Rofe, bid by telephone.

The notice given was not ambiguous
In opening submissions, it was put for the plaintiffs that given the terms of the caveat 'with the benefit of hindsight and knowing what's actually been said, one can see that it was probably intended as a challenge to the validity of the notice, not to want of service'. The concession as to the invalidity of the notice was not, however, made until the hearing commenced on 12 April 2012. The hearing was then adjourned, to permit the parties to explore the possibility of a settlement. That did not eventuate and so the questions raised by the motion must be determined.
In final submissions it was urged for the plaintiffs that it would be concluded that the caveat was inherently ambiguous. That submission may not be accepted, notwithstanding Mr Stoyles' evidence that he thought it was claiming that no notice had been served. The caveat squarely raises the failure to serve a valid notice; the plaintiff having no power of sale; and the dispute as to the validity of the mortgage. It is not ambiguous. 
Mrs Anstee did not encourage a reasonable belief on the plaintiffs' part that the notice would not be challenged. 
It was accepted for the plaintiffs at the hearing that the notice was invalid. Despite this acceptance, the plaintiffs claim that the caveat was only served at a 'minute to midnight', in circumstances where there had been relevant laches by Mrs Anstee. In the result they should be relieved of the consequences of their failure to serve a valid [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice, on which their power of sale rested. 
It was in November 2011 that the property was listed for auction on 6 December, the steps pursued in relation to the DA hearing having failed. Within a short time, Mr Stoyles deferred the auction because of his concern about the inordinate level of interest which the auction was generating. The caveat was lodged on 5 December and Mr Stoyles received it on 8 December. By then the auction had been rescheduled. It was due to take place on 13 December. It was again deferred because of the view which Mr Carpenter took, even though that was not the result of Mr Stoyles' instructions. 
Had the caveat been received by the plaintiffs after the auction had taken place, the position may well have been different. It was, however, received on 8 December before the auction, which only proceeded on 22 December, after the plaintiffs had not only considered the matters raised in the caveat, but had taken legal advice. The reason for Mr Stoyles' approach was obvious. The problems raised by the caveat clearly had to be considered by the plaintiffs. If the notice was invalid, they had no power of sale.
Given the nature of the problem with the notice given, which has now resulted in its invalidity being conceded by the plaintiffs, it is difficult to see that the problem would not have been recognised in December 2011, if the terms of the notice which had been given had then been given any consideration. Mr Stoyles took legal advice. A failure on his part to seek appropriate advice about the terms of the notice on which the power of sale rested, or even if incorrect advice was then given, because the invalidity of the notice was not recognised, are not difficulties of Mrs Anstee's making. Nor is the result of the decision to proceed with the sale of the property on 22 December, in circumstances where there was no power of sale and where steps were not taken to protect the plaintiffs from the consequences of any problem with its right to sell the property. As Mr Stoyles acknowledged, these steps were easily available to be taken by way of provision inserted in the sale contract. 
Before the auction proceeded, Mrs Anstee's solicitor twice drew attention to the caveat. Being on clear notice of the challenge to its power of sale, the plaintiff decided to proceed, without ensuring that a condition was placed in the contract, to deal with the possibility that there was a problem with the notice, which affected its power of sale. It was not then claimed by the plaintiffs that there had been any laches on Mrs Anstee's part, or that the plaintiff would suffer any detriment by having to issue another notice. In all of these circumstances. It is difficult to see why the plaintiffs should be protected from the consequences of their failure to ensure that they had a power of sale, notwithstanding that it may have been possible for Mrs Anstee to have raised the difficulties with the [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice earlier than she did.
Mrs Anstee did not give evidence. The plaintiffs submitted that a Jones versus Dunkel  <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] inference arose against her. The inference is that her evidence would not have assisted her case. The problem with the notice was known to Mr Barry Anstee and Mr Matthew Anstee, before Mrs Anstee lodged the caveat in December 2011. The inference is that so did Mrs Anstee.
It is in those circumstances that the plaintiffs urged the view that despite being on actual notice of the problem with the [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice, and the exercise of power of sale prior to the auction, it would be concluded that Mrs Anstee raised the problem with the [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice too late and that as a matter of discretion, the order the plaintiffs seek should be made. It was argued that consideration would be given to the entirety of the course of dealings between the parties and the repeated opportunities given Mrs Anstee by the plaintiffs, to address arrears and to refinance the borrowings, as well as the co-operative, but ultimately unsuccessful pursuit of the DA. In those circumstances, it would be accepted that the plaintiffs had acted to their detriment and a discretion would now be exercised in their favour, given the sale of the property. It was also urged that attention would be given to the fact that there is now no question that the loan has expired and that time for repayment is long past. It was accepted that there was nothing stopping the service of another notice, but it was submitted that it would be taken into account that the plaintiffs had entered a binding contract with the purchasers as would the consequences which would result for the plaintiffs, if it could not complete that sale. 
I cannot see that these submissions assist the plaintiffs in the circumstances which have arisen for consideration. It was accepted that it was only if the plaintiff could establish laches on Mrs Anstee's part, that the difficulty with the [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice could be overcome. The Court has no discretion to rectify or ignore the defect. All that arises to be determined is whether by her conduct, the plaintiffs may be relieved of the consequences of its failure to adhere to its statutory obligation to give a valid [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice. 
The plaintiffs' approach to the pursuit of their rights against Mrs Anstee, prior to the steps taken to sell the property, was the result of commercial decisions which they made from time to time. Those decisions did not relieve them of the statutory obligation to serve a valid [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice, before pursuing a different course, namely, of selling the property. The exercise of the power of sale depended on the validity of the notice given. 
At the time that the invalidity of the notice was raised by Mrs Anstee in December 2011, there was nothing to prevent the plaintiffs deferring the auction. That step was taken twice, once before Mrs Anstee raised the difficulties, when Mr Stoyles dealt with another concern that had arisen, namely, the unusual interest which the auction was generating. The caveat was lodged on 5 December, the day before the originally scheduled auction. It was received by Mr Stoyles on 8 December, before the rescheduled auction due to proceed on 13 December. That sale was also postponed because of Mr Carpenter's concerns. It was Mr Stoyles who instructed that it be rescheduled for 22 December. Nothing prevented it being delayed until a valid notice was given. 
It ought to have been a matter of significant concern to the plaintiffs at that point, to ensure that they had a valid basis upon which to exercise a power of sale. There had, after all, been a problem with the first notice given. That there was a problem with the second notice as well, was a matter which could have easily been checked. It was only in November 2011 that the plaintiffs decided to auction the property. Mrs Anstee may well have been able to pursue the problem earlier, but she finally did not stand by and allow the plaintiffs to act to their detriment, without alerting them to the problem with the notice, before the auction took place. She drew the plaintiffs' attention to the difficulty in sufficient time for the auction to have been deferred, so that a valid notice could be given. It was the plaintiffs who decided to proceed, rather than taking steps necessary to ensure that a valid notice had been served, or including a term in the contract to deal with any problem with the notice on which it had relied. 
The submission that by the time the advice was received, the marketing and sales process had acquired such momentum, that the auction could not reasonably be deferred, may not be accepted. It had already been deferred once. It was in fact deferred twice, with the result that it was Mrs Anstee who finally complained that the disrupted process did not meet the plaintiffs' obligations in relation to the marketing of the property. 
It was on 15 December that the plaintiffs' solicitors instructed the real estate agents to proceed with the auction. It took place on 22 December, despite a further approach from Mrs Anstee's solicitor. It was not suggested to her then that her advice had been given too late. Deferring the auction so that a valid notice could be given, would have resulted in the auction proceeding in January. I cannot see, in terms of the considerations arising in respect of the principles discussed in Websdale, that such a delay could on any view be considered to have resulted in real detriment for the plaintiffs, given the circumstances. They were clearly not that the plaintiffs had been wrongly led to the view that Mrs Anstee would not challenge the validity of the notice. The position was quite to the contrary. The plaintiffs were put on actual notice of the problem and Mrs Anstee's view that it had no power of sale, but proceeded nevertheless. 
Given the approach which Mr Stoyles took to the advice received about validity of the notice and the plaintiffs' power of sale, and the course which the plaintiffs decided to pursue, notwithstanding service of the caveat and the correspondence received form Mrs Anstee's solicitor, it is difficult to see that there would have been any different result, had the plaintiffs' attention been drawn to the problem earlier than it was. 
It follows that this was not a situation like that in Websdale, where the invalidity of the notice was not raised until after the sale. Clarke J observed in Websdale at 581: "As I have pointed out none of these facts was in issue except in so far as the respondents did not accept that the first appellant had overlooked at the relevant times the extension of the term of the mortgage. If the correct view is that, with full knowledge that the term of the mortgage had not expired when the notices were given, he had delayed raising the notice issue until the last possible minute I do not doubt that it would be proper to refuse the claims for equitable relief. Obviously, if he had taken the point at the earliest possible time the first respondent would have served another notice and thereby overcome the deficiencies in the notices actually served.

This could have been done at any time in the months leading up to the exercise of the power of sale. By taking the point for the first time after the power of sale had been exercised the appellants sought to gain an advantage which would not have been available if the issue had been raised at any time prior to, say, March or April 1991 and also greatly to prejudice the respondents who had, clearly enough, contracted upon the basis that the appellants had accepted that the power of sale had arisen."
That was not this case. To the contrary, the auction scheduled for 13 December was actually deferred, after the notice was given. It was the plaintiffs who decided to proceed, notwithstanding that it was on notice of its problem and could have taken steps to protect itself from the possibility that it did not have a power of sale, by making relevant provision in the contract. 
The plaintiff's case cannot be resolved on the basis of the outcome in the earlier proceedings, given the dispute as to what was agreed would result from Mr Matthew Anstee's payment, on Mrs Anstee's case, that it would bring those proceedings to an end. On the evidence the judgment obtained in the earlier proceedings, after this payment was made, did not come to light for a considerable time, during which there were ongoing negotiations as to refinancing and other matters. That those proceedings rested on the [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice, which it is now accepted was invalid, cannot provided a proper basis for the orders now sought. If it be correct that the orders obtained in those earlier proceedings were the result of an irregularity, as was Mr Barry Anstee's evidence, that would clearly not be a proper foundation for the orders here pursued by the plaintiffs in these proceedings. 
Given the statutory requirements in relation to the giving of a [s 57(2)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) notice, the case advanced for the plaintiffs cannot be accepted. It has not been shown that the circumstances establish laches on Mrs Anstee's part, of the kind discussed in Websdale, nor are the observations in Khalid of assistance. Given the conclusions which I have reached, that there was not relevant laches on Mrs Anstee's part, she not having encouraged a belief on the plaintiffs' part, that the notice given would not be challenged, it follows that the orders sought must be refused.

Costs
The usual order as to costs is that they follow the event. In the circumstances that would be an order as to the costs of the motion in favour of Mrs Anstee, as agreed or assessed. Unless the parties approach to be heard within 14 days, that will be the Court's order as to costs.

Orders
For these reasons given, I order that the motion be dismissed. * * * 
