

Regina versus Champain Matter No Cca 60245/97 [1997] NSWSC 619 (5 December )
 
Regina versus Harriett Anne Champain /97 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Cole JA, Newman J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Harriett Anne CHAMPAIN 
CRIMINAL LAW - SOCIAL SECURITY FRAUD - appellant convicted of defrauding Commonwealth - Crown case circumstantial, based upon pattern of frauds over several years - issue whether verdict unsafe or unsatisfactory - HELD - verdict not unsafe or unsatisfactory. 
ORDER 
Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus Harriett Anne CHAMPAIN 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: After a lengthy trial before his Honour Judge Gibson and a jury in the District Court, the appellant was convicted of five offences of defrauding a Department of the Commonwealth. She was sentenced to imprisonment for four years, with a non-parole period of two years and six months. She appeals against her conviction. There is no application for leave to appeal in relation to the sentences. 
Each of the five charges concerned payments of pensions or benefits which were made by the Crows Nest office of the Department of Social Security over a period commencing in early 1986, and ending in mid 1993. Throughout that period the appellant was employed at the Crows Nest office of the Department.
All of the payments were made into a single bank account. That account was opened at the North Sydney branch of the Advance Bank on 16 January 1986 in the name of Christine Wood of 48 Milson Road, Cremorne. The bank was told that the date of birth of Christine Wood was 21 June 1955. Throughout the period in question a total of some six hundred and fifty withdrawals were made from that account. Each withdrawal but one was made by the use of an automatic teller machine (ATM). The identification used to open the account was a hand- completed Health Benefits card of a kind issued by the Department.

Although all of the pension and benefit payments in question were made into the one bank account, there were four different persons who were understood by the Department to be entitled to the payments. It was the fact that payments were being made into the one bank account which first alerted investigators to the possibility of fraud.

The first count in the indictment concerned sickness benefit payments to Carl
Wood. The second count concerned invalid/disability support pension payments to Carl Wood. The third count concerned wife pension payments to Christine
Wood. The fourth count concerned age pension payments to John Williams. The fifth count concerned age pension payments to Catherine Williams. The total amount of such payments was $187,930. The Crown case was that all of the payments were fraudulent, that they all went into the Advance Bank account in the name of Christine Wood, and that all the withdrawals from the Christine
Wood account were made by the appellant.

The Crown called evidence relating to each of the withdrawals from the
Christine Wood bank account. It was the Crown case that every one of those withdrawals was made by the appellant. It was also the Crown case that it was the appellant who procured every one of the pension or benefit payments the subject of the five counts in the indictment, all of those being payments into the Christine Wood bank account.

The trial judge directed the jury that the case had been conducted, both by the Crown and the defence, on an all or nothing basis. He told the jury that, as the case had been run, they must either convict the appellant on all five counts, or acquit her on all five counts. No complaint was made about that direction, and, although it was originally the subject of a ground of appeal, that ground of appeal was withdrawn. It is, however, worth noting the implications. The Crown prepared a schedule, supported by evidence, showing the date, time, amount, and location of over six hundred ATM withdrawals. The
Crown did not claim to be able to prove by direct evidence that any one of those withdrawals was made by the appellant, but it relied upon a powerful body of circumstantial evidence to support the claim that they were all made by her. As the case was conducted, and left to the jury, and putting to one side questions of onus of proof, if it appeared that one or more of those withdrawals had not been made by the appellant, then the Crown case would have failed. On the other hand, the Crown's circumstantial case gained weight from the large number of withdrawals in question. The reason for that will appear below. It suffices for the present to say that this was not a case in which the Crown set out to prove, for example, that half a dozen withdrawals were made at times when, and at places where, the appellant was present. The Crown called evidence of that kind in respect of over six hundred withdrawals, and, in addition, it placed strong reliance upon the existence of occasions when there was a break in the pattern of withdrawals coinciding with absences of the appellant.

It was common ground on this appeal that the Crown had established that all of the pension and benefit payments had been fraudulently procured, and that whoever was operating on the Christine Wood bank account was involved in the fraud. Senior Counsel for the appellant did not concede that there was only one person who was the perpetrator of the fraud, but he argued the case upon the basis that there must have been involved in the fraud at least one person who was employed, over the period in question, in the Crows Nest office of the
Department. The Crown case, on the other hand, was that there was only one person involved, and that person was the appellant.

The number of persons employed in the Crows Nest office of the Department who were potential suspects was relatively limited. There were eleven such persons, of whom only three were females. One of the females was the appellant. The significance of the fact that the appellant was a female was, of course, that the Christine Wood account was opened by a female and, indeed, a female said to have had a date of birth relatively close to the date of birth of the appellant. The appellant was about the same age as the age of
Christine Wood as represented to the Advance Bank.

The jury heard evidence of the investigation which was undertaken following the discovery of the frauds in 1993, and there was a good deal of information about the other possible suspects, who had been eliminated. Of the other two females who were included amongst the eleven possibilities, one had been overseas or absent on leave for a lengthy period during which withdrawals from the Christine Wood account had occurred. The other had also been away on leave at a time when a number of withdrawals were made from an ATM near the Crows
Nest office, and there were additional circumstances which appeared to eliminate her as a possibility.

As has been mentioned, aspects of the pattern of withdrawals which appeared to implicate the appellant, and to which further reference will be made below, included the fact that, when she was overseas, withdrawals always ceased, but they resumed again soon after she returned home. Again, some withdrawals were made from Lismore, and others from Maitland, at times when the appellant was in the vicinity.

In relation to matters such as this, Senior Counsel for the appellant suggested in argument that a possible and reasonable hypothesis was that the real perpetrator of these frauds had cunningly sought to implicate the appellant by structuring the pattern of withdrawals in a manner that would direct suspicion towards her. This, it may be noted, seems to involve the idea that somebody followed the appellant to Lismore and to Maitland.

One of the grounds of appeal relied upon by the appellant was that the verdicts were unsafe or unsatisfactory in accordance with the principles enunciated in M versus The Queen [(1996) 181 CLR 487.] It is convenient to begin with a consideration of that ground of appeal, because it provides an occasion to outline the facts in more detail.

The appellant was employed as an Administrative Officer of the Department at the Crows Nest office from 1979. She was in a position to procure the payment of the various benefits the subject of the five counts in the indictment and, as in fact happened, to re-instate such payments on occasions when, for one reason or another, they had ceased.

As was mentioned, all of the pensions and benefits were paid into the
Christine Wood bank account opened at the North Sydney branch of the Advance
Bank in January 1986. The account was opened using, as identification, a hand- completed health benefits card of a type available in blank form near the public counter at the Crows Nest office of the Department. The address which was given as the address of Christine Wood, 48 Milson Road, Cremorne, was, at the time, a large residence on Sydney's Lower North Shore which provided boarding house accommodation. The appellant's date of birth was 2 June 1956, about a year later than the date given as the date given of Christine Wood.
Thus, the appellant and "Christine Wood" were females of about the same age.

Throughout the period in question, the appellant lived on Sydney's Lower North
Shore. The addresses provided for the persons to whom the pensions and benefits were paid were all addresses for boarding houses or nursing home accommodation at Sydney's Lower North Shore.

John and Catherine Williams were fictitious persons. There were persons known as Carl Wood and Christine Wood, but they did not claim or receive any of the pensions or benefits to which the charges related. For a short period of time, in 1985, Carl Wood lived at Cammeray on Sydney's Lower North Shore and obtained unemployment benefits from the Crows Nest office of the Department.
At that time he was married to Christine Wood.

In the ordinary course of her employment, the appellant was involved in the administration of pensions and benefits at the Crows Nest office of the
Department. She had access to information about pensioners and beneficiaries, and she had access to mail which had been sent to pensioners and beneficiaries and returned unclaimed to the office. There were occasions in 1992 and 1993 when some of the pensions in question were suspended, and the evidence showed that the appellant was involved in every case in the restoration of those pensions.

The great majority of the withdrawals were made through ATM's located at
Sydney's Lower North Shore, either in the vicinity of the appellant's place of work, or in the vicinity of her residence.

There was close correspondence between the appellant's movements, and the time and location of the withdrawals. All of the withdrawals which were made from
ATM's outside Sydney were made at places with which the appellant had substantial links, and which she visited from time to time. For example, three of the withdrawals were made in Maitland at a time when the appellant's father lived there and used to be visited by the appellant. Three of the withdrawals were made at Lismore at a time when the appellant was staying with her mother in the nearby township of Goonengerry. Two of the withdrawals were made at
Crows Nest on days when, although the appellant was a patient at Royal North
Shore Hospital, she received leave passes from the hospital. One of the withdrawals was made at Neutral Bay on the same day as a withdrawal was made from the appellant's Westpac account at the Westpac ATM at Neutral Bay.
Another withdrawal was made at Wynyard on the same day as a deposit was made into the appellant's Westpac account at a Westpac branch in George Street,
Sydney. The appellant was on strike on that day, and did not attend work at
Crows Nest. One of the withdrawals was made from an ATM at St Leonards which was immediately adjacent to the surgery of the appellant's dentist on a day, and at approximately the time, when the appellant had an appointment with that dentist. One of the withdrawals was made from an ATM at Neutral Bay on the same day as the appellant was shown to have paid a deposit at a nearby art gallery. One of the withdrawals was made the Warringah Mall Shopping Centre at
Brookvale on a day when the appellant was working at the Dee Why office of the
Department. Brookvale is near Dee Why.

Between January 1986 and June 1993, the appellant travelled overseas on five occasions. There were no withdrawals from the Christine Wood account during any of these overseas absences. On each occasion the last withdrawal from the
Christine Wood account prior to the appellant's departure was made either on the day of the departure, or within the couple of days before it. On one occasion the first withdrawal after the appellant's return to Sydney was made at Neutral Bay two and a half hours after her aeroplane arrived at Sydney
Airport. On another occasion, the first withdrawal was made two days after her return to Australia. In the other three cases, although the first withdrawals after the appellant's return to Australia were made between four and eighteen days after her return, they were all made at Crows Nest on the day of, or the day following, her return to work at the Crows Nest office of the Department.

There was also an apparent relationship between withdrawals from the Crows
Nest account, and operations on the appellant's own bank account. There were lengthy periods, during which repeated withdrawals were made from the Crows
Nest account, when there were no withdrawals from the appellant's account.
This was consistent with the appellant resorting to the Christine Wood account on occasion for her day to day living expenses. There was a long period of inactivity on the appellant's account in late 1992 and the first half of 1993, but that account became active again after June 1993, when the suspected fraud was discovered, and the Christine Wood account was closed.

In June 1993, certain of the relevant pensions were restored as a result of a telephone call from the appellant to Robert Tippitt, a fellow officer of the
Department. The appellant told Tippitt that she had spoken to a social worker from the Royal North Shore Hospital who had in turn seen the Woods and the
Williams, and had requested the restoration. The appellant gave addresses for the Woods and the Williams which were later shown to be incorrect. Evidence from the Royal North Shore Hospital showed that no such contact, or request, in relation to the Woods and the Williams had occurred.

On 24 June 1993, when the matter was being investigated by Mr Walmsley, then in charge of the Crows Nest office, the appellant told him she had received the telephone call referred to above from a social worker at Royal North Shore
Hospital at a time when the appellant was working at Chatswood. She also told
Walmsley that the social worker had told her that the Woods and the Williams were at the hospital and needed urgent payment.

After the suspected fraud had been discovered and was under investigation, the appellant told Mr Freeman and Mr Walmsley that there had earlier been an investigation of the Woods' and Williams' pensions by a named officer who had found the pensions to be in order. The evidence established that there had been no such investigation.

A substantial body of character evidence was called on behalf of the appellant, but some of the shine was taken off that evidence by other evidence in which the appellant acknowledged that she had failed in her income tax returns to disclose rental payments that had been made to her by certain tenants.

The extent to which the appellant was able to dissociate herself from any of the payments in question was an important issue. She, of course, did not carry any onus of proof, but since the Crown case depended upon establishing a pattern, it was important to her case to point to any break in the alleged pattern.

When asked to indicate what he submitted was the strongest example of an alibi put forward by the appellant, Senior Counsel for the appellant referred to those parts of an alibi notice which related to 8 June 1989, and 13 November .

The appellant was a long standing patient of a dentist, Mr Taylor, whose surgery was close to where the appellant worked, although the precise location altered over the period the subject of the charges. The evidence suggested that occasionally the appellant and Mr Taylor also socialised if she had an appointment late in the day. Mr Taylor gave character evidence for the appellant.

The evidence showed that on Thursday, 8 June 1989, at 11.38am, there was a withdrawal from the Christine Wood account using an ATM at the Advance Bank at
Crows Nest. The appellant called Mr Taylor to prove that at that time, on that day, she was in his surgery receiving dental treatment.

On 8 June 1989, Mr Taylor was practising at 100 Pacific Highway, Crows Nest.
He said it would have taken about ten to fifteen minutes to walk there from the appellant's work place. Mr Taylor's appointment book for the day showed that the appellant had an appointment with him to commence at 11.00am, and the nature of the work that he performed was such that he said it would have taken about an hour. However, he described the system that operated in relation to making a mark in the appointment book to indicate whether a patient did or did not turn up. According to that system, which was not necessarily perfectly adhered to, it appeared that the patient who was due to come at 10.30am, before the appellant, had not turned up. Mr Taylor said that sometimes, when that happened, he would arrange for the next patient to come early. It may be added, although this does not seem to have been dealt with specifically in the evidence, that if the next patient had turned up early then that patient's treatment might begin before the appointed time. Mr Taylor said, at p 1104 of the transcript, that it could have been the case with the appellant that she was on a short list of people who worked or lived near the surgery, and who would have been contacted to come early if a previous patient had not turned up, and had left a gap in the dentist's schedule.

The evidence showed that on Wednesday, 13 November 1991, at 5.46pm, there was a withdrawal using the ATM at the St George Bank, 544-546 Pacific Highway, St
Leonards. On that day Mr Taylor was practising at 550 Pacific Highway, St
Leonards. The appellant, according to Mr Taylor's appointment book, had an appointment with him at 5.00pm, and the appointment was for an hour. However,
Mr Taylor's records of what he did on that day showed that he did not perform all of the dental work for the appellant which he had originally planned when the appointment was originally fixed. The Crown argued that it was, therefore, quite possible, assuming the work commenced at precisely the appointed time, that it had only taken three quarters of an hour.

The Crown placed particular reliance upon this dental appointment. The St
George Bank was only about twenty metres away from Mr Taylor's surgery. This was the only occasion when there was a withdrawal from the Christine Wood account using the ATM at the St George Bank at St Leonards. It would have been an extraordinary coincidence, so the Crown argued, if that withdrawal had been made, by someone other than the appellant, at the very time the appellant was sitting in the dentist's chair only twenty metres away. It is far more likely, so the Crown argued, that the explanation of the making of that withdrawal from that location was the appellant's dental appointment.

The appellant also raised an alibi in relation to a withdrawal on 18 July , contending that she was at the relevant time in the presence of Mr
Charkey and Ms McGrath at their home. However, the evidence about this matter was inconclusive. It did not exclude the possibility that the appellant might have been at the ATM machine from which the withdrawal was made at the time of the withdrawal.

In relation to another instance, the appellant contended that she was at a funeral near Newcastle, in the company of her father, (since deceased) and her father's solicitor at the time of a withdrawal made in Sydney. However, she could not call anyone who remembered her being at the funeral, and her name did not appear in a condolence register at the funeral. The appellant's failure to call the solicitor to support her alibi was the subject of a comment by the judge which has given rise to another ground of appeal which will be referred to below.

In relation to the withdrawals from an ATM at Lismore at a time when the appellant was visiting her mother at a nearby town, the appellant said, for a reason which she gave, that she would not have been able to drive to Lismore.
The Crown replied that she had not excluded all possibility that her brother had driven her, and her failure to call the brother gave rise to a similar comment to that mentioned above, and will also be referred to below.

In what is set out above, I have not attempted to cover in full detail all of the factual arguments relied on, one way, or another, in the present appeal.
The court was provided with lengthy and detailed written submissions from both sides, and I have not attempted to reproduce or summarise the whole of those submissions. I have endeavoured to concentrate upon what appear to me to be the most important points.

It was argued on behalf of the appellant that, although there may be ample ground for suspicion concerning the appellant, the Crown case never rose above the level of suspicion, and did not amount to proof.

As has often been observed, circumstantial evidence is sometimes more compelling than direct evidence. It does not suffer from the frailties of human observation and recollection, or the possibility of honest mistake, that accompanies certain forms of direct evidence. The tribunal of fact is not so dependent upon the honesty or the reliability of witnesses as in a case where proof takes the form of an account of what a person professes to have observed, or to have heard.

Different aspects of the evidence in the present case might have had a different effect on the minds of individuals jurors. To my mind, one of the most compelling aspects of the evidence is the relationship between the appellant's absences overseas, and the pattern of withdrawals from the
Christine Wood account. On any view of the matter, the relationship between the appellant's movements and the pattern of withdrawals seems impossible to explain as mere coincidence. That, perhaps, is why the appellant has advanced, both at first instance and on this appeal, the hypothesis that the real perpetrator of this fraud took some pains to do things which would make it appear that the appellant was responsible.

The appellant herself gave evidence at the trial and, as was noted, called a substantial body of character evidence. It is not easy, from a reading of the transcript, to judge what kind of impression the appellant would have made as a witness.

On the whole of the evidence it was well open to the jury, acting reasonably, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. The convictions have not been shown to be unsafe or unsatisfactory.

The two remaining grounds of appeal both turn upon criticisms of the summing up which were not made at the trial, and which did not give rise to any application for re-direction. Leave to argue those grounds is required, and I do not consider that leave should be given. However, relevant to that conclusion is the view I have formed as to the strength of the grounds, which were fully argued, and certain matters as to the way in which the trial was conducted. It is necessary, therefore, to examine the grounds in some detail.

Reference has already been made to the absence of a witness, a solicitor, who was identified by the appellant during her evidence as someone who could support her alibi concerning attendance at a relative's funeral on the occasion of one ATM withdrawal, and to the absence of the appellant's brother whose evidence might have been relevant to an issue concerning possible transportation of the appellant to Lismore. Gibson DCJ gave the following directions: "Suggestions have been made by counsel in this case that either the accused or the Crown should have called certain witnesses. The brother of the accused was one, the solicitor that acted for the accused's father who was at the funeral was another one, and there are other persons referred to. I want to give you this direction. If you believe that one of the parties should have called a particular witness and has not done so and that the evidence of that witness is relevant to an issue in this case and there has been no explanation given to you for not calling that witness, or you do not believe the explanation tendered, then you must not guess at what that witness might have said, but you may infer that his or her evidence would not have assisted the case of the party who you think should have called that witness. I say may draw that inference; you do not have to and it is entirely a matter for you whether you do so or not, as it is as to whether you accept any explanation that is tendered. As I say, you may draw that inference but you do not have to; it is entirely a matter for you." 
Later, when referring to the argument about Lismore and Goonengerry, his
Honour said: "She says she never went there (to Lismore). There is no doubt the card was used there. The Crown says well is was open for her brother to have taken her there if she could not drive herself. She was well enough in Sydney to go to the club on the day before she went up to Goonengerry. And if she could not drive herself there the evidence is that her brother could have driven her. He is not called and you will draw an inference that any evidence that he gave would not have assisted her case, whether you draw that evidence or not is entirely a matter for you." 
It may be noted that in the above passages, up until the concluding sentence, the judge is merely repeating an argument of the Crown. He adds his own comment in the concluding sentence.

In relation to the funeral, the judge said: "There was the funeral of the aunt at Maitland, and you have heard the submissions he made concerning that, that you would accept the evidence of
Miss Moss who was called, who said that she had no recollection of seeing the accused there, the accused said she was there with her father and her father's solicitor. But she said she had the book of people that signed there, and the accused did not sign it, her father and the solicitor, on my understanding of it, did. And once again the Crown says well the solicitor is not called. One would have thought that if it be the situation that he was there he would have been called and be able to say what the situation was, he is not called, you may draw the inference that his evidence would not have assisted the accused's case." 
It is well established, both that the principles enunciated in Jones v
Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298] apply to criminal, and not only to civil, cases, and also that caution needs to be exercised in the application of those principles to criminal cases (R v
Buckland [1977] 2 NSWLR 452). One of the reasons for that caution is that it can often be very difficult in a criminal case to know, or to explain, in a way which does not cause embarrassment or prejudice to an accused, why a particular witness is not being called. That consideration, however, does not appear to have anything to do with the circumstances of the present case. It is also true, as Senior Counsel for the appellant has submitted, that it can often be unhelpful to give a direction of the kind set out above without explaining to a jury matters that might throw light upon the question of who "should" call a witness. Once again, however, that problem does not seem to have much to do with the circumstances of the present case. In relation to the funeral, the appellant's notice of alibi did not identify the solicitor as a person who could support her alibi. When she came to give evidence, during the defence case, she referred to the solicitor as a person who could support her alibi. It can hardly be suggested that in those circumstances the Crown should have called the solicitor. It was not until the defence case was under way that the Crown knew of the solicitor as a potential witness. Similarly, it seems hard to suggest that the Crown should have called the appellant's brother to deal with the issue of the possibility of transportation of the appellant between Goonengerry and Lismore.

It is evident from what Gibson DCJ said to the jury that Jones versus Dunkel arguments were deployed on both sides in the course of final addresses at this trial. No complaint was made about the summing up in this respect, and the problems which attend the application of Jones versus Dunkel to criminal trials were not problems that played a significant part in the present case.
This ground of appeal lacks merit, and it is not surprising that the point was not raised at the trial.

Similarly, in relation to the remaining ground of appeal, there was no complaint at the trial.

The matter raised on appeal concerns what are said to be the inadequacies given in relation to the character evidence.

The first point to be made about this ground is that, although it is true that there was evidence of the appellant's good character, there was also evidence, which emerged in the course of her cross-examination, which a jury might well have regarded as tending in the opposite direction; indeed, evidence a jury might have regarded as showing tax evasion.

The essence of the complaint which is made about the trial judge's directions is that, although he repeated to the jury, in orthodox terms, the ways in which the defence relied upon evidence of good character, he did not, or did not adequately, give the arguments the independent weight of his own authority.

What the judge said was as follows: "The accused has placed before you, and put in issue, her character. She places herself before you as a person who because of her character is unlikely to have committed the crime for which she stands accused. And a person who is unlikely to lie. And she called the following witnesses. She called Mr Taylor who was also the dentist but he gave evidence as to her character. He had known her for some years. Mr Martin the chiropractor who also gave evidence of knowing her for some years. Mr Killip who was called as a straight out character witness who had known the accused for a long while. She was a personal friend. She visited. Both he and his wife had various places that they'd been around the country. He said that he couldn't accept the fact that she would act dishonestly in the way that's alleged here. In his opinion she couldn't do that.

Miss Lawson who is a friend of the accused, who had known her for years, she had worked with her originally at the DSS Office at Crows Nest and was now computer services trainer at the Taxation Office, and she said she had known the accused for a long while and it was not her character and she would not accept the fact that she would have acted dishonestly in this way. Leonie Mary
Arthur was also called. She gave evidence you will remember, of visiting her parents and she is tied up. She was called in relation to perhaps she might have been somebody who bought a book at Dymocks. But she also gave evidence as to her knowledge of the appellant. McGrath, her friend, in relation to the baby, gave evidence as to her good character and her beliefs concerning her good character. As did Charkey and you will remember Jennifer Anne Evans who had travelled overseas with her and had known her for a number of years since and she did not believe that she would be dishonest. And finally Geoffrey
Maxwell Thompson who was the solicitor that was called who had acted for her on occasions and who gave evidence also as to good character. They all gave evidence of the high regard they held her in. And as to her honesty and how they could not believe that she could be dishonest.

Now that is a matter for you. The law gives her the right to do this and you are required by law to consider the evidence of character before you decide whether or not she is guilty. In answer to this evidence the Crown relies on material before you concerning the honesty of the accused. That evidence is evidence which came from the mouth of the accused herself. And that is that she did not disclose to the Taxation Department the money she had received by way of rent from the Broughton family because it was only a small amount, not worth bothering about. This was despite signing the declaration on the return and knowing that she should do so. The Crown argues that when you take the evidence into account along with the matters raised by the accused, the combined effect of the character evidence is such that it does not help the accused at all. That is that you could not describe her as a person unlikely to tell lies or a person unlikely to commit the crime. It is for you to assess this evidence and to make your own decision as to whether or not it has the effect that the accused claims for it. And if it does to what extent it helps the accused in this case. However I must emphasise to you that even if you took the view that the accused is a person of bad character that must not be used to strengthen the Crown case against her. For example you could not say and you are not entitled to say and you cannot say, "Because of her bad character we think she is a person who is likely to have committed this crime." That is not the way that you can use that evidence if you came to that conclusion." 
The way in which Gibson DCJ put the competing arguments about character to the jury would surely have left the jury in no doubt that if, contrary to what the
Crown was saying, they accepted that the appellant was a person of good character, then that was a matter which went both to the question of her honesty, and also the question of whether she was likely to have committed the offences alleged against her. The real argument that arose, in the way the trial was conducted, and the one which the trial judge dealt with in his summing up to the jury, was whether, on the totality of the evidence, it appeared that the appellant was a person of good character.

Because no application for re-direction was made, the trial judge did not have an opportunity of considering any particular form of words that might have been suggested as appropriate for addition to his directions.

In the circumstances , leave to rely on this ground should not be given and, in any event, it is not shown that any miscarriage of justice occurred by reason of the way the issue of character was dealt with.

The appeal should be dismissed.

REGINA versus Harriett Anne CHAMPAIN 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I agree with Gleeson CJ. 
REGINA versus Harriett Anne CHAMPAIN 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I agree with Gleeson CJ. * * * 
