

Woods and Ors (T/as Turner Freeman) versus Wilfried Hanoldt Nos. Ca 40299/94 and Ddt 2384/93 Abuse of Process [1995] NSWSC 18 (30 August 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
CLARKE(1) MEAGHER(2) HANDLEY(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 16 June 1994 #DATE :3:1995 #ADD 30:8:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:     B Toomey QC and A Quinlivan 
Solicitor for the Appellant:   
Turner Freeman 
Counsel for the Respondent:    M J Joseph 
Solicitor for the Respondent:   Watkins Tapsell and Nolan
ORDER
Orders made.
JUDGE1
CLARKE JA: The claimants for leave to appeal (I will call them the appellants) are members of a firm of solicitors known as Turner Freeman who are experienced practitioners in common law damages actions and workers' compensation claims.
One partner, Armando John Gardiman, has the overall supervision, care and conduct of all asbestos disease and latent injury cases within the firm. He is, therefore, a very experienced practitioner before the
Dust Diseases Tribunal and, in particular, has represented many claimants who have suffered from asbestos related diseases.
The opponent, Wilfried Hanoldt, was, in 1994, the plaintiff in proceedings in which he claimed damages against Qantas Airways Limited upon the ground that he was suffering from mesothelioma as a consequence of Qantas's negligence. Ms solicitor was Mr Andrew Hartcher, of the firm of Watkins,
Tapsell and Nolan, who has sworn an affidavit in which he said that he had never previously conducted a matter in the Dust Diseases Tribunal.
During the course of interlocutory proceedings in the case of Hanoldt v
Qantas Airways Limited the respondent served a subpoena upon the appellants requiring the production of a number of documents which will be described in more detail below. The response of the appellants was to move to set the subpoena aside on a number of grounds. That application was heard by Judge
Johns who, on 18 May 1994, set aside part of the subpoena but required production of the documents referred to in Annexure "A" of the subpoena as
PX32, PX33, PX34 and
PX38. The appellants immediately sought leave to appeal from that judgment and the court, because the substantive hearing in the respondent's claim was due to be held very shortly, heard argument both on the application for leave to appeal and the appeal itself
At the end of the hearing the court ordered that leave to appeal be granted, that the appeal be upheld and that the subpoena, insofar as it required production of the documents previously mentioned, be set aside. The court then reserved its reasons. I now publish the reasons which led me to conclude that the subpoena should be set aside.
 
Facts
The documents of which production was ordered were as follows:
Exhibit PX32 - Report of Mr Boris Osman dated 26 March 1991;
Exhibit PX3 3 - Report of Mr Osman in Barker versus Siddons Pro
Line Limited dated 26.5.92.
Exhibit PX34 - Report of Mr P Deary dated 15.5.91
Exhibit
PX3 8 - Exhibits Z1-Z20 in Phillips versus C C Victoria Pty
Ltd and Ors No DDT98/1990.
As I earlier indicated the subpoena was far more wide reaching. It sought the production of many documents and did so in terms which in my view almost certainly rendered the subpoena oppressive. In order to overcome this problem the respondent restricted his claim for compliance with the subpoena to the stipulated documents. I mention this fact solely to indicate that the parties joined issue before Judge Johns and this Court only upon the requirement that the abovementioned documents be supplied. In particular no argument was put to either court that in view of the wide reach of the subpoena it should be set aside as oppressive without further enquiry.
Some further description of the four classes of documents is necessary. I take it from the affidavit of Mr Gardiman which was relied upon both before
Judge
Johns and this Court. It read, relevantly, as follows: "13. Exhibit PX32 is a report of Mr Osman in proceedings Ellul v
Norton
Pty Limited. The report is a specific report prepared by Mr
Osman, commissioned by Turner Freeman on behalf of Ellul who was an employee of the Second Defendant who worked as a machine operator emptying bags of raw amosite fibre into the mixing machine that used to manufacture "Proofkote". Ellul was employed by Norton Pty Limited within a short period of time after
Preston (to whom I shall refer later) ceased employment and worked with
Norton for a number of years. The report is specific to Ellul's working conditions with Norton Pty Limited. It is not a report directed to the working conditions of brake lining workers either in the manufacture of brake linings or in the removal and repair of brake linings.
Exhibit PX3 3 is a report of Mr Osman prepared in the proceedings of Barker versus Siddons Pro Line Limited on behalf of
Barker at the specific request of Turner Freeman solicitors.
Barker was employed as a courier and sales person by a series of large scale suppliers of wide ranges of engineering and other products including products containing asbestos. Those products did not include brake linings. They did include asbestos rope, asbestos gloves and asbestos meal and similar products.
Exhibit PX34 was a report prepared by Peter Deary in Urner v
LNC Industries Pty Limited and Ors at the specific request of
Turner Freeman. Peter
Deary is an English expert. In the Urner proceedings three large English manufacturers of brake linings and suppliers of brake linings were sued. One of those companies was
Ferodo Limited which as earlier referred to entered into a joint venture agreement with James Hardie and Coy Pty Limited that lead to the incorporation of Jsekarb Pty Limited (to whom I will later refer). The report deals generally with the question of knowledge in English industry with relevance to the brake lining industry in particular and contains numerous specific references to matters solely applicable to England. The report also touches upon some of the known Australian literature which has been referred to on numerous occasions by other experts before the
Dust Diseases
Tribunal of New South Wales including Dr David Kilpatrick and Dr
Maurice Joseph. Extensive objections were taken to large portions of the report and substantial portions were deleted. The document ultimately tendered was various portions of the Deary report that were ruled to be applicable to the Preston proceedings.
Exhibit PX38 upon enquiry of the Dust Diseases Tribunal
Registry does not form part of the Rule 4 material. The transcript of evidence given by Dr
David Kilpatrick and Dr Maurice Joseph in the Phillips proceedings is however part of the Rule 4 material and is again available to the Plaintiff's solicitors upon request and upon payment by the Plaintiff's solicitors of the appropriate fee.

In para 21 further reference was made to PX38. There it was said: "21. Exhibits PX37, PX38, PX39 and PX40 and the surrounding transcript material together with a vast quantity of other general material all of which forms part of the Dust Diseases Tribunal
Rule 4 library is all available at the Registry of the Dust
Diseases Tribunal of New South Wales upon simple request and upon payment of the applicable fee. I am informed and do verily believe that upon payment of an amount of $250.00 the entirety of the
Tribunal's Rule 4 library will become available to the Plaintiff's current solicitors. Upon enquiry of the staff of the Dust Diseases
Tribunal I am informed and do verily believe that the Plaintiff's current solicitors have sought access to the Turner Freeman exhibits specified as exhibits PX16 and PX42 inclusive in the
Preston proceedings but seemingly have not sought to avail themselves of Rule 4 material which includes most of what is sought in the subpoena and that is readily available from the
Registry of the Dust Diseases Tribunal. A simple enquiry either by telephone or in person of Mr Ponza would have revealed this to the solicitors for the plaintiff. It is clear that they have not made the relevant enquiry given the contents of their letter to Turner
Freeman dated 15 April 1994."
None of this material throws much light on the nature of the documents in
PX38. Neither does the judgment but they were described in the summons for leave.
That description was not, however, in evidence before Judge Johns and, as counsel for the respondent opposed reliance upon it, the court has disregarded it. In consequence there is no evidence which provides any description of the documents. In those circumstances it is difficult to understand how it could have been suggested that they had any possible relevance to the issues in the respondent's case. But an examination of the judgment under appeal makes it clear that the argument before Judge Johns proceeded upon the basis that the documents were "an accumulation of expert reports and scientific material" by the appellants, in some instances at the cost of litigants who had retained them. The judgment also reveals that the appellants relied on the unfairness of allowing an unconnected litigant to take advantage of their labours, particularly as the same, or similar, material could have been obtained by the respondent's solicitors in the ordinary preparation of the case.
Reference has been made to Preston. For a number of years in the 1950's he had been employed by Norton Pty Ltd in the capacity of a storeman and during the course of that employment was required to handle asbestos and asbestos products. He later brought proceedings against Norton. Preston also sued
Jsekarb Pty Limited as manufacturer and supplier of brake linings upon which
Preston had to carry out work from time to time. According to the judgment under appeal the documents described in paragraphs 13, 14, 15 and 18 were tendered in the case of Preston versus Jsekarb Pty Limited and withdrawn upon its completion.
The judgment proceeds: "It was confirmed, however by Mr Letcher QC for the applicant, that the documents described above in Mr Gardiman's affidavit were tendered in the following cases: PX32 in Ellul versus Norton Pty Ltd
DDT68/89, PX3 3 in Barker v Siddons Pro Line Limited DDT103/90;
PX34 in Urner versus LNC Industries Pty Limited and Ors DDT52/90 and
PX3 8 in Phillips v
C C Victoria Pty Ltd and Ors DDT98/90."
Although the judgment is expressed in that way it seems clear that there are two distinct categories of documents involved. The first includes the first three sets of documents (ie PX32, PX33 and PX34) which were initially tendered in the proceedings in respect of which they had been secured and later tendered in the Preston proceedings and the second encompassed the PX38 documents which were first gathered together for the Phillips case. I should also mention, for ease of understanding, that the respondent's case was, according to Mr Hartcher, a brake linings case.
There are a number of references to Rule 4 (of the [Dust Diseases Tribunal
Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/)) in Mr Gardiman's affidavit and it is appropriate to set it out. It reads: "Historical and general medical evidence concerning dust exposure and dust diseases which have been admitted in any proceedings before the Tribunal may, with leave of the Tribunal, be received as evidence in any other proceedings before the Tribunal whether or not the proceedings are between the same parties." (Material of this nature, the evidence makes clear, is available from the
Tribunal's library.) 
The Judgment
Judge
Johns concluded that the production of the documents would not be excessively burdensome nor would it impose such an obligation as is placed on a party required to give discovery of documents. He thought it was conceivable that the documents may have some relevance to the pending proceedings in the light of [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html) and he concluded that "the fact that these documents may or may not be available from the Dust Diseases Tribunal Registry is not a
sufficient reason to excuse the applicants from producing the documents to the
Tribunal in response to a subpoena served upon them".
In his opinion the real issue involved "a balance of the rights of Turner
Freeman and their clients and the object of [Rule 4"](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html) - Would the purpose or intent of [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html) be defeated by setting the subpoena aside? Ms Honour clearly thought it would because of his conclusion that the documents should be produced.
 
The Submissions
Before Judge Johns the appellant submitted that the subpoena should be set aside upon the grounds that it was issued for improper purposes or, to put it another way, involved a misuse of the Tribunal's process. Before this Court the appellants sought also to put an argument based on the asserted confidentiality of the documents. An objection was taken to this argument by the respondent upon the ground that the point was never taken in the court below. In view of the conclusion I have reached on the substantive ground argued it is not necessary to rule upon this objection or to express a concluded view upon the submission.
I should indicate, however, that, as at present advised, I do not think that the submissions have any substance.
The issue of substance which was debated before the Court was whether, in the light of [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html), solicitors for litigants could be required to produce, in answer to a subpoena, documents which had come into existence for specific proceedings and clients (and which had been tendered in those proceedings) in later proceedings with which neither they nor their clients were concerned. I should mention again that there is a vast quantity of general material relating to asbestosis held by the
Dust Diseases Tribunal [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html) library and that this material is available upon simple request and upon payment of the applicable fee.
 
Reasons
The power of a court to issue a subpoena for the production of documents for service on a person, whether a party or a stranger to the litigation, is an important facility for the just disposal of disputes between persons before the court. Its importance lies in the fact that documentary evidence which may be highly relevant may not be available to the court unless produced under the compulsion of an order of the court.
Obviously the recipient of a subpoena to produce documents may be put to a great deal of trouble and cost in complying with the subpoena. That fact does not on its own provide any excuse for the recipient failing to comply with the subpoena and, unless it is set aside or some valid ground is established for declining to produce the documents, the recipient who declines to comply with the subpoena is guilty of contempt of court and is liable to be punished by attachment or fine.
The court will, however, be astute to ensure that its coercive powers to require the production of documents are not misused or abused. Where a court concludes that the power has been misused by a party the court will, on the application of the recipient of the subpoena or even its own motion, set it aside as an abuse of process. That the courts are empowered to act in this manner has not been doubted. Nor could it be in the light of a consistent line of authority (Raymond versus Tapson [(1882) 22 Ch D 430], at 435; The Commissioner for Railways versus Small, 38 SR 564, at 573; NEM Ltd versus Waind and Hill [(1978) 1
NSWLR 372], at 101).
It is true that specific examples of abuses of the power appear in both
Small and Waind but there is no basis for the argument propounded by counsel for the respondent that unless a case falls within the four comers of one, at least, of the examples given in those cases a subpoena cannot be set aside as an abuse of process. In neither of these cases is it suggested that there could not be other instances of an abuse. On the contrary Moffitt P (in Waind, at 382) made it clear that there may be ways other than those he discusses in which a subpoena may constitute an abuse and he emphasised the importance of respecting the private rights of a stranger to the litigation.
In Morgan versus Morgan  <case>; [(1982) AC 529], at .)
What the appellants say in this case is that the documents the production of which is sought and which fall within the first category are reports produced at the cost of the particular litigant for use in specific litigation to which they had direct relevance and that they could have no possible relevance to different litigation between different parties.
Alternatively, if, in the light of [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html), they could be said possibly to have some relevance to the present proceedings that relevance was so slight as to be outweighed in a proper balancing exercise by the private rights of the client (on whose behalf the solicitor held the documents) and the solicitor so that it should be concluded it would be oppressive to require production of the documents.
Insofar as the second category is concerned they are documents which can be obtained in public libraries but which have been collected together by the appellants into a bundle of documents relevant to, and for use in, litigation involving asbestos related illness as is conducted by the appellants.
Their submission is that while the respondent's solicitor can secure access to, and get copies of each of the documents from public sources, it is an abuse of the coercive power to secure the production of documents on subpoena to seek to secure the fruits of the appellants' labours by this method.
The answer that is given in both cases is that the documents are, or may be, relevant to the issues in the litigation, that they are not privileged (a matter which the court has assumed in the absence of argument) and that the fact they were secured for other litigation provides no basis for the setting aside of the subpoena. The respondent added that any suggestion that the documents are private or privileged is unsustainable in the light of the fact that they were also tendered in the Preston litigation.
In my opinion it is not a proper use of the coercive powers of the court to seek to obtain in the circumstances of this case the production of documents brought into existence for specific litigation at the cost of the litigant for use in other, unassociated, litigation between different parties and presumably, involving completely different factual issues.
The highest that the respondent can put its case is that the material may bear some relevance to the issue concerning the knowledge that the defendant had, or ought to have had, of the dangers of asbestos at varying periods of time. No doubt if the respondent wished to obtain the views of Mr Osman or Mr Neary on the subject he could have retained them as experts but, as it seems to me, it is not a proper use of court process to endeavour to obtain access to their views in the manner adopted in this case. The procedure was, in my opinion, quite irregular.
The trial judge regarded the question facing him as involving a balancing exercise between the proper functioning of [rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html) and the rights of the appellants and their clients. With the greatest of respect I believe he asked himself the wrong question.
[Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html) is, in my opinion, an eminently sensible rule designed to assist litigants in the presentation of evidentiary material bearing on what may often be an important question as to the state of knowledge of problems related to asbestos within the community, or overseas, in the past. If it is properly used it provides an applicant for compensation with an avenue for proof of facts, on issues on which he or she bears the onus, in a manner both less costly and time consuming than the normal procedures. It is a fine example of the constructive use of a rule making power and its use is, clearly enough, to be encouraged. I should add that there could be no question of injustice in the reception, without cross-examination, of historical material because the material is only admissible with leave of the court.
The rule is not, however, concerned with the coercive powers of the court to require litigants and other persons to produce documents to the court. In particular it does not alter or extend, either expressly or impliedly, the function of a subpoena to produce documents. The power to require the production of documents remains unaltered. The rule enables the parties to tender the documents to which reference is made but cannot be construed as transforming an improper use of the coercive powers of a subpoena into a proper one.
The respondent sought to explain the procedure adopted upon the grounds that his solicitor was inexperienced in the particular field of litigation.
That provides no reason for adopting the role of a parasite and feeding from the table of expert solicitors. One may well doubt the wisdom of a novice accepting a retainer in what is, undoubtedly, a difficult area of litigation but if the challenge is accepted he or she is bound by the same rules as the expert. Furthermore, there is (at least there was) an advice on evidence, a ready avenue of assistance to solicitors whether they are experienced or not, who are preparing an action for trial. I say this merely to emphasise that the inexperience of the solicitor is totally irrelevant.
The novelty of the present circumstances probably lies in the fact that evidentiary material unconnected with the litigation in question would, in general, be totally irrelevant to, and inadmissible in, the litigation.
Accordingly, there would be no occasion to require the production of documents of the category of those the subject of the present subpoena. Any attempt to subpoena them would probably be rebuffed, initially at least, on the grounds of obvious irrelevance. [Rule 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ddta1989243/s4.html) changes that insofar as it provides a possible basis of argument on relevance but, as I have sought to point out, it does not extend the court's coercive powers. Although I would always support legitimate attempts to limit the cost of proceedings it is clear to me that this case stands as an example of an unjustified invasion of the private rights of persons unconnected with the litigation.
The position is the same concerning the second category. During the hearing Handley JA referred to a passage in an article on "Discovery of
Documents" which appeared in [107 Law Quarterly Review 370.] At 372 it was said, in a slightly different context: "If a party's solicitor can secure useful material, not by his own efforts, but simply by raiding that secured by the solicitor for the opposing party, then neither will have much incentive to individual diligence in gathering together such material, at least before the trial. As Maguire once said' ... we must not let the drones sponge upon the busy bees. Otherwise it would not be long before all lawyers became drones.' (Evidence: Common Sense and 
Common Law (1947) at p 91)"
That is entirely apt and while it expresses no principle of law it is good sense. Solicitors should not, as a general rule, be permitted to secure by subpoena the fruits of the labour of other solicitors, thereby avoiding the necessity to undertake for themselves the burden of securing evidence for presentation at a trial, particularly where there is a readily available source which involves the invasion of no-ones rights.
There is, it seems to me minimal, or no, public interest in requiring that the appellants comply with the subpoena. On the other hand there are strong arguments against compliance based on the invasion of private fights and a public interest that solicitors carry out their work diligently without fear that the products of their endeavours will become available to any other practitioners who seek to secure them.
This need to maintain the privacy of a solicitor's work was expressed in the context of discovery in Hickman versus Taylor <case>; [(1946) 329 US 495], at 510, in which it was said: "... simply an attempt without purported necessity or justification, to secure written statements, private memoranda and personal recollections prepared or formed by an adverse party's counsel in the course of his legal duties. As such it falls outside the arena of discovery and contravenes the public policy underlying the orderly prosecution and defence of legal claims.
Not even the most liberal of discovery theories can justify unwarranted inquiries into the files and the mental impressions of an attorney.

Historically, a lawyer is an officer of the court and is bound to work for the advancement of justice while faithfully protecting the rightful interests of his clients. In performing his various duties, however, it is essential that a lawyer work with a certain degree of privacy, free from unnecessary intrusion by opposing parties and their counsel. Proper preparation of a client's case demands that he assemble information, sift what he considers to be the relevant from the irrelevant facts, prepare his legal theories and plan his strategy without undue and needless interference.
That is the historical and the necessary way in which lawyers act within the framework of our system of jurisprudence to promote justice and to protect their clients' interests. This work is reflected, of course, in interviews statements, memoranda, correspondence, briefs, mental impressions, personal beliefs, and countless other tangible and intangible ways - aptly though roughly termed by the Circuit Court of Appeals in this case as the 'work product of the lawyer'. Were such materials open to opposing counsel on mere demand, much of what is now put down in writing would remain unwritten. An attorney's thoughts, heretofore inviolate, would not be his own. Inefficiency, unfairness and sharp practices would inevitably develop in the giving of legal advice and in the preparation of cases for trial. The effect on the legal profession would be demoralising.
And the interest of the clients and the cause of justice would be poorly served.
 
We do not mean to say that all written materials obtained or prepared by an adversary's counsel with an eye towards litigation are necessarily free from discovery in all cases. Where relevant and non-privileged facts remain hidden in an attorney's file and where production of those facts is essential to the preparation of one's case, discovery may properly be had. Such written statements and documents might, under certain circumstances, be admissible in evidence or give clues as to the existence or location of relevant facts. Or they might be useful for purposes of impeachment or corroboration. And production might be justified where the witnesses are no longer available or can be reached only with difficulty. Where production of written statements and documents to be precluded under such circumstances, the liberal ideals of the deposition-discovery portions of the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure would be stripped of much of their meaning. But the general policy against invading the privacy of an attorney's course of preparation is so well recognised and so essential to an orderly working of our system of legal procedure that a burden rests on the one would invade that privacy to establish adequate reasons to justify production through a subpoena or court order.
That burden, we believe, is necessarily implicit in the rules as now constituted."
This passage illustrates what I seek to convey when referring to a public interest protecting the work of solicitors, in particular circumstances, from discovery or rendering it amenable to production on subpoena.
In my opinion the subpoena was an abuse of process and for that reason
I concurred in the order proposed.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Clarke JA.
JUDGE3
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Clarke JA.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/18.html  
