

Wilson versus Budsoar Pty Limited and Anor Matter No 30083/96 [1997] NSWSC 594 (28 November 1997) 
Last Updated: 12 October 1998 
JANINE WILSON versus BUDSOAR PTY LIMITED & ANOR /96 November 1997 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: In 1996 the plaintiff brought before the Equal Opportunity Tribunal of NSW a complaint under <case> of the Anti Discrimination Act 1977 ("the ADA") that the first defendant had discriminated against her on the ground of race in dismissing her from her employment as editor of "the Koori Mail". She sought an order that the first defendant apologise, and an award of damages, representing both compensation for non-economic loss (in the nature of general damages) and financial loss occasioned by her loss of employment. 
In a decision published on 27 June 1996 the Tribunal found the complaint substantiated and ordered the first defendant to pay the plaintiff "general damages" of $2,000. It refused to order an apology, and refused to make an award of damages representing financial loss.

By <case> of the ADA an appeal lies to this court, on a question of law only, against any decision or order of the Tribunal. The present proceedings are an appeal by the plaintiff against the Tribunal's refusal to make an award of damages for financial loss. There is no appeal against the finding that the complaint was substantiated, and no appeal against the refusal to order an apology. It is therefore necessary to say very little about the facts that gave rise to the finding.

S 113 of the ADA gives the Tribunal broad powers to make appropriate orders where a complaint is found to have been substantiated. Relevantly the Tribunal is empowered to order the payment of damages not exceeding $40,000 "by way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered by reason of the respondent's conduct": (s 113(1)(b)(i)).

The plaintiff argues that the Tribunal erred in law in its approach to the claim for an award of damages as compensation for financial loss. In determining the claims for relief the Tribunal wrote: "26. As to the question of the appropriate order of the Tribunal, we do not think that a public apology is an appropriate remedy in the present circumstances. "The Koori Mail" provides a substantial and important service to the Aboriginal communities of Australia and those interested in issues addressed by it in its columns. No apology is necessary to right the wrong done to Ms Wilson, who exhibited an unnecessarily disrespectful attitude towards some members of the Board who were senior members of the Aboriginal communities concerned. Further, before us Ms Wilson exaggerated her claims of loss and damage. As to compensation, a substantial amount of evidence has been led in relation to the question of the financial loss and emotional upset caused to Ms Wilson as a result of the dismissal. In relation to the emotional upset, it is our view that her claimed emotional sequelae have not been linked to the dismissal at all. Ms Wilson has given evidence, and it has been supported in statements made by her to a psychologist, Ms Jolley, that the real cause of such emotional upset she has suffered since 1993 has been a sustained series of harassing telephone calls, possibly linked to her loss of employment. However, when Mr Wilson gave evidence it appeared that these calls could not be identified to any person, as the caller would simply hang up immediately the telephone was answered. It was impossible to trace the calls to any particular person, and impossible to suggest that in some way the
Respondent was responsible for those calls. Furthermore, we consider that Ms
Wilson exaggerated complaints. In the circumstances, we are not inclined to give any damages in relation to any emotional upset arising out of the dismissal over and above what we would consider to be an appropriate remedy in respect of the actual event of discrimination. We reject the Complainant's evidence that the Board members and staff of the newspaper were responsible for the calls.
As to financial losses, it appears that Ms Wilson was employed as a journalist both before and after her employment with "The Koori Mail". There have been periods of unemployment, either through illness or through study leave, during her career. It is said that she has undertaken media studies at the Southern Cross University at Lismore on a full-time basis as a means of getting back into the industry following upon the loss of reputation associated with her dismissal. However, we do not accept this aspect of Ms
Wilson's case, bearing in mind that she has been employed on a part-time and full-time basis with several other newspapers from time to time since dismissal in February 1993. More significantly, however, is the fact that she has been compensated for any financial loss and damage for the period immediately following her dismissal by the Industrial Relations Commission.
Accordingly, we are not prepared to award any damages under this head of claim.
The question arises as to what general damages should be awarded to Ms
Wilson as a result of the discrimination on the ground of race associated with her dismissal. There is no tariff, although we bear in mind the relatively low jurisdictional limit of $40,000. We take into account the fact that she has already been awarded damages by the Australian Industrial Relations Commission for salary loss suffered as a result of the dismissal, and also the observations of Lockhart J in Hall versus Sheiban [(1989) 83 ALR 503] at 522, and the High Court in Haines versus Bendall <case>; [(1991) 172 CLR 60] at 63; also see Smith versus Buvet (unreported, 20 May 1996,
Qd Anti-Discrimination Tribunal, pages 12 and 13). In all the circumstances, we are of the view that an appropriate award in this case is the sum of $2,000." 
In Australian Postal Commission versus Dao [(1985) 3 NSWLR 565] McHugh JA (as he then was) expressed the view that an action under the ADA was an action in tort (p 604). In Australian Iron and Steel Pty Limited versus Najdovska [(1988) 12 NSWLR 587] Priestley JA rejected an argument that damages for the loss of employment opportunity on grounds prohibited by the ADA must be measured by reference to the principles in Chaplin versus Hicks [1911] 2KB 786 (loss of a chance) but did not otherwise eschew the notion of assessing such damages by reference to the principles that govern the assessment of damages in claims of tort. In a case concerned with assessment of damages under comparable but not identical Commonwealth legislation (The [Sex Discrimination Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/sda1984209/))
Lockhart J wrote: "As anti-discrimination, including sex discrimination, legislation and case law with respect to it is still at an early stage of development in Australia, it is difficult and would be unwise to prescribe an inflexible measure of damage in cases of this kind and, in particular, to do so exclusively by reference to common law tests in branches of the law that are not the same, though analogous in varying degrees, with anti discrimination laws. Although in my view it cannot be stated that in all claims for loss or damage under the
Act the measure of damages is the same as the general principles respecting measure of damages in tort, it is the closest analogy that I can find and one that would in most foreseeable cases be a sensible and sound test. I would not, however, shut the door to some case arising which calls for a different approach.

Generally speaking, the correct way to approach the assessment of damages in cases under <case> of the Act is to compare the position in which the complainant might have been expected to be if the discriminatory conduct had not occurred with the situation in which he or she was placed by reason of the conduct of the respondent. The effect of <case> is that the damage which is compensable under s 81(1)(b) of the Act includes injury to the complainant's feelings or humiliation suffered by him or her." (p239) 
Wilcox J wrote: "First, the task of determining the appropriate level of damages in a case of sex discrimination or sexual harassment is not an easy one. Where it appears that a claimant has incurred a particular expenditure or lost particular income as a result of the relevant conduct, that economic loss may readily be calculated." (p256) 
It may be that in an appropriate case, assessment of damages under s 113 will demand the kind of flexibility Lockhart J had in mind. That was not so in the present case. The Tribunal was faced with an uncomplicated claim for actual loss of earnings in addition to the claim made by the plaintiff for damages for hurt to feelings, reputation, and concern about her future. Such an assessment could readily have been made. The Tribunal declined to embark upon the assessment. The reasons it gave are those that appear in paragraph
On one view, the first four sentences might have been intended as a prelude to a finding of fact that the plaintiff had not demonstrated any loss because her post dismissal part-time and full-time employment yielded income equivalent to that she had lost as a result of the unlawful conduct of the defendant. If so such a finding of fact was never made and in the light of the accepted fact that the employment she lost was full-time employment, such a finding would not appear to be supportable. The Tribunal made no attempt to meansure the loss of income she claimed or to set it against the amount awarded by those amounts she in fact received. In any event, that can be put to one side because the Tribunal itself saw as more significant the second reason it gave. The plaintiff's trade union had taken action in the Australian
Industrial Relations Commission which ordered the defendant to pay her an additional twelve weeks pay, together with an amount for superannuation benefits. It was this that the Tribunal referred to when it said that the plaintiff had been compensated for any financial loss and damage for the period immediately following her dismissal.

In this, I consider that the Tribunal did make an error of law. Its task was to assess the plaintiff's claim for damages by reference to the principles applicable to the assessment of damages under the ADA. The task of the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission was an entirely different one as can be seen from one passage in the decision. Commissioner Merriman wrote: "The Alliance [the plaintiff's trade union] claims that Mrs W should be paid twelve weeks pay, which is consistent with payments made under awards of the
Commission for this level of journalism in this type of newspaper and I am satisfied that the payment which was made to Mrs W is unfair and unreasonable given the service of the employee and the manner in which the termination was affected (sic). I therefore determine Mrs W is to be paid an additional twelve weeks pay and that superannuation from 1 July 1992 at 3 percent is also to be paid." 
While it was open to the Tribunal to receive in evidence the transcript of the proceedings before the Commissioner, and to adopt his findings, decision or judgment where relevant (s 107) it was not open to it to abdicate its function of assessing the plaintiff's damages in accordance with the appropriate principles. The findings and decision of Commissioner Merriman were relevant in one respect only, to which I will refer shortly.

Mr Corr, for the first defendant, argued that the award of damages is purely a question of fact with which this court cannot interfere. He argued that the
Tribunal had found either that the economic loss shown was trifling, or was within the scope of the amount awarded by of the Commissioner. I do not so read the Tribunal's decision. It is quite plain that the Tribunal declined to assess the damages because of the existence of the award, which is quite a different thing to assessing damages in a sum which is less than the amount awarded by the Commissioner.

It was an error to conclude, as the Tribunal did, that the compensation that was awarded by the Commissioner was adequate compensation for financial loss under the ADA. This is because the Tribunal did not undertake the analysis necessary to yield that conclusion. It may be that, on proper analysis, the same result will emerge.

On a proper assessment of the plaintiff's claim for damages for economic loss the Tribunal may arrive at a figure larger, or one smaller, than that awarded by the Commissioner. It is in this respect that his decision is relevant.
Should the Tribunal, on evaluating the plaintiff's claim for loss of income, conclude that the actual amount shown is less than that awarded by the
Commission, it will be appropriate for it to decline to award damages in that respect. Should it conclude that the loss shown by the plaintiff is greater than the sum awarded by the Commissioner that amount will have to be deducted from the amount assessed by the Tribunal before a final award of damages is made. But it is necessary that the assessment be made on proper principles before that determination can be made.

The plaintiff also sought an order in the nature of certiorari in relation to two findings of fact made by the Tribunal. These were the findings of fact made in paragraph 26. The first is that the plaintiff had exhibited an unnecessarily disrespectful attitude towards some members of the Board of the first respondent who were senior members of the Aboriginal communities concerned. The second is that the plaintiff exaggerated her claims of loss and damage.

I do not consider it necessary to decide whether this court has jurisdiction to quash findings of fact. Contrary to the argument advanced on behalf of the plaintiff, I am satisfied that neither of these findings of fact was a relevant finding in relation to the question of damages for financial loss.
Both appeared in that passage in the decision in which the Tribunal was considering the question of the apology sought by the plaintiff. The finding that the plaintiff exaggerated her complaints appeared a second time, but in relation to the plaintiff's claim for damages for emotional upset and concern - that is, on the assessment of general damages. Neither appears in paragraph where the Tribunal turned its attention to the question of damages for financial loss. They are, accordingly irrelevant to the question here for decision.

The orders I make are as follows:
The appeal is allowed.
The decision of the Equal Opportunity Tribunal of 27 June 1996, so far only as it relates to the refusal to award the plaintiff damages for economic loss, be set aside.
The matter be referred back to the Equal Opportunity Tribunal for assessment of damages in accordance with the relevant principles.
 * * * 
