

Evans versus Page [1996] NSWSC 258 (5 July 1996) 
EVANS versus PAGE /94; DC 31435/78 July 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
CLARKE, SHELLER, COLE JJA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - contributory negligence - motor vehicle accident - evidence - creditworthiness of witnesses - apprehended bias - Podreberserk vAustralian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 492] 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
On 17 December 1972 the appellant and the respondent were involved in a motor vehicle accident, in which the respondent sustained injuries. The appellant was making a right hand turn and his vehicle had reached the centre of the intersection when it collided with the respondent's vehicle. The respondent began proceedings against the appellant, claiming damages for negligently failing to keep a proper lookout and failing to give way to the respondent's vehicle.

During the trial, Judge Garling refused the tender of a medical report and interrupted the cross examination in a way that could have suggested an answer to the particular question being asked. Counsel for the appellant asked that the trial judge disqualify himself on the ground of apprehended bias, but he refused to do so. His Honour gave judgment in favour of the respondent, assessing damages at $104,680 which were reduced by one third for contributory negligence. In the course of his judgment, he found that even though the appellant was a good witness with a good memory whose honesty could not be questioned, he inferred that it was unlikely that the respondent had not told the truth because he was a barrister, and if he lied under oath he would be in great risk of being allowed to continue in practice.

The appellant appealed on two grounds; that the judge erred in not disqualifying himself for apprehended bias, and that he erred in finding that the respondent was guilty of contributory negligence of only one-third.

HELD: . While judges should be circumspect in interrupting cross examination particularly in a way which may suggest to a witness an answer to the cross examiner's question, the interruption in this case did not have the effect of stopping the line of questioning. Further, the rejection of the report was justified because it had been served late and could not have been cross examined upon. In these circumstances no fair minded and informed observer could have apprehended that the trial judge was biased.
It was not open on the evidence to place the majority of blame on the appellant. Accepting that the appellant was negligent in failing to be more careful of the vehicle on his right, the respondent was travelling at a greatly excessive speed and came upon the appellant's vehicle much more quickly than he would have expected. If the respondent had been driving carefully and keeping a proper lookout, there was nothing to suggest he could not have averted the collision. The respondent led no evidence that he saw the appellant's car, that he braked to avoid the collision or that a diversion onto the wrong side of the road into oncoming traffic which resulted in a collision was justified. His share of responsibility should be apportioned at percent.

Podreberserk versus Australian Iron and Steel Pty Limited <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 492] at 493-4.
There is no general presumption that a witness will be more or less truthful because of background or religion or occupation. The creditworthiness of any witness must be determined without reference to such generalities. It was not open to the trial judge to accept the evidence of a witness because he was a barrister and because a finding that he lied would be a finding that he was prepared to risk his career.

ORDERS 
Appeal allowed;
Set aside his Honour's verdict in favour of the plaintiff for $69,787;
In lieu thereof, verdict for the plaintiff in the sum of $10,468;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/);
The appellant to have leave on fourteen days' notice to the respondent, if so advised, to apply to vary the order for costs of the hearing. In the event of no such application being made the order for costs of the hearing is confirmed.
 
JUDGMENT 
CLARKE JA: I agree with Sheller JA.

SHELLER JA: These proceedings arise out of a motor vehicle accident which occurred shortly after 1 am on 17 December 1972 at the intersection of Old Northern Road and Church Street, Castle Hill. The plaintiff/respondent, Richard Bruce Page, was driving his vehicle, a Holden, south on Old Northern Road towards the intersection. The defendant/appellant, Frank Darcy Evans, accompanied by his wife as a passenger, was driving his vehicle, a Ford, west in Church Street and was in the process of making a right hand turn from the T-junction to proceed for a distance north along Old Northern Road. At the time the appellant was making this turn, another vehicle, identified as a Volkswagen, was proceeding from his left along Old Northern Road to the north. The appellant's vehicle had reached a position at the centre of Old Northern Road and stopped when the respondent's vehicle collided with it, damaging the appellant's vehicle in the area of the near side front mudguard. The respondent's vehicle continued on and collided with the Volkswagen. Both the occupants of the Volkswagen died as a result of the accident. 
The respondent commenced the proceedings with a statement of claim filed on 14
December 1978 and served on the respondent on 28 November 1980. The proceedings came on for hearing before his Honour Judge Garling in the
District Court on 31 October 1994, nearly twenty-two years after the accident.
On 4 November 1994 his Honour delivered judgment in favour of the respondent, assessed damages at $104,680, which he reduced by one-third or $34,893 for contributory negligence, and entered a verdict for $69,787.

EVIDENCE 
The respondent gave evidence that he had been in practice for just over nine years as a barrister and before that had been a solicitor. He recalled that on the evening of the accident he had dined with his girlfriend and then driven with her to the place where she lived with her family at Annangrove. He said that he recalled driving up the driveway of this property. The next thing he remembered was lying on his back in a bed in the intensive care ward of Parramatta Hospital looking up at the ceiling. The journey from the property at Annangrove to 123 Old Northern Road, Baulkham Hills, where the respondent then lived with his parents, would have taken him along Old Northern Road through the Castle Hill area to the south past the accident site. Counsel for the appellant challenged the respondent's evidence of loss of memory. In the course of cross examination the respondent reiterated that he had no recollection of anything other than driving up his girlfriend's driveway and that that was the last recollection he had prior to Parramatta Hospital. The transcript continues as follows: "Q. Sir, you were not knocked unconscious in this collision? A. I don't know.

Q. Well sir you had sufficient interest I suppose to scour the Parramatta
Hospital records of your admission have you not? 
OBJECTION. QUESTION PRESSED. QUESTION ALLOWED 
A. I have seen a discharge summary from Parramatta Hospital.

Q. And you have seen that it records that there was no loss of consciousness?
A. I do not recall that as being recorded on it but it may well have been.

Q. You've never noted any document in relation to this case and this is a new question I stress recording that there was no loss of consciousness on your part? 
OBJECTION. QUESTION WITHDRAWN 
Q. You suggest that you've never noted in the discharge summary of the
Parramatta Hospital that you were recorded as having sustained no loss of consciousness? A. I have no recollection of having seen it sir I don't know whether I've noted it or not I haven't read the entire summary, it's only two pages but I haven't read it all.

Q. Sir have you ever had the slightest interest in ascertaining why it might be that you've got no recollection of events from the time you left your girlfriend's driveway? A. Well yes I suppose I've got an interest in it.

Q. Reasonably direct interest would you not accept? A. Well it doesn't occupy a great deal of my time if I can say that, I have a loss of consciousness or what - I don't have any memory, it's gone and I can't get it back so it doesn't really matter to me that I don't have it now.

Q. But haven't you ever had the slightest interest in ascertaining why it might be that you've not got a memory such as to ascertain whether you were knocked out? A. No.

HIS HONOUR: Q. Or I suppose suffered shock? [STRIKEOUT BEGINS] A. Well a presumption that I've suffered shock yes your
Honour. [STRIKEOUT ENDS] 
SHORE: Your Honour with respect that may not explain retrograde amnesia no it may not.

HIS HONOUR: Who say it's brain? 
SHORE: Sorry? 
HIS HONOUR: He say he has no memory, the reasons why he has no memory may come from a number of different areas as I understand.

SHORE: Your Honour I tender a report from Dr Robert B Fitzsimmons dated 25
October 1994 which I'm not suggesting provides any conclusive answer but it does deal with the matters that your Honour has raised.

HIS HONOUR: It deals with the shock aspect does it? 
BARTLEY: Well I object to that your Honour." 
This objection was upheld and the tender rejected. Shortly afterwards counsel for the appellant asked the Judge to disqualify himself, which he refused to do. He did however, as the transcript indicates, strike out the answer to his question "Or I suppose suffered shock?" 
Both the appellant and his wife gave evidence. The appellant called Sergeant
Garard, the police officer who attended the scene of the accident, who said that he noticed the Volkswagen on the western side of Old Northern Road about feet south of the prolongation of the southern kerb of Church Street and the respondent's vehicle about 90 feet further south of the Volkswagen on the western side of Old Northern Road on its roof.

The respondent tendered depositions made in other proceedings by the appellant and Sergeant Garard and a copy of the statement made by the appellant's wife in the presence of Sergeant Garard. The appellant tendered depositions of evidence made in those other proceedings by Robert Honeywood and the appellant's wife and a statement by the appellant. Mr Honeywood, who had died before the proceedings were heard, deposed that on the morning in question he was driving east along Showground Road to its intersection with Old Northern
Road. This intersection is north of the intersection of Old Northern Road with
Church Street. Mr Honeywood deposed that as he reached the intersection of Old
Northern Road and Showground Road he slowed to make a right hand turn and heard the noise of a motor vehicle approaching from his left. The deposition continued: "I then stopped as I could see, I could hear that it was travelling at a fairly excessive speed.

Q. Explain what you did hear? A. The noise I heard was a screaming motor as it if was travelling at peak revs.

Q. When you heard that sound... A. I looked immediately up the road and I couldn't see a vehicle.

Q. Which direction did you look? A. To the left. I couldn't see a vehicle, then I waited for a matter of two or three seconds and I saw the vehicle approaching. It then passed me, and I then took off in the same direction as the vehicle.

Q. Old Northern Road at that intersection, at that point, does it have a centre line painted on it? A. Yes, there are three lines on the road, there is a centre line. The vehicle was partially on the wrong side of the road.

Q. Did you observe the vehicle go passed you? A. Yes, I did.

Q. You said you took off after it? A. Yes 
Q. When you did that did you continue to have that vehicle under your observation for some time? A. Not for very long. As there is a bend in the road a few hundred yards further on.

Q. Now, you have told us as the vehicle went passed you it was partially on the wrong side of the road? A. Then travelled onto the correct side of the road and then veered slightly out onto the incorrect side of the road, in order to make the left hand bend that is in Old Northern Road.

Q. And at this time were you travelling along Old Northern Road, in the same direction? A. Yes.

Q. Did you observe this vehicle to [sic] negotiate the bend? A. Yes, the rear wheels slid slightly out onto the bend, and my reaction was .... OBJECTION TO
REACTION...

Q. Yes. A. The driver held control of the vehicle and then it was out of my sight.

Q. You continued to drive your motor car towards the same bend? A. I did.

Q. And what did you next see? A. The flames of the Volkswagen.

Q. Where abouts were you when you first observed those flames? A.
Approximately 100 to 150 yards from the bend.

Q. Still on the approach side of the bend? A. Yes.
 .......

Q. Now approximately how long had you been driving motor vehicles? A.
Approximately 21 years.

Q. And during that time, are you able to assist us with the number of miles you have driven? A. It would be well in excess of 400,000 miles.

Q. When you had the moving Holden under your observation did you form any opinion about its speed? A. Yes.

Q. What was that opinion? A. I considered the Holden was travelling in excess of 100 miles per hour." 
In the course of cross examination Mr Honeywood deposed as follows: "Q. Fair to say you are familiar with the noise made by motors at high speed?
A. I would say so yes.

Q. That was the sound that you heard on this night? A. The sound I heard was not like any I had heard.

Q. That means that it was not the sound of a car travelling at high revs? A.
Yes, I considered that it was the sound of a car being driven at peak revs to the extent of damaging the motor.

Q. You have any mechanical qualification? A. No.

Q. You said you saw this vehicle for two or three seconds? A. Yes.

Q. How far back to your left was the nearest bend in the road? A. I wouldn't be sure I would say approximately 100 yards.

Q. And how far to your right was the next bend in the road? A. Once again approximately two to three hundred yards.

Q. Now, this car I assume came into your vision around the bend at 100 yards to your left? A. Yes.

Q. It passed out of your vision two to three hundred yards to your right? A.
Yes.

Q. How long do you estimate you had it in your vision? A. I would say perhaps five or eight seconds I really wouldn't know.

Q. Where were you when the car got to the bend on your right? A. I was approximately 100 to 150 feet from the bend.

Q. So the time he passed you at the corner of Showground Road and Old Northern
Road and travelled two to three hundred yards, you had travelled 100 to 150 feet? A. Yes.

Q. So that would make you assuming you travelled 50 yards, that would make you yards behind him? A. Yes.

Q. And at that range at night you are able to tell us that his rear wheels slid slightly? A. Yes." 
A little later in the cross examination he confirmed that the other vehicle was travelling at 100 miles per hour. When Mr Honeywood came to the Church
Street intersection he said that the appellant's vehicle was partly blocking his left hand side of Old Northern Road with its nose close to the centre line and agreed that this left insufficient room for a car to pass in front of it or behind it on the correct side of the road. Photographs in evidence show that at the intersection with Church Street, Old Northern Road, as it approached the intersection from the north, consisted of four marked lanes for traffic, two in each direction. On the southern side of the intersection only the centre line was marked. Counsel informed the Court that the carriageway narrowed at that point.

TRIAL JUDGE'S REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
Judge Garling referred to the respondent's loss of memory but said that it became apparent as the case progressed that his lack of memory was irrelevant and that in the end no submissions were made in relation to the lack of memory or the relevance of it; "....until I asked about the earlier submission. It was apparent it was of little or of no importance but despite that, I was asked to disqualify myself.

It was suggested to the plaintiff that he was not telling the truth and that he did have a memory of this accident and that he knew he was speeding. The plaintiff is a barrister and as I see it, for me to make such a finding would mean that I would have to make a finding that this man was prepared to lie to the extent that he was prepared to risk his career. I would have thought that if a barrister deliberately lied under oath in a Court, he would be in great risk of being allowed to continue in practice as a barrister." 
His Honour said that he could not understand why this line of questioning was taken and why there was an attempt to abort the hearing of the matter, referring to the application to him to disqualify himself.

The Judge referred to the appellant's evidence. The appellant stopped at the intersection of Church Street and Old Northern Road and looked to his right.
In the distance he saw lights coming from his right along Old Northern Road.
He looked to his left and he saw the Volkswagen 75 to 100 feet away. At that time the law required the Volkswagen to give way to the appellant's vehicle on its right. The appellant then proceeded out and when he got close to the centre line there was a collision. He said that after he looked to the right, he looked to the left and he moved out with caution as he was concerned as to whether or not the Volkswagen would stop and give way to him. He did not look to the right again. His wife's evidence was that she looked to the right and saw a car further along Old Northern Road some distance away. She looked to the left, saw a car coming, they started to move, she looked to the left again and saw that that vehicle was coming quite quickly. She said she glanced to the right, saw the other vehicle coming to them, she called out to her husband, he stopped, there was collision. When she gave her evidence she said she first noticed the car on her right in the distance about 600 feet away.
She said she was no judge of distance. Their car proceeded quite slowly from the mouth of Church Street.

After referring to Mr Honeywood's depositions his Honour said that the appellant was a good witness with a good memory, whose honesty could not be questioned. His Honour continued: "He said he had an obstructed view to his right when he stopped. However at night you could see the lights, even though the view was obstructed. He said it took him about three or four seconds from his standing position to the scene of the accident but he freely admitted it was only a guess. He had difficulty in explaining the position of his vehicle at the time of the accident, as his vehicle had been struck on the passenger's side which would seem to suggest that he was facing in a northerly direction at the time of the accident. He agreed that his vehicle was facing north at the time of the accident but later drew a diagram which showed it travelling partially north.
He did not hear any sound before the accident.

The defendant was clearly negligent. He had a duty to keep a proper lookout.
He had a duty to give way to the vehicle on his right and he had a duty to take care when making a right turn. He had looked to his right, he had an obstructed view, he assessed the situation and then he concentrated on a vehicle on his left and at no time did he ever look to the right again. In other words on a quick glance to the right he decided there was no danger from his right and although he had to give way to his right, he drove his vehicle out. He clearly should have looked again to his right as that was the area where all the danger was coming from.

I have no doubt that any prudent or careful driver would be very careful about the vehicle on the right, having been alerted to it no matter what distance they thought it was away. It must be remembered that the defendant could not tell where this vehicle was, the defendant could only guess where it was and was prepared to act on that guess and is in my view from that point of view clearly negligent." 
This analysis, which leads to the conclusion of negligence, pays no regard to the speed at which the respondent's vehicle was coming from the right. A prudent driver in the position of the appellant would not have expected the respondent's vehicle to be travelling in a built up area at 100 miles per hour. Moreover, if one accepts that it was not imprudent for the appellant to start to cross Old Northern Road to make a right hand turn, it is not clear what he could or should have done to avoid the respondent's vehicle, assuming it was travelling at 100 miles per hour. Plainly it was not negligent to start this manoeuvre if the car was, as the appellant's wife said, about 600 feet away. Sergeant Garard had measured a distance of 753 feet from the commencement of the kerb north of Church Street to the northern kerb alignment of Church Street. Understandably the appellant was concerned that the vehicle to his left, which was only about 75 to 100 feet away, would not stop and give way. His Honour's finding that the appellant was "clearly negligent" without regard to the speed of the respondent's vehicle proceeds, in my opinion, upon faulty analysis. However, having made that finding, his Honour went on to say that there was another argument. He immediately acknowledged that if the respondent's vehicle was travelling at 100 miles per hour or some similar speed that would be something that the appellant would not expect. He turned to consider the evidence of speed.
 "What evidence do I have of speed. The plaintiff has no memory. The defendant and his wife cannot help. There are no skid marks. In the end I really have the evidence of Mr Honeywood which I approach with some caution as he was not available for cross examination in this Court, although I did have the advantage of seeing depositions where he was cross examined. Nobody has explained how somebody sitting in a motor vehicle, watching another motor vehicle pass, can say with certainty what speed that vehicle is travelling at.
It seems to me that all I can take from Mr Honeywood's evidence is that he felt that the vehicle which passed him was travelling at a very fast pace, that is at a speed well in excess of the speed limit. It was as I recall, a common expression when describing a vehicle moving quickly, to say it was travelling at 100 miles an hour. It seems to me that he is stuck on a speed which he really has no way of telling and that others have cottoned onto that speed and somehow it has become a magical number in this case when it never should have. The simple fact is that there could never be any evidence that someone can look at a car travelling past and say it is travelling at such and such a speed.
 ........

It is argued by the defendant and they called an expert who said that it takes someone two or three seconds to react and if you add the time given by the defendant driver that it took him to drive to the point of impact, then that gives you somewhere between five and seven seconds. If you take someone travelling over 230 metres in a period of five to seven seconds, that gives you a speed somewhere between 75 miles per hour and 100 miles per hour and that is consistent with what Mr Honeywood said.
 .......

The other matter which was raised was this. The defendant looked, saw the plaintiff's vehicle's lights and then looked to the left and saw a vehicle 75 to 100 feet away which had to give way to him. We know that that vehicle and the plaintiff's vehicle collided at about the point where there was an impact with the defendant's vehicle. Now that in effect means that in the time the
Volkswagen travelled 75 to 100 feet at about 35 miles per hour, the plaintiff would have travelled 753 feet. That on my calculations will give a speed of about seven and a half times the speed of the Volkswagen which would get you up round the 250 miles per hour mark and I am sure that that did not happen here.

I do not know where the plaintiff's vehicle was when the defendant saw it. He had a restricted view. He said he estimated it was either at the corner or coming round the corner but when one looks at the photographs one wonders how he could estimate that. It was a very restricted view. I accept at night it would be a better view than in day time because you could see the lights.
However he has a quick look, he sees a vehicle some distance away and he moves out. I am not persuaded on any evidence before me that the plaintiff is travelling at 100 miles per hour. None of that adds up. Another matter which troubled me was this. How does Mr Honeywood go from a standing position, turn right and then follow the plaintiff's vehicle if indeed it had gone past him at 100 miles an hour. Whilst there was never any direct evidence on that, simple mathematical calculations would show that that is just impossible. The likelihood of the matter is that the plaintiff was travelling in excess of the speed limit. I accept Mr Honeywood's evidence to this extent that he certainly observed the car travelling past him at a fast speed. I might add that there was also evidence from the expert that you could not tell by the sound of a vehicle what the speed was. I find that the plaintiff was travelling at a fast speed, speed in excess of the speed limit. I am not satisfied that this was such a speed as to fall into the area where it would absolve the defendant from negligence. I reject the argument that the speed of the plaintiff's vehicle was in the vicinity of 100 miles per hour." 
This is not convincing reasoning for the conclusion that the respondent was not travelling at a speed of about 100 miles per hour. His Honour had said the appellant was a good witness. The respondent had to establish that the appellant, having observed the respondent's vehicle 600 feet or more away, was negligent in proceeding out into Old Northern Road, when he did, to make his right hand turn. To make good that case, the respondent had to show that when the appellant observed the respondent's vehicle, it was too close for him to make the turn with safety, and that required him to show that he was proceeding in a built up area at a speed which the appellant might reasonably expect or, if the speed were higher, which the appellant should reasonably have observed. There was no evidence that the respondent was proceeding at a reasonable speed and no basis at all for his Honour to conclude that the respondent was travelling, not at 100 miles per hour, but at a speed in excess of the speed limit but not "such ..... as to fall into the area where it would absolve the defendant from negligence." What such a speed would be was not revealed.

His Honour found that the appellant was negligent in failing to keep a proper lookout, failing to give way to the right and failing to make a right hand turn with care. He was of the view that the respondent's vehicle was travelling "quite well above the speed limit". Therefore the appellant was put in the position where the respondent's vehicle came upon him much more quickly than he would have expected and that contributed to the accident. However the majority of the blame in his Honour's opinion had to be placed upon the appellant. His Honour said: "He had control of the situation, he could have waited there, he could have waited until the cars passed, he could have and should have looked again to his right and if he had have, he would have seen the vehicle much closer than he expected when he saw the lights and he really must bear the greater proportion of the blame. However, as I said, the plaintiff must also accept some of the blame for this accident as the vehicle travelling at an excessive speed would have come upon the defendant far quicker than he expected. I assess contributory negligence at one-third." 
I find it hard to see how it could be said that the appellant had control of the situation. No reasons are stated for this conclusion. Nothing is said to explain why the respondent did not stop or slow down or divert to the rear of the appellant's car attempting to cross the road. There was nothing to suggest that the respondent applied his brakes. All that is known is that after colliding with the appellant's vehicle and then head on with the Volkswagen the respondent's vehicle continued on for a further 90 feet. The reasons for judgment ignores these matters.

GROUNDS OF APPEAL 
With the leave of the Court, the appellant filed in Court a further amended notice of appeal. Included in the grounds was one that his Honour erred in finding that the appellant was negligent. This ground was not pressed. The appellant limited its appeal to two matters; first, that the trial Judge erred in denying the motion to disqualify himself on the ground of apprehended bias and second, that he erred in finding that the respondent was guilty of contributory negligence of only one-third. 
APPREHENDED BIAS 
Mr Di Suvero, who appeared for the appellant, sought to make good this ground on the basis of his Honour's intervention in the cross examination of the respondent with the question "Or I suppose suffered shock?" together with the rejection of the report from Dr Fitzsimmons. This, it was said, had to be looked at in the context of the whole case. We were referred to a number of matters related to the way in which the respondent had presented his case.

No doubt Judges should be circumspect in interrupting cross examination particularly in a way which may suggest to a witness an answer to the cross examiner's question. It would have been better in this case if his Honour had not asked the question complained of. At one stage Mr Di Suvero submitted that this had the effect of stopping this particular line of cross examination about the respondent's recollection of the event. However the transcript shows that the cross examination was subsequently pursued. The rejection of the report was completely justified by the fact that it had been served late and that Dr Fitzsimmons was overseas and not available for cross examination. In my opinion no fair minded and informed observer could possibly apprehend that, because of the question he asked or because of his refusal to admit the report, the trial Judge was biased. I am not persuaded that his Honour wrongly rejected the application to disqualify himself.

CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE 
In Podrebersek versus Australian Iron and Steel Pty Limited <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 492] at 493-4 the High Court said: "A finding on a question of apportionment is a finding upon a `question, not of principle or of positive findings of fact or law, but a proportion, of balance and relative emphasis, and of weighing different considerations. It involves an individual choice or discretion, as to which there may well be differences of opinion by different minds': British Fame (Owners) versus Macgregor [[1943] AC 197] at 201. Such a finding, if made by a judge, is not lightly reviewed. ......... The making of an apportionment as between a plaintiff and a defendant of their respective shares and the responsibility for the damage involves a comparison both of culpability, ie of the degree of departure from the standard of care of the reasonable man (Pennington versus Norris <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 10] at 16) and of the relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage: Stapley versus Gypsum Mines Limited <case>; [[1953] AC ] at 682;
Smith versus McIntyre <case>; [(1958) Tas SR 36] at 42-49 and Broadhurst versus Millman ( <case>; [1976) VR 208] at 219 and cases there cited. It is the whole conduct of each negligent party in relation to the circumstances of the accident which must be subjected to comparative examination. The significance of the various elements involved in such an examination will vary from case to case; for example, the circumstances of some cases may be such that a comparison of the relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage will be of little, if any, importance." 
The defendant was a good witness. He had a good memory and his honesty could not be questioned. He stopped at the intersection. According to his deposition he looked to the right and noticed a car coming round a gentle bend "up the top of the road possibly in excess of 200 yards", then glanced to the left and noticed a car "quite a lesser distance away". In evidence at the trial he said that by stepping it out he measured the distance from Church Street to the bend at approximately 300 metres. What he saw was some lights up near the curve. He believed he had plenty of time. He said: "It was the car on the left I was more concerned about because it was much closer and I was just - that was the man I was taking into account. I'd sort of ascertained that the one on the north side was a distance that I considered quite safe for me to proceed." 
He moved out at a speed to take account of the car closer to him on the left.
While his Honour was of opinion that any prudent or careful driver would be very careful about the vehicle on the right he did not think that anyone would expect a vehicle to be coming at 100 miles per hour or 160 km per hour in a relatively built up area.

His Honour found that the respondent was travelling at a fast speed in excess of the speed limit. He did not attempt to estimate the speed beyond saying that it was well in excess of 35 miles per hour and it was well under 100 miles per hour. As I have already indicated, the evidence did not support the second part of that conclusion. However his Honour said that it was such a speed that it would have caused the vehicle to come onto the appellant much more quickly than it should have. If the appellant's evidence is accepted, his vehicle must have been in the respondent's view for a distance of approximately 250 metres. There is no evidence to explain why the respondent, if he had been keeping a proper lookout, was unable to stop or otherwise avoid the accident. Mr Honeywood deposed that before the collision the respondent had been travelling partially on the wrong side of the road. There was no explanation of why the respondent would attempt to go past the appellant's car by proceeding on the wrong side of the road into an oncoming vehicle. Mr
Toomey QC, who appeared for the respondent, referred to the passage in Mr
Honeywood's deposition where he said that when he arrived at the scene the appellant's vehicle was in a position where there was insufficient room to pass either in front of it or behind it on the correct side of the road. The vehicle was big but the appellant's evidence in the form of a sketch of the position of his vehicle at the moment of impact shows it astride the centre line of the road pointing in a direction approximately 45deg. from the prolongation of the alignment of Church Street towards the north with approximately one-third of the vehicle to the west of the centre line and two- thirds to the east. The photograph of the carriageway of Old Northern Road at that position suggests that, if the appellant's vehicle was astride the centre line, there was room for the respondent to have passed behind it on his correct side of the road. Importantly there was no explanation of why the respondent did not do this and his Honour never dealt with the point.

I am satisfied that on the evidence it was not open to his Honour, properly weighing all the different considerations, to find that the majority of the blame should be placed upon the appellant. While it is true that he had control of the situation before he started to move into Old Northern Road, his
Honour accepted that the respondent's vehicle came upon him much more quickly than he would have expected. Once the appellant moved into the intersection, had the respondent been driving carefully and keeping a proper look out, the respondent would have had control of the situation and there is nothing to suggest that he could not have averted the collision. It follows, in my opinion, that his Honour's apportionment of the share of responsibility must be set aside. On the one hand I must accept, because it is not challenged, that the appellant was negligent in failing to look again for a danger that he did not expect rather than concentrate on a danger from the Volkswagen which, it seems to me, he quite reasonably was concerned about. On the other hand the respondent was travelling at a greatly excessive speed and led no evidence to suggest that he saw the appellant's car, that he braked to avoid the collision or that a diversion onto the wrong side of the road into oncoming traffic in a way which resulted in a collision was justified. In reality, in my opinion, the respondent was almost entirely to blame for what happened. I would apportion his share of that responsibility at 90 percent.

MATTERS OF CONCERN 
There are two further matters which, though not directly pertinent to the grounds of appeal relied upon, require comment. In the first place it is quite wrong for a Judge to prefer the evidence of one witness over another because of the profession or occupation of that witness. Courts expect people who make an oath or affirmation to tell the truth, to do so. However there is no general presumption that a witness will be more or less truthful because of background or religion or occupation. The credit worthiness of any witness must be determined without regard to such generalities. In this case, in particular, it is not open or appropriate for a Judge to accept the evidence of a witness for reason that he is a barrister and that a finding that he lied would be a finding that he was prepared to risk his career.

The second comment is that I am not satisfied that there was any basis upon which his Honour was justified in criticising the appellant's counsel, in the circumstances of this case, which included the delay in bringing it to hearing, for suggesting to the respondent that he was not telling the truth and that he did not have a memory of the accident and that he knew he was speeding. This line of cross examination was appropriate. There is always a danger that bias may be apprehended if a Judge accepts the evidence of a plaintiff because he is a barrister and criticises a line of legitimate cross examination with the rhetorical question "Is it suggested that a prominent barrister would have advised the plaintiff to tell the police officers he had no memory of the accident? I doubt that." 
As I have said these matters were not the subject of grounds of appeal and not directly significant but they are matters which I do not think this Court should allow to pass without comment.

ORDERS 
I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed;
Set aside his Honour's verdict in favour of the plaintiff for $69,787;
In lieu thereof, verdict for the plaintiff in the sum of $10,468;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of this appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/);
The appellant to have leave on fourteen days' notice to the respondent, if so advised, to apply to vary the order for costs of the hearing. In the event of no such application being made the order for costs of the hearing is confirmed. Friday, 5 July 1996 
COLE JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 * * * 
