

Regina versus Hopton Matter No Cca 60099/98 [1998] NSWSC 566 (8 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
REGINA versus JOHN DEAN HOPTON 
CCA 60099/98 October 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Abadee J, Ireland J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
HEADNOTE 
The appellant appeals against his conviction for the offence of dangerous driving causing death contrary to [s52A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , on the basis that the trial judge did not properly direct the jury with respect to the Crown's submission that the appellant failed to keep a proper lookout.

Held: 
The trial judge's direction to the jury manifested appellable error in that there was no specific direction distinguishing mere negligence from the level of seriousness required to constitute driving in a manner dangerous to the public: McBride <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 44], 49-50. In a context in which there was a specific Crown submission that was consistent with a lower level of negligence than is required for the commission of the offence, the trial judge should have directed the jury in more specific terms by warning them that mere negligence would not be sufficient. In circumstances where inattentiveness is the sole ground, it will often be found to be the case that the jury should be instructed as to the relevant distinction.

Although momentary inattention may amount to driving in a dangerous manner (see Coventry <case>; [(1939) 59 CLR 633], 638, 639; LKP [(1993) 69 ACrimR 149], 162), it was not open to the jury to find, on the state of the whole of the evidence before them, that the only inference available from the objective circumstances was of the degree of inattentiveness that constituted driving in a manner dangerous to the public.

ORDERS
Conviction quashed.
Verdict of acquittal is directed.

REGINA versus John Dean HOPTON 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The appellant was tried before her Honour Judge Karpin and a jury in Newcastle District Court for the offence of dangerous driving occasioning death contrary to [s52A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) . The appellant pleaded not guilty but was convicted. 
At approximately 2.15am on 16 November 1996 the appellant was driving a loaded
Mitsubishi rigid pantechnicon eastward along Nelson Bay Road, Nelson Bay.
Asleep in the cabin at the time was Peter Austin Tighe, the appellant's friend. Driving through a roundabout and continuing at a speed of some 60-70 kilometres per hour (within the 100 kilometres per hour limit), the appellant, according to his evidence, looked for a place to park his lorry off the road in order to park and sleep.

His evidence was that at a point some 300 metres from the roundabout he turned his head for a matter of two seconds or so. He said he noticed a brown object with which his lorry collided. The appellant continued to a point where he turned the lorry back through the roundabout before retracing his original route eastward, when he observed the body of the deceased.

The deceased was Gary Bryce Moir. Post mortem analysis of the deceased's blood revealed it to contain .165 grams of alcohol per 100 ml. Two witnesses gave evidence that some forty-five minutes before the accident they were driving in a westward direction along Nelson Bay Road. They saw a person lying partly in the grass and partly in the gutter on the road. They stopped the car and one of the witnesses addressed the person, but was met with unintelligible mumbles. It was clear this was the deceased.

On the evidence, during the period of forty-five minutes the deceased, who was obviously seriously affected by alcohol, moved from a prone position on the kerb on the opposite side of the road on which the appellant was driving, to a position some metres further along - and it appears in a westerly direction - and just over the unbroken double lines in the centre of the road. There was no other evidence of the circumstances by which the deceased had come to be at the point where he was struck by the truck driven by the appellant.

According to the appellant's evidence, just past the roundabout, which was some 320 or so metres from the point of impact, the appellant had dimmed his lights because of an approaching car.

He went on to say he was "looking for somewhere to sleep to pull over because we didn't have to unload the next morning." In his evidence he said he had looked to the lefthand side of the road at a sporting complex, looking for somewhere to pull over. He said he looked for approximately two seconds. When he looked back he saw "something brown hit the bullbar." 
In evidence in chief he denied he was looking for somewhere to sleep because he was tired. His evidence was: "No, no, I wasn't tired at all because I hardly drove the truck." Earlier in his evidence he indicated that for a substantial portion of the relevant journey the truck had been driven by Mr
Tighe.

During cross-examination Mr Tighe confirmed the appellant's version of what had happened during the course of the journey in terms of sharing the driving.
The accused had said that for a considerable period of time up to about 40 kilometres from Nelson Bay the appellant had been sleeping in the lorry while
Tighe was driving. At that point Tighe stopped driving because he was tired.
Tighe was asleep at the time of the accident.

On the day of the offence Tighe was disqualified from driving. According to the evidence of the appellant, and of Tighe, they had agreed immediately after the incident to say that the appellant was driving throughout the length of the journey.

In an electronically recorded interview between the appellant and a police officer a few hours after the incident the appellant informed the police officer that he had been driving throughout the journey. Tighe also made a statement to the police in which he confirmed the appellant had driven for the whole of the trip. Although the appellant denied during that interview that he was tired, he had also agreed that his last substantial sleep had been on
Wednesday night, whereas the incident occurred in the early hours of Saturday.
In this interview the appellant's recollection was also that he had hit something brown.

The charge alleged that the appellant had driven the vehicle "in a manner dangerous to another person or persons" contrary to para 52A(1)(c) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).
No particular was alleged that the appellant had driven under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a drug, or at a dangerous speed contrary to paras
A(1)(a) and (b) of the Act.

The objective facts before the jury included the following: it was a clear night and there was evidence from the police officers who attended the scene that visibility was good. There was, however, also evidence from independent witnesses, specifically those who had passed and seen the deceased some forty-five minutes before the incident, that it was dark and that there was no moon out. Whilst there is some evidence of a street light in the vicinity of the sporting complex, there was no suggestion that that illuminated the point at which the impact with the deceased occurred; the point of impact was about 20 metres past the road leading to the sporting complex, to which the accused said he had glanced; the deceased was struck by the front of the truck directly in front of the driver, indicating that the deceased was in approximately the centre of the road; there were no skid marks on the roadway and no signs of braking on the part of the lorry; the deceased was wearing a pink shirt, blue jeans and white joggers.

In her summing-up to the jury her Honour indicated the Crown had put its case in two ways: first, that at the time of the impact the appellant was so tired that it had affected his capacity to properly manage the vehicle. Secondly, that even if he was not that tired he was not concentrating or keeping a proper lookout at the relevant time.

On the second occasion on which her Honour summarised the Crown case she did so in the following terms: "And it is for the Crown to prove that the manner of driving was dangerous in the circumstances which existed at that time, and those are matters which the
Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt. And the Crown says that the accused was driving in a manner dangerous because he was tired, but that he failed to keep a proper lookout. Whether or not that was as a direct consequence of his asserted tiredness is irrelevant. So the Crown really puts its case in two ways. It says, either the accused was over-tired because he had been driving for a grossly lengthy period and for that reason he failed to keep a proper watch upon the road, and accordingly failed to see the deceased.

Or if you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was so tired to the point where that caused him to fail to keep a proper lookout, he nonetheless, the Crown says, failed in his duty to keep a proper lookout and it was that failure to keep a proper lookout that caused him not to see the deceased. And you must consider the Crown case obviously on both these bases.

Remember however, that it is the Crown to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt, and most importantly remember that it is not permissible for you to reason that because a person was killed then inevitably the accused must have been driving in a manner dangerous. The fact is that there are accidents in which a person is killed and which either as the fault of the deceased, or an accident which for one reason or other simply could not have been avoided by a vehicle, or foreseen or avoided by the driver of the vehicle. But it is this positive onus on the Crown which is so important to bear in mind, and that you would have to be satisfied before you could return a verdict of guilty that the Crown has put before you facts which establish beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was driving in a manner dangerous in circumstances which made that driving dangerous." 
Subsequently in her summing-up her Honour said again: "The Crown is asking you to draw an inference that he was at that time driving in a manner dangerous because he was not keeping, the Crown says, a proper lookout." 
Subsequently in her summing-up her Honour turned to give directions to the jury in a form which was not challenged before us on behalf of the appellant, although, as I will indicate, a challenge was made to that part of the summing-up which I have quoted. Specifically, her Honour directed the jury in the following two ways: "Whether or not you consider that his driving amounted to such a serious breach of the proper standards of management of a vehicle on a public road that he was driving in a manner dangerous," and "Is a momentary looking away, if you are satisfied it was a momentary looking away, something which falls outside the proper standards of care and management of a vehicle?" 
One of the grounds of appeal, to which leave was granted this morning, was that her Honour misdirected the jury by leaving it open to convict the appellant on a finding of mere negligence. This turns on the reference in her
Honour's direction to the phrase "failure to keep a proper lookout," in each case succeeded by references to the fact that by reason of that failure the appellant "failed to see the deceased." 
The significance of the distinction between negligence and the seriousness of the conduct necessary to constitute driving in a manner dangerous to the public was emphasised in the decision of McBride <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 44] and specifically in the reasoning of the then Chief Justice,
Sir Garfield Barwick at 49-50. In a form of words which bears some resemblance to the form of the direction eventually given by her Honour, and to which, counsel for the appellant, Mr Strickland, found no fault, his Honour commenced in the following way: "The concept for which the section deals requires some serious breach of the proper conduct of a vehicle upon the highway, so serious as to be in reality and not speculatively, potentially dangerous to others. This does not involve a mere breach of duty however grave to a particular person having significance only in damages caused thereby. These distinctions make it imperative that the jury be specifically directed as to the criteria to be applied and the distinctions to be observed in determining whether any particular speed or manner of driving can have the quality, intrinsic or occasional, of being dangerous to the public within the meaning of the section: and that the particular features of the driving charged as in breach of the section be isolated for the jury and related to these criteria." 
In the present case, it was the element of inattentiveness that was "isolated for the jury" in the sense referred to by Barwick CJ. However, there was no direction of a specific character to the jury distinguishing mere negligence from the level of seriousness which was required to constitute driving in a manner dangerous to the public. In McBride Barwick CJ went on to say at 51: "The quality of the driving may be deduced from the resultant facts. But where it is sought to make out the relevant quality of the driving by inference from the contemporaneous impact and its consequences, it seems to me to be the more necessary to carefully apprise the jury of the matters to which
I have called attention and to keep before them the precise issue they have to try. Because the charge is unlikely to be laid unless the impact has caused death or grievous bodily harm, there will always be before the jury the serious result of the occurrence and the temptation to try an issue of negligence as between the driver and the injured party will naturally be most marked ..." 
His Honour went on to indicate that the facts of that case were not dissimilar to the facts of this case in the following passage @ 51-52: "However, in the present case, the only basis which the evidence offered for concluding that the motor vehicle at the time of impact was being driven in a manner dangerous to the public was that it was being driven so inattentively when approaching the pedestrian crossing that such inattentive driving constituted a danger to the public. And as I have said, the only evidence that the motor vehicle was being driven inattentively were the circumstances of the impact and the accused's account of the happening." 
In my opinion the facts of the present case were of a character which would have justified a more specific direction distinguishing clearly between the level of seriousness, which her Honour did direct the jury was the appropriate test, and the references in her summing-up to the Crown's submissions as to the failure to keep a proper lookout. In a case in which inattentiveness is the basis of the allegation that the manner of driving constituted a manner which was dangerous for the purposes of the section, it is often the case that the jury will not be properly instructed if they are left to speculate as to the level of negligence which may be appropriate. In a context in which there was a specific Crown submission, which her Honour summarised without comment, that was consistent with a lower level of negligence than is required for the commission of the offence, it would have been appropriate, and will usually be appropriate, for the trial judge to direct the jury in more specific terms by warning them that mere negligence would not be sufficient. The jury must be left in no doubt that the level of seriousness is not subject to exceptions, in the sense that the lower standard (of negligence) is not sufficient for the purpose of the offence. In circumstances where inattentiveness is the sole ground, it will often be found to be the case that the jury should be instructed as to the relevant distinction.

In this case the principal ground of appeal for the appellant was that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory in accordance with the test propounded in M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] @ 494; affirmed in Jones <case>; [(1997) 149 ALR 598] @ 670.

The appellant's principal submission was there was no cogent evidence that the appellant was so fatigued at the time of the impact that he was driving in a dangerous manner. In its submissions to this court the Crown stated that the twofold submission of its position, as contained in her Honour's summing-up, was really one case; namely, that the appellant was inattentive and failed to keep a proper lookout, perhaps for a relatively brief period, and that that was the relevant act. Whether or not it was caused by tiredness was not essential to the Crown case, but the Crown indicated there was evidence available to the jury which it could accept as to tiredness.

It appears that this is consistent with the directions her Honour gave, as quoted above, particularly the sentence: "Whether or not that was a direct consequence of his asserted tiredness is irrelevant." It is also reflected in the fact that both ways of putting the case ended with the same ultimate sentence in her Honour's summing-up; namely, a failure to keep a proper lookout and accordingly a failure to see the deceased.

The appellant submitted it was not open to the jury to convict on the basis of the record of interview about the length of time he was driving; namely, that his last substantial sleep had been on Wednesday night. However, this was a matter which was before the jury.

This is a borderline case on any view of the facts. Other than the evidence of the appellant himself, the case was entirely circumstantial. There may have been some evidence open to be accepted as to whether or not the appellant was tired on the night. Nevertheless, that evidence was heavily qualified and the nature of the cross-examination as I read it, while challenging the changed version, left the position of the evidence in a somewhat confused state.
Although I have to have in mind that it was the jury who saw both the appellant and Mr Tighe, who similarly had given a statement and given evidence contrary to his statement, although his cross-examination was restricted by a claim that answers may tend to incriminate him.

As to the objective facts about the state of the road, we have had the photograph taken after the incident indicating some visibility and indicating how dark the evening was. There is the evidence of the other drivers who saw the deceased on the other side of the road some forty-five minutes before that the evening was very dark.

There is an issue in matters of this character as to the degree of confidence that is left at the end of the day, taking into account the state of the evidence and such objective factors as are available to a jury.

It is the case that even momentary inattention may amount to driving in a manner dangerous. The authorities referred to in the Crown submissions establish that: Coventry <case>; [(1939) 59 CLR 633] @ 638 and 639; and LKP [(1993) 69 ACrimR 149] @ 162.

The evidence of momentary inattention may or may not have been accepted by the jury. The question is whether on either hypothesis it was open to the jury to find beyond reasonable doubt, in the state of the whole of the evidence before them, that the only inference available from the objective circumstances was one of a degree of inattentiveness so as to constitute driving in a manner dangerous to the public. This is a level of seriousness which the authorities, including McBride to which I have referred, make clear is a significant level.

In my opinion, looking at the evidence as a whole, I have formed the view that it was not open to the jury to so find. The evidence was not of such a character that that was the only inference reasonably open from all the objective circumstances, together with such treatment as they gave to the direct evidence by the appellant.

Accordingly, in my view, the proper order is that the conviction should be quashed and that this court should direct a verdict of acquittal.

ABADEE J: I agree with the reasons of the Chief Justice and his proposed order. 
IRELAND J: I also agree. 
SPIGELMAN CJ: The order is conviction quashed and a verdict of acquittal is directed. * * * 
