

Union des Assurances de Paris I.A.R.D. versus Petersen and Anor; Union des
Assurances de Paris I.A.R.D. versus Shadomill Pty Limited Matter Nos 13420/97 [1998] NSWSC 1003 (3 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
UNION DES ASSURANCES DE PARIS I.A.R.D. versus PETERSEN & ANOR /97 
UNION DES ASSURANCES DE PARIS I.A.R.D. versus SHADOMILL PTY LIMITED /97 March 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: Each of these proceedings was commenced by way of Summons. The two proceedings are related. The same question arises in each of them. It was described as a common matter of principle. 
The plaintiff is an insurer. It extended insurance cover over stock and contents owned by Mr and Mrs Petersen (the Petersens) and Shadomill Pty
Limited (Shadomill) respectively. There were two separate policies. Both the
Petersens and Shadomill made separate claims in respect of water damage. The insurer declined indemnity. Each of the Petersens and Shadomill brought separate proceedings in the Commercial Division. The questions of liability and quantum were separated and the questions of liability were heard together.
Both of the proceedings were dismissed. An appeal brought in each of the proceedings was also dismissed with costs. The Petersens and Shadomill had the same representation. No special order was made as to costs. All costs were to be assessed on a party/party basis.

Bills of costs were given in respect of the costs orders made in each of the proceedings. The bills were referred to a costs assessor (Mr Scammell). The
Costs Assessor made the relevant determinations and issued certificates.

There is no dispute that the determinations were made on the basis that, where work related to both the Petersens and Shadomill, half of the total allowance for that work would be attributed to each of them.

Prior to the making of the determinations, the Costs Assessor gave notice to the parties that he proposed to make the assessments on that basis. In his letter dated 27 October 1997, he said:- "I have now completed my consideration of the various bills.

I propose to assess the bills on the basis that where work relates to both actions half of the total allowance for that work will be attributed to each action. In cases where the work is identified, or can be identified, as referable to only one of the actions the amount allowed will be attributed to that action. The same principles will apply to disbursements.

In my opinion, the plaintiffs could not have brought the one action and, therefore, have become jointly and severally liable for the costs. In any case they did not and the plaintiffs cannot be taken to be jointly and severally liable for the costs in the two actions.

If I were to assess all of the costs in each action, as claimed, your client could recover twice and I have no power to impose any undertakings or restrictions in that regard.

I will defer preparation of the certificates until 4 November to give you the opportunity to refer me to any case law which you may think relevant to this issue and contrary to the views I have expressed.

I am forwarding a copy of this letter to Phillips Fox." 
It is not said that the parties did not have the opportunity to make submissions on this matter. Indeed, it was the subject of submissions.

Both of these proceedings are brought by way of appeal pursuant to section
L of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act). It is this matter which is the subject of the appeals.

As has been observed in the past, section 208L confers a narrow avenue of appeal. It is restricted to "a matter of law arising in the proceedings to determine the application".

Each Summons contains a Statement of the grounds relied on by the plaintiff.
It is not necessary to set those grounds out in this judgment. It suffices to say that the defendants dispute that the grounds raise any matter of law.

Before proceeding further, I should mention one matter which was raised on behalf of the plaintiff during its reply. It was touched upon briefly and not fully argued. It was said that the contents of the fourth paragraph in the letter dated 27 October 1997 disclosed an error of law on the part of the
Costs Assessor. It is not necessary to express any view on this submission. If some error is disclosed therein, it is not of significance in the determination of these appeals.

I should also observe that these appeals, if successful, will be of no practical significance if the defendants can satisfy the costs determinations that have been made. So far, no attempt has been made to enforce the determinations. There is nothing before me to suggest that any of the defendants are unable to satisfy the determinations. The possibility of one of them being impecunious seems to be a motivating factor in the bringing of the appeals. The plaintiff desires to be in a position where the defendants are jointly and severally liable for the total of the assessed amounts.

In a letter dated 3 November 1997, the solicitor for the plaintiff said the following to the Costs Assessor:- "The risk associated with your proposal is that our client will be denied the full fruits of the costs orders made in these proceedings, especially if, for example, one of the Respondents is impecunious.

Furthermore, we do not believe that a costs assessor has the power to determine, in effect, what proportion of a costs order should be paid when there are two or more Respondents and discrete orders for costs are made in separate proceedings (even where both matters are heard together). If it was to be contended otherwise, this should have been a matter for the court to determine and submissions made on the point before the various costs orders were made by Mr Justice Rolf and the Court of Appeal respectively. As you may be aware, no such submissions were ever made.

In the above circumstances, there should be no interference at all with discrete and independent costs orders, especially when an unequivocal undertaking has been given on behalf of the Applicant not to double dip. There can be no injustice in the light of our client's preparedness to give such an undertaking to the Respondent's solicitors, Messrs Phillips Fox.

Whilst we understand your concern that, if you were to assess all of the costs in each action, as claimed, our client could recover twice, we do not consider that that concern could now be reasonably entertained. Indeed, we suggest otherwise, because it would be contrary to both law and principles of equity if `double dipping' were to occur.

What you are attempting to do by your proposal is to determine a proportion of the costs payable between unsuccessful parties; however, with respect, this is not a matter you are required to deal with.

Unfortunately, most of the case law which exists in respect of the question of costs deals with the discretionary power of the courts in this regard. To the writer's knowledge, there does not exist any case law directly on point which perhaps is hardly surprising, given that the amendments to the [Legal
Profession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/) have only come into effect comparatively recently." 
The onus rests with the appealing party to demonstrate error as to a matter of law. In my view, the plaintiff has not discharged that onus.

It seems to me that the appeals are misconceived. The submissions were brief.
The plaintiff does not rely on any of the provisions of the Act which specify the task of assessment to be performed by the Costs Assessor. The
Court was referred to the decision in Ward versus Guinness Mahon PLC [(1996) 1
WLR 894.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281996%29%201%20WLR%20894 "View LawCiteRecord" ) I did not find that decision to be helpful in this case.

The assessment process is governed, inter alia, by the provisions contained in sections 208F and 208G. The Costs Assessor must consider whether or not it was reasonable to carry out the work to which the costs relate and what is a fair and reasonable amount of costs for the work concerned. The statute requires him to determine the costs payable by assessing the amount of the costs that, in his opinion, is a fair and reasonable amount.

It seems to me that the Costs Assessor has done what the Act required him to do. His determinations may be seen as an exercise in which he gave consideration to the relevant matters and assessed an amount of costs for each proceeding which was, in his opinion, a fair and reasonable amount. I am not satisfied that he fell into error.

In proceedings 13420/97, I dismiss the Summons and order the plaintiff to pay the costs of the proceedings.

In proceedings 13421/97, I dismiss the Summons and order the plaintiff to pay the costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
