

Samad and Anor versus Cook and Ors Matter No 3598/98 [1998] NSWSC 537 (29
September 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 November 1998 `SAMAD & ANOR versus COOK & ORS` `3598/98` `29 September 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for an interim injunction to prevent the alleged sellers of shares and/or land and their associates from diminishing the value of what was sold by conducting the company in a way detrimental to the plaintiffs. 
The evidence of the contract is very slim. The principal evidence is para 8 of a document headed "Minutes of Meeting held on the 16th March 1998" on letterhead which is merely branded Barbara Street Clinic. There is no indication on the letterhead of any company or any ACN number.

The minutes say that "this was an Extra Ordinary Meeting". There are listed nine people as present, of whom I am told five were directors and four were not. Paragraph 8 then records that "Manfred", which appears to refer to
Manfred Schoenhoff "offered to buy Barbara Street Clinic complete for the sum of $44,000" and then records that Dr Samad offered each director $21,000, which was accepted by all directors.

Following that, the solicitors for the plaintiffs tendered a deed, whereby under cl 2.1 the vendors, whoever they might have been, agreed to transfer their shares to a company, A Samad Pty Ltd, which company was not a party to the deed. The schedule, however, seems to suggest that not only were the directors not the sole holders of the shares of the Barbara Street Clinic Pty
Ltd, but the evidence suggests that the alleged purchase price also took into account the interests of the directors as tenants in common of certain land on which the clinic was then conducted.

The seminal case of Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1953) 91 CLR 353] at 360, plus the later exposition by the Court of Appeal in
G R Securities limited versus Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd [(1986) 40
NSWLR 631], shows that the present situation can fall into four different categories. There may be a concluded informal contract, but ordinarily where parties are selling important property of value, and where the congeries of rights involved are complex, courts are usually reluctant to find that there is a contract that definitively binds them until there is an exchange in writing dealing with all terms and conditions: a fortiori when land is involved.

In the instant case, the evidence shows that after the meeting of 16 March there was correspondence floating between the solicitors dealing with matters like superannuation rights, redundancy of staff, et cetera. Mr Commons, solicitor, who appeared for the plaintiffs, said that this was all irrelevant because it happened after the contract was made. However, cases such as
Barrier Wharfs Ltd versus W Scott Fell & Co Ltd <case>; [(1908) 5 CLR 647] show that this is not so, and that where one sees that there are queries raised shortly after the relevant meeting one can take them into account to find there is no contract in the first place.

It seems to me that the whole of the evidence presented at this stage shows there was no contract until there had been some formal documentation.
Accordingly, there is insufficient material, in my mind, to show there is an arguable case for the plaintiffs, and there is, accordingly, to be no injunction granted. The amended notice of motion is dismissed with costs. The exhibits may remain with the papers for the time being.

I stand the matter over to the Registrar's list on 16 October 1998 for directions.
 * * * 
