

Regina versus Salem Matter No 60381/96 [1997] NSWSC 459 (3 October 1997) 
Regina versus Salem /96 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Hunt CJ at CL, Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction in the District Court (Shadbolt DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60381 of 1996 
DELIVERED: Friday 3 October 1997 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday 26 February 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Albert SALEM 
JUDGMENT OF: Gleeson CJ; Hunt CJ at CL; Hidden J 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: G J L Scragg * Respondent: P G Berman 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: Neil J O'Connor & Associates * Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW - drugs - undercover operation - inciting supply of heroin - whether police acting illegally - <case> [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) - consideration of Ridgeway versus The Queen 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
NO OF PAGES: 21 
REGINA versus Albert SALEM 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) [s138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) - appellant convicted of supplying heroin - undercover police agent, who himself participated in arranging the supply, a material witness - objection to agent's evidence on ground of illegality of his conduct - trial judge admitted evidence - HELD - trial judge was correct to decide the issue on the basis that the agent had acted illegally - trial judge was also correct in deciding, pursuant to [s138](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html), to admit the evidence.

Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 19] applied, Reg versus Anderson [[1986] AC 27] distinguished.

O R D E R S 
Appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus Albert SALEM 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Hidden J. I agree with the order proposed by Hidden J and with his reasons.

In the present case, the conclusion that, so far as appears from the evidence, the man Harris, and certain police officers, contravened the Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act, seems inescapable. As the authorities referred to by Hidden
J show, there may be cases in which an absence of mens rea will protect a police officer, or undercover agent, from being held to have acted illegally if such an issue arises. However, performance of public duty is not of itself an excuse, either at general law or by statutory implication.

In R versus Ormerod (1969) Vol 4 CCC 3, Laskin JA said at 17: "In principle, the recognition of `public duty' to excuse breach of the criminal law by a policeman would involve a drastic departure from constitutional precepts that do not recognise official immunity, unless statutes so prescribe ... How far such immunity exists in the exercise of discretionary power not to prosecute is unknown to me, but even if it be considerable, the fact that it does not reside in a settled rule is a safeguard." 
If it be the case that frequently, and perhaps almost as a matter of routine, the techniques of investigation and exposure of drug offences involve law enforcement agencies, or their officers, in breaches of the law, and their only protection lies in discretionary decisions not to prosecute them, then a very unhealthy situation exists. Whether the problem can and should be dealt with by legislation is a difficult question, with far-reaching implications.

REGINA versus Albert SALEM 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with Hidden J, for the reasons which he has given, that the appeal should be dismissed.

REGINA versus Albert SALEM 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: In June 1996 the appellant was tried before Shadbolt DCJ and a jury at Sydney District Court on a charge of supplying heroin at Punchbowl on 22
December 1992 (s 25(1) of the Drug Misuse & Trafficking Act, 1985). He was found guilty and was sentenced to imprisonment for four years, comprising a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year. He has appealed against conviction only.

Around the middle of 1992 the appellant, who lived at Punchbowl, was contacted by a man who in the trial used the pseudonym, John Harris. Harris was a drug offender from Queensland who had become a police informer and who, at the time, was assisting New South Wales and Federal police in relation to a number of drug investigations. The appellant was the target of one of those investigations and, at all times during his dealings with him, Harris was acting on behalf of the New South Wales police. On several occasions over a period of months Harris visited the appellant at his home, where they used heroin. Harris had received information that the appellant might be a supplier and, on the occasions that he visited him, he asked whether he could help him to obtain heroin. It is the Crown case that eventually an arrangement was made for the supply of five ounces of heroin for $50,000.

From late November until 22 December 1992, Harris had a number of telephone conversations with the appellant which were intercepted by police. On 21
December arrangements were made for the transaction to take place the following day. Det Snr Const Maricic, then working under cover, was arranged to pose as the buyer and was supplied with $50,000 in cash. Harris was fitted with a listening device, so that conversations with the appellant in person, as well as on the phone, were recorded.

As events of the day proceeded, it became apparent that the appellant had brought three other men, who were not known to Harris, into the deal. As it happens, for reasons which need not concern us, no heroin or money changed hands. The Crown case was founded upon the allegation that the appellant offered, or agreed, to supply the drug. The appellant's case was that there was never any intention to supply heroin and that he and his companions had hoped to relieve Harris of the money. The issue left to the jury was whether they were satisfied that the appellant had made an offer to supply the drug which was intended to be regarded as genuine: Dendic & Mazzeo [(1987) 34
A Crim R 40. (See] also Addison [(1993) 70 A Crim R 213], per Gleeson CJ at 217.) 
Three grounds of appeal were filed, but only the first was pressed in oral argument.

Admissibility of the Evidence of Harris.

The ground of appeal is that the learned trial judge should have rejected the evidence of John Harris. At the trial, Harris' evidence, together with that of
Det Maricic and Mr Stewart Smith, a former police officer who had been in charge of the enquiry, was taken on the voir dire. It seems that the objection was not only to the evidence of Harris, but to the whole of the evidence of the negotiation and attempted execution of the drug deal, on the basis that a proper application of the principles enunciated in Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 19] required its rejection. Although that case was concerned with the common law discretion to reject evidence on public policy grounds, the decision required of his Honour was governed by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). While his
Honour's reasons for admitting the evidence contained no reference to that section, we were informed from the bar table that his Honour was reminded, after the argument had concluded, that the matter was governed by the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) and there is no reason to think that he did not approach it accordingly.

For the present purposes, it is sufficient to set out [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) and (3) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), which provide: "138 - Discretion to exclude improperly or illegally obtained evidence 
Evidence that was obtained: improperly or in contravention of an Australian law, or in consequence of an impropriety or of a contravention of an Australian law, is not to be admitted unless the desirability of admitting the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting evidence that has been obtained in the way in which the evidence was obtained.
 ...

Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account under subsection (1), it is to take into account: the probative value of the evidence, and the importance of the evidence in the proceeding, and the nature of the relevant offence, cause of action or defence and the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and the gravity of the impropriety or contravention, and whether the impropriety or contravention was deliberate or reckless, and whether the impropriety or contravention was contrary to or inconsistent with a right of a person recognised by the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, and whether any other proceeding (whether or not in a court) has been or is likely to be taken in relation to the impropriety or contravention, and the difficulty (if any) of obtaining the evidence without impropriety or contravention of an Australian law." 
The objection was founded upon the proposition that Harris, and the police with whom he was co-operating, were themselves acting in contravention of the
Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act. His Honour did not consider that they could be guilty of knowingly taking part in a supply (s 25(1)), or conspiracy to supply (s 26), because they did not have the requisite state of mind. However, he added that "it might be said" that they had committed the offence of soliciting or inciting a supply (s 27), and his reasons appear to have proceeded upon that basis. Nevertheless, his Honour was of the view that his discretion ought be exercised in favour of admitting the evidence. Having considered the competing factors, he concluded (with his customary eloquence): "When that balance is struck it falls on the side of the Crown. It is not, in my view, evidence obtained at too high a price, such as to offend against a sense of fair play, or immediately to arouse feelings of moral outrage.
Rather, it presents itself as the now quite normal police subterfuge and rather squalid deception which is one of the more depressing by-products of the hermetically sealed drug culture." 
However, the question whether Harris and, more particularly, the police had done anything illegal loomed large in the argument before us. In Reg versus Dumas (CCA, unreported, 20 September 1995) the same question was raised by the Chief
Justice, but left for another day. That day has arrived.

Dumas involved the all too familiar encounter between an undercover police officer and a suspected drug dealer. The offender approached the police officer in a hotel and sold him a small quantity of heroin. Subsequently the police officer negotiated with the offender for the supply of a larger quantity and, when that transaction was about to take place, the offender was arrested.

The position was governed by the common law as expounded by the majority in
Ridgeway (supra), and the court held that the evidence of the undercover police officer had been promptly admitted. The leading judgment was given by
Allen J, who proceeded upon the assumption that the behaviour of the undercover officer amounted to an offence under <case> of the Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act. Indeed, it seems that the Solicitor General, then appearing for the Crown, had accepted that that was so. However, Gleeson CJ expressed reservations about that proposition but, as the matter had not been argued, did not wish to decide it. His Honour referred to part of the speech of Lord
Bridge of Harwich in Reg versus Anderson [[1986] AC 27] at 39, dealing with the infiltration by law enforcement authorities of a criminal enterprise for the purpose of frustrating it. That passage must be viewed in its context and I shall return to it.

In the course of argument, there was discussion of a number of situations in which, on a literal application of provisions of the Drug Misuse and
Trafficking Act, a person would appear to have committed an offence even though he or she was acting in the interests of law enforcement. Section 10, creating the offence of possession of a prohibited drug, exempts persons in certain specified categories from its operation (see sub-s (2)). None of those categories applies to police officers who have possession of drugs which have been seized for the purpose of their production as an exhibit in court proceedings, nor to any of the lawyers or court staff who handle the drugs for the same purpose. Section 25, creating the offence of supplying prohibited drugs, also exempts people in certain categories from its operation (see sub-s ). That exemption would not embrace a citizen who found a quantity of a prohibited drug and handed it to a police officer, expecting it to be destroyed. Are these people guilty of an offence under one provision or the other? 
More to the point, <case>, which makes it an offence for any person to aid, abet, counsel, procure, solicit or incite the commission of an offence under division 2 of part 2 of the Act (which includes supplying prohibited drugs), exempts no-one from its terms. Nor is any exemption to be found in any other part of the Act. What of the plain clothes police officer who observes a person outside a school, apparently selling a prohibited drug to students as they come and go, and who himself purchases some of the drug to obtain evidence against the suspect? Has that officer committed an offence under s ?

None of these sections provides for a general exception by way of lawful excuse or reasonable cause: cf <case>(c) of the [Customs Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/), relating to the possession "without reasonable excuse" of prohibited imports. That counsel were unable to refer us to any authority dealing with any of the situations postulated is hardly surprising: presumably, such conduct never has been prosecuted and is never likely to be. Nevertheless, insofar as it relates to the conduct of law enforcement authorities and of their agents, the question is by no means academic, as illegality or impropriety on their part is the foundation of the discretion conferred by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

Before us, the Crown prosecutor submitted that exemptions from criminal liability should be implied in the legislation for persons acting in the interests of law enforcement. In particular, he submitted that such an exemption should be implied in <case> of the Act for police, or their agents, who become involved in a criminal enterprise for the sale and purchase of drugs with the intention of exposing it and preventing the dissemination of those drugs.

In Ridgeway itself the appellant was charged with an offence under s
B(1)(c) of the [Customs
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (supra) of possessing a prohibited import, being a quantity of heroin. That appellant had set about arranging an importation of heroin from south east Asia but, unbeknown to him, the person with whom he was dealing in Malaysia had become a police informer. In the event, through the co-operation of the Royal Malaysian
Police and the Australian Federal Police, heroin was purchased in Malaysia and brought into Australia by a Malaysian police officer in what was known to law enforcement authorities as a "controlled" importation. The police officer was accompanied by the Malaysian informer and, in due course, they met the appellant in Adelaide for the purpose of a "controlled" delivery of the heroin, which led to the appellant's arrest.

The importation of heroin into Australia is proscribed by <case>(b) of the [Customs Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/), which provides for no exception (such as "reasonable excuse") or exemption from its terms. All seven justices of the High Court held that the conduct of the police in effecting the importation was unlawful, notwithstanding that it was done with a view to apprehending the appellant, and that the procedure of "controlled importation" in appropriate cases had been sanctioned at the highest level of government and involved the co-operation of the Customs
Service. Certainly, the case was an unusual one: not only was the importation carried out and endorsed by the law enforcement authorities of two countries, but also it was an essential element of the crime charged against the appellant. However, their Honours' reasoning does not admit of any notion that, in the absence of statutory authority, conduct on its face criminal is excused because it is pursued with a view to the apprehension of offenders. In their joint judgment, Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ, wrote (at 36): "In a context where ancillary offences - such as counselling, being knowingly concerned in, inducing, aiding, abetting and procuring - exist, in one form or another, in all of Australian jurisdictions and where no laws exist authorising law enforcement officers to encourage or participate in the commission of criminal offences in order to enable the apprehension and procure the conviction of those whom they believe to be involved in criminal activity, it is likely that conduct which intentionally procures the commission of a criminal offence by another will itself be criminal." 
Brennan J (as his Honour then was) held that, valuable as it might be as a technique of law enforcement, the "controlled importation" would need to be authorised by the legislature. His Honour went on (at 54): "So long as the unqualified terms of <case>(b) reveal the Parliament's intention to prohibit all persons, including the law enforcement agencies, from importing heroin, it is not for the courts to encourage the Executive branch of Government to sanction a deliberate course of contravention. The
Executive branch of Government cannot dispense its officers from the binding effect of the laws prescribed by the Parliament." 
Gaudron J (at 73) wrote: "... the criminal law has developed on the basis that criminal liability attaches if a person `intends to commit a crime and actually commits it'. And that is so no matter that the person concerned is acting for or on behalf of a law enforcement agency or some other arm of executive government. Thus, and as a matter of legal principle, law enforcement agents who engage in criminal activity are criminally liable for their actions and liable to punishment accordingly." (I have omitted from that passage her Honour's references to authority.) 
McHugh J (at 81) put it thus: "Law enforcement officials are not exempted from the operation of the criminal law. If their acts or omissions induce a person to commit a crime, they are liable to be punished as principals or accessories. It is no answer that they acted with the best of motives." 
Like the other justices, Toohey J (at 59) relied upon the statement of principle (albeit in a different context) of Gibbs CJ in A versus Hayden (No 2) <case>; [(1984) 156 CLR 532] at 540: "It is fundamental to our legal system that the executive has no power to authorise a breach of the law and that it is no excuse for an offender to say that he acted under the orders of a superior officer." 
As observed earlier, in Dumas Gleeson CJ made a passing reference to the speech of Lord Bridge in Anderson (supra). That case was concerned with a conspiracy to effect the escape of a prisoner, conspiracy now being a statutory offence in England. The relevant passage (at 38-9) is as follows: "There remains the important question whether a person who has agreed that a course of conduct will be pursued which, if pursued as agreed, will necessarily amount to or involve the commission of an offence is guilty of statutory conspiracy irrespective of his intention, and, if not, what is the mens rea of the offence. I have no hesitation in answering the first part of the question in the negative. There may be many situations in which perfectly respectable citizens, more particularly those concerned with law enforcement, may enter into agreements that a course of conduct shall be pursued which will involve commission of a crime without the least intention of playing any part in furtherance of the ostensibly agreed criminal objective, but rather with the purpose of exposing and frustrating the criminal purpose of the other parties to the agreement. To say this is in no way to encourage schemes by which police act, directly or through the agency of informers, as agents provocateurs for the purpose of entrapment. That is conduct of which the courts have always strongly disapproved. But it may sometimes happen, as most of us with experience in criminal trials well know, that a criminal enterprise is well advanced in the course of preparation when it comes to the notice either of the police or of some honest citizen in such circumstances that the only prospect of exposing and frustrating the criminals is that some innocent person should play the part of an intending collaborator in the course of criminal conduct proposed to be pursued. The mens rea implicit in the offence of statutory conspiracy must clearly be such as to recognise the innocence of such a person, notwithstanding that he will, in literal terms, be obliged to agree that a course of conduct be pursued involving the commission of an offence." 
The significance of that passage is apparent from the last sentence. A police officer or agent who infiltrates a criminal enterprise, appearing to participate in it but in fact bent upon frustrating it, does not have the intention necessary for conspiracy: that is, the intention that the object of the conspiracy be achieved.

So much is clear from the advice of the Privy Council in Yip Chiu-Cheung v
The Queen <case>; [[1995] 1 AC 111], a case having some parallels with Ridgeway. That appellant had been found guilty in Hong Kong of conspiring with two other people to traffic in a dangerous drug. One of the people with whom he was dealing was in fact an American undercover drug enforcement agent. The arrangement was that the agent would meet the appellant in Hong Kong, where the appellant would supply him with a large amount of heroin. The agent was then to take the heroin by air to Australia. Exporting heroin from Hong Kong amounted to "trafficking" by Hong Kong law. The agent kept Hong Kong and Australian authorities informed of developments, and the intention was that the plan should be carried out with a view to apprehending both the suppliers and the distributors of the drug. As it happens, the agent was unable to meet the appellant in Hong Kong in accordance with the arrangement, and the plan proceeded no further.

Of course, the agent was not charged with the offence, but he was named in the indictment against the appellant as a co-conspirator. Before the Privy Council (as before the Court of Appeal of Hong Kong), a question arose whether he was properly so described in law. Their Lordships held that he was. Whilst acknowledging that he "was acting courageously and with the best of motives" and was "trying to break a drug ring", they observed that the method by which he chose to do so involved the commission of a criminal offence by Hong Kong law, that is, the carrying of heroin from that country to Australia. Their
Lordships referred with approval (at 118) to the statement of Gibbs CJ in
Hayden (No 2) set out above.

In the course of argument for the appellant in that case, reliance had been placed upon the passage from the speech of Lord Bridge in Anderson to which
I have earlier referred. Their Lordships dealt with that argument in this way (at 117-8): "On the principal ground of appeal it was submitted that the trial judge and the Court of Appeal were wrong to hold that Needham, the undercover agent, could be a conspirator because he lacked the necessary mens rea or guilty mind required for the offence of conspiracy. It was urged upon their Lordships that no moral guilt attached to the undercover agent who was at all times acting courageously and with the best of motives in attempting to infiltrate and bring to justice a gang of criminal drug dealers. In these circumstances it was argued that it would be wrong to treat the agent as having any criminal intent, and reliance was placed upon a passage in the speech of Lord Bridge of
Harwich in Reg versus Anderson (William Ronald) [[1986] AC 27], 38-39; but in that case Lord Bridge was dealing with a different situation from that which exists in the present case. There may be many cases in which undercover police officers or other law enforcement agents pretend to join a conspiracy in order to gain information about the plans of the criminals, with no intention of taking any part in the planned crime but rather with the intention of providing information that will frustrate it. It was to this situation that
Lord Bridge was referring in Reg versus Anderson. The crime of conspiracy requires an agreement between two or more persons to commit an unlawful act with the intention of carrying it out. It is the intention to carry out the crime that constitutes the necessary mens rea for the offence. As Lord Bridge pointed out, an undercover agent who has no intention of committing the crime lacks the necessary mens rea to be a conspirator." 
In the light of these statements of principle, I am satisfied that in the present case, Harris and the police were acting unlawfully in arranging and pursuing the supply of heroin by the appellant. Certainly, they committed the offence of incitement under <case> of the Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act.
Indeed, given that it was intended that the transaction should take place, it may well be that the learned trial judge was in error in absolving them of conspiracy (s 26), or knowingly taking part in supply (s 25). That undercover police who incite the commission of a drug offence are themselves acting illegally was assumed in Regina versus Karam (CCA, unreported, 21 November 1995): see the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL at pp 4-8. The joint judgment in Ridgeway also considers the effect of conduct by police which is improper, but not illegal, and in this context their Honours envisaged (at 36) that "circumstances can conceivably exist in which a law enforcement officer intentionally brings about the opportunity for the commission of a criminal offence by conduct which is not criminal ..." Given the familiar modus operandi of undercover police (and their agents) in drug situations, those circumstances do not readily come to mind.

The position of police who procure the commission of a drug offence is qualitatively different from that of people who, as in the examples referred to earlier, hold or deal with drugs for the purpose only of the procedures necessitated by the Act (the citizen who hands in drugs for destruction, or the police, lawyers or court officers who handle drugs as exhibits). There is much to be said for their position being clarified in the legislation but, in any event, it might be argued that their actions are exempted by implication from the proscriptions of the Act because they could be seen only as being incidental to its purpose: cf John Fairfax Publications Pty Limited versus Doe [(1994) 37 NSWLR 81], per Kirby P at 111. However, this is a matter which could certainly abide another day (although, given that it is never likely to be of any practical significance, that day may never come).

Accordingly, Shadbolt DCJ was correct to approach the admissibility of the evidence upon the assumption that the conduct of Harris, and the police for whom he was acting, was unlawful. The question which then arises is whether, in deciding that their evidence was nonetheless admissible, his Honour's discretion miscarried. The discretion to be exercised is that created by [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), with an eye to the considerations set out in sub-s (3) and any other relevant matters arising from the evidence.

By sub-s (1), the question to be determined is whether the desirability of admitting the evidence outweighs the undesirability of admitting it, given that it was obtained by the unlawful conduct of the police and their agent.
The onus was on the accused to establish that illegality but, it being established, it was for the Crown to satisfy his Honour that the evidence should be admitted: Reg versus Coombe (CCA, unreported, 24 April 1997) per Hunt
CJ at CL at 25. With that qualification, the assessment of the competing public interests is relevantly similar to the exercise at common law described in The Queen versus Ireland <case>; <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54], and revisited by the High Court in Ridgeway. In the joint judgment in Ridgeway, their Honours (at 39) contrasted the circumstances of that case with the more common class of case "in which the police conduct has induced an accused person to commit the offence which he or she has committed". Their Honours went on: "In that category of case, the public interest in the conviction and punishment of those guilty of crime is likely to prevail over other considerations except in what we would hope to be the rare and exceptional case where the illegality or impropriety of the police conduct is grave and either so calculated or so entrenched that it is clear that considerations of public policy relating to the administration of criminal justice require exclusion of the evidence." 
Before his Honour and before us, the matter was argued with reference to the notion of entrapment, which was considered at length in Ridgeway. Brennan J (at 49-50) cited a passage from the judgment of Gleeson CJ in R versus Sloane [(1990) 49 A Crim R 270] at -3: " ... the concept of entrapment involves as a necessary element the idea that an accused person has been induced to commit a crime which he or she otherwise would not have committed or would have been unlikely to commit: see, for example, Police versus Lavelle [[1979] 1 NZLR 45.] In the context of an ongoing course of criminal activity, such as dealing in drugs, the reference to committing a crime which otherwise would not have been committed is a reference to a form of conduct rather than to a particular transaction ... A common method of establishing that a person is carrying on an activity of selling goods of a particular kind is to buy some of the goods in question from that person. The specific sale would never have taken place but for the activity of the relevant police officer or informer, but that is not sufficient to constitute a case of entrapment. To use the language of an
American case on the subject, `a line must be drawn between the trap for the unwary innocent and the trap for the unwary criminal': Sherman versus United
States <case>; [356 US 369] at -3." 
Brennan J went on to observe that the fact that an accused was "an unwary criminal" does not necessarily lead to admission of the evidence obtained as a result of the entrapment. The illegality of the conduct of the law enforcement authorities might be so grave that the evidence ought still be rejected on the basis that the conviction of the accused would be bought "at too high a price": Ireland (supra) per Barwick CJ at 335.

Counsel for the appellant relied upon the evidence on the voir dire that it was Harris who, on behalf of the police, made contact with the appellant and sought over a period to gain his confidence; that both were users of heroin and the only heroin supplied by the appellant to Harris was small quantities which they used at the home; that Harris never saw the appellant supply heroin to anyone else, nor did he ever see large quantities of heroin or the paraphernalia of a supplier at the home; that it was only after a period of months, during which Harris asked the accused several times to supply a substantial amount of heroin, that the arrangement for the supply of five ounces was finally made; that it was not until 22 December itself that it appeared that the transaction would proceed; and that, at all times, Harris was endeavouring to persuade the appellant to become involved in a significant supply so that he could be seen to help the police. Certainly, Harris acknowledged that he was anxious to mitigate sentence in relation to charges outstanding against him in Queensland at the time.

On the other hand, the evidence on the voir dire persuaded his Honour that the appellant may have been unwary, but was no innocent. His Honour relied upon the transcripts of conversations recorded on 22 December from which it appears that the appellant was under no pressure to proceed with the transaction, but rather was a willing supplier with some knowledge of the trade. His Honour found that the appellant "was not being persuaded into entering the heroin trade, but was ever there, standing, if not at the centre, certainly well enough in to know where he could obtain heroin for himself, and if necessary, for others." This was a finding clearly open to his Honour on that material, and it is not to the point that it might not have been apparent from Harris' earlier contact with the appellant.

His Honour's reasons do not recite the considerations set out in [s (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), but counsel for the appellant did not suggest that he fell into error for that reason. The fact that the sub-section specifies matters to be weighed in the exercise of the discretion does not mean that it should be approached in any mechanical way. The question ultimately to be decided is whether the public interest is best served by the admission of evidence tending to establish a citizen's guilt of the crime, notwithstanding that that evidence was obtained by the unlawful or improper conduct of law enforcement authorities. That is the question which his Honour addressed and I can see no error in his conclusion that it should be answered in favour of the Crown. His Honour's observation that the familiar investigative technique used in this case is "one of the more depressing by-products of the hermetically sealed drug culture" was entirely apt.

I would propose that the appeal be dismissed.
 * * * 
