

Hoskins versus Van Den-Braak and Ors Matter No 40735/96 [1998] NSWSC 80 (3
April 1998) 
Last Updated: 21 April 1998 
HOSKINS versus VAN DEN-BRAAK & ORS 
CA 40735/96; CLD 14184/96 April 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: COMMON LAW DIVISION - COOPER AJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40735/96; CLD 14184/96 
DELIVERED: 3 APRIL 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 20 FEBRUARY 1998 
PARTIES: HOSKINS V VAN DEN-BRAAK & ORS 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P; PRIESTLEY JA; BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: D F JACKSON QC/ M COHEN 
Respondent: K ANDREWS 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: DAVID MORROW 
Respondent: D BALOG & ASSOCIATES 
CATCHWORDS: 
Practice and Procedure - Failure to serve cross-defendant - right to relief ex debito justitiae - Local Court (Civil Claims) Act 1970, ss69 and
A(1),(3) - Local Court (Civil Claims) Rules 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 24 
Practice and Procedure - Local Court - Failure to serve cross-defendant - no knowledge of proceedings - whether proceedings and judgment a nullity - right to relief ex debito justitiae 
Local Court (Civil Claims) Act 1970, <case> and <case>, (3) - Local Court (Civil Claims) Rules Pt6 r3(1)(b), Pt7 r7(2), Pt26 r3 
The appellant undertook work at the home of Mrs Van Den-Braak, the first respondent, as a subcontractor of Mr Healy, the second respondent. Healy instructed a solicitor to bring action against Van Den-Braak to recover moneys outstanding for work done. The solicitor acting under the misapprehension that
Healy and Hoskins were in partnership, caused a Statement of Liquidated Claim to be issued in the Local Court which named both Healy and Hoskins as plaintiffs. Van Den-Braak filed a cross-claim against them, which was served on the solicitor instructed by Healy but not on Hoskins. Judgment in the Local
Court was in favour of Van Den-Braak on the claim and cross claim.

Hoskins was first notified of his status as cross-defendant when the sheriff's officer attended his home to levy execution. He applied on two separate occasions to the Local Court for the judgment against him to be set aside.
Both applications were refused. The second application was rejected by
Magistrate Dive on the basis that <case> could not be applied to remedy the irregularity that had occurred. An appeal by way of Stated Case was dismissed by Cooper AJ.

HELD, allowing the appeal: 
Since neither the appellant nor anyone acting on his behalf was served with the claim on which judgment was given against him, prima facie the proceedings, and the judgment are nullities. The appellant was entitled ex debito justitiae to have the judgment set aside unconditionally.

Re Pritchard [[1963] Ch 502], considered. 
The Local Court has power to relieve against the injustice suffered by the appellant as an incident of its function as a court of justice. Nothing in the language of s75A(1) detracts from the common law right to relief ex debito justitiae against such a denial of natural justice.

Coles versus Burke [(1987) 10 NSWLR 429], considered. 
ORDERS
Appeal allowed.
Set aside the orders of Cooper AJ made on 19 November 1996.
Declare that the determination of Magistrate Dive was erroneous in law.
Order that it be set aside.
Order that judgment entered in favour of the first respondent in the Local
Court, Downing Centre on 25 August 1994 be set aside insofar as it was entered against the appellant.
Order that the name of Norman Hoskins be struck out of the Statement of
Liquidated Claim and the Notice of Cross Claim filed in proceedings 62262 of in the Local Court.
Order that the first respondent pay the costs of the appellant in the
Local Court, the Supreme Court and in this appeal, together with the costs of the third respondent on a submitting basis. No order as to the costs of the second respondent in the Supreme Court (including the Court of Appeal). First respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if qualified.

JUDGMENT 
MASON P: The first time Mr Hoskins knew he had been sued by Mrs Van Den-Braak was on 15 February 1995 when a sheriff's officer called at his home and seized items of property in reliance upon a writ of execution. Subsequent enquiries revealed that Mrs Van Den-Braak had obtained judgment in her favour in the sum of $7251.21 at the Local Court at the Downing Centre following a contested hearing that had spanned several days. 
Mr Hoskins had attended part of those court proceedings, but solely as a witness. At least that was his perception, a perception that was reasonably based from his perspective.

What had happened was that a solicitor (Mr Pritchard) had received instructions from a mercantile agency which he interpreted to mean that Messrs
Healy and Hoskins were in partnership under the firm name of Hydrotek Damp
Proofing; and that the firm had done work for Mrs Van Den-Braak for which it had not been paid. Whether the solicitor was reasonable in interpreting his initial instructions or his much later conversation with Mr Healy in May 1992 as asserting that a partnership existed is rather debatable. But what is clear on the evidence is that there was no partnership. Mr Hoskins had been involved in doing work at Mrs Van Den-Braak's home, but as a sub-contractor of Mr
Healy.

The solicitor caused a Statement of Liquidated Claim to be issued in the Local
Court at the Downing Centre. It was filed on 3 October 1991 purporting to be issued pursuant to the [Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/) ("the
Act"). The originating process named Messrs Healy and Hoskins as plaintiffs and Mrs Van Den-Braak as defendant. It was served on Mrs Van Den-Braak who countered with a Notice of Cross Claim against the two plaintiffs. Presumably she sought damages for the cost of rectifying unsatisfactory work. This process was served at the offices of Duffield & Duffield, the firm of which Mr Pritchard was a partner. Such service appeared to be authorised by
Part 7 Rule 7(2) of the Local Court (Civil Claims) Rules as a method of serving a Notice of Cross Claim. Part 7 r7(2) provided: "Where a party has, on the record of the court, a solicitor acting for the party, delivery of a copy to the solicitor, or leaving a copy at the solicitor's office, or sending a copy by post addressed to the solicitor at the solicitor's office, shall be taken to be good service on the party." 
From Mrs Van Den-Braak's perspective at least, Mr Hoskins was a "party", on the record of the court, represented by Mr Pritchard.

On the first day set down for the hearing of the action, 31 March 1994, the solicitor announced that the plaintiffs had withdrawn his instructions. In fact it had been Mr Healy - the only plaintiff with whom the solicitor had dealt - who withdrew instructions to act. The action continued over several days with Mr Healy acting for himself and Mrs Van Den-Braak represented by counsel. Mr Hoskins attended for part of the proceedings at Mr Healy's request. He gave evidence, he took no part in abortive settlement negotiations, and he went home thinking he had heard the last of the matter.
The action proceeded to judgment. On 29 August 1994 the Registrar of the Local
Court wrote to the two judgment debtors c/- Duffield & Duffield notifying them that at a hearing on 25 August 1994 the Court had made the following order: "Judgment for the defendant on the claim and cross claim in the sum of $7,251.21 including $362.71 interest." 
Mr Hoskins was not notified personally by any party. The first he knew of his status as cross-defendant and joint judgment debtor was when the sheriff's officer turned up at his home to levy execution in February 1995.

On 9 March 1995 Mr Hoskins moved the Local Court for orders that the judgment entered against him be set aside and that he be allowed to file a defence to the judgment-creditor's cross-claim. The application was dismissed on 21 April on the ground that "as there had been a hearing on the merits, the application could not succeed". Faced with this, Mr Hoskins made three successive applications for time to pay the judgment. He then applied again to the Local Court, seeking orders that the judgment entered in the action be set aside insofar as it was made against Mr Hoskins and that Mr Hoskins' name be removed from the Statement of Claim which had commenced that action and also from the Notice of Cross-Claim. Alternatively, the Local Court was moved to set aside the judgment, and to allow Mr Hoskins to file a defence to the cross-claim. Magistrate Dive rejected the application.

He held: "There are three reasons why this application must fail: 
Firstly, the applicant has taken a number of steps since becoming aware of the irregularity. He has sought a stay of proceedings and to have the judgment set aside, and had a hearing, albeit short, on the application to set aside the judgment. He has made three application to pay the judgment by instalments. This application is thereby clearly caught by [s75A(3) of the [Local Courts (Civil Claims)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/)].

Secondly, the rules of court, specifically [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/index.html#p26)
Rule 3 provides a comprehensive avenue for curing the irregularity alleged.
The authorities suggest that a provision aimed at curing irregularities should not be invoked to overcome a matter which is comprehensively dealt with elsewhere.

Thirdly, there having been a hearing on the merits of the case, therefore, save in special circumstances, the parties are entitled to assume that the judgment is the final judgment of the court. In my view, such a hearing is not a barrier to an application under [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s75a.html), but it certainly raises the threshold the applicant must meet." 
An appeal by way of Stated Case was dismissed by Cooper AJ. From that order Mr
Hoskins appeals by leave. The respondents to the appeal are Mrs Van Den-Braak,
Mr Healy and Magistrate Dive. Only Mrs Van Den-Braak opposed the appeal. The
Magistrate has submitted to the orders of the Court and Mr Healy has appeared in person to inform the Court that he does not wish to take an active role in the appeal.

APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES 
Senior counsel for the appellant has submitted that, since neither the appellant nor anyone acting on his behalf was served with the claim on which judgment was given against him, prima facie the proceedings, and the judgment against him are nullities: see Re Pritchard [[1963] Ch 502] at 523-4, 526-7;
Re March <case>; [(1991) 32 FCR 482] at 484-5. The appellant was entitled ex debito justitiae to have the judgment set aside unconditionally: White versus Weston [[1968] 2
QB 647];
Willowgreen Ltd versus Smithers [[1994] 1 WLR 832.] I agree.

An action brought in the name of a plaintiff without that party's consent (cf [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/index.html#p6) rule 3(1)(b)) will be stayed and struck out on the application of that party, even if application is first made after trial and judgment: see In re
Savage [(1880) 15 Ch D 557];
Fricker versus Van Grutten [[1896] 2 Ch 649]; Geilinger v Gibbs [[1897] 1 Ch 479]; Simmons versus Liberal Opinion Ltd [[1911] 1 KB ]
(non-existent defendant, but principle the same); Proficient Building Co
Pty Ltd versus Daimaru Pty Ltd [(1990) 21 ATR 965] at 968.
This is because the unauthorised action is a nullity, albeit one capable of ratification by the party wrongly joined: Reynolds versus Howell [(1873) LR 8
QB 398] at 400; Danish Mercantile Co Ltd versus Beaumont [[1951] 1
All ER 925]; Omega Estates Pty Ltd versus Ganke [(1962) 80 WN ]; Re Manias [(1986) 15 FCR 1.] Several of these cases illustrate that the remedy of the "innocent" party is to recover costs on the indemnity basis from the solicitor who wrongly warranted authority to commence the proceedings: see also Bowstead & Reynolds on
Agency 16th ed page 603.

Where proceedings are commenced in the name of several parties but without authority from one of those parties, then the name of the wrongly added party will be struck out, even after final judgment: In re Savage. Fricker v Van Grutten was such a case, where the plaintiff whose name had been used without authority was struck out and all proceedings against him stayed. The solicitor who had acted without authority was ordered to indemnify that party against all costs and to pay the costs of the defendants (see at 658-9). The wrongly joined plaintiff had first come forward (promptly) after an appeal that had been prosecuted on behalf of all plaintiffs had been dismissed on its merits.

The present appeal is a case where neither the appellant nor anyone acting on his behalf was served with the cross claim on which judgment was given against him. [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/index.html#p7) [rule (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s7.html) (relied upon by counsel for Mrs Van Den-Braak) could not deem Mr Hoskins to have been served, because it goes no further than authorising service upon the solicitor acting for a "party" who has, on the record of the court, a solicitor acting for that party. Mr Hoskins was never a party, even though the solicitor who caused the originating process to issue represented him to be one. Since he was not properly joined in the proceedings they were a nullity so far as he was concerned. In an oft-cited judgment in Cameron versus Cole <case>; [(1944) 68 CLR 571] at 589 Rich J said: "It is a fundamental principle of natural justice, applicable to all courts whether superior or inferior, that a person against whom a claim or charge is made must be given a reasonable opportunity of appearing and presenting his case. If this principle be not observed, the person affected is entitled, ex debito justitiae to have any determination which affects him set aside; and a court which finds that it has been led to purport to determine a matter in which there has been a failure to observe the principle has inherent jurisdiction to set its determination aside (Craig versus Kanssen [[1943] 1
KB 256] at 262). In such a case there has been no valid trial at all. The setting aside of the invalid determination lays the ghost of the simulacrum of a trial, and leaves the field open for a real trial...." 
This passage was cited with approval by Gibbs J in Taylor versus Taylor <case>; [(1979) 143 CLR 1] at 6 and 7. Gibbs J added (at 8): "It is clear that the majority of the Court in Cameron versus Cole accepted that a court, whether superior or inferior, has inherent power to set aside an order made against a person who did not have a reasonable opportunity to appear and present his case." 
Stephen J agreed with Gibbs J.

Mason J said (at 16): "Although the Family Court is a court created by statute it none the less possesses an inherent jurisdiction to set aside a judgment obtained by default. Three members of this Court (Latham CJ, Rich and Williams JJ) concluded in Cameron versus Cole that the Federal Court of Bankruptcy had an inherent jurisdiction to set aside its orders, notwithstanding that it was a statutory court and, further, that it was a court of limited jurisdiction. A jurisdiction to set aside its orders is inherent in every court unless displaced by statute. In my opinion the jurisdiction extends not only to the setting aside of judgments which have been obtained without service or notice to a party (Craig versus Kanssen [[1943] KB 256] at 262-263) but to the setting aside of a default or ex parte judgment obtained when the absence of the party is due to no fault on his part. I can find no indication in the Family Law Act of an intention to displace this inherent jurisdiction." 
Aickin J agreed with the reasons of Mason J. The fifth member of the Court (Murphy J) dissented.

In my view these principles have direct application to the present case.

THE REASONS IN THE COURTS BELOW 
It is convenient to address first the third ground relied upon by the learned magistrate. With respect to him, there was no "hearing on the merits" so far as Mr Hoskins was concerned. He had not been served with the Notice of Cross
Claim and had played no part in the litigation other than as a witness. The fact that there was a "hearing on the merits" was entirely irrelevant, since it was not the appellant who had had that hearing. The learned magistrate who stated the case was in error in his third reason.

Cooper AJ's judgment may briefly be summarised as stating that the only power vested in the Local Court to set aside its own judgments and orders is to be found within the confines of its legislation and Rules: and concluding that Mr
Hoskins' situation fell outside s75A of the Act and Part 26 Rule 3 of the
Rules. (In other words, he upheld Magistrate Dive on the first two grounds of the latter's decision.) 
Cooper AJ characterised the issue before him as one which involved the power of an inferior Court which is the creature of statute to set aside its own judgments and orders. He said that the first principle was that whatever power the Local Court has to set aside its own judgments and orders must be found within the confines of its legislation and/or rules. The Local Court, he held, has no inherent powers outside of those sources. His Honour cited Coles v
Burke [(1987) 10 NSWLR 429.] His
Honour then noted [s69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/s69.html) of the [Local Courts (Civil Claims)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lcca1970250/) which provides that subject to a limited right of appeal all judgments and orders of a court exercising jurisdiction under the Act shall be final and conclusive.
He then considered whether the facts of the case fell within s75A(1). The learned judge held that it did. In his view there was a "failure to comply with [a] requirement of" the Act and Rules (cf s75A(1)). Indeed two failures to comply were identified: non-compliance with s11, which provides that a party to an action may appear by an attorney; and with Part 5 rule 2, which provides that a statement of claim shall be signed by the plaintiff's solicitor or on that solicitor's behalf. In these circumstances the failure was not to be treated as a nullity but as an irregularity (cf s75A(1)); and the court was precluded from setting aside any step in the proceedings on the grounds of the failure since the applicant had taken "fresh steps" after becoming aware of the irregularity. The fresh steps were the application to set aside judgment made on 9 March 1995 and the three later applications for time to pay.

Turning to the Rules, his Honour held that Part 26 rule 3(1) was the only basis upon which the Local Court could set aside its own judgment or order of the class relevant to this case. However, the application before Magistrate
Dive was "doomed to failure" because of the pre-existing order of 21 April
He held that that order was final and conclusive by virtue of s69. In any case, had Part 26 rule 3(1) been invoked, it would (in his view) have provided no assistance because the order of 21 April 1995 had not been made irregularly, illegally or against good faith.

Before addressing the balance of the reasoning of Magistrate Dive and Cooper
AJ it is convenient to set out the provisions of the Act and Rules which were relied upon. Section 69 provides: "69 (1) Subject to subsection (2), all judgments and orders of a court exercising jurisdiction under this Act shall be final and conclusive.

A party to proceedings under this Act who is dissatisfied with the judgment or order of the court as being erroneous in point of law, may appeal to the Supreme Court therefrom.

However, in the case of proceedings in the Small Claims Division of a court, an appeal under subsection (2) lies only on the ground of lack of jurisdiction or denial of natural justice.

The provisions of section 101 to section 115 both sections inclusive of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), apply, to the extent to which they are applicable, to appeals under subsection (2) in the same way as they apply to appeals to the Supreme Court under those provisions." [Section
A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s75a.html) relevantly provides: "(1) If, in the purported commencement of any proceedings or at any stage in the course of or in connection with any proceedings, there is, by reason of anything done or left undone, a failure to comply with any requirement of this
Act or of the Rules whether in respect of time, place, manner, form or content or in any other respect: the failure is to be treated as an irregularity and is not to nullify the proceedings, or any step taken in the proceedings, or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings; and subject to (2) and (3), the Court may, on terms, set aside wholly or in part the proceedings or any step taken in the proceedings or any document, judgment or order in the proceedings, or exercise its powers under the Rules to allow amendments and to make orders dealing with the proceedings generally.
 ...

The Court must not set aside any proceedings or any step taken in any proceedings or any document, judgment or order in any proceedings on the grounds of a failure to which (1) applies on the application of any party unless the application is made within a reasonable time and before the applicant has taken any fresh step after becoming aware of the irregularity." 
Part 26 rule 3 provides: "A judgment or order of the Court in any proceedings may on sufficient cause being shown be set aside on terms by order of the Court if the judgment was given or entered up or the order was made irregularly, illegally or against good faith." 
In my view Coles does not stand for the categorical proposition that the
Local Court has no inherent powers outside its Act and Rules. In Coles, a judge of the District Court had given procedural directions in a complicated building case, adding that in default of compliance with his directions the defence and cross claim filed by the defendants should be struck out. There was non-compliance and this led to the entry of default judgment. Application was then made in the District Court for an order setting aside the default judgment. The parties against whom the default judgment had been entered gave evidence that they had not given specific instructions for the consent to the original directions, with their default orders. There was obviously a high level of negligence on the part of the moving party's former solicitors.
Nevertheless Smyth DCJ set aside the default judgment on terms. His power to do so was challenged in the Court of Appeal. The relevant District Court Rule was Part 31 Rule 12A which provided (in part): "1. A judgment or order of the Court in any proceedings may, on sufficient cause being shown, be set aside, on terms, by order of the Court, if the judgment was given or entered up, or the order was made, irregularly, illegally or against good faith." (The closeness of this Rule to Part 26 Rule 3 of the Local Court (Civil
Claims) Rules (set out above) will be apparent.) 
The leading judgment was given by Kirby P, with whom McHugh JA agreed. His
Honour noted that it had not been suggested that there was any "irregularity or illegality" to support the setting aside of the judgment by Smyth DCJ. And his Honour found that the charge of lack of "good faith" also failed. In this context, Kirby P said (at 437): "The genus which is involved in the phrase "irregularly, illegally or against good faith" appears to me to be misconduct or dishonourable conduct of the person who procured the judgment which it is suggested undermines the authority of that judgment warranting the exceptional course for which r12A provides. Here, there was no such lack of good faith on the part of the claimants. The signing of the judgment was made in accordance with the authority of the order earlier consented to and after a warning had been given by the letter to which I have referred. It is perhaps undesirable, in the modern practice of the legal profession (where much give and take is required) that judgment should be signed in this way without a final telephone call or other warning. However, the failure to give such a final and further warning could not, on any view, amount to a lack of good faith. Therefore, r12A, likewise has no application to these circumstances. No other rule or statutory provision was relied upon by the first opponents to support the order which Smyth DCJ made.
 
It was submitted that the District Court had an inherent power to regulate its own affairs. By this, I understood the first opponents to mean that the
District Court, as a court, had such powers as a court must have to perform its functions including, so it was suggested, the power to set aside a judgment entered in the circumstances of this one. I do not consider it is necessary to explore that question at length. The power of the District Court to set aside judgments was relevantly exhausted by the explicit provisions of the District Court Act and rules. Reference was made to the High Court decision in Taylor versus Taylor which concerned the Family Court of Australia, and in particular the remarks of Gibbs J (at 5). I do not read that decision, or his Honour's remarks, to apply to the present circumstances. In
Taylor versus Taylor there was a lacuna in the Family Court's powers. The
District Court's powers, to the contrary are ample. They provide for the setting aside of judgment, in terms of great detail. But they regulate and control the discretion to grant such relief."(emphasis added) 
In my view Cooper AJ was in error if he read these remarks as stating a universal principle negating any power in a statutory inferior Court to set aside default judgments unless explicit authority could be found within the statute or Rules defining the jurisdiction and procedure of that Court. The portions of Kirby P's judgment which I have emphasised indicate that the Court in Coles was dealing with a particular factual situation far removed from the present. And Taylor versus Taylor was only distinguished because "there was a lacuna in the Family Court's powers". In Coles, the proceedings had been regularly commenced and the original procedural directions had been duly consented to by the party's solicitor. Rule 12A addressed the field within which an application to set aside the subsequent default judgment was to be considered. In those circumstances the relevant power was constrained by the limitations and procedures spelled out in that
Rule.

In his judgment agreeing "generally" with the reasons of the President,
Samuels JA emphasised the distinction between cases such as Coles and the present. His Honour said (at 438-9): "I add only one thing on my own account. I do not agree that the justice of the orders made below is not the issue before us. Perhaps it is correct to say that it is not the issue in the sense of the only issue; but it is certainly an issue before us. I think that the justice of orders made from which an appeal is brought is always the concern of an appellate court. It is a question, of course, of what the word means, and particularly what is meant in the context of a particular case, and thus whether in the circumstances what has occurred amounts to a denial of justice.

I need only to say here that this is not a case where any injustice has occurred which the Court has proved powerless to remedy or to avert. We are concerned primarily, to my mind - apart from the general considerations to which I have referred - with whether the circumstances were capable of attracting the provision of Pt 31, r12A, or the inherent power of the District
Court. Clearly, for the reasons given by the President, they were not. The learned judge was in error in concluding that they were." 
It follows that Cooper AJ saw too wide a field of potential operation of s75A(1). The passages in Cameron versus Cole and Taylor versus Taylor to which reference has been made, and the other cases discussed above, establish that the power to relieve against the type of injustice suffered by Mr Hoskins resides in the Local Court as an incident of its function as a court of justice; that the duty to set aside and/or relieve against the consequences of a default order or judgment exists ex debito justitiae (ie not as a matter of discretion, or subject to terms).

Nothing in the language of s75A(1) detracts from the common law right to relief ex debito justitiae against a denial of natural justice of the present type. I have already referred to cases establishing that relevantly indistinguishable rules do not have this draconian effect: see Craig esp at 260; MacFoy versus United Africa Co Ltd [[1962] AC 152] esp at 159;
Pritchard esp at 519. The analysis of s75A in Coles is consistent with this, for reasons already given.

Even if one focuses upon the language of s75A itself, it offers no assistance.
Cooper AJ thought that s11 (which provides that a party may appear by an attorney) and Part 5 rule 2 (which provides that a statement of claim shall be signed by the plaintiff's solicitor or on that solicitor's behalf) imported "requirements". Counsel for the respondent also referred to Part 7 rule 5(3) (which deems a party to have waived any objection to service, unless notice of objection is lodged and served when the party lodges a document for filing in reply to a document alleged to have been served on that party). Each of these rules apply only to parties, with the consequence that they imposed no "requirement" with which Mr Hoskins could have failed to comply.

Since s75A(1) was not engaged it becomes unnecessary to consider whether the appellant's fruitless attempts to be relieved of the judgment entered in his absence amounted to the taking of "any step in the proceedings".

Section 69 offers no answer to the appeal. Its purpose is to limit the scope of prerogative and appellate review. It does not purport to convert an interlocutory judgment or order into a final one. Nothing estopped Magistrate
Dive from dealing with all of the grounds upon which the application before him was argued. The earlier application that had been (wrongly) rejected on the ground that Mr Hoskins had had a hearing on the merits was interlocutory.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed.
Set aside the orders of Cooper AJ made on 19 November 1996.
Declare that the determination of Magistrate Dive was erroneous in law.
Order that it be set aside.
Order that judgment entered in favour of the first respondent in the Local
Court, Downing Centre on 25 August 1994 be set aside insofar as it was entered against the appellant.
Order that the name of Norman Hoskins be struck out of the Statement of
Liquidated Claim and the Notice of Cross Claim filed in proceedings 62261 of in the Local Court.
Order that the first respondent pay the costs of the appellant in the
Local Court, the Supreme Court and in this appeal, together with the costs of the third respondent on a submitting basis. No order as to the costs of the second respondent in the Supreme Court (including the Court of Appeal). First respondent to have a certificate under the Suitors' Fund Act if qualified.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with Mason P. 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Mason P. * * * 
