

Benedek and Anor versus Meng and Anor Matter No 12685/90 [1997] NSWSC 675 (23
December 1997) 
Andrew BENEDEK & Anor versus Catherine MENG & Anor /90 December 1997 
Graham AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /90 - ANDREW BENEDEK & ANOR v. CATHERINE MENG & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs, Andrew Benedek and Denise Benedek, his wife, reside at 26 Longleat Lane, Kurmond in the State of New South Wales. Kurmond is located near Richmond on the western outskirts of Sydney. 
Until 9 August 1989 the Benedeks carried on business as haulage contractors with a contract for the transport of bulk cement through a family company known as Tinoro Pty. Limited. They had previously had a business, in which Mr.
Benedek was primarily involved, working as cleaning contractors.

Until September 1988 when one of his knee caps was crushed and his tibia fractured Mr. Benedek worked as a truck driver in Tinoro Pty. Limited's haulage contracting business. Mrs. Benedek has, at all material times, worked as a school teacher at Grose Vale Public School.

In 1989 the Benedeks and Tinoro Pty. Limited banked with the Royal Exchange,
Sydney branch of Westpac Banking Corporation. They also dealt with the
Fyshwick, A.C.T. branch of National Australia Bank Limited, the second defendant, in relation to lease finance obtained by Tinoro Pty. Limited and guaranteed by them in respect of the truck used in the haulage contracting business.

On or about 8 April 1989 the first plaintiff saw an advertisement in the Daily
Telegraph newspaper reading:- "SILENT PARTNER Needed for 
North Coast Hotel Small outlay good returns on short term Ring 
Neil, aft 8pm, on (02) 560 7003" 
According to the first plaintiff's affidavit sworn 10 March 1996 he telephoned the number mentioned in the advertisement on or about 8 April 1989 and spoke to a male person who introduced himself as Neil Meng. Thereupon conversation took place to the following effect:- 
First plaintiff: "I have read the advertisement in the newspaper and I am interested in investing in the hotel." 
Neil Meng: "My mother is the person you need to speak to. I will get her to call you." 
On or about 8 April 1989 the first plaintiff says that he received a telephone call from Catherine Meng, the first defendant, who has not been served and has not appeared, whereupon conversation to the following effect took place:- 
First plaintiff: "How much money are you after?" 
First defendant: "$60,000.00. We should meet and discuss the proposal.

I will meet you next Wednesday at the Central Cafe, opposite Central Railway Station at 12.00 noon to discuss the hotel. I will bring the hotel's ledgers with me." 
First plaintiff: "I don't want to be a silent partner. I want to learn the trade. I want to be actively involved in the business." 
First defendant: "I am happy to consider that. I will need to meet you to see whether you're suitable for the job." 
The first plaintiff was attracted by the advertisement because he did not believe that he could continue in the trucking business in his disabled state.
He was looking for further training so that he could embark upon a new career and lifestyle.

It would appear that on or about 12 April 1989 the first defendant and her son
Neil met with the plaintiffs at the proposed meeting place at Central.
Thereupon each of the plaintiffs says that conversation took place to the following effect:- 
First defendant: "I need $60,000.00 because I am currently short of cash and the hotel needs to be able to: * pay the Liquor Licence fee; * re-stock the bottle shop; * renovate the beer garden; * buy chairs and tables for the interior public and lounge bars and to buy three more card machines." 
Second plaintiff: "But why do you need our money for that?" 
First defendant: "I have used up my money on equipment and fixtures for the hotel which should have been there already. I am also short of money at the moment because the previous owner has ripped me off. The hotel was under-stocked and under-equipped from what it was supposed to be. I am currently suing the previous owner. I have had to spend big money for legal expenses to fight him and I hope to be able to recover my losses." "I have a property in Queensland valued at about $750,000.00 which I am trying to sell." 
Second plaintiff: "If you want a buyer for it why don't you reduce the price?" 
First defendant: "I can't get a buyer for the property at the moment because of the 1987 Stock Market crash. The Japanese buyers have all dried up." 
First plaintiff: "Why don't you borrow money on the property for the hotel?" 
First defendant: "Esanda is holding all my deeds." 
First plaintiff: "We are going to have to borrow the money. Is that OK with you?" 
First defendant: "That's no problem." 
Second plaintiff: "How is the hotel going to pay for this loan?" 
First defendant: "I can get poker machines secondhand for $1,500.00 each and they will pay for the loan. Money is not really a problem. There is a lot of druggies around the area.

They have plenty of money to spend at the hotel. They are harmless. They just spend their money. Come up and see." 
Second plaintiff: "How much are you paying for the Liquor Licence?" 
First defendant: "The Liquor Licence is 10% of the liquor that is purchased." 
Second plaintiff: "How much do you mark your prices up?" 
First defendant: "100%" 
First plaintiff: "How many staff have you got?" 
First defendant: "John, Richard, Sharon and myself, plus a couple of part-timers when I need them." 
Second plaintiff: "We will have to discuss this with our Solicitor and think about the whole proposition. We will get back to you." 
First defendant: "You don't need a Solicitor. They are too expensive. I have spent so much money on the case with the owner.

All you need to do is come up to Mullumbimby and see for yourself." 
The hotel to which the advertisement referred was apparently the Chincogan
Tavern at Mullumbimby, some 30 kilometres west of Byron Bay.

I should observe that the above account of the initial meeting between the plaintiffs and the first defendant was the product of a combined effort by the plaintiffs to recall same. The second plaintiff appears to have taken the major part in its preparation and, indeed, in the reconstruction, a word which
I use advisedly, of what has been presented to the Court as the recollection of both the first and second plaintiffs of what transpired in the ensuing months in 1989 especially where she was present or otherwise involved. Much of the first plaintiff's evidence was quite unreliable.

In the witness box the first plaintiff seemed to me to be floundering when asked, for instance, why he had changed his account of an important conversation, which he attributed to 14 June 1989 and in which he alone was involved, in his affidavit of 3 June 1996. Putting to one side the question of the date, to which I will return, I have little confidence in the accuracy of the first plaintiff's recollection of this alleged conversation.

When asked about differences between his first account of the alleged conversation and his second account the first plaintiff gave, inter alia, the following evidence:- "Q. Do you see that in respect of the matter I have just asked you about, what you have said is that having thought about it you now remember that he did not say that at the meeting on the 14th, but he said it at the meeting two days later. You appreciate that you were correcting yourself? 
A. Yes.

Q. Well, may I take it that you really don't have a clue? 
A. As far as the dates go? 
Q. When he said those words? 
A. I do recall him saying that.

Q. Why did you swear an affidavit saying you got it wrong the first time, and that it in fact occurred at the next meeting? 
A. I don't know." (The emphasis is mine) 
Later he gave the following evidence:- "Q. Well why did you, in this affidavit, add all these other things that are mentioned in this paragraph? 
A. I don't know." (The emphasis is mine) 
Later, the first plaintiff gave the following evidence about discrepancies between his first and second accounts of those parts of this conversation which dealt with the value of his haulage contracting business:- "Q. Did you in fact tell him that? 
A. Mate, the truck - I am sorry the truck - well I must have if it is here (referring to the second affidavit), yes, I must have." (The emphasis and the words in parenthesis are mine).

What the first plaintiff was indicating was not that he recalled what was said but that, if conversation attributed to him had been recorded in the affidavit sworn by him, he must have said it.

In response to questions which I asked him the first plaintiff continued:- "Q. A moment ago you were asked that question and you said, `It is there, I must have said it'? 
A. Well, okay.

Q. It that a truthful answer or is it wrong? 
A. What is here (referring to the second affidavit) I suppose is what I said." (The emphasis and the words in parenthesis are mine).

I do not consider that the first plaintiff recalled any inaccuracies in his affidavit of 10 March 1996 when he swore his second affidavit on 3 June 1996 which he then remembered but has since forgotten. The way the first plaintiff handled the questioning put to him about the differences between his two affidavits cast considerable doubt upon everything other than the documentary evidence contained in them. As will later appear, even some of the documentary evidence is highly suspect, to say the least.

When asked whether he was very confident about the dates which he attributed to various conversations in his affidavit, he replied:- "No, not the dates, I am not sure with the dates." 
In relation to the conversation at the Central Cafe when the second plaintiff asked the first defendant about the licence fee for the Tavern, the first plaintiff's evidence as to his recollection was as follows:- "Q. I know you swore to it but did you, when you did swear to it, remember it or was it merely your wife's recollection and you were prepared to go along with it? 
A. My wife's recollection and I was prepared to go along with it, yes." 
As at 1 May 1989 the market value of the plaintiffs' home was $350,000.00 and, based on this valuation the second defendant's assessment of its value for bank lending purposes was apparently $280,000.00.

As at 18 May 1989 the plaintiffs indebtedness to Westpac Banking Corporation on their 25 year home loan secured by a first mortgage was $106,152.50 which was attracting interest at a variable rate then 16% per annum charged monthly.
As at 8 June 1989 the pay out figure in respect of the Westpac Banking
Corporation home loan may well have been as much as $124,000.00 although the discrepancy between this figure and $106,152.50 was not explained in the evidence.

As at 25 May 1989 the principal outstanding under Tinoro Pty. Limited's truck lease and for which the second defendant held a registered second mortgage over the plaintiffs' home in support of their guarantee thereof, was $152,844.00. As at 19 June 1989 the amount outstanding appears to have been $164,489.00.

The first plaintiff then believed the haulage contracting business to be worth $240,000.00. As an aside I should mention that the haulage contracting business was sold on 9 August 1989 for $224,000.00 and, presumably, the truck lease was then paid out.

After travelling to Mullumbimby by car on 18 April 1989 the first plaintiff spent the next five days being shown around the Chincogan Tavern by the first defendant and being trained in various hotel procedures. During the course of this visit a conversation took place between the first plaintiff and the first defendant to the following effect:- 
First defendant: "If you invest $100,000.00 instead of $60,000.00 you will get a 20% share in the business. The hotel is valued at around $500,000.00 since I have spent money re-equipping the hotel." 
First plaintiff: "If you can get the freehold of the hotel I would be interested in selling my home and truck and investing in the hotel as a freehold." 
The first plaintiff says that the first defendant said, referring to the owner of the freehold:- "Lewis is an addict. He will not hold the freehold too much longer. If we all work together we will all have shares in the hotel as a freehold." 
I observe that the plaintiffs' then solicitor, Mr. Bill Messner of Messrs.
Messner & Blunden, who was instructed to act for them in relation to their proposed investment in the hotel in mid-April 1989 made a file note on 24
April 1989 reading, inter alia:- "...

Andrew & Denise Benedek ...

Vendor Catherine Meng $100000:00: = 1/5th" 
Whilst it will be necessary to return to attempts by the plaintiffs to secure finance for the first plaintiff's proposed hotel investment through Westpac
Banking Corporation and, later, its wholly owned subsidiary Australian
Guarantee Corporation Limited, it is sufficient for the moment to refer to an alleged approach made by the first plaintiff to the Fyshwick, A.C.T. branch of the second defendant. The first plaintiff says that on Monday, 22 May 1989 he telephoned the Fyshwick branch of the defendant and asked to speak to the manager, Mr. Solway. Mr. Solway was said to be unavailable whereupon he says that the following conversation took place between himself and an officer of the second defendant, Mr. Mark Booker. That conversation was, so he says, to the following effect:- 
First plaintiff: "I'm having a problem with AGC. They won't give me a third mortgage for the loan so that I can buy shares in the hotel." 
Booker: "This is the Chincogan Tavern at Mullumbimby isn't it? 
I used to live there. It's a great hotel isn't it? I used to know the owner of the hotel." 
First plaintiff: "I'm working at the Tavern at the moment. I need to get a loan for $100,000.00 so that I can get a 20% share in the hotel. Can you speak to Mr. Solway and see whether you can arrange a loan for me. Do you think it will be a problem?" 
Booker: "That should be no problem. I will send the necessary forms up to Mullumbimby for you to complete." "In order to process the loan we will need the hotel's trading figures and also the trading figures for your company, Tinoro." 
This conversation is relevantly denied by Mr. Booker, who was then the security clerk at the Fyshwick, A.C.T. branch, although he may at some stage have said to the first plaintiff in relation to the Tavern "This is the
Chincogan Tavern at Mullumbimby isn't it? I used to live there". (Mr. Booker's father had been the manager of the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant in the period 1975-8. During that period Mr. Booker was in his last two years of his primary education and the first two years of his secondary education.) 
Mr. Booker was not required by the plaintiffs to attend for cross-examination.
I do not accept that any such conversation took place between the first plaintiff and Mr. Booker on 22 May 1989.

It seems to me that the genesis of the first plaintiff's attempt to secure finance for his hotel venture from the second defendant relevantly lay in a telephone conversation between the plaintiff's solicitor, Mr. Messner, and Mr.
Solway on 29 May 1989 when, according to Mr. Solway's contemporaneous diary note he said:- "Told him (meaning Mr. Messner) we MAY be able to assist Benedik (sic) with the $88,000 and to send me down a copy of valuation so that I could get it confirmed with our Richmond Branch. On confirmation we can discuss with
Benedik (sic) his requirements and we may also look at taking out the Westpac st R/M (meaning the registered first mortgage over the Benedeks' Kurmond home) as well. As Benedik (sic) is now in Mullumbimby I told Messner it would be preferable for him to call at that Branch to discuss the deal. Benedek to get in touch with me about this." (the words in parenthesis are mine) 
The significance of the figure of $88,000.00 rather than $100,000.00 at this stage will emerge later.

When discussing lease payments due in respect of his truck, the first plaintiff may have raised his interest in the Chincogan Tavern with other officers of the second defendant's Fyshwick, A.C.T. branch, but I am unable to find that this matured into any formal or even informal loan application until at least 1 June 1989. On that day Mr. Solway made the following diary note:- "Benedik (sic) rang re above (referring to his diary note of 29 May) - told him to go to NAB Mullumbimby to discuss above matters ..." (the words in parenthesis are mine).

According to the first plaintiff he was at the Chincogan Tavern on or about 24
May 1989 when he observed the first defendant, her son Richard Meng and another male person, Raymond Wade Duncan, the manager of the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant since November 1987, sitting around one of the tables at the hotel. According to the first plaintiff the first defendant said:- "This is Mr. Duncan from the bank. He's got some forms for you to sign." 
Thereupon the first plaintiff says that Mr. Duncan introduced himself and proceeded to produce two blank bank forms and said:- "These came from Fyshwick for your loan." 
The first plaintiff says that Mr. Duncan offered no explanation in respect of the forms and invited the first plaintiff to sign them in blank.

The forms signed by the first plaintiff and said to have been completed after signature by him, bear date 8 June 1989. The first was a standard National
Australia Savings Bank Limited Home-Loan Application form and the second a standard National Australia Bank Loan Information form adapted for use in respect of a proposed Home Equity Loan.

The Application in respect of the proposed Home-Loan sought $125,000.00 to enable the plaintiffs to pay out Westpac $124,000.00. The Loan Information document sought a loan of $88,000.00 to enable them to purchase a one-fifth share in the Chincogan Tavern, Mullumbimby. Because National Australia Savings
Bank Limited's policy precluded the making of Home Equity loans in excess of $80,000.00 Mr. Duncan modified the Loan Information document to refer to a proposed loan of $80,000.00 rather than $88,000.00. At the same time he varied the Home-Loan Application form to seek a loan of $133,000.00 instead of $125,000.00. Mr. Duncan says that the two documents were completed at the Bank on 8 June 1989 in their original form before they were signed by the first plaintiff. I have no doubt that the first plaintiff's evidence in respect of the execution by him of these documents in blank on 24 May 1989 is false.

Inter alia, the plaintiffs' case is that the first plaintiff could not have been in Mullumbimby on 8 June 1989 because he only left Penrith for Brunswick
Heads at 4.45pm on that day. Whilst he had a ticket issued on 7 June 1989 for travel to Brunswick Heads on 7 June, which would have placed him in
Mullumbimby during normal banking hours on 8 June 1989, the plaintiffs say that due to a commitment which the second plaintiff had at the Windsor
Community Centre it was not possible for her to drive the first plaintiff to the bus station on 7 June 1989 to catch a bus on that day, he missed the bus and travelled to Brunswick Heads on the following day, arriving on the morning of 9 June 1989. I do not accept the plaintiffs' evidence in this regard.

In his first affidavit the first plaintiff said:- "63. I booked a bus ticket by phone to travel to Mullumbimby on Wednesday, 7
June 1989. However, as a result of my wife returning late from a conference in
Windsor I missed the bus on 7 June 1989. I departed for Mullumbimby on 8 June
I did not book another ticket for my bus trip on 8 June 1989 as I had not used my ticket for the trip to Mullumbimby booked for Wednesday, 7 June ..." 
Before me the first plaintiff gave the following evidence:- 
His Honour: Q. Have you ever missed any buses you were intending to catch to Brunswick Heads? 
A. Yes.

Q. When? 
A. That was the 7th and I got the 8th.

Q. Of what? 
A. Of June.

Q. What happened? 
A. My wife went down to Windsor to do something with the Education Department and she was running late and I missed that bus and the next day I got there but I didn't get a ticket, I just went straight on the bus.

Q. You have not been able to remember other dates, how do you remember that date? 
A. Because we have been looking for the tickets and there was no ticket and there was a crucial ticket.

Williams: Q. How does that help you remember the dates? 
A. I just do.

Q. You have a specific recollection of going on the 8th, do you? 
A. I don't personally but my wife does.

Q. Did you miss the bus more than once? 
A. No, just the once.

His Honour: Q. You have been talking to your wife about this date and how it is of crucial importance, is that right? 
A. Not while we were in Court, no.

Williams: Q. But before you have been in Court? 
A. Yes, before.

Q. You and your wife spent many hours discussing how it is you could prove that you went up to 
Mullumbimby on 8 June? 
A. We have discussed that matter yes.
 ...

His Honour: Q. You have no recollection yourself but you give the evidence because your wife does recall, is that right? 
A. Yes." (the emphasis is mine) 
The plaintiffs' evidence in relation to dates is quite unreliable. I have no reason to doubt that the ticket purchased by the first plaintiff on 7 June for travel to Brunswick Heads on that day was in fact used on that day with the consequence that the first plaintiff arrived at Mullumbimby on the morning of 8 June.

The second plaintiff obtained passenger manifests from Sunliner Queensland in respect of the Inter-Capital 217 coach journeys between Sydney and Brisbane on and 8 June. These showed the first plaintiff as travelling to Brunswick
Heads on 7 not 8 June. The second plaintiff conceded that these manifests did not support her version of events. The manifests were not discovered by the plaintiffs. When they were produced by the plaintiffs on the second last day of the hearing, the travel coupon for the first plaintiff's trip on 7 June was attached to the manifest for that day. The manifest indicated that he sat in seat No.3A.

Whilst it appeared to me, at one stage during the trial, that the second plaintiff may have engaged in a ruse to pervert the course of justice in relation to another travel document, I am not satisfied that this in fact occurred. However, she did, I believe, take liberties with the evidence and, as I see it, has to live with the odium which attaches to the plaintiffs' case as a result thereof.

It seems to me that the first plaintiff undertook bus journeys to and from
Brunswick Heads en route to Mullumbimby on the dates mentioned hereunder, using the tickets referred to in the following table. In each case, the journeys were overnight with departure on one afternoon or evening resulting in arrival at the relevant destination on the following morning:- 
Departure Date 
Trip Undertaken 
Coach Line 
Ticket Used 
Exhibit No.  ---|---|---  May 1989 
Hornsby to Brunswick Heads 
McCafferty's 
A388713    May 1989 
Brunswick Heads to Penrith 
Sunliner 
S1095628    May 1989* 
Penrith to 
Brunswick Heads 
Sunliner 
S1109356    June 1989 
Brunswick Heads to Penrith 
Sunliner 
S1109357    June 1989 
Penrith to 
Brunswick Heads 
Intercapital 
B001317 
J,P  June 1989 
Brunswick Heads to Penrith 
Sunliner 
S1095631   
The problem with the plaintiffs' case is that they endeavoured to establish the relevant trips and departure dates with evidence that was not authentic.
As I understand it, the first plaintiff swore that he effected his trip to
Brunswick Heads on 6 May 1989 using the ticket No.S1095628 and that he effected his trip to Brunswick Heads on 18 May 1989 using ticket No.S1109357 (see paragraphs 29 and 41 of his affidavit sworn 10 March 1996 and annexures "G" and "L" thereto. See also Exhibits H, J, K and L). In cross-examination the first plaintiff gave the following evidence:- "Q. Did your wife assemble the bus tickets which are annexures to your affidavit? 
A. Yes, she did." 
As it transpires the annexures "G" and "L" were photocopied from facsimiles which had been sent by the second plaintiff to the plaintiffs' then solicitor,
Mr. Clive Potts. The facsimiles became Exhibits 2 and 3 respectively before me.

According to the second plaintiff she took the original tickets, photocopied them, glued the copies to two pieces of paper three at a time, wrote some notes in lead pencil on the two pieces of paper, photocopied them and then faxed the photocopies to Mr. Potts. Mr. Potts asked the second defendant to bring the originals of the tickets into him and she sat with him as he made certain notes in lead pencil on the original ticket covers. At a later stage the second plaintiff also wrote in lead pencil "1st Trip" on one of the two facsimile pages (Exhibit 2) but this was after the said annexure "G" was brought into existence. Mr. Potts says that the second plaintiff worked "tirelessly" with him to try and establish the frequency and number of the first plaintiff's trips.

The value of annexures "G" and "L" to the first plaintiff's affidavit of 10
March 1996 is diminished by virtue of the fact that they not only reproduce the facsimiles which the second plaintiff sent to Mr. Potts but also additions thereto made in part by the second plaintiff and, so the second plaintiff says, in part by a person or persons unknown.

Firstly, the facsimile (Exhibit 2) has been marked in lead pencil to suggest that ticket No.S1095628 related to a journey on "Fri 6 May" rather than Friday May and the facsimile (Exhibit 3) has been marked in blue ink, by Mr.
Potts, to suggest that ticket No.S1109357 related to travel to Brunswick Heads whereas it was a ticket for travel from Brunswick Heads to Penrith.

I am unable to conclude whether the second plaintiff or Mr. Potts made the relevant alteration to the copy of ticket No.S1095628 appearing on Exhibit 2 which was reproduced in annexure "G" to the first plaintiff's affidavit of 10
March 1996.

In relation to the alteration to the copy of ticket No.S1095628 it may be noted that there was no Friday 6 May 1989. The 6th May was in fact a Saturday.

When asked whether she told anybody that the ticket (Exhibit 6) was used to convey or to cover the first plaintiff's trip on his birthday (18 May) from
Penrith to Brunswick Heads the second plaintiff said "I don't know, I suppose so".

Regardless of what the facts may have been in respect of the first plaintiff's travel movements by bus, I am left with no confidence in the plaintiffs' account of how they establish those movements to and from Mullumbimby at any time. I cannot accept that the ticket, acquired on 7 June 1989 for travel to and from Brunswick Heads was not used on that day to convey the first plaintiff from Penrith to Brunswick Heads. I reject the plaintiffs' suggestion that it was booked for 7 June 1989 but not in fact used until 8 June 1989 as the manuscript note of the second plaintiff on Exhibit J which has been reproduced, with Mr. Potts' overscoring in black ink on Exhibit 3, in annexure "L" to the first plaintiff's affidavit, suggests.

Before leaving the tickets issue I should mention that ticket No.S1109356 asterisked by me above purports to have been issued on 18 May 1989 for travel at 6.10pm on 17 May. The inference which I have drawn is that the travel date specified is incorrect and that it was in fact issued on 18 May for travel on that day (cf Exhibit 6 which was an open dated return ticket also issued on 18
May).

By about 13 June 1898, the two loan applications to National Australia Savings
Bank Limited had been approved by the Bank's regional office.

The first plaintiff says that on or about 13 June 1989, whilst he was at the
Chincogan Tavern at Mullumbimby he received a telephone call from a bank officer at the Fyshwick, A.C.T. branch of the second defendant whereupon conversation took place to the following effect:- 
First plaintiff: "Have you approved the loan?" 
Bank officer: "No, we can't do the loan for you." 
The first plaintiff says that to the best of his recollection the bank officer with whom he spoke was either Mr. Mark Booker or Mr. Ross Yarnold. Each of Mr.
Booker and Mr. Yarnold denies that any such conversation took place and I accept their denials. Given the demeanour of the first plaintiff in the witness box, his retractions and modifications of his account of so many conversations, his reliance on his wife's account of so many matters which he adopted as his evidence, his inability to explain how his evidence came to be as recorded in his affidavits and aspects of his evidence which are simply inconsistent with others, I am unable to accept the first plaintiff's evidence, especially where it is in conflict with that of others. I am not satisfied that the conversation alleged took place.

The first plaintiff says that whilst he was working in the Chincogan Tavern on
Wednesday, 14 June 1989 he was approached by a member of the bar staff who said to him words to the effect:- "You've got to go straight down to the bank." 
Thereupon, the first plaintiff says that he went to the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant and, according to his affidavit sworn 10 March 1996 "walked straight into the manager's office to find Mrs. Meng (the first defendant) sitting there".

In his second affidavit the first plaintiff says that he approached a teller who proceeded to go into an office and then returned to the counter whereupon he invited the first plaintiff to come in. The first plaintiff then proceeded to follow the teller to the office where he found Mr. Duncan and the first defendant seated.

According to his affidavit sworn 10 March 1996 the first plaintiff says that conversation ensued to the following effect:- 
Duncan: "I understand that you are interested in the hotel and want to be a partner with Cathy Meng. How much do you want to borrow?" 
First plaintiff: "$100,000.00 for my share in the hotel." 
Duncan: "How is the hotel going to repay the $100,000.00?" 
First plaintiff: "With the income from three (3) more poker machines that Cathy has ordered as well as from extensions to the beer garden." 
Duncan: "What's your house worth?" 
First plaintiff: "About $350,000.00 but I am doing some renovations on it and when it is finished it should be worth about $400,000.00." 
Duncan: "What's your truck valued at?" 
First plaintiff: "With the business contract about $240,000.00." 
Duncan: "What's Denise's wage?" 
First plaintiff: "Roughly $30,000.00 per annum." 
The first plaintiff says that Mr. Duncan proceeded to question him about the value of items such as furniture and personal effects. Thereupon further conversation is said to have ensued as follows:- 
Duncan: "Given your history as a truck driver why are you interested in a pub?" 
First plaintiff: "It's a goer for me. It is a step up the ladder for me and besides I have had an accident which crushed my knee- cap and tibia bone destroying ligaments so I need a new job." 
Duncan: "I know your history because Fyshwick sent paperwork to me regarding your recent business with them." "Are you still using the same Solicitors and 
Accountants?" 
First plaintiff: "Yes" 
Duncan: "We can't do a ten (10) year reducible loan but we can do it another way with a twelve (12) month short term fixed loan. We can arrange further finance at the end of the year or we can re-finance the whole deal in three (3) or four (4) months time." "I will look into it and see what we can do." 
The first plaintiff says that the first defendant interrupted occasionally saying words to the effect:- "I am selling my property at Jacobs Well in Queensland which is worth $750,000.00" "In the future we could arrange some finance and buy into another hotel in south east Queensland." 
In his affidavit sworn 3 June 1996 the first plaintiff says that the conversation which took place at this meeting said to have taken place on 14
June 1989 was to the following effect:- 
Duncan: "I understand that you are interested in the hotel and you want to be a partner with Cathy Meng. We may be able to help you, how much do you need to borrow?" 
First plaintiff: "$100,000.00" 
Meng: "I have a property at Jacobs Well in Queensland worth about $750,000.00 and I could raise the money on that but the ANZ bank has the Deeds and will not release them. I need the money urgently to pay the outstanding 
Liquor Licence fee, buy additional stock for the bottle shop, re-vamp the beer garden, and buy three (3) additional card machines. We are selling 20% of the shares in the hotel and, if you lend him the money he needs to buy those shares, he will earn a dividend on the shares each year and in addition he will be working in the hotel for wages. He has got to have another operation to take the pins out of his leg and he will even be able to get wages while he is in hospital and recuperating from that operation. I am arranging to get the Deeds for the Jacobs Well property and, when I get them, that property will be sold. If Andy and I don't work well together, then I will pay out the loan and buy the shares back from him. If we are working well together, then I will use the money to buy the freehold of the hotel. I am also looking at buying a hotel at 
Thangool in Queensland for my son, Richard, to manage, and Andy and I will do that in partnership as well if we get along." 
Duncan: "What's your house worth?" 
First plaintiff: "About $350,000.00 but I am doing some renovations on it and when it is finished it should be worth about $400,000.00" 
Duncan: "What's your truck valued at?" 
First plaintiff: "Well the prime mover itself is worth about $240,000.00 but the goodwill of the business contract is worth about another $160,000.00." 
Duncan: "Are going (sic) to sell that when you buy into the hotel?" 
First plaintiff: "No, I've got a driver on it now and I'm just going to keep a driver on. I want to buy shares in the hotel and then I'll learn the hotel trade but I've got no plans to sell the truck at the moment, I'll see what happens after I learn about running hotels." 
Duncan: "Does your wife work?" 
First plaintiff: "Yes, she's a teacher." 
Duncan: "What does she earn?" 
First plaintiff: "I really don't know but it's probably about $30,000.00 a year." 
In his second account the first plaintiff says that Mr. Duncan proceeded to ask him about the value of furniture and garden machinery and his car, he asked about the age of his children and where they were going to school.

Further conversation is said to have then ensued to the following effect:- 
Duncan: "Given your history as a truck driver why are you interested in a pub?" 
First plaintiff: "It's a go up for me. It's a step up the ladder for me and besides I have had an accident which crushed my kneecap and tibia bone destroying ligaments and I can't operate the truck so I need a new job." 
Duncan: "I know your history because Fyshwick sent paperwork to me regarding your recent business with them." "Are you still using the same solicitors and accountants?" 
First plaintiff: "Yes" 
Duncan: "Well I'll look into it to see what we can do." 
In his affidavit of 3 June 1996 the first plaintiff says that in his earlier affidavit he wrongly attributed the conversation between Mr. Duncan and himself concerning the unavailability of a 10 year reducible loan and the availability of a 12 month fixed loan to the conversation with Mr. Duncan on June 1989 but this conversation took place, so he says, during the course of his next meeting with Mr. Duncan on 16 June 1989.

I have already commented upon the difficulties which I have with the first plaintiff's competing accounts of the conversation said to have taken place at the Bank on 14 June 1989. In the witness box the first plaintiff was invited to consider his account of the relevant conversation as contained in his affidavit sworn 10 March 1996 and to indicate whether that account contained anything which was wrong or incomplete, to indicate whether anything else was said at the meeting and to indicate whether or not anything which he had attributed to that meeting did not take place at that meeting. His response was "I can't see anything".

After giving this answer the first plaintiff was invited to indicate what contribution the first defendant made to the conversation. His evidence was:- "Q. Did she say anything at that stage? 
A. She was just talking about her hotel and her tradings.

Q. Did she say anything about a property at Jacobs Well? 
A. She had - there was two meetings - yes she did.

A. Yes.

Q. What did she say? 
A. That her property is worth $750,000, and she is going to sell it.

Q. Anything else? 
A. And the bank has got her deeds.

Q. Anything else? 
A. I think she was speaking about she was looking at another hotel at - where was it - Thangool?" 
The above passage clearly demonstrates that the alleged contribution of the first defendant to this conversation as recorded in the first plaintiff's affidavit sworn 3 June 1996 is not the product of any independent recollection of the first plaintiff. Putting to one side the question of whether or not the first defendant was present at any meeting at the bank between the first plaintiff and Mr. Duncan, I am not satisfied that the first defendant said, in the presence of Mr. Duncan, "I need the money urgently to pay the outstanding liquor licence fee, buy additional stock for the bottle shop, re-vamp the beer garden, and buy three additional card machines. We are selling 20% of the shares in the hotel and, if you lend him the money he needs to buy those shares, he will earn a dividend on the shares each year and in addition he will be working in the hotel for wages. He has got to have another operation to take the pins out of his leg and he will even be able to get wages while he is in hospital and recuperating from that operation. ... if Andy and I don't work well together, then I will pay out the loan and buy the shares back from him. If we are working well together, then I will use the money to buy the freehold of the hotel. ..." 
The first plaintiff says that on or about 16 June 1989 he received a telephone call from an officer of the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant who indicated that Mr. Duncan wished to see the first plaintiff with a view to him signing some papers.

The first plaintiff said, in his affidavit sworn 10 March 1996 that he proceeded to the bank where he met with Mr. Duncan and conversation took place to the following effect:- 
Duncan: "Come straight in, how is everything?" 
First plaintiff: "Great" 
Duncan: "The hotel's a good business isn't it?" "This is the loan application for $102,000.00. I can only arrange a twelve (12) month loan. You can look to re- finance later this year." 
The first plaintiff says that Mr. Duncan proceeded to read the contents of a one page document which he had before him to the first plaintiff whereupon Mr.
Duncan handed that page to him. The first plaintiff says that he briefly looked at the document and read parts of it. He also says, but I do not accept, that there were "no other documents attached to this one page document".

In his first affidavit the first plaintiff says that further conversation ensued as follows:- 
Duncan: "Sign here. It will have to get Board approval." 
The first plaintiff says that he then proceeded to sign the document whereupon he handed it back to Mr. Duncan and then had further conversation with him as follows:- 
Duncan: "Denise has got to sign it as well." 
First plaintiff: "She is not here." 
Duncan: "Where is the closest National Australia Bank branch to 
Denise?" 
First plaintiff: "Richmond" 
Duncan: "Can you contact Denise and tell her to sign the paper at the Richmond branch. I will send it to Richmond." 
First plaintiff: "Is that it? Have we got the loan?" 
Duncan: "As soon as Denise signs it and it gets approved by 
Regional Head Office. I will contact you and let you know." 
The first plaintiff says that no documents other than the one page document which he signed were shown to him or read out to him prior to his signing the one page document. He says that he never provided Mr. Duncan with an oral authority to transfer any funds arising from the document which he signed to any other account and that he never authorised or approved the transfer of moneys to the account of Brylife Pty. Limited, the owner of the business of the Chincogan Tavern.

The first plaintiff says that throughout his meeting with Mr. Duncan on
Friday, 16 June 1989 the first defendant was also present and, indeed, that she had arrived at Mr. Duncan's office ahead of him.

As it transpires on 16 June 1989, the first plaintiff signed two separate copies, an original and a carbon, of a standard 4 page Bank Loan Conditions:
Persons and Partnerships letter of offer dated 16 June 1989 signed by Mr.
Duncan which offered a Fully Drawn Advance of $102,000 to the plaintiffs at an interest rate of 20.5% p.a. repayable on 30 June 1990 to be secured by the registered second mortgage over the plaintiffs' Kurmond home, which the second defendant already held. The two copies of the letter of offer were signed by the first plaintiff at the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant immediately under the words "I/we hereby accept the Loan upon the terms and conditions herein contained". In addition, the first plaintiff signed a
Customer Record Card and Notice of Authority to Transact Banking Business for use in respect of the proposed new loan account.

The second plaintiff swore an affidavit in which she suggested that on Monday June 1989 she went to the Richmond branch of the second defendant and signed a one page loan application. I find that she in fact signed the same three documents as her husband had signed at Mullumbimby on the previous
Friday, her signature being applied to each document, including the original and the copy of the four page letter offering the $102,000 fully drawn advance, immediately adjacent to her husband's signature.

The first plaintiff's account of his meeting with Mr. Duncan on 16 June 1989 as contained in his affidavit sworn 3 June 1996 contains embellishments which were not present in his original account and I will highlight the more important differences. In his affidavit sworn 3 June 1996 the first plaintiff says that on the morning of 16 June 1989 he received a telephone call from an officer of the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant who said:- "Mr. Duncan has got some papers for you to sign, would you please come up to the bank as soon as possible." 
The first plaintiff says that he then proceeded to the bank and went into Mr.
Duncan's office where he found Mrs. Meng was already present. Conversation is said to have then taken place as follows:- 
Duncan: "Come straight in, how is everything?" 
First plaintiff: "Great" 
Duncan: "The hotel's a good business isn't it?" 
First plaintiff: "Well there's certainly a lot of drinkers in the pub." 
Duncan: "Well we can lend you the money that you need but we can't do a ten (10) year reducible loan, we'll have to do it another way with a twelve (12) month short term fixed loan. We can arrange further finance at the end of the year or we can refinance the whole deal in three (3) or four (4) months time. It's just important that we get the loan on the way." 
I have already indicated that in this affidavit the first plaintiff attributes the conversation concerning the availability of finance to the 16 June 1989 meeting as opposed to the 14 June 1989 meeting.

The first plaintiff says that Mr. Duncan proceeded to put a one page document in front of him whereupon conversation took place as follows:- 
Duncan: "This is the application for the loan. It is the best deal that I can arrange. The interest rate is 21% and the amount will have to be $102,000.00." 
First plaintiff: "Well the repayments will be more than they would have been on the other loan." 
First defendant: "You don't have to worry about that, the hotel will be making the repayments out of either the money from the card machines or from the business." 
The first plaintiff says in his second account that he didn't read the document in detail himself. He says that Mr. Duncan said "sign here" and pointed to the bottom of the page whereupon the first plaintiff proceeded to sign the document.

Conversation is then said to have ensued as follows:- 
Duncan: "I'll have to get your wife to sign it and then we'll have to get Board approval." 
First plaintiff: "Well Denise is not here she's in Sydney." 
Duncan: "Well, she can go to a National Australia Bank branch in Sydney, what would be the closest branch for her?" 
First plaintiff: "Richmond" 
Duncan: "Would you contact Denise and tell her to go to the 
Richmond branch and I will have the documents sent to 
Richmond and she can sign it there." 
First plaintiff: "Is that it, have we got the loan?" 
Duncan: "As soon as Denise signs it and it gets approved by 
Regional Head Office I'll contact you and let you know." 
The second plaintiff says that she spoke with her husband on the evening of
Friday, 16 June 1989 whereupon she rang the Richmond branch of the second defendant on Monday, 19 June 1989 and said to a bank officer:- 
Second plaintiff: "I'm supposed to be coming in there today to sign a loan application form. I'm going to be late." 
Bank officer: "Depending on how late you are we may still be here." 
Second plaintiff: "I will get there as soon as possible." 
The second plaintiff says that she proceeded to the Richmond branch of the second defendant on 19 June 1989 whereupon she was handed a "one page document setting out repayment particulars which document was attached to a clip board by a female bank officer". She says that she read the sections headed "Item 1 - LOAN DETAILS", "Item 2 - REPAYMENT DETAILS", "Item3 - INTEREST DETAILS" and also "Item 6 - SECURITIES".

If the second plaintiff were accepted in respect of this evidence then the only part of the schedule to the loan conditions document which are relevant for present purposes and which she did not read are those contained within
Item 4 dealing with fee details, including the reference to the $800.00 payable by way of application fee, and the words immediately above her signature namely "I/we hereby accept the Loan upon the terms and conditions herein contained".

The second plaintiff says that she does not recall seeing her husband's signature on the document that she was being asked to sign. The original document bears the signatures of both the first plaintiff and the second plaintiff and I am satisfied that the signature of the first plaintiff was already on the document at the time when it was signed by the second plaintiff.

Before signing the document the second plaintiff says that she had a conversation with a female bank officer who had provided it to her for signature to the following effect:- 
Second plaintiff: "Who has to make the payments on the loan? Could you please phone the bank at Mullumbimby to confirm that the hotel is paying for the loan.." 
The second plaintiff says that the female bank officer proceeded to another office from which she returned about 5 minutes later and said:- "I phoned the Mullumbimby branch and they said that the hotel would be servicing the loan." 
The second plaintiff says that she then proceeded to sign the "one page `loan application'". She acknowledges that she also signed the Customer Record Card.
She thought she was signing everything that was required on her part to obtain the money.

In cross-examination the second plaintiff gave the following evidence:- "Q. And you signed your signature below the words that said `I/we hereby accept the loan upon the terms and conditions herein contained', didn't you? 
A. Say that again please? 
Q. You signed your signature beneath the words, `I/we hereby accept the loan upon the terms and conditions herein contained'? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you read those words before you signed it, didn't you? 
A. Well, I don't know whether I did or not.

Q. The probability is you read them, didn't you? 
A. Well, I probably glanced over it. Whether I took in every word, I don't know.

Q. You wanted to satisfy yourself, didn't you, you were signing a document that was in accordance with what you understood the position to be? 
A. I guess so, yes." 
The second plaintiff's recollection, 8 years after the event, was that the piece of paper which she signed at the Richmond branch of the second defendant was a smaller piece of paper than that which she did sign - one which was contained on a piece of A4 paper.

I think there is some force in the suggestion put to the second plaintiff by
Mr. Williams of Counsel who appears for the second defendant that in her reconstruction of the events of 1989 the second plaintiff has been influenced by her observations in respect of a photographically reduced copy on A4 paper of the fourth page of the loan agreement which she signed which has been included in the materials which have more recently been made available to her.

In so far as the first plaintiff's account of his conversation with Mr. Duncan at the time of his signing the loan agreement on 16 June 1989 is at variance with Mr. Duncan's account I am unable to accept the first plaintiff's version/s.

It would appear that on or about Tuesday, 20 June 1989 Richard Meng signed a
Periodical Payment Authority directed to the second defendant authorising the bank to debit the account of Brylife Pty. Limited trading as Chincogan Tavern at the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant with the interest accrued upon the plaintiffs' fully drawn advance.

On Tuesday, 20 June 1989 the second defendant established a fully drawn advance account No.95 817 3356 in the names of the plaintiffs at its
Mullumbimby branch. $100,800.00 was debited to that account and on the same day the account of Brylife Pty. Limited trading as Chincogan Tavern No.04 -8617 at the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant was credited with $100,000.00 the relevant bank statement recording the word "Transfer" against the credit details.

The reason why the plaintiffs' fully drawn advance account was debited with $100,800.00 would appear to be to have enabled the requisite application fee of $800.00 to be met.

On 21 July 1989 the said fully drawn advance account was debited with a further $468.00 for "stamp duty & stamping fee".

The reason why $100,000.00 and not a greater amount was transferred to the
Brylife Pty. Limited account appears to flow through from the first plaintiff's desire to borrow $100,000.00 so that he could get a 20% share in the hotel.

According to Mr. Duncan he first met the first plaintiff in the company of
Mrs. Meng at some time between 5 and 24 May 1989 when Mrs. Meng said to him words to the effect "Andrew is a long-time friend of mine. He is the one buying into the business and he is up here learning the game." 
The first plaintiff accepted that at the time of his first meeting with Mr.
Duncan conversation to this effect took place. He was surprised when Mrs. Meng referred to him as a "long-time friend" as this was not the case but he did nothing to correct it.

When it was suggested to the first plaintiff that no business was done during his first conversation with Mr. Duncan he said:- "No, there was some paperwork I had to sign".

When pressed about whether the signing of documents took place on a later occasion at the Mullumbimby branch of the Bank he said that he couldn't remember and didn't know.

Mr. Duncan says that on or about 8 June 1989 the first plaintiff attended upon him on his own at the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant at which time
Mr. Duncan completed two National Australia Savings Bank Limited loan application forms being the documents referred to above which bear date 8 June
I accept Mr. Duncan's evidence that the applications were completed before they were signed by the first plaintiff.

On the same day namely 8 June 1989 Mr. Duncan endorsed the Home-Loan
Application with a recommendation in the following terms:- "TO TAKE OVER ALL WESTPAC DEBTS. FAMILY COY PRESENTLY BANKS AT OUR FYSHWICK
BRANCH WHERE THEY HAVE A LEASING FACILITY, FACILITY ORG $234000 - NOW $152000 - . FYSHWICK ADVISE CUSTOMERS ARE HONEST AND RELIABLE WITH COMMITMENTS MEET . LEASE WAS FOR A TRUCK. TRUCKING BUSINESS IS TO BE SOLD OVER THE NEXT 6
MONTHS WITH EQUITY BEING $100,000 - WESTPAC ADVISE CUSTOMERS ARE HONEST &
RELIABLE WHILST REPAYMENTS ARE HIGH COMPARED TO INCOME THEY ARE ALREADY PAYING $1,708 - TO WESTPAC WITHOUT ANY PROBLEMS. EXCELLENT EQUITY IN FAMILY HOME.
RECOMMENDED. VALUATION FROM RICHMOND BCH IS ATTACHED." 
The Loan Information document in respect of the home equity loan was endorsed with a recommendation signed by Mr. Duncan in the following terms:- "TO PURCHASE 1/5TH SHARE OF CHINCOGAN TAVERN MULLUMBIMBY. REPAYMENTS ON THIS
LOAN WILL BE MADE BY THE HOTEL. NET PROFIT OF HOTEL FOR 40 WEEK PERIOD $98,201 - RECOMMENDED." 
I observe that the reference to the initial hotel profit for a 40 week period accords with Mr. Messner's diary note of his original instructions of mid-
April 1989 which included "40 - 98,000:00". The source of the figure $98,201 was a Statement of Trading Profit and Loss for Brylife Pty. Limited trading as "Chincogan Tavern" which accompanied an Accountant's Report of Holmes &
Partners, Chartered Accountants dated 9 February 1989.

Mr. Duncan says that in the course of the conversation he said to the first plaintiff:- "Andrew it will be easier and cheaper for us to take over the housing loan (referring to the plaintiffs existing borrowing from Westpac Banking
Corporation)." 
The first plaintiff replied:- "Cathy (referring to the first defendant) needs the money and I want it as soon as possible." (the words in parenthesis are mine) 
After the applications were signed Mr. Duncan said words to the effect "I'll know in a couple of days".

Mr. Duncan denies that any meeting took place between himself and the first plaintiff on 14 June 1989. There can, however, be no doubt that the first plaintiff was eager to borrow money from the second defendant at that time.

When the first plaintiff first approached Mr. Duncan for a loan he was seeking to borrow $88,000.000 i.e. the same amount as Australian Guarantee Corporation
Limited had offered to the plaintiffs but which they could not accept because of their inability to satisfy the relevant loan conditions.

During the course of the conversation on 8 June 1989 Mr. Duncan said to the first plaintiff words to the effect "How is the loan going to be serviced?" and "What income will you be receiving from the hotel?".

Mr. Duncan says, and I accept, that the answers given by the first plaintiff were incorporated into the two loan application forms.

Mr. Duncan sent the two loan application forms to his regional office and, as
I have said earlier, was later advised by the Assistant Regional Manager that the Bank would be prepared to make the proposed loans. However he indicated that the Trading Bank, which had dealt with Tinoro Pty. Limited in respect of the truck lease, would have to give priority to National Australia Savings
Bank Limited in respect of both the proposed home loan and the home equity loan.

The plaintiffs' Kurmond home was then the subject of a registered first mortgage in favour of Westpac Banking Corporation which was to be paid out under the new loan arrangements and a registered second mortgage in favour of the second defendant to secure the plaintiffs' guarantee in respect of the truck lease.

According to Mr. Duncan he went to the Chincogan Tavern early in the morning on Friday 16 June 1989 at a time when there were no customers present. The purpose of his visit was to obtain a Directors' guarantee from the first defendant and her son Richard Meng in relation to the account of Brylife Pty.
Limited. The Assistant Regional Manager had, presumably because of the state of the account at that time, directed him to do so.

Mr. Duncan and the first defendant were joined by Mr. Richard Meng and also the first plaintiff. In their presence he said words to the effect:- 
Duncan: "Because of the delay, I have been instructed to take a 
Directors' guarantee to provide some security for 
Brylife's debt." "This is a guarantee from the Directors in favour of the company to secure the overdraft for $100,000." 
Thereupon the first defendant and Mr. Richard Meng proceeded to execute the guarantee in Mr. Duncan's presence. The guarantee was subject to a "basic liability" of $100,000, which had been changed from $88,000, the typed figure in the form.

Conversation then ensued between the first plaintiff and Mr. Duncan as follows:- 
First plaintiff: "Do you want my signature as well?" 
Duncan: "No, because you're not a Director of the company." 
First plaintiff: "How long before we can have the money? How much longer is it going to be? 
Duncan: "Listen Andrew, we are still a couple of weeks away as we have to get priority from Fyshwick and allow time for Westpac to prepare their discharge and arrange settlement." 
First plaintiff: "Is there any other way we can do it? I want to give 
Cathy her money as soon as possible." 
Duncan: "We already have a trading bank mortgage and I could lend you the money on trading bank without having to seek approval from Fyshwick and without involving 
Westpac. I could have that type of facility ready in a couple of days." "The terms would be different. The interest rate will be higher and it'll be short term with interest payable at the end of each month." 
First plaintiff: "Let's do it that way." 
It was within Mr. Duncan's authority to approve a fully drawn advance of $100,000.00 on the second defendant without the necessity of his obtaining regional office approval.

Later in the day on 16 June 1989 the first plaintiff proceeded to the
Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant and signed his acceptance on the two copies of the second defendant's Loan Conditions: Persons and Partnerships letter of offer in respect of a fully drawn advance of $102,000.00 and also signed the second defendant's Customer Record Card. During the course of the meeting at the Bank conversation took place between Mr. Duncan and the first plaintiff as follows:- 
Duncan: "How do you want it?" 
First plaintiff: "Put it into the Tavern's account." 
This conversation was not addressed by the first plaintiff in his affidavit sworn 3 June 1996 or in any subsequent affidavit nor was it addressed by him in his evidence in chief. In the course of his cross-examination he denied it but I find that conversation to that effect did take place.

Mr. Duncan also denied, and I accept his evidence, that the first defendant was present at the Mullumbimby branch of the Bank when the first plaintiff signed his acceptance of the terms and conditions of the loan agreement in respect of the fully drawn advance.

The reason why the loan became one for $102,000.00, or $100,000.00 net to the plaintiffs, rather than $88,000.00 is because that was what the plaintiffs really wanted to enable them to acquire a 20% interest, rather than a 17.6% interest, in the hotel business.

As I have indicated above, the first plaintiff wanted, virtually from the outset, to purchase a 20% interest in Brylife Pty. Limited for $100,000 and expedition was in the forefront of the plaintiffs' minds. As early as 28 April the second plaintiff instructed Mr. Messner to proceed whereupon Mr. Messner contacted the first defendant's solicitor and said to proceed "ASAP".

As it transpires the first plaintiff and Brylife Pty. Limited made a Deed on May 1989 in which the parties were shown as being Brylife Pty. Limited as "the Vendor", Richard Keith Douglas Meng and Catherine Caroline Meng, the first defendant, as "the Shareholders" and the first plaintiff as "the
Purchaser" but no provision was made for the Deed to be executed by the shareholders. Clause 3 is of importance in that it required payment of the consideration to be made by the first plaintiff to Brylife Pty. Limited by 26
May 1989.

The Deed contained a recital as follows:- "AND WHEREAS the Vendor is desirous of introducing ANDREW BENEDEK to the
Company and he is desirous of subscribing to same." 
The Deed contained the following clauses:- "1. It is agreed between the parties that in consideration of the payment of the sum of EIGHTY-EIGHT THOUSAND DOLLARS ($88,000.00) the 
Vendor shall issue and the Purchaser shall acquire sufficient shareholdings namely EIGHTY-EIGHT (88) shares equal to 17.6% of the issued share capital of the Company hereof.
It is agreed that within fourteen (14) days from the date of entering into this Deed and upon receipt of the moneys referred to the Vendor shall issue such shares which shares however shall then be held by the Vendor with a duly executed transfer signed by the Purchaser by way of charge to secure his obligation hereunder.
It is agreed that within that same said period of fourteen (14) days the Purchaser shall pay to the Vendor the abovementioned consideration.
In making payment of the sum of EIGHTY-EIGHT THOUSAND 
DOLLARS ($88,000.00) it is acknowledged by the parties that the 
Purchaser has borrowed that money from A.G.C. and that the terms of repayment constitute repayment of ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY equal instalments of $ and that whilst it is agreed that it is solely the responsibility of the 
Purchaser to make those payments it is acknowledged by the parties that it may well be he will be unable to do so.
In the event that the Purchaser is unable to make those monthly payments then the Company shall undertake to pay the same in which event 82.4 per centum of such payments made by the Company shall be deemed a debt in favour of the Company against the Purchaser and which amount shall be recorded and in the event of sale by the Purchaser of his share or any part thereof shall be first deducted from the proceeds of the sale of such share those moneys which are then outstanding and for this purpose the Company shall not be obliged to make available the abovementioned share transfer to any party or to record the same in its books unless and until all moneys owing to it by the Purchaser have been paid in full.
The Purchaser acknowledges that the Company itself is the proprietor of 
Lease of the business known as "The Chincogan Tavern" and should it be established at any time that it is necessary for purposes of compliance with the liquor licensing laws that any additional documentation should be signed to comply with those requirements then he shall forthwith do so without delay so as not to prejudice the operation of that business and further to that end does agree to forthwith upon presentation of same execute the managerial agreement in favour of the nominee of the 
Company.
It is acknowledged by the parties hereto that the prime undertaking of the 
Company is the conduct of the abovementioned business known as "The 
Chincogan Tavern" at Mullumbimby and that the Shareholders of that 
Company are RICHARD KEITH DOUGLAS MENG AND 
CATHERINE CAROLINE MENG which together hold a total FOUR 
HUNDRED AND TWELVE (412) Ordinary Shares.
In the event that either or any of the Shareholders (which expression shall include the Purchaser herein referred to) wish to dispose of their shareholding then same shall be offered in the first instance to the remaining Shareholders who shall have first right of refusal in respect to the disposal of such shares. The Shareholder or Shareholders to whom the said shares are offered shall signify their/his/her acceptance or rejection of same within fourteen (14) days of being notified that the shares are available. In the event that the offer to purchase is rejected then the said shares may be placed on the open market for sale to members of the public.
It is acknowledged that the Purchaser ANDREW BENEDEK together with RICHARD KEITH DOUGLAS MENG AND CATHERINE 
CAROLINE MENG shall be actively involved in the promotion and operation of the Tavern business herein referred to and in that respect shall be paid such salary by the Vendor Company as is agreed from time to time.
The Vendor Company warrants that it has at the date hereof complied in all respects with the requirements of the N.S.W. Companies Code and that it is not aware of any activity on its part that may in any way cause the company to be wound up or liquidated.
The Purchaser/s acknowledge that they have entered into this Deed as a result of representations made to them by the Vendor Company and/or it 
Shareholders." 
One suspects that the draftsmen of the Deed were oblivious of the terms of section 129 of the Companies Code which precluded a company from directly or indirectly financing the purchase by a person such as the first plaintiff of shares in itself. Certainly, Mr. Messner did not have the section in mind.

The first draft of the abovementioned Deed was forwarded by facsimile by the first defendant's solicitors to Mr. Messner at about 12.18pm on 10 May 1989.
Mr. Messner responded to the draft by a letter forwarded by facsimile on the same day. He suggested a number of alterations which were taken up in the later versions.

On 11 May 1989 Mr. Messner further addressed the draft, established that there were two existing ordinary shares and established that an extra 410 would be issued to the Mengs and 88 to the first plaintiff. It was apparently also decided that the second plaintiff would not be named as a purchaser.

On 12 May 1989 at about 9.20am the first defendant's solicitors forwarded by facsimile an amended draft Deed to Mr. Messner for his perusal. He proceeded to pick up a couple of typographical errors which were corrected before the formal Deed was executed by the first plaintiff at Mullumbimby later in the day.

In late April - early May 1989 Mr. Messner was being told by the plaintiffs that there was some urgency in getting the matter attended to and they were very anxious to settle it as soon as they could. Mr. Messner was being urged to pull out all stops to get things happening as soon as he could.

According to Mr. Duncan he received a telephone call from Mr. Messner on 24
May 1989. I observe that at that stage Mr. Duncan had no involvement beyond being the manager of the branch at which Brylife Pty. Limited had opened an operating account on 14 April 1989. He says that conversation took place to the following effect:- 
Messner: "I'm ringing in regard to Cathy Meng who has an account with you. My clients have money approved through AGC that will be drawn within 3 days and paid to Cathy Meng. We are just waiting on your bank at Fyshwick to consent to the mortgage and the reason I'm ringing is to convey this information and you can do what you like with regard to paying of cheques." 
In his affidavit Mr. Messner said "I deny that I had that conversation with
Mr. Duncan".

On examination, Mr. Messner's denial was not as strong as it appeared from the terms of his affidavit.

A file note of Mr. Messner of 23 May 1989 reads:- "Andrew Benedek O.K.

John Solway .805287. Canberra.
 
Wade Duncan 
NAB 
M'by.
 : 842722 "

I have no doubt that as at 23 May 1989 Mr. Messner was pursuing a proposed loan of $88,000.00 by Australian Guarantee Corporation Limited to the plaintiffs which had been offered to them on certain terms and conditions on May 1989. At that stage the plaintiff had been unable to obtain satisfaction of one of the loan conditions which involved the second defendant's Fyshwick branch. The first defendant was no doubt under pressure to cause the moneys intended to be paid by the first plaintiff to Brylife Pty.
Limited to be paid into Brylife Pty. Limited's bank account. I am satisfied that Mr. Messner was given Mr. Duncan's name so that he could contact him and inform him of the progress which had been achieved with the proposed
Australian Guarantee Corporation Limited loan referred to in the Deed of 12
May 1989 and the ability of the first plaintiff to meet his contractual obligation under that Deed to pay the requisite consideration to Brylife Pty.
Limited on or before 26 May.

The only real matter of substance which, under cross examination, Mr. Messner denied was that he said to Mr. Duncan "You can do what you like with regard to paying of cheques".

I find it unnecessary to decide whether these words were spoken because I am satisfied that a conversation generally along the lines alleged by Mr. Duncan did take place.

Whilst the first plaintiff was working at the Chincogan Tavern at Mullumbimby his employee driver was apparently drinking on the job, not performing his duties and generally causing damage to Tinoro Pty. Limited's haulage contracting business.

When the first plaintiff returned to Sydney on Friday, 23 June 1989 he says that he focused his attention upon repairing the damage which had been caused to the haulage contracting business and arranging for its sale. On or about 9
August 1989 it was finally disposed of whereupon Tinoro Pty. Limited discharged its liability to the second defendant in respect of the truck lease.

The first plaintiff's return to Sydney from Mullumbimby on 23 June 1989 occurred in circumstances to which I will return hereafter.

The business of the Chincogan Tavern was disposed of by Brylife Pty. Limited on 1 March 1990. It would appear that a purchaser for the lease of the premises was found in about early November 1989.

In the meantime the first plaintiff returned to the Tavern by car on 24 August with a view to arranging for the rental of a house in which his family could reside in anticipation of a move by them to Mullumbimby or a nearby location.

The first plaintiff says that on or about 25 August 1989 the first defendant had a conversation with him to the following effect:- 
First defendant: "I am going broke and I have to sell the hotel. I have a buyer for my property and I am exchanging after the 
Chincogan Festival. I want to buy the Red Steer Hotel freehold in Thangool, Queensland. Are you interested in coming with me? 
First plaintiff: "What happened? Where did the $100,000.00 go?" 
First defendant: "I don't know I am going broke, but I will pay you back." 
First plaintiff: "I am going to see a Hotel Auditor in Surfers Paradise to get some advice." 
It would appear that on 27 August 1989 the first plaintiff returned to Sydney.
Shortly prior to this the second plaintiff received a telephone call from the first defendant whereupon conversation took place as follows:- 
First defendant: "I am going broke, all the drug busts are making trade drop off. I can't make a living here any more." 
Second plaintiff: "What happened to the $100,000.00?" 
First defendant: "I will owe it to you and pay it off." "I want to purchase the Red Steer freehold at Thangool.

Why don't you, Andy and your family come up and work with me at Thangool?" 
Second plaintiff: "I will discuss (it) all with Andy when he gets home." 
The second plaintiff says that she had a second conversation with the first defendant on or about 29 August 1989 as follows:- 
Second plaintiff: "We have decided not to go to Thangool. We want our money back or else we want to buy the Tavern. Why are you rushing to buy the Red Steer when we are all ready to come up and live and work at Mullumbimby and help build up the business and share the workload?" 
First defendant: "You can't make a living here." 
Second plaintiff: "But you said the business was thriving." 
First defendant: "I am going broke. I must sell." 
Second plaintiff: "You are rushing to Red Steer because the new owner will take your property as a deposit." 
First defendant: "No, no, that is not right. I already have a buyer for the
Pub who will settle on 25 September with a syndicate with a lot of money." 
Second defendant: "We are shareholders and we have the first right to buy the Tavern." 
First defendant: "Well you'd better hurry up." (The emphasis is mine) 
On 28 August 1989 Messrs. Messner & Blunden, the then solicitors for the plaintiffs, wrote to Messrs. Hungerford, Lehmann & Andrews solicitors of
Mullumbimby, who were then acting as the solicitors for the first defendant and, presumably, also Brylife Pty. Limited as follows:- "We refer to telephone conversation of today's date and enclose herewith for your consideration, draft Deed to reflect the total monetary imput (sic) by our client into the Chincogan Tavern.

We also note that Mrs. Meng has expressed a desire to dispose of the Tavern, and our client is concerned that the sale price nominated could be excessive.
In the circumstances he has suggested that an Hotel Broker be appointed to assess the true value of the Tavern and we are instructed to indicate that our client would be interested in purchasing the Tavern. Moneys paid to date by our client could be shown as a deposit, in that event.

We would be grateful if you could seek your client's instructions and advise us of our (sic) present attitude in respect of the above matters, at your earliest convenience." (The emphasis is mine) 
The draft Deed submitted by the plaintiffs' solicitor to the first defendant's solicitors was in substantially similar terms to the Deed made on 12 May 1989.
The significant differences were that the reference to $88,000.00 was changed to $100,000.00, the number of shares being taken up by the first plaintiff increased from 88 to 100 and the percentage interest increased from 17.6% to %. As an aside I note that clause 7 in the draft Deed was not altered to show the shareholdings of Richard Meng and the first defendant as totalling ordinary shares. If the Mengs' shareholdings were to be left at 412 shares then for the first plaintiff to acquire 20% the number of shares subscribed by the first plaintiff for which $100,000.00 was paid to Brylife Pty. Limited should have been shown as 103.

Clause 4 was altered in the draft Deed to refer to the borrowing of $100,000.00 by the first plaintiff from the second defendant. In the draft
Deed it provided as follows:- "4. In making payment of the sum of ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS ($100,000.00) it is acknowledged by the parties that the Purchaser has borrowed that money from the National Australia Bank for a term of twelve months at an interest rate of twenty-one ($21.00) per centum per annum.
The terms of repayment are that the Purchaser is to pay interest only during the term of the loan and a final payment of $100,000.00 at the expiration of the twelve months period. Whilst it is agreed that it is solely the responsibility of the Purchaser to make those payments it is acknowledged by the parties that it may well be he will be unable to do so." (the emphasis is mine) 
In their reply dated 30 August 1989 to Messrs. Messner & Blunden's letter,
Messrs. Hungerford Lehmann & Andrews said:- "... Our client Mrs. Meng has informed us she received an offer through a hotel Broker and another through aa (sic) private source both for the sum of $360,000.00 together with stock at value estimated at $40,000.00 for the sale of the tavern.

Our client feels this adequately establishes a value for the business.

In dealing with the matters surrounding the company this office is not dealing with the sale which is presently being put together through Solicitors in
Coffs Harbour, they being the firm through which we understand our clients have had previously (sic) licensing dealings.

Mrs. Meng feels the sale should proceed on the basis set out above and then the amount paid to date by mr Benedek be retained by her by way of a personal loan secured in some fashion by Property in Queensland. This property is to be sold and out of the proceeds mr Benedek repaid.

Alternatively as is implied by our letter should mr Benedek wish to purchase the business himself it would seem that an offer could be made by im (sic) on the basis of the abovementioned values and appropriate credit given to him for interest in the company.

In this regard we are instructed Mr. Benedeks contribution of $100,000.00 as distinct from $88000.00 previously agreed in writing between the parties was made on the basis the companys total worth was $550,000.00 so therefore Mr.
Benedeks interest would be 100/550ths.
 ..." 
It would appear that on or about 31 August 1989 the first defendant retained other solicitors, at least in relation to the sale of the Tavern. On that day the plaintiffs' solicitors wrote to Messrs. Murray & Backhouse solicitors at Coffs Harbour as follows:- "Re BRYLIFE PTY. LIMITED 
We refer to our telephone conversation of today's date and confirm that we act for Mr. Andrew Benedek who instructs us that the above Company wishes to dispose of the Chincogan Tavern at Mullumbimby. Our client holds 100 shares in the above Company and has a right to purchase the shareholdings of Mr.
R.K.D. Meng and Mrs. C.C. Meng in the event of a sale of the Tavern.

Our client believes that the sale price is $360,000.00 together with stock at valuation estimated at $40,000.00. He is prepared to purchase the business on similar terms provided credit is given to him for the amount of $100,000.00 contributed by our client to the Company upon acquisition of his shares.

We enclose the following documents:
Copy deed made on 12th May, 1989;
Copy amended deed prepared after our client made an additional financial contribution; 
Copy letter to Hungerford Lehman (sic) dated 28th August, 1989;
Copy letter from Hungerford Lehman (sic) datd (sic) 30th August, 1989.

We await receipt of Agreement to Purchase Shares in due course." (the emphasis is mine) 
On 4 September 1989 the plaintiffs' solicitors wrote again to Messrs. Murray & Backhouse in the following terms:- "Re: BRYLIFE PTY. LIMITED 
We refer to our faxed letter to you dated the 31st August, 1989.

We note that we have not received the Agreement to Purchase Shares as requested therein.

As our client is anxious to proceed with this matter expeditiously we would be pleased to receive the same as soon as possible. Would you kindly confirm with the writer as soon as possible when the Contract will be forthcoming." 
It would appear that the first plaintiff approached Lismore Money Centre, finance brokers and insurance agents, about a possible loan to enable the plaintiffs to buy out the interests of the first defendant and her son in the
Chincogan Tavern. It would appear that the first defendant was involved in assisting the first plaintiff with this finance application.

The purchase price then proposed was apparently $360,000.00 with stock at valuation estimated at $40,000.00.

On 5 September 1989 the Lismore Money Centre wrote to the plaintiffs, referring to them as "Andrew and Denise", drawing attention to problems which were being experienced in securing loan finance for the plaintiffs.

Inter alia the letter said:- "I would sugest (sic) that you not purchase the Tavern untill (sic) your accountant has examined the trading figures. At a quick glance it would appear that the repairs and maintenance expenses are high and some renovations and improvements could be included. The motor vehicle expenses appear high and include leasing for at least one vehicle.

I cant proceed any further untill (sic) I get a copy of the trading figures for the period ended 30/6/1989." 
In or about early September 1989 the first defendant apparently telephoned the second plaintiff whereupon a conversation ensued as follows:- 
Second plaintiff: "We can't buy the Tavern it is too expensive. We wanted to become a partner in the business to share the expenses and everything." 
First defendant: "I still have a buyer who will settle on 25 September.

What are you going to do? You can work at the Tavern for nothing during the Chincogan Festival in September because I am going to make heaps of money. I can't afford to pay you any wages but Andrew can come and work in the Pub." 
The second plaintiff says that in or about early September 1989 she had a further conversation with the first defendant to the following effect:- 
First defendant: "Andrew is no good behind the bar his legs can't carry him. He is just not suitable, I shouldn't have had him, he is just too slow." 
Second plaintiff: "Then why did you take our money if you thought that?" 
First defendant: "Look, I will pay the $100,000.00 back to you by working in the bar." 
Second plaintiff: "No way. It will be paid straight from the sale of the 
Tavern or from your Queensland property and that's all." (the emphasis is mine) 
On or about 19 September 1989 the second plaintiff telephoned the first defendant and had a further conversation as follows:- 
Second plaintiff: "Is the sale of the property still proceeding on 25 
September." 
First defendant: "No it has been delayed because of paperwork." 
Second plaintiff: "Andy has had his leg operated on and has sold the truck business. Andy now has no business and no job because he was planning to come and work with you in 
Mullumbimby." 
The second plaintiff says that on or about 25 September 1989 the first defendant telephoned her and had a further conversation as follows:- 
First defendant: "Do you want to buy the Tavern? I have still got plenty of interested people if you don't want to." 
Second plaintiff: "No we really need a partner. We need our money back. I want the $100,000.00 mortgage transferred to your Queensland property (sic)." 
First defendant: "It has just been valued by Esanda at $500,000.00. I have spoken to Wade Duncan at the bank and he sees no reason why the mortgage can't be transferred to my 
Queensland property (sic). I will tell my solicitors to do it straight away." (the emphasis is mine) 
The second plaintiff says that on or about 6 October 1989 she telephoned the first defendant again and had a conversation as follows:- 
Second plaintiff: "Why hasn't anything happened about the transfer of the 
Mortgage yet?" 
First defendant: "My Solicitor has been sick and is in Sydney and hasn't done anything. I will phone my Solicitors on Monday and discuss it." 
The second plaintiff says that her later attempts to contact the first defendant were unsuccessful. She says that on each occasion she telephoned the
Tavern and introduced herself the person on the other end of the telephone either simply hung up or left the telephone disengaged.

On 1 February 1990 the first plaintiff lodged a caveat over the leasehold estate of Brylife Pty. Limited in respect of the Tavern. The nature of the estate or interest claimed was expressed to be "As equitable shareholder of % of the issued capital of the registered proprietor". The interest was said to arise by virtue of the Deed made 12 May 1989 "and thereafter" and "Payment to the registered proprietor in or about June 1989 of the sum of $100,000.00 in consideration as aforesaid." 
On 30 March 1990 the plaintiffs' then solicitors sought the execution by the first defendant of a Deed charging her interest in her property at Jacobs
Wells with the repayment of the plaintiffs' obligations to the second defendant.

On 30 March 1990 the plaintiffs' then solicitors indicated a willingness to withdraw the caveat upon receipt of a Deed signed by the first defendant and on 2 April 1990 the plaintiffs' solicitors forwarded an amended form of Deed to the first defendant's solicitors for their consideration. That Deed sought a charge over the first defendant's "Jacobs Wells" property to secure repayment of the plaintiffs' obligations of $100,000.00 plus interest arising out of the purchase of shares from Brylife Pty. Limited to the second defendant.

The original Cross-Claim of the second defendant filed 4 February 1991 in these proceedings included the following paragraph:- "4. By agreement dated 16 June 1990 (sic), the cross-claimant agreed to grant to the cross-defendants a fully drawn advance of $102,000.00" 
The verified defence of the plaintiffs sworn 14 March 1991 dealt with this paragraph in the following terms:- "2. The Cross Defendants admit that, in about June 1990 (sic), the Cross 
Claimant advanced a sum in excess of $100,000.00 to the Cross 
Defendants, but otherwise do not know and cannot admit paragraph 4." 
Notwithstanding the claims made by the first plaintiff to have acquired an interest in the hotel and to have paid $100,000.00 to Brylife Pty. Limited in respect of the interest which he allegedly acquired, the plaintiffs now assert that they never received any moneys from the second defendant and deny that the payment of $100,000.00 to Brylife Pty. Limited on 20 August 1989 was made at their direction.

Secondly, they allege that the second defendant engaged in unconscionable conduct in that it allowed the plaintiffs to enter into the Loan Agreement with the second defendant when they were ignorant of the true intentions of the first defendant and of Mr. Duncan in respect of the moneys which were to be advanced by the second defendant. The plaintiffs assert that at the meeting on 14 June 1989 the first defendant said in the presence of Mr. Duncan that the moneys would be used to pay the licence fee and acquire new assets whereas it is alleged that Mr. Duncan knew that the first defendant intended to cause the money to be used by Brylife Pty. Limited to repay existing indebtedness to the bank at least as to $88,000.00 thereof. They also assert that Mr. Duncan knew or ought to have known that Brylife Pty. Limited was not profitable, he knew that the plaintiffs believed it to be profitable and failed to tell the plaintiffs that it was not.

The plaintiffs submit that in accordance with the principles enunciated by the
High Court in The Commercial Bank of Australia Limited v. Amadio <case>; [(1983) 151 CLR 447] the Court would not allow advantage to be taken by the bank of the relative disability suffered by the plaintiffs.

I have no doubt that as at 16 June 1989 the plaintiffs considered that an agreement had been reached under which the first plaintiff had agreed to subscribe for 17.6% of the issued capital of Brylife Pty. Limited for $88,000.00. Shortly after the original meeting between the plaintiffs, the first defendant and her son Neil Meng the plaintiffs were keen to become silent partners of the Mengs in the Chincogan Tavern and to contribute the $60,000.00 which the first defendant then sought.

It seems to me that when the first plaintiff made his first visit to the
Tavern on 18 April 1989 he became convinced that an investment on the terms proposed by the first defendant namely that by subscribing $100,000.00 he could acquire a 20% share in the business would be a sound one.

The plaintiffs consulted Mr. Messner in respect of the purchase and also their accountant, Mr. Arkinstall. Mr. Arkinstall invited the plaintiffs to go away and obtain some reliable financial information produced by an accountant which he could consider but the plaintiffs chose not to do this. The first plaintiff gave the following evidence:- "Q. Did you go and get your accountant to go and have a look at the figures at that time? 
A. No, I didn't.

Q. Why not? 
A. I don't know but I didn't.

Q. Is that because you perceived that you had sufficient knowledge of the 
Tavern by this stage to come to a decision yourself as to whether or nor it was a good buy or not? 
A. Well, what I seen of the pub was a good buy.
 ...

Q. See, you were in May and June of 1989, very keen to buy shares in this company, were you not? 
A. I was keen, yes.

Q. You thought it was a good business? 
A. Yes.
 ...

Q. Did you make any enquiries as to whether or not the company was in debt? 
A. No, I did not.

Q. Well, didn't you ask Mrs. Meng how much the company owed? 
A. No, I did not.

Q. But you were buying shares in the company, you thought, didn't you? 
A. Yes.

Q. Well, didn't you think it relevant to know whether or not the company was in debt? 
A. Yes, I suppose so.

Q. Well, why didn't you ask? 
A. While I was there the hotel was trading like at Darling Harbour, it was so crowded, know what I mean? ..." 
The plaintiffs chose to rely upon their own judgment as to the merits of the proposed investment.

The reason why the first plaintiff's proposed acquisition of an interest in
Brylife Pty. Limited contracted back from 20% for $100,000.00 to 17.6% for $88,000.00 was simply that he could not, at that stage, secure a loan for $100,000.000.

The plaintiffs originally sought a loan of $100,000.00 to enable them to purchase a 20% interest in the hotel from Westpac Banking Corporation. When this did not eventuate they sought a loan of $100,000.00 from Australian
Guarantee Corporation Limited. This loan was approved on conditions which the plaintiffs were unable to meet. Australian Guarantee Corporation Limited then proceeded to offer the plaintiffs a loan of $88,000.00 which was to be secured by a registered third mortgage over their family home at Kurmond. This offer was conditional upon Westpac Banking Corporation agreeing to confirm that the indebtedness of the plaintiffs under the registered first mortgage was $106,000.00 and the second defendant confirming that the amount of the plaintiffs' indebtedness which was secured by the second mortgage was only $51,000.00.

In the result the second defendant refused to accept a limit on the plaintiffs' liability under the second mortgage of $51,000.00 with the consequence that the proposed loan of $88,000.00 from Australian Guarantee
Corporation Limited fell through on or about 29 May 1989. At this stage the second defendant indicated that it may be able to assist the plaintiffs in securing the $88,000.00 which the first plaintiff was then seeking. (See Mr.
Solway's diary note of 29 May referred to above.) 
From 8 June 1989, the date of the plaintiffs' applications for loans to
National Australia Savings Bank Limited including $88,000.00 odd for the purchase of the proposed interest in Brylife Pty. Limited, Mr. Duncan was "hounded" by the first plaintiff as to when he could draw the relevant loans.

When the first plaintiff became impatient with the delay which was being experienced in having the plaintiffs' loan applications to National Australia
Savings Bank Limited processed, which would have required fresh security documents and the question of priority as between National Australia Savings
Bank Limited and the second defendant addressed, the alternative proposal was advanced by Mr. Duncan for a trading bank loan which would avoid those problems.

I have no doubt that the loan which was then sought by the plaintiffs was for $100,000.00 so as to enable a full 20% interest in Brylife Pty. Limited to be acquired rather than $88,000.00 which would only have permitted a 17.6% interest to be acquired. This may well have been discussed when the guarantee was signed by the Mengs at the Tavern on the morning of 16 June 1989.

The first plaintiff says, but I do not accept, that he sought a $100,000.00 loan on the basis that $88,000.00 would be paid to Brylife and the balance of $12,000.00 used by the plaintiffs for home renovations. As I see it, the plaintiffs sought a loan of $100,000.00 on the basis that the whole amount would be paid to Brylife. The truth in relation to home alterations may lie in two answers given by the second plaintiff in cross-examination as follows:- "A. When my husband came back after one of his journeys up and down, up and down, one of next door neighbours was an excavation person. He had him over at our house giving us a quote to smash our garage down.

And I said to my husband, `What are you doing?' and he said, `This garage has had it, it has to be fixed, and Cathy is going to lend me some of the money to do it." 
Q. He told you that Cathy was going to lend him the money to do it? 
A. She was going to let him use part of the money to get this thing sorted out." (the emphasis is mine) 
I find that the plaintiffs' intention was to borrow $100,000.00 on the basis that it would be paid to Brylife Pty. Limited to enable the first plaintiff to acquire a 20% interest in that company. If any of the moneys so paid were to be used for home renovations on the plaintiffs' Kurmond property, such moneys were to be provided by way of loan from Brylife Pty. Limited to the plaintiffs for that purpose.

I accept Mr. Duncan's evidence that the first plaintiff was asked by him how he wanted the $100,000.00 to be paid whereupon the first plaintiff responded with words to the effect "put it into the Tavern's account". This then occurred on Tuesday, 20 June 1989.

The Notice of Authority to Transact Banking Business signed by the plaintiffs on 16 and 19 June respectively and directed to the second defendant included the following:- "... We advise you regarding banking account ... as title on the face hereof 
Authority has been given to any 1 of the authorising parties to the account whose signatures appear below ...
 to - ... make arrangements with you regarding ... withdrawals ... and to overdraw the account ... to any extent permitted by the Bank." 
Clause 1 of the Loan Conditions: Persons and Partnerships agreement signed by the plaintiffs on 16 and 18 June 1989 respectively included the following:- "1. The proceeds of the loan shall be:- made available in an account styled as set out in Item 1 of the 
Schedule (`the Loan Account'), and applied for the purpose or purposes which have been disclosed to the Bank at the date hereof." 
Item 1 of the Schedule specified the name of the Loan Account as :- "Andrew Benedek & Denise Maxine Benedek 
Fully Drawn Advance".

Mr. Harris of Counsel who appears for the plaintiffs submits that the authority communicated by the first plaintiff to Mr. Duncan on Friday 16 June to put the $100,000.00 which the plaintiffs were borrowing from the second defendant into the Tavern's account could not be binding on the second plaintiff because she did not sign the Notice of Authority to Transact Banking
Business, permitting the first plaintiff to bind her, until Monday 19 June
In my opinion there is no substance in this submission. The authority communicated by the first plaintiff to Mr. Duncan was plainly communicated in the context of the Loan Agreement and Notice of Authority to Transact Banking
Business being executed by him with the expectation that these documents would also be executed by his wife at the Richmond branch of the second defendant on the following Monday. The first plaintiff clearly intended the authority to be put into effect only after the second plaintiff had signed the relevant documents. The critical time to determine whether there was an existing authority was when the loan was made, namely on 20 June 1989. At that stage one of the authorising parties had given a sufficient authority in respect of the intended fully drawn advance and nothing further was required.

Mr. Harris further submitted that the authority did not constitute a direction by the first plaintiff as to payment of the fully drawn advance but rather an attempt by the first plaintiff and the second defendant to vary the Loan
Agreement between the plaintiffs and the second defendant. His submission was that by effecting the loan on 20 June 1989 as it did the second defendant did not "make the proceeds of the loan available in an account styled `Andrew
Benedek and Denise Maxine Benedek Fully Drawn Advance'".

In my opinion this submission is misconceived. The bank statement issued by the second defendant in respect of account No.082-729 clearly demonstrates that $100,800.00 was made available to the plaintiffs on 20 June 1989. On 19
June that account had a zero balance and on 20 June a debit for $100,800.00 was passed. The bank statement issued by the second defendant in respect of the account of Brylife Pty. Limited covering the same day indicates that $100,000.00 was credited to Brylife Pty. Limited's account on 20 June 1989 the relevant entry appearing against the credit being the word "Transfer".

In the circumstances I find that a fully drawn advance was made by the second defendant to the plaintiffs on 20 June 1989 in accordance with the Loan
Agreement and the transfer of the amount of $100,000.00 to Brylife Pty.
Limited on that day was duly authorised.

Brylife Pty. Limited trading as Chincogan Tavern opened its account with the second defendant on 28 April 1989. As at the opening of business on 12 May the account was overdrawn $12,943.85. As at the opening of business on 16
June 1989 it was overdrawn $83,010.38 and as at the opening of business on 20
June 1989 it was overdrawn $98,554.16.

Whilst Mr. Duncan was obviously concerned about the state of the Brylife account which was operating with an unapproved overdraft in May-June, especially prior to his becoming aware of the 12 May Deed and later when he learnt on or about 1 June that the Australian Guarantee Corporation Limited loan to the plaintiffs had fallen through, I do not consider that he was in any way seeking to take advantage of the plaintiffs. He impressed me as an honest and fair man. Twice weekly he attended the Tavern to draw the raffle for the local Surf Club and he was conscious of significant capital works and improvements being effected at the Tavern as the overdraft increased. He was privy to the most recent set of accounts for Brylife Pty. Limited which demonstrated its profitability. I am satisfied that he neither knew nor had reason to believe that in May-June 1989 the Tavern was unprofitable. The fact that a hotel's overdraft is increasing rapidly is hardly a sound basis for measuring its profitability especially at a time when significant improvements are being undertaken.

The plaintiffs were cross-examined in relation to instructions which they gave to their solicitor Mr. Messner concerning their awareness of the extent of the indebtedness of Brylife Pty. Limited. When first asked about it the first plaintiff said emphatically that he didn't tell Mr. Messner that the first defendant had told him that the company operating the Tavern owed a considerable amount of money. Later he said he couldn't remember whether he had told Mr. Messner that Brylife was in considerable debt. He said that he didn't know and that he didn't recall it.

When the second plaintiff was asked whether she told Mr. Messner that the first defendant had told her that Brylife Pty. Limited was in considerable debt she responded "I'm not going to say yes to that". When pressed as to whether she had said something like that to Mr. Messner she replied "maybe, but I can't recall".

Mr. Messner's evidence, which I accept, is that prior to 12 May 1989 he received instructions from the plaintiffs that Brylife Pty. Limited, as the company operating the Tavern, owed a considerable amount of money.

It is quite clear that the plaintiffs embarked upon the Chincogan Tavern enterprise with a clear understanding that the first defendant did not have enough money to enable her to meet her debts. At their very first meeting the first defendant explained that she needed a third party to inject $60,000.00 to pay the liquor licence fee, to restock the bottle shop, to renovate the beer garden and to buy chairs and tables for the interior public and lounge bars and to purchase three more card machines.

The first plaintiff came to think that the licence fee would be "$15,000.00, $20,000.00, something like that". It proved to be $23,827.00.

The plaintiffs were aware at all times that Brylife Pty. Limited was in considerable debt.

When the first plaintiff was working at the Tavern prior to mid-June 1989 he spent most of his time in the bottle shop. Whilst working there he says that he saw "all these trucks there loaded with all this liquor". Whilst he was not involved in the ordering of stock he was present when it was being received and he observed deliveries from a number of suppliers. When asked whether there were people like Bonds delivering stock he replied "there was a lot - yes".

Between 1 May 1989 and 19 June 1989 the Brylife bank account was used to pay for over $100,000 worth of alcoholic beverages and almost $5,000 worth of renovations. There was no evidence as to what, if any, purchases or improvements were paid for with cash, nor was there any evidence of the
Tavern's takings or trading expenses in that period.

I should indicate that the amount of money which the first defendant was seeking to enable three extra card machines to be acquired was a total of only $4,500.00.

The first plaintiff agreed that one of the purposes of his putting in money was to enable debts to be paid which the first defendant was unable to meet.

I am satisfied that the conduct of Brylife Pty. Limited in accumulating debt in the period April - June 1989 was entirely consistent with the representations which the first defendant had made to the plaintiffs and the agreement which had been reached at least in principle well before 12 May 1989 for the first plaintiff to acquire a 20% interest in Brylife Pty. Limited subject to finance. It could not be suggested by the plaintiffs that they expected the business to stand still between April and June. Plainly, nobody expected the licence fee which the first defendant was unable to meet from her own resources, to remain unpaid through June 1989. Nor could it be suggested that it was the contemplation of the parties that the Tavern would remain under-stocked.

The first defendant was not present at the Mullumbimby branch of the Bank on 8 or 14 June 1989 or any other date prior to 20June 1989 in the company of the first plaintiff and Mr. Duncan. Whatever representations the first defendant may have made privately to the plaintiffs or either of them, Mr. Duncan was not privy to such representations and could not have been aware of the falsity thereof, if that be the case.

I do not accept that it came as a shock to the plaintiffs or either of them to learn that the $100,000.00 which they had borrowed had been paid into Brylife
Pty. Limited's bank account on 20 June 1989 and that a substantial part of the loan had been used to meet Brylife Pty. Limited's then outstanding indebtedness. The first plaintiff alleged that he went to see Mr. Duncan on 21
June 1989 to find out what was happening with the loan and expressed extreme disquiet when told what had happened to the money. Mr. Duncan says, and I accept, that he wasn't even at the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant on 20-22 June.

It is significant to note that no contemporaneous complaint was made by the plaintiffs to the second defendant in writing, the first plaintiff did not share his concerns in respect of the Bank's alleged misdeeds with the second plaintiff upon his return to Sydney on 23 June 1989 nor did the first plaintiff raise his concerns with his solicitor Mr. Messner.

He says that he became abusive to Mr. Duncan on 21 June 1989, complained to the first defendant on the same day and told his wife that night that he would be returning home on the following day. He says that he also tried unsuccessfully to contact Mr. Messner. What is curious, if this be so, is that
Mr. Messner made a file note of 22 June 1989 in relation to this matter which simply reads "20% $100,000.00". I reject the first plaintiff's account of what occurred on 21-22 June. The inference which I draw is that on 22 June he simply contacted Mr. Messner and informed him that he had been successful in securing a 20% interest in Brylife for $100,000.00 which the second defendant had lent to the plaintiffs. This is a far better explanation for why, when the first plaintiff returned to Kurmond, he didn't tell his wife anything adverse.
I reject his suggestion that he simply "did not want to worry her". The first plaintiff told the second plaintiff that "everything had been taken care of" and that I accept as being the truth.

The first suggestion that the Bank may have acted improperly is to be found in a letter to the Mullumbimby branch of the second defendant from Messrs.
Messner & Blunden dated 14 November 1989 as follows:- "As you know, we act for Andrew and Denise Benedek.

Our clients have instructed us that an advance of $102,000.00 was made by your branch of the bank to our clients to enable them to acquire an interest in
Brylife Pty. Limited (correct). The loan has been secured by way of a mortgage over our clients' property at Kurmond. (Correct but a registered mortgage was already in place).

Applications for loans of similar amounts for the same purpose had been refused previously by other banks, (the loans were approved but the plaintiffs could not meet the loan conditions) including another branch of the National
Australia Bank (incorrect). You were aware of this at the time you approved the loan from your branch (incorrect).

Further, it now appears that Brylife Pty. Limited was unable to pay its debts as they fell due and had a substantial deficiency of assets at the time the loan was made (not known to Mr. Duncan and not proved to be the case); indeed, the company owed the bank a substantial sum for which the Bank had inadequate security (correct, subject to the worth of the Directors' guarantee given on June 1989) and the money advanced was not paid to our client (incorrect - see also Mr. Duncan's comments on the line of credit application - commercial referred to hereunder) but was debited to him and credited to the company's account with the bank (correct, but as authorised). This appears to have been done before our clients had signed the loan documents (incorrect), such was the urgency to reduce the company's indebtedness to the bank (the urgency was that of the plaintiffs).

Our clients were not given time to consider the documents they signed , or to obtain legal or other advice on those documents and they were not advised to do so (this complaint was not pressed). At no time did you indicate the parlous financial position of the company nor the extent of the bank's exposure to it (the bank was unaware of the company being in a `parlous' financial position); you told Mr. Benedek that the company operated a good business which would have no trouble repaying the loan (incorrect), which you also arranged (correct).

We are of the view that our clients' signature to the loan and mortgage documents was procured by unconscionable conduct on your part (incorrect), or alternatively, in circumstances which would lead a court to set aside those documents under the Contracts Review Act (no claim for such relief was pressed). We are writing to request the bank to deliver up to us for cancellation the loan and mortgage documents and credit our clients with the balance of the loan now outstanding and to debit that amount from the company's account, failing which our clients will commence proceedings in the
Supreme Court seeking orders to that effect." (The comments in parenthesis are mine) 
The comments of Mr. Duncan on the Line of Credit Application - Commercial dated 19 June 1989 referable to the loan which was made 20 June 1989 were as follows:- "INTRODUCED THROUGH FYSHWICK BRANCH AFTER ANDREW HAD CONTACTED THEM FOR FUNDS.
FYSHWICK WERE KEEN TO TAKE OVER ALL DEBTS. HOWEVER, ANDREW HAS BEEN PUSHING TO
GET THIS THROUGH SO DUE TO TIME INVOLVED TO PAY OUT WESTPAC I HAVE AGREED TO
PROVIDE BY WAY OF FDA. ANDREW HAS REQUESTED FUNDS BE PAID DIRECTLY TO BRYLIFE
P/L. ANDREW IS TO HAVE AN OPERATION ON HIS LEG AFTER WHICH HE WILL WORK AT THE
HOTEL WITH A VIEW TO TAKEOVER OPERATIONS WITHIN A SHORT PERIOD." 
There was no suggestion that these remarks were anything other than contemporaneous or that they were contrived in any way.

In my opinion the Bank did not engage in unconscionable conduct in the respects alleged by the plaintiffs or at all.

This brings me to the Bank's Amended Cross-Claim under which it seeks judgment for possession of the plaintiffs' Kurmond home, leave to issue a Writ of
Possession, judgment for the plaintiffs' outstanding indebtedness to the second defendant with interest up to judgment and costs on a solicitor and client basis.

The evidence establishes that all necessary notices were served upon the plaintiffs and as at 24 November 1997, the first day of the hearing before me, the balance of the plaintiffs' indebtedness was $277,033.20 excluding legal costs. As at 19 December 1997 the amount due was $278,831.68 with interest continuing to accrue at the rate of $72.03 per day.

The second defendant is entitled to judgment on its Cross-Claim.

In relation to the question of costs, the Loan Agreement and the mortgage given by the plaintiffs provided for all costs charges and expenses incurred by the Bank for legal advice or assistance to be paid by the plaintiffs "as between solicitor and client".

The orders which I propose to make are as follows:-
On the plaintiffs' claims against the second defendant, judgment for the second defendant with costs on an indemnity basis.
On the second defendant's Amended Cross-Claim against the plaintiffs - judgment for the second defendant against the plaintiffs in the sum of $279,109.80; judgment for the second defendant against the plaintiffs for possession of 
Longleat Lane, Kurmond; grant leave to the second defendant to issue a Writ of Possession against the plaintiffs in respect of the judgment contained in paragraph (b) forthwith; order that the plaintiffs pay the second defendant's costs on an indemnity basis.
Direct that Exhibits 19, 20, P, Q, X, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, H, J, K, L, 2 and 3, annexures "G" and "L" to the affidavit of the first plaintiff sworn 10 March and the Transcript of the evidence of the second plaintiff be referred to the Director of 
Public Prosecutions to consider whether a charge of perjury should be laid against the second plaintiff in respect of the omission from the plaintiffs' verified
List of 
Documents of the documents comprised within Exhibits P and Q.
 * * * 
