

De Dominicis versus Spano Matter No 3033/95 [1998] NSWSC 217 (26 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
DE DOMINICIS versus SPANO /95 May 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
INTRODUCTION 
The late Salvatore Greco and his wife Venera Greco had four children: the plaintiff Josephine born 1952, Nunzio born 1954, Gaetano born 1955, and the defendant Natalie born 1959. For convenience, I will refer to these persons by their forenames.

In July 1978, Gaetano entered into a contract to purchase the property 2
Burley Crescent, Griffith. In July 1980, Gaetano died. No administration was taken out of his estate at that time. In September 1980, Natalie entered into a contract to purchase the same property from the same vendors, taking the benefit of money previously paid to the vendors by Gaetano. Thereafter,
Natalie became the legal owner of the property, and she sold it in December for $150,000.00.

On 17th April 1998, letters of administration of Gaetano's estate were granted to Josephine. In these proceedings, Josephine claims declarations as to the entitlement of Gaetano's estate to this Burley Crescent property and the proceeds of sale thereof, and consequential orders.

On 1st December 1980, Venera died. At the date of her death, the property 25
Blumer Avenue, Griffith, was recorded as owned by Salvatore and Venera as joint tenants. However, a document apparently signed by Venera and Salvatore purported to transfer this property from themselves as joint tenants to themselves as tenants in common. By her last will dated 17th November 1980,
Venera left her half share in this property equally between Josephine and
Natalie.

By a Notice of Death dated 11th August 1987 and registered 17th February 1988,
Salvatore became registered as sole owner of this property by reason of survivorship. Salvatore died on 23rd September 1988, and by his last will dated 11th February 1988, he left the residue of his estate to Natalie. By a transmission application dated 28th July 1989 and registered 18th September , Natalie became registered as sole owner of this property. Natalie sold this property in May 1993 for a stated sum of $150,000.00.

In these proceedings, Josephine claims declarations as to her entitlement to one half of this Blumer Avenue property and the proceeds of sale thereof, and consequential orders.

Natalie resists both claims, relying on laches, the Real Property Act 1990, and the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), as well as on denials on the merits of Josephine's claim.
 . OUTLINE OF FACTS 
I first outline facts which are either not in dispute or else are clearly proved.

The contract for the purchase of the Burley Crescent property, between Gaetano as purchaser and Mr. and Mrs. Skyrm as vendors, was dated 17th June 1978. It provided for a price of $1,500.00, with a deposit of $150.00. The contract showed that the property was a Town Land Purchase under Pt.6 of the Crown
Lands Consolidation Act; that the Crown Purchase Money was $8,990.00; that there were to be forty-nine half-yearly payments of principle and interest of $418.00 each; that the purchaser was responsible for the first such payment to be made on 30th June 1978; and that the land was subject to the condition that, within eighteen months after grant of the application for the Town Land
Purchase, the holder must effect permanent improvements to the value of not less than $12,000.00.

In July 1978, plans for a very large two-storey house for this property were lodged with the Wade Shire Council by Gaetano. These plans were approved on th August 1978.

The vendors Mr. and Mrs. Skyrm executed a Deed of Conveyance of this property, and also a transfer under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act, each dated 18th
August 1978 and each acknowledging receipt of the purchase price of $1,500.00.
According to a statement dated 26th July 1978, prepared by Mr. Vardanega,
Gaetano's solicitor for this transaction, Gaetano was required to pay a total of about $2,808.00 in connection with this transaction, including $480.00 for shire rates, $418.00 for the instalment due on 30th June 1978, $202.00 for legal expenses, and various charges. On about 18th August 1978, the vendors
Mr. and Mrs. Skyrm received the balance of purchase money of $1,350.00, with adjustments reducing it to $1,218.66.

By letter dated 7th August 1979, the Water Resources Commission approved an extension of time for compliance with the expenditure condition on this property to 14th October 1979. The letter notified that no further extensions would be granted. Subsequently, by a letter dated 1st July 1980 to Mr.
Vardanega, the Water Resources Commission advised that the condition had still not been complied with, and that the matter was being referred to a Land Board for enquiry and report as to incurred forfeiture.

Meanwhile, on 5th October 1978, Gaetano had given notice to the Council that trenches with reinforcement were in situ ready for inspection. Later, on 19th
June 1980, internal ground floor plumbing was inspected by the Council, and noted as OK.

By about July 1980, Venera was very ill, and was in hospital in Sydney. On th July 1980, Gaetano was killed in a motor vehicle accident returning from
Sydney to Griffith. Salvatore was badly injured in this accident. Gaetano left no will. He was not married, and had no de facto wife. He may possibly have left children.

After Gaetano's death, his brother Nunzio continued with the building of the house at 2 Burley Crescent. A concrete slab was poured, and was inspected on about 31st October 1980.

However, a contract dated 16th October 1980 for the purchase of this Burley
Crescent property by Natalie from Mr. and Mrs. Skyrm for $1,000.00 was drawn up by Mr. Vardanega and signed by the parties; and this was ultimately completed by transfer to Natalie. The conveyance and transfer to Gaetano previously executed by the Skyrms was never given effect to. No further consideration was paid to the Skyrms. An application for consent to the transfer to Natalie was lodged with the Water Resources Commission on 17th
October 1980, consent was given on 20th January 1981, and the transfer was registered in the Books of the Commission on 8th April 1981. However, I note that under s.145A of the Crown Lands Consolidation Act it does not appear that consent was necessary.

By 21st October 1980, Venera was in Griffith Base Hospital, and she died there on 1st December 1980. I will return to some circumstances surrounding her will and death when I have completed the account concerning the Burley Crescent property.

The evidence is not clear as to the source of payments of instalments to the
Crown and of building costs for the house erected on the Burley Crescent land, at least until 2nd January 1986 when Nunzio disappeared. Natalie claims that she made all the payments. She was 21 in October 1980, and was giving substantially all her earnings to her father Salvatore, who was then in substantial control of family affairs and finances. It is clear that Nunzio did building work on the property, and organised for contractors, apart from the time when he was in prison for a drug-related offence between June 1981 and 31st December 1982. About the time when he went to prison, Nunzio was made bankrupt and was never discharged. It seems that payments for the building were made out of a cheque account in Natalie's name, but cheques were signed by Nunzio, and the source of the money for that account is not clear.

Nunzio was married on 6th August 1982, having been engaged since 1979. A revised plan for a smaller single-storey three-bedroom house for the land was drawn up in September 1982, still described as "proposed residence for Mr. G.
Greco". These plans were approved on 29th November 1982. Subsequently, there was a further revision to a similarly sized house, but with four bedrooms, in
May 1984, these plans being approved on 20th June 1984.

In or about December 1983, Natalie received $33,000.00 on account of the settlement of a personal injury claim, and she says that at least $28,000.00 of that amount was spent on building the house on the property. She says that when that was spent, she was granted an overdraft on her account (which apparently was secured by mortgage to the State Bank in April 1984), which was ultimately replaced by a mortgage to the State Building Society for $30,000.00 in September 1985. Natalie also says that she used $8,000.00 borrowed from her father Salvatore on the house: there is in evidence a document bearing date th July 1983 and signed by Natalie acknowledging receipt from Salvatore of $8,000.00, which was "used for the acquisition of building materials in respect of premises owned by me and known as 2 Burley Street, Griffith".

It appears that, at the time of receipt of the money for the personal injury claim, Natalie was in partnership with Nunzio's wife in a boutique business in
Griffith. On 16th November 1983, Nunzio as executor of his mother's estate authorised Mr. Vardanega to pay from that estate $15,000.00 to Natalie and
Nunzio's wife to finalise the purchase of stock for this boutique. This amount was paid on 18th November 1983.

A valuation report dated 4th July 1985, obtained for the purpose of the mortgage to the State Building Society, valued the improvements on the property at $91,000.00. Payments on this house may also have come from money paid to Nunzio from his mother's estate, namely $1,250.00 on 12th July 1983, $1,000.00 on 19th July 1983, $2,500.00 on 29th July 1983, $1,200.00 on 7th
November 1983, $450.00 on 23rd November 1983, $5,000.00 on 26th December 1983, $7,000.00 on 3rd February 1984, $7,000.00 on 13th February 1984, $5,000.00 on th March 1984, $5,000.00 on 27th March 1984, $1,000.00 on 27th April 1984, $3,200.00 on 21st May 1984, and $12,000.00 on 14th August 1984. These amounts total $51,600.00 
The house was completed in about March 1984. Nunzio moved into the house with his wife and two children. The final Council inspection on 26th April 1984 noted many departures from the approved plans, giving rise to the amended plan of May 1984 referred to earlier.

Natalie lived with her father, until she was married on 26th May 1984: she had met her husband about six months previously. Natalie and her husband then lived in Josephine's house, until Josephine returned from a visit to Italy in late 1984. Then Natalie and her husband moved to a friend's house about two or three kilometres from Griffith.

Nunzio and his family moved to Sydney in about mid-1985, locking up the house at Burley Crescent and leaving their furniture there. In about August 1985,
Natalie was having trouble paying rent; and she telephoned Nunzio, and arranged to move into the Burley Crescent property. She and her husband moved into the property in September 1985, and was living there in January 1986 when
Nunzio disappeared. Her first child was born in September 1986.

In November 1988, Natalie's husband received about $200,000.00 on account of a personal injury verdict, and about $50,000.00 of this was paid in reduction of the mortgage on the Burley Crescent property. About $6,600.00 appears to have been used for renovation on the Blumer Avenue property.

In early 1989, Natalie and family moved to the Gold Coast, and the Burley
Crescent property was sold in December 1989. Nunzio was still bankrupt when he disappeared, and no representation was taken out of his estate.

I will return now to events concerning the Blumer Avenue property, which had been the family home of Salvatore and Venera.

In October 1980, Venera was in Griffith Base Hospital. She asked Josephine to arrange for a solicitor to visit her so that she could make a will. On 21st
October 1980, Mr. Vardanega went there and obtained instructions, to the effect that Venera's one-half share in the family farm was to go to Nunzio, her one-half share in the Blumer Avenue home was to go to Josephine and
Natalie, and the residue of her estate was to be divided between Nunzio,
Josephine and Natalie. Mr. Vardanega appreciated that Venera's intention concerning the Blumer Avenue property could not take effect unless the joint tenancy of that property was severed, and he prepared a form of transfer of that property from Salvatore and Venera as joint tenants to Salvatore and
Venera as tenants in common.

It seems clear that Mr. Vardanega gave the will and the transfer to a clerk
Peter McCormack to have them executed. Venera executed the will at the hospital, by making her mark in the shape of an X on it, such execution being witnessed by Mr. McCormack and a clerk at the hospital. As regards the transfer, the original document now produced to the Court appears to bear on it an X similar to that on the will, in the place provided for Venera's mark, and also to bear Salvatore's signature. Both the mark and the signature are witnessed by a Justice of the Peace, a local real estate agent Stan Pellizzer.
In his evidence before me, Mr. Pellizzer had no recollection of witnessing the document, but he was clear that he did not at any time go to Griffith Base
Hospital. It is also clear that Venera did not leave Griffith Base Hospital, and Mr. Pellizzer's evidence was consistent with him having witnessed signatures as signed in his presence, even though they were not so signed.

It is clear that the will went back to Mr. Vardanega's office: it was subsequently uplifted from there on 23rd March 1983. The original transfer was produced to the Court from the custody of Mr. Vardanega's firm, although Mr.
Vardanega said he did not know when or how it came into that custody.

Mr. McCormack, who apparently is now practising as a solicitor in a firm at
Murwillumbah, was not called to give evidence.

Venera died on 1st December 1980. At this time, the Blumer Avenue house had been let, and Salvatore was receiving the rent.

Nunzio was the executor of Venera's will, and he was in prison from June 1981 to 31st December 1982. Apparently, there were disputes between Nunzio and his father Salvatore concerning the assets and will of Venera. These disputes were resolved by a deed dated 20th January 1983, prepared by Mr. Vardanega. The deed recited that the assets of Venera's estate included a half interest in 25
Blumer Avenue. The deed was signed by Salvatore, and his signature witnessed by Mr. Vardanega.

In April 1983, Nunzio gave instructions to another solicitor, Paul Carew, to apply for probate. He uplifted the original will from Mr. Vardanega's firm on st March 1983. On 12th April 1983, Mr. Carew gave notice to the letting agent that half the rent of the Blumer Avenue property was to be paid to his firm, and by letter dated 18th April 1983, the agent acknowledged that it would do this. However, it appeared that no rent was received by the estate: the letting was terminated in mid-1983, and Salvatore and Natalie moved into that house, where they both lived until Natalie married in May 1984.

The stamp affidavit in Venera's estate, lodged in about August 1983, showed a one-half share of the Blumer Avenue property as part of the estate, passing by will to Josephine and Natalie. There were requisitions by the Stamp Duties
Office. These were answered in part by an affidavit by Nunzio, prepared and witnessed by Mr. Vardanega, annexing a balance sheet of the partnership between Venera and Salvatore as at 1st December 1980, which showed 25 Blumer
Avenue as then being held by them as tenants in common. On 14th February 1994,
Mr. Vardanega took over as solicitor acting for Nunzio as executor of the estate, and the file was returned to him on that day.

Meanwhile, around the time of Venera's death and also subsequently, Josephine lent sums of money to Salvatore, and that gave rise to disputes when Josephine sought repayment of those loans. The dispute was settled on 12th October 1983, by payment to Josephine of $15,000.00 in full settlement of her claim.

On 9th August 1984, Mr. Vardanega wrote to Nunzio advising that, subject to one small matter, the only matter which appeared outstanding in the estate was "the finalisation of the Blumer Street property". The letter went on "Would you please let us have your urgent instructions in this regard".

Nunzio as executor swore an affidavit verifying accounts in the estate on 5th
December 1984. The accounts were prepared and the affidavit witnessed by Mr.
Vardanega. The accounts showed the estate's interest in the Blumer Avenue property as an asset still unrealised.

On 19th June 1985, Mr. Vardanega wrote to Josephine advising that certain amounts were owing on the Blumer Street property, namely a plumbing account, rates, and a Crown Purchase instalment; and the letter went on to request a cheque for one-half of the total ($983.51), and advising that he would arrange for Mr. Greco (presumably Salvatore) to pay the other half.

On 26th August 1985, Mr. Vardanega wrote to Nunzio, Josephine, and Natalie advising that Salvatore did not propose renewing insurance on this property, and enclosing for their attention the insurance renewal accounts.

Nunzio disappeared in January 1986, and is presumed dead.

Meanwhile, on 4th February 1985, Salvatore had given Mr. Vardanega instructions for a new will, in which he made no provision for his surviving children Nunzio, Josephine, and Natalie. Clause 3 of that will, which was executed on 7th February 1985, was as follows: . AND I DECLARE that I have made no provision in this my will for my children Nunzio Greco, Josephine De Dominicis and Natalie Spano as adequate provision has been made for them during my lifetime and further that I have had no contact with my said children owing to numerous disputes and disagreements with them both in respect of the estate of my late wife Venera Greco, and in respect of financial arrangements between myself and my children during my lifetime.

It appears that by 13th March 1986, Salvatore was in a de facto relationship with one Rosalin Matijak. On that day, he made a further will in which he left $10,000.00 and a motor vehicle to Ms. Matijak, and the residue of the estate to Natalie. Clause 3 of that will was in similar terms to that of the previous will, except that it omitted reference to Natalie. On 29th October 1986,
Salvatore made another will to similar effect.

On 11th August 1987, Salvatore signed a Notice of Death as surviving joint tenant of the Blumer Avenue property. This was sent for registration by Mr.
Vardanega on 20th January 1988, and registered on 17th February 1988.

On 11th February 1988, Salvatore made his last will. It was in similar terms to the previous will, except that it left $15,000.00 and some furniture to Ms.
Matijak. Clause 3 was in similar terms to previous wills, except that it made no reference to Nunzio, who by that time was apparently accepted as having died.

In about July 1988, Josephine went to live in Italy, where she remained until .

On 23rd September 1988, Salvatore died. Natalie was named executor in the will, and she obtained probate on 6th February 1989. A Transmission
Application of the Blumer Avenue property to Natalie was dated 28th July 1989, and registered on 18th September 1989. It was prepared and lodged by Mr.
Vardanega.

Also in 1989, a Deed of Family Arrangement was entered into between Natalie and Ms. Matijak. It noted that Ms. Matijak was making a claim as an eligible person within the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/), and it resolved this claim by providing for a payment of $18,000.00 to her, inclusive of the provision for her under the will.

It appears that the Blumer Avenue property was rented in about mid-1989.
According to an affidavit by Natalie, the rent for the first eighteen months was about $600.00 per week. This may be incorrect. I note that the rent was $110.00 per week in 1983. A rental of around $150.00 per week would appear more in accordance with the value of the property. I note that, if the rent was of the order of $150.00 net per week, the one-quarter share in the property claimed by Josephine would amount to a little under $2,000.00 per annum.

Between about 1989 and the beginning of 1994, it is clear that Natalie sent some quite substantial sums of money to Josephine in Italy. There is evidence that $3,579.95 was sent on 6th February 1991, $3,144.65 on 30th May 1991, $2,000.00 on 26th March 1993, $5,000.00 on 2nd July 1993, $3,000.00 on 30th
October 1993, and $2,500.00 on 24th January 1994. According to Josephine, she requested Natalie to send her money from her share of rent receipts of the
Blumer Avenue property. Josephine also says that in 1993, she was telephoning
Natalie advising her of financial difficulties of herself and her husband, and pressing Natalie to sell the Blumer Avenue property so that she could have her share of it. In Natalie's first affidavit dated 14th June 1996, Natalie refers to these sums as being given to Josephine. In her affidavit of 16th March , and in her oral evidence, Natalie asserted that these were requested by
Josephine and provided by her as loans.

There is in evidence correspondence sent by Natalie with some of these payments. In a letter that appears to have accompanied the payment made on 2nd
July 1993, Natalie wrote "Here is the money I told you I was sending ... We hope this help you. I send some more by Christmas". In a letter that appears to have accompanied the payment made on 13th October 1993, Natalie wrote "I am sending you the money ...". In a letter that appears to refer to the payment made on 24th January 1994, Natalie wrote "This is money I told you about on the phone".

In fact, the Blumer Avenue property was sold by contract dated 29th March , for a stated price of $150,000.00. According to Natalie, she told
Josephine of this sale in June 1993. According to Josephine, she only found about this sale in about March 1994, when her husband travelled to Australia.
According to Josephine, when she put this to Natalie over the telephone some time afterwards, Natalie told her that the property had been sold for $220,000.00, with $70,000.00 being paid in cash in addition to the stated contract price. The payment of cash was denied before me by Natalie, by her husband, and by the purchaser of the property.

The relationship between Josephine and Natalie broke down entirely at around this time. These proceedings were commenced on 31st July 1995.
 . ISSUES 
The first matter that I will need to consider is the credit of the principal witnesses, namely Josephine, Natalie and Mr. Vardanega.

Next, I will need to consider the issues concerning the Burley Crescent property. These are essentially as follows: first, what, if any, interest did
Gaetano's estate have in this property; and second, whether that interest is now enforceable, having regard to considerations of indefeasibility under the
Real Property Act, lapse of time under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), and laches.

Next, I will need to consider the Blumer Avenue property. The main issues here are as follows: first, was there an effective severance of the joint tenancy, so that Venera's half interest passed under her will; and second, if so, can that interest now be enforced, having regard to questions of indefeasibility under the Real Property Act, lapse of time under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), and laches? 
Finally, there is Josephine's application for provision out of Salvatore's estate under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/).
 . CREDIT .1 Josephine 
Mr. Wilson for Natalie submitted that Josephine gave inconsistent evidence concerning Gaetano's estate and certain jewellery; that her evidence concerning the payment of $70,000.00 cash in relation to the sale of the
Blumer Avenue property was false; that she gave inconsistent evidence concerning the linguistic capabilities of Venera; that her evidence conflicting with that of Mr. Vardanega, as to whether she was present when
Venera gave her instructions for her will and as to the reading of that will subsequent to Venera's death, should be rejected; and that she gave evasive and unsatisfactory evidence concerning her property in Sicily, and in particular concerning a possible sale of some of that property on her behalf by her daughter.

Mr. Rundle for Josephine submitted that Josephine had not been cross-examined on the first and third of those matters; that Josephine's evidence should be preferred to that of Mr. Vardanega; that Josephine's evidence concerning property in Sicily and its sale was not shown to be false or indeed evasive; and that Josephine had given evidence in a forthright and impressive manner, was doing her best to tell the truth, and should be accepted.

In my opinion, I can make little of the matters on which Josephine was not cross-examined. I consider Mr. Vardanega's recollection somewhat unreliable concerning matters occurring about seventeen years ago. Although I am not affirmatively satisfied that $70,000.00 in cash was received by Natalie on the sale of the Blumer Avenue property, particularly having regard to the denial of the purchaser of the property, nor am I affirmatively satisfied that this did not happen; so Josephine's evidence on this point raises suspicion rather than being a clear point against her. As regards the property in Sicily and the sale of it, I did have the distinct impression that Josephine was being evasive in her evidence on that matter: I consider that she knew more about that matter than she was prepared to tell the Court, and which, having regard to the questions that were asked, she should have told the Court. For those reasons, while I am not satisfied that Josephine has set out to mislead the
Court, I cannot be fully confident that she has set out to tell the Court the whole truth.
 .2 Natalie 
Mr. Rundle submitted that Natalie had given deliberately false evidence in claiming that the Burley Crescent house, when re-designed in 1982, was planned and intended for her, and that she actually provided all the money spent on it. He submitted that her evidence to the effect that Nunzio had told her words to the effect that the transfer to Salvatore and Venera as tenants in common was not valid, and that to claim the half share in the house Josephine and Natalie would have to contest the will, was plainly false. He submitted that Josephine's claim that the amounts of money sent to Italy were sent as loans was also plainly false.

Mr. Wilson submitted that Natalie's evidence about the Burley Crescent property should be accepted. At the time the revised plans were approved,
Nunzio was still in gaol. The document recording the loan of $8,000.00 to
Natalie from her father showed that this money was applied by her for building materials. Her receipt of $28,000.00 in December 1983 was clearly established.
Up to November 1983, the money received by Nunzio from his mother's estate was only about $5,000.00; and in any event, there was no evidence that Nunzio actually put any money of his own into the property. Mr. Wilson submitted that it was entirely plausible that Nunzio should have made the statement to
Natalie about the invalidity of the severance: if Nunzio was satisfied that the severance had taken place, why was action not taken to give effect to it?
It was also plausible that the amounts of money sent by Natalie to Josephine were loans. Mr. Wilson submitted that I would be impressed by Natalie's demeanour.

Having due regard to the care which I must take before coming to such a conclusion, I am satisfied that Natalie did set out deliberately to give false evidence concerning the Burley Crescent house. The amended plans for this house were drawn up about November 1982. At that time, Nunzio was married (he was married on 6th August 1982, having been engaged in 1979), and was to come out of prison in December 1982. Natalie was unmarried and living with her father: she did not meet her husband until December 1983. I find totally implausible Natalie's evidence that the re-design of this property took place on her instructions and on her initiative. Nunzio arranged for the carrying out of the building, and payments for the building were made by cheques signed by Nunzio on Natalie's account. When the house was completed in about April , Nunzio moved in with his wife and children. In mid-1985, Nunzio and his family moved to Sydney, and the house was locked and Nunzio's furniture left there. At that time, Natalie continued for some time to rent premises, until she telephoned Nunzio to arrange to go into the Burley Crescent house in
September 1985.

In those circumstances, I infer that the property was put into Natalie's name essentially to hold on trust for Nunzio. By October 1980, when Natalie signed the contract to purchase this property, Nunzio was in trouble with the police (he was arrested in about January 1980) and I infer that his bankruptcy was anticipated. At that time, Nunzio was already engaged to be married, and was actually working on the house. Furthermore, as regards expenditure on the house, at best Natalie accounts for about $58,000.00, whereas improvements were valued at about $91,000.00. I infer that some or all of the $51,600.00 that Nunzio received at the relevant time from his mother's estate was spent on the house, as well as around $30,000.00 borrowed from the bank on the security of the house. I accept that $8,000.00 provided by the father did go to the house, and I infer that Natalie signed the receipt for this money for the same reason that the house was put in her name and payments were made through a bank account in her name, namely, to disguise Nunzio's involvement.
It is possible that some of Natalie's $28,000.00 went towards the house; but I note that, despite Natalie's denial, substantial sums were at that time also being put into a business which Natalie was engaged in along with Nunzio's wife. I infer that the property was put into Natalie's name because of
Nunzio's anticipated bankruptcy, to ensure that it did not go to Nunzio's creditors.

It follows that, in my opinion, apart from whatever interest Gaetano's estate may have had in the property and apart from money paid by Natalie's husband to reduce or discharge a mortgage over that property, that property was, at the time it was sold, substantially held by Natalie subject to a trust in favour of Nunzio's creditors. However, that is not a trust to which I can give any effect in these proceedings.

In my opinion also, Natalie was at least mistaken in her evidence about what
Nunzio said to her concerning the transfer signed by Venera and Salvatore.
Right up to August 1985, in all dealings between the estate's solicitor Mr.
Vardanega and Nunzio, the severance purportedly effected by the transfer was treated as effective. It is true that appropriate steps were not taken to regularise the legal title, but Mr. Vardanega admits that he never advised
Nunzio, much less Josephine, that such steps needed to be taken. The documents strongly suggest that Mr. Vardanega, Nunzio, Josephine, and Natalie herself accepted that the severance was effective, at least up to August 1985.

In my opinion also, Natalie's evidence that amounts sent by her to Josephine were loans was false. In her first affidavit, Natalie said that these amounts were "given" to Josephine. The suggestion of loan was only made in an affidavit filed after pre-trial directions, at which I was told that there was no further evidence to be put on by the plaintiff apart from evidence replying to recently-filed material by the defendant. The correspondence accompanying those payments also tends to point against the payments being loans. It is true that the total amount of the payments seems to be in excess of
Josephine's share of the rent: that share might have amounted to something like $8,000.00 over the years from 1989 to 1993, whereas it seems that at least $19,000.00 was sent. However, Josephine says that she was pressing
Natalie to sell the property, and the property was in fact sold in early 1993.

Although, for reasons given in my assessment of Josephine's credit, I am not confident that the account Josephine has given of her conversations with
Natalie is accurate, I consider that they give a picture which is closer to the truth than Natalie's account of these conversations.
 .3 Mr. Vardanega 
Mr. Rundle submitted that Mr. Vardanega had not properly resolved conflicts of interests which arose in his dealings with the Greco family, and that his recollection was unsatisfactory. In particular, he submitted that I should reject his evidence to the effect that there were instructions from Gaetano not to proceed with the purchase of the Burley Crescent property before
Gaetano died.

Mr. Wilson submitted that Mr. Vardanega was plainly endeavouring to give true and accurate evidence of what matters he could recall after such a long time.
He made appropriate and frank concessions concerning matters of conflict of interests.

In my opinion, there are some unsatisfactory aspects of Mr. Vardanega's conduct and evidence. In the first place, leaving aside for the moment the suggestion of some instructions from Gaetano before he died, it appears that
Mr. Vardanega promoted an arrangement where another party got the benefit of something like $3,000.00 paid by Gaetano in respect of the Burley Crescent property, without making any provision for any recompense to Gaetano's estate.
Next, if his evidence is fully accurate, he prepared a will and transfer for
Venera, and then did not take any steps to ensure that her instructions were carried out or to advise her as to what she could do if those instructions were not carried out. Next, he did not advise Nunzio of the need to do anything in relation to the half interest in the Blumer Avenue property. So far as all the documents are concerned, until August 1985 he dealt with
Salvatore, Nunzio, Josephine, and Natalie on the basis that the severance was effective and the half interest passed under Venera's will. Yet by early 1988, he was assisting Salvatore deprive the estate of that half interest, without giving any notice to Josephine or Natalie that this was happening.

All these events are a long time ago. I am not affirmatively satisfied that
Mr. Vardanega acted dishonestly or has sought to give dishonest evidence.
However, in my opinion, Mr. Vardanega has reconstructed events poorly recollected, in a way to put these rather unsatisfactory circumstances in the best light. I am not satisfied that he did have instructions from Gaetano that
Gaetano did not wish to go ahead with the purchase before Gaetano died. Mr.
Vardanega's evidence does not, in my opinion, provide any obstacle to my inferring that the will and the transfer were returned to his office before
Venera died, and that Mr. Vardanega knew about this at the time. I infer that, at least up to August 1985, Mr. Vardanega was aware that all his dealings with
Salvatore and Josephine and Natalie were on the basis that the severance had been effective, yet he did not advise Nunzio or Josephine or Natalie that they needed to do anything to ensure that Salvatore did not subsequently assert ownership by survivorship. Indeed, he later assisted Salvatore to do this, without advising Josephine or Natalie that this was happening.
 . THE BURLEY CRESCENT PROPERTY .1 What, If Any, Interest Did Gaetano's Estate Have? 
Mr. Rundle submitted that, even if there were conditions to be satisfied before Gaetano was entitled to the land, Gaetano still had a good equitable claim before he died: see Butts v. O'Dwyer <case>; [(1952) 87 CLR 267.] Furthermore, Natalie, knowing of Gaetano's interest, could not take the property free of that interest: see Brun v. Brun, Powell, J., th May 1990. Natalie's interest came into being pursuant to an arrangement between Salvatore and Mr. Vardanega, in which the Skyrms signed a document which indicated $1,000.00 had been paid to them by Natalie, when this had not happened. In fact, Gaetano had already paid $1,500.00 to the Skyrms. In addition to taking the benefit of this payment, Natalie took the benefit from
Gaetano's estate of the opportunity to acquire the land, the benefit of building approval, and the benefit of footings which Gaetano had built.
Gaetano's interest was recognised by the Water Resources Commission, because correspondence from the Commission was sent to Mr. Vardanega on behalf of
Gaetano. Because Gaetano was in substance entitled to the property, Gaetano's estate should have the benefit of Nunzio's payments, unless and until a valid claim was made against Gaetano's estate by Nunzio's estate or otherwise on behalf of Nunzio's creditors.

Mr. Wilson has provided a written outline of submissions which I will leave with the papers. In particular, Mr. Wilson submitted that at the time of
Gaetano's death, the condition that improvements be constructed to the value of $12,000.00 had not been complied with: time for compliance with that condition had in fact expired on 14th October 1979. Because of this, Gaetano's interest was liable to forfeiture, and in circumstances where no-one was prepared to carry the matter forward on behalf of Gaetano's estate, the rights of the estate must be considered of no value. For the same reason, equity would not have granted specific performance. What was done was to save, for the benefit of the family, and in particular of Natalie, an interest which otherwise would have been worth nothing. Mr. Wilson also submitted that the purchase had initially been made with family money, and was continued after
Gaetano's death with family money. (To this, Mr. Rundle replied that there was no evidence or suggestion that the money paid on behalf of Gaetano was not
Gaetano's money.) 
In my opinion, the rights which the Skyrms had in relation to the Burley
Crescent property were statutory rights under the Crown Lands Consolidation
Act: Davies v. Littlejohn <case>; [(1923) 34 CLR 174.] These rights could be transferred as provided by that Act: see s.154A(4), s.259 and s.259A. This being a Town Lands Purchase, it appears that consent to the transfer was not necessary: s.145A(4). It appears that such a transfer takes effect when lodged for registration with the Water
Resources Commission, or possibly on its being recorded in the books of the
Commission: see Helmore, Law of Real Property in New South Wales, 2nd Ed.,
Gaetano paid to the Skyrms the full purchase price agreed under the contract with them; and accordingly, would appear to have had an unconditional right to have these statutory rights assigned to him. By signing the transfer and conveyance, and passing them to Gaetano's solicitor, the Skyrms probably had done everything they needed to do under the contract. It has been said that in such circumstances, a vendor still holding a legal title is a trustee of that property for the purchaser under a constructive trust: see Chang v.
Registrar of Titles <case>; [(1976) 137 CLR 177] at 184, 189-90; Jacobs, Law of Trusts in Australia, 5th
Ed., pp.277-8. However, I would question whether the Skyrms could correctly be regarded as trustees, and as having the fiduciary obligations of trustees, once they had done everything they needed to do to transfer the title.
Whatever Gaetano's rights were, it would appear that Natalie (and/or Nunzio) had notice, at least through Mr. Vardanega, of those rights, so that, subject to questions arising under the Real Property Act and [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), and questions of laches, Gaetano's rights could be asserted against Natalie and/or
Nunzio.

But the question is, what was the nature and quantum of Gaetano's rights? One question is whether they can property be regarded as statutory rights of some value, or alternatively as in substance being an equitable title to the land, subject to a charge for moneys contributed to the property by others. Where a fiduciary obtains property in breach of a fiduciary duty, it is very usual to find that the fiduciary holds the property on trust for the beneficiary, subject to just allowances. However, there is a real question as to whether
Natalie can be regarded as having been a fiduciary in relation to Gaetano's estate. For one thing, as submitted by Mr. Wilson, the statutory rights to which Gaetano's estate had an equitable claim were of very dubious value. They were liable to forfeiture, and there was no person prepared to take steps and to spend money on behalf of Gaetano's estate to avoid that forfeiture. Without money being spent, payments of instalments to the Crown would rapidly fall into arrears, so that pursuant to s.145A(4) of the Crown Lands Consolidation
Act, entitlement to have a transfer recognised would be lost.

It would, in my opinion, be unrealistic to regard Natalie as a trustee for
Gaetano's estate, particularly in circumstances where I think it would be unrealistic to regard the Skyrms as having been trustees for Gaetano. In my opinion, the realistic view of the rights of Gaetano's estate is that of an equitable claim to certain statutory rights of somewhat dubious value, which equity could in appropriate circumstances give effect to as an equitable charge for the value of these rights. These rights could probably have been sold by Gaetano's estate for something in the order of what Gaetano had paid out for them, that is, something in the order of $3,000.00.
 .2 Is Any Interest of Gaetano's Estate Now Enforceable? 
Mr. Wilson submitted that Natalie was protected by her registration under the
Real Property Act; and also that the times limited under [ss.14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s14.html) and [23](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s23.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) had expired. Mr. Rundle submitted that the interest of Gaetano's estate fell within one of the exceptions to indefeasibility, either that relating to fraud under s.43 of the Real Property Act, or as a personal equity enforceable against Natalie. He further submitted that the applicable limitation period was that for recovery of trust property under [s.47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s47.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), and that that period had not expired.

Dealing first with the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/), I note that "trust" in that Act is defined to include constructive trusts. However, a constructive trust is essentially a trust imposed by the Court where the circumstances require it. For reasons I have given, I would not regard this as a case of constructive trust, but rather a case where an equitable interest in land is sought to be enforced against the present owner of that land.
Accordingly, in my opinion the applicable section under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) would be [s.36](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s36.html), which in general terms adopts the twelve-year limitation period prescribed by s.27 of the Act in relation to legal interests in land.

However, the limitation period commences to run "from the date on which the cause of action first accrues to the plaintiff or to a person through whom he claims". In this case, no cause of action accrued to the plaintiff, that is to
Josephine, until she obtained administration of Gaetano's estate. No cause of action accrued to Gaetano himself, because he died before any cause of action arose. The cause of action accruing to Gaetano's estate may in some sense have been vested in the Public Trustee until Josephine obtained administration; but in my opinion, the Public Trustee is not a person through whom the plaintiff claims: Josephine's title, upon administration being granted, related back then to the date of death.

This appears to be the position, on the correct construction of the wording of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). It also appears to be the position at general law. This was decided in Murray v. East
India Company (1821) 5 B. and Ald. 204, and does not seem to have been questioned since then: see Hammond v. State Rail Authority (Newman, J., /6/88, appeal dismissed [(1988) 15 NSWLR 395).] 
On this approach, it could be contended that the plaintiff must fail, because she herself had no cause of action until after the commencement of these proceedings. If this Baldry v. Jackson point is taken, I would be minded, subject to whatever submissions the defendant might make, to give leave for a fresh action to be commenced, and to be decided on the basis of the evidence and submissions which I have heard.

Turning to the Real Property Act question, I am not satisfied that Natalie had such dealings with Gaetano or his estate, or such notice of the interest of
Gaetano's estate, that she can be said to be subject directly to personal equities in favour of Gaetano's estate, or guilty of fraud directly against
Gaetano's estate. However, for reasons I have given when dealing with the credit of Natalie, in my opinion her registered interest was subject to a trust in favour of Nunzio; and in my opinion, Nunzio's equitable interest was in turn subject to the equitable interest of Gaetano's estate. In my opinion,
Gaetano's estate can assert against Natalie so much of the interest of Nunzio as is subject to the equitable interest of Gaetano's estate. However, in my opinion, Gaetano's estate cannot assert against Natalie the balance of
Nunzio's interest: that would have to come from Nunzio's estate or some representative of Nunzio's creditors.

On the approach I have taken, I do not think there can be any reliance on laches: and in my opinion, the Court should recognise a claim which Josephine can assert on behalf of Gaetano's estate, which I would value at $3,000.00 as at 16th October 1980, with some provision for interest from that date to the present.
 . BLUMER AVENUE PROPERTY .1 Was There An Effective Severance of the Joint Tenancy? 
Mr. Rundle submitted that I should infer that the transfer purporting to sever the joint tenancy was indeed signed by both parties before Venera died. That this was so, and that Salvatore was well aware of this, was confirmed by the deed signed on 20th January 1983, just 21 days after Nunzio was released from prison.

Mr. Wilson provided written submissions on this matter also. He submitted that
Mr. Vardanega's evidence showed that Salvatore was unlikely to have executed such a document knowing of its contents, this being confirmed by the evidence of Salvatore's objections and complaints about the document made subsequently.
Clearly, Mr. Vardanega's instructions for preparing the document had come only from Venera, and not from Salvatore. Furthermore, the great delay in seeking to put this document into effect counted strongly against its authenticity and effectiveness. The three children became aware of the transfer, but did nothing to ensure that it took effect. The failure by the three children to take action to give effect to this document was consistent with a view that, in the light of Salvatore's objections, they did not seek to enforce it against him. That in turn suggests that Salvatore's assertions that this was not a document that he knowingly signed was accepted by the children. In all the circumstances, the Court should not infer that Salvatore knowingly signed this document; and in any event, the plaintiff's claim in these proceedings would be defeated by laches. Furthermore, Mr. Wilson submitted, the execution of the transfer did not itself effect a severance of the joint tenancy, but at best was evidence of an agreement to that effect: see Wright v. Gibbons <case>; [(1949) 78 CLR 313.] So at best, the plaintiff is seeking specific performance of an agreement, which would be affected by the unconscionable delay in seeking this remedy.

Now, these are proceedings in which relief is sought on the basis of action taken by Salvatore, who is now deceased, and subsequent repudiation by
Salvatore of that action. In those circumstances, it is incumbent upon a plaintiff to be particularly diligent in calling available evidence. From my account of the facts, it seems clear that Mr. McCormack would have been an important witness in this case, who, more than perhaps anyone else, may have been able to give direct evidence concerning the execution of the transfer document. However, I am satisfied that the absence of this witness from the case is no fault whatsoever of the plaintiff. The importance of this witness was not suggested by any evidence provided on behalf of the defendant within the times limited for filing and serving affidavits, nor was it indicated by the affidavit of Mr. Vardanega which was filed and served only shortly before the hearing of this matter. The importance of this witness only fully emerged in Mr. Vardanega's oral evidence. Mr. Vardanega, as a solicitor who assisted
Salvatore to obtain a registered title by survivorship, was plainly a witness in the defendant's camp. While I would not go so far as to draw a full Jones v. Dunkel inference against the defendant through failure to call Mr.
McCormack, I do consider very strongly that the absence of Mr. McCormack from this case should not in any way disadvantage the plaintiff.

In those circumstances, in my opinion the inference can and should be drawn that Mr. McCormack did what he was instructed to do, namely get the will executed and get the transfer document executed by Venera and Salvatore. The circumstance that the transfer document was witnessed by a person who did not see Venera making her mark does not cause me to think that Salvatore did not willingly sign the document, and sign it understanding its effect. Although he later repudiated the document, and although it may well have gone heavily against the grain for him to do something that would enable a half-interest in this house to be directed by his wife to his children, I see nothing particularly implausible in even so domineering a person as Salvatore acceding to the wishes of his dying wife.

Furthermore, although Salvatore did later repudiate the document, and certainly protested and complained strongly about it, every document brought into existence up to about August 1985, including a deed drawn up by Mr.
Vardanega and executed by Salvatore and witnessed by Mr. Vardanega, recognised the effectiveness of the severance. In my opinion, Mr. Vardanega and the three children accepted that the severance was effective, up to August 1985. I am satisfied that any denial by Salvatore that he signed the document was false.
There is no clear evidence as to any other legitimate basis on which Salvatore may have repudiated the document, and I see no basis for either declining to infer that the document was effective or for declining to infer that Salvatore understood that it was effective.

Even though the document may have amounted to an agreement to sever rather than an immediately effective severance operative on legal interests, it was a transaction for full consideration with no aspect of consideration left outstanding, and in my opinion it was effective in equity subject to the usual equitable defences.
 .2 Can The Half-Interest Passing Under Venera's Will Now Be Enforced? 
Mr. Wilson submitted that Natalie's title was indefeasible. There was no privity between Natalie and Josephine which would give rise to a personal equity: see Queensland Insurance Co. v. Australian Mutual Fire Insurance
Society <case>; [(1941) 41 SR 195.] He submitted that, in evidence, Josephine conceded that Natalie had told her that
Salvatore had left the house to her: had Natalie been engaged in a fraudulent endeavour to deprive Josephine of her interest, she would not have openly have told Josephine about this. In any event, specific performance should not be granted, having regard to the long delay: see Meagher, Gummow & Lehane,
Equity, 3rd Ed., par.3414.

Mr. Rundle submitted that Natalie was well aware that Salvatore had acted fraudulently with a view to depriving Josephine of her interest, had recognised Josephine's interest by making payments to her, and then had herself acted fraudulently in denying that interest. Natalie had told lies to
Josephine in denying that the property had been sold, at a time when it had already been sold, indicating full consciousness of Josephine's entitlement.

In my opinion, Salvatore was bound by his execution of the transfer to give effect to the severance, and he remained bound by that obligation when he became registered as sole proprietor of the property. In my opinion, Natalie knew of Josephine's one-quarter equitable interest in the property, made payments to Josephine purportedly on account of that interest, and then sought to defeat that interest by herself becoming registered as sole proprietor. In my opinion, that would amount to fraud sufficient to overcome s.43 of the Real
Property Act.

I do not believe there is any problem under the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/). A cause of action first arose, in my opinion, when Salvatore set out to become registered as sole proprietor by virtue of survivorship, that is, on or about 20th
January 1988, when the Notice of Death was sent for registration. At that time, in my opinion Salvatore was in the position of a trustee, so that the appropriate limitation is that provided by [s.47](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s47.html) of the [Limitation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/).
Furthermore, in my opinion, payments made by Natalie to Josephine confirmed
Josephine's cause of action.

As regards laches, I do not think the failure of Nunzio, and later of
Josephine, to have legal effect given to the transfer document should be considered as laches. Up to August 1985, so far as Nunzio and Josephine were aware, the document was treated as effective by Mr. Vardanega; and although
Salvatore protested about it, it was not conveyed to Nunzio or Josephine that
Salvatore did not accept its effectiveness. Indeed, the statements in
Salvatore's wills rather suggest that he did accept its effectiveness.
Furthermore, Mr. Vardanega accepts that he never gave advice that anything more needed to be done. I have already mentioned that the payments made by
Natalie were made and accepted essentially as being on account of Josephine's interest. Accordingly, in my opinion, there has been no significant delay in bringing these proceedings.
 . [FAMILY PROVISION ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) 
In circumstances where I have found in substance that Josephine is entitled to the one-quarter share of the Blumer Avenue property, I do not understand the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) application to be pressed. Certainly, in those circumstances, I would not see any ground which would amount to special circumstances which would, in this case, be required by s.28(5)(d) of the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) to justify an extension of time.
 . CONCLUSION 
It follows that, subject to the Baldry v. Jackson question, I would be prepared to find in favour of the plaintiff, as administrator of Gaetano's estate, to the extent of $3,000.00 plus interest since 1980. If necessary, I will hear submissions as to whether that sum should be regarded as charged on property presently held by the defendant.

As regards the Blumer Avenue property, the plaintiff is entitled to one- quarter of the net proceeds of sale, subject to some accounting in relation to any excess of the payments made to Josephine over the share of income to which she was entitled. I will hear submissions if necessary as to the precise figures. At present, it would appear that the net proceeds of sale amounted to something like $140,000.00, so that a one-quarter share would be $35,000.00.
It appears that the payments made to Josephine amounted to about $19,000.00, whereas her share of income may have been of the order of around $8,000.00.
That would mean $11,000.00 would come off $35,000.00, giving a balance of $24,000.00. To this would be added interest, I believe at the Court rates, from 7th May 1993, that is interest of the order of $13,000.00. This total of around $37,000.00 would be charged on the Gold Coast property.

As regards costs, despite the relatively low amount of the recovery, my tentative view is that the defendants should pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings. However, if necessary, I will hear further submissions on this.
 * * * 
