

Evatt versus Chief Commissioner of Land Tax Matter No 30069/98 [1998] NSWSC 652 (16 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
VICTOR EVATT versus CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF LAND TAX /98 October 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Administrative Law 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On this motion the defendant, the Chief Commissioner for Land Tax, seeks summary dismissal pursuant to the SCR Pt 13 r5, of the plaintiff's appeal against certain assessments of land tax for the years 1991 to 1994 issued in respect of the property "Leurella" at 41 Belmore Road, Leura, on the ground that an appeal lies only in respect of a valid objection which has been wholly or partly disallowed, and the objections in the present case were not valid because they were lodged outside the time permitted. 
The assessments appealed against were issued on 8 May 1995 (in respect of the tax year) and 5 July 1995 (in respect of the 1992-1995 tax years) and according to the affidavit of Geradus van Emmerck sworn 6 October 1998 were all sent to the plaintiff by pre paid post "on or about the date shown in the
Notice as the issue date".

Prior to 1 July 1997, s35 of the [Land Tax Management Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ltma1956173/) (the
LT Act) provided that a tax payer dissatisfied with an assessment could object to it, but "only within sixty days (or such longer period as the Chief
Commissioner may allow for reasonable cause shown in a particular case) after service of the notice of assessment": subs (1) and (2); and s76 provided that in the case of service by post, service should be deemed to have been effected at the time when it would have been delivered in the ordinary course of post.

By letter to the Chief Commissioner dated 26 September 1995 (received 27
September) the plaintiff objected to the various assessments which he claimed he received on 18 August 1995. By a further letter dated 29 September (received 3 October 1995) he purported to amend his grounds of objection.

This appears to have been followed by a deadly silence for over two and a half years until 11 May 1998 when the defendant wrote to the plaintiff a letter which read in part as follows: "Dear Mr Evatt, 
I refer to your letter of 26/09/1995 objecting to the above assessments and apologise for the time it has taken to make a determination in this matter.

It is now advised that your objection is invalid in that it was not lodged within the time constraints of Section 35(1) of the [Land Tax Management Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ltma1956173/).

Notwithstanding that the grounds of your objection have been considered, in that regard it has been determined that..." and the letter went on, in effect, partially to allow the objection in respect of part of the property.

By this time there had been enacted the Taxation Administration Act, 1996 (No 97)(the TA Act) and the Taxation Administration (Consequential
Amendments) Act, 1996 (No 98) which both commenced on 1 July 1997. The effect of these Acts was that s35(1) and (2) of the LT Act were both repealed and new provisions relating to objections and appeals enacted in the TA Act (ss to 106).

Section 86 provides for the making of objections, which under s89 are required to be lodged not later than sixty days after the date of service of the assessment, but s90 allows the Chief Commissioner to permit a person to lodge an objection after the sixty day period; and although it requires the applicant to state the circumstances and reasons for failing to lodge the objection within time, it contains no express reference to "reasonable grounds". Section 91 provides for the determination by the Chief Commissioner of objections and s96 for the giving of notice of determinations, whilst s96 provides for appeals if the tax payer is dissatisfied with the determination of the objection, or the objection has not been determined within ninety days.
Such appeals must be lodged within sixty days after the issue of the notice of the Chief Commissioner's determination of the objection (s97) or such further time as this Court may allow (s98). As a result of clause 16(2) of Schedule 1 of the TA Act, the earlier legislation continues to apply to notices of assessment and determinations served before the new legislation came into force, the new Part 10 only applying to notices of assessment and determinations of the Chief Commissioner served after that commencement.

It follows that to determine whether there has been a valid objection, the former legislation is relevant, but assuming that the defendant's letter of 11
May 1998 was a Notice of a Determination (as it is headed), the new legislation is relevant to determine whether a valid appeal has been instituted.

The Summons in this case was filed on 8 July 1998 within sixty days of 11
March 1998. There is no dispute that the appeal was instituted within time, but the Chief Commissioner submits that the appeal is incompetent because there was no valid objection, the original objection being out of time.

It was further submitted that the letter of 11 May does not constitute an extension of time for lodging the objection because it makes no reference to extension of time and expressly states that the objection is invalid, and it was further submitted that even if it is constituted as an extension of time by the Chief Commissioner, such purported extension of time was invalid and hence a nullity because "no reasonable cause" had been shown as required by the former s35(2).

The scheme of the two pieces of legislation read together is that there can only be an appeal under s96(1)(a) of the TA Act if the tax payer is dissatisfied with the Chief Commissioner's determination of the tax payer's objection; and it follows that before there can be a relevant determination with which the tax payer may be dissatisfied there must be a valid objection, and for present purposes, that means an objection which complies with the former s35 of the LT Act, including subs (2), otherwise there is no valid appeal before the court: Commissioner of Taxes (NT) versus Tangentyere Council
Inc (1992) 92 ATC 4313.

In the absence of express statutory power, revenue authorities have no authority to waive or relax time limits fixed by Parliament: Federal
Commissioner for Taxation versus S Hoffnung and Company Limited (1928) 42 CLR 39 at 54; Chadwick versus Commissioner for Stamp Duties [[1977] 1 NSWLR ]
at 155. In the latter case, Hutley JA said at 155: "I am of opinion that this Court is bound by authority to hold that the
Commissioner, though charged with the responsibility for levying and collecting duty, is confined by Parliament in performing his duties, and cannot, for any reason, extend a courtesy which could be expected in ordinary business relations between honourable men".

The times cannot be extended by the Court: Saville versus Commissioner for Land
Tax (1980) 81 ATC 4373, except where expressly authorised by s98 of the TA
Act or s38C of the LT Act.

Under the former s35(c) the Chief Commissioner had power to extend the time "for reasonable cause shown". This is a more restricted power than under s90 of the TA Act which does not require "reasonable cause" to be shown, but I am satisfied that, as the Chief Commissioner cannot extend the time unless given such power, so when given power if certain conditions exist, he cannot extend the time unless such conditions exist; and therefore he had no power to extend the time unless "reasonable cause" was shown.

The power of determining whether reasonable cause has been shown rests with the Chief Commissioner. It is his determination of whether what has been shown amounts to "reasonable cause" that is relevant, subject, presumably, to the ordinary principles of administrative review, but there must be some cause shown which is capable of being regarded by the Chief Commissioner as reasonable.

In the present case, the purported objection of 26 September asserted that the plaintiff tax payer had only received the assessments on 18 August 1995, although no further details are contained in that letter as to why they were only received by him then rather than within three or four days of their issue, and posting as contemplated by s76 of the LT Act. However, later receipt of the assessments (even if no fault of the Chief Commissioner) could constitute reasonable cause for granting an extension of time for the lodging of an objection.

It was submitted on behalf of the Chief Commissioner that he had not in fact granted an extension of time and reliance is placed on the second paragraph of the letter quoted above advising that the objection was invalid, but on the other hand, there are a number of factors capable of supporting an inference that the Chief Commissioner had in fact allowed further time. In particular, the document is headed "Notice of Determination" and the first paragraph apologises for the delay in making "a determination", whilst the third paragraph refers to the grounds of the objection being "considered" and certain things being "determined". Such language is, in my view, appropriate to dealing with a valid objection (including one in respect of which the time for lodgment has been extended) rather than dealing with an invalid objection, in which case the Chief Commissioner was not required to consider the merits of such objection at all. Whether the Chief Commissioner has granted an extension of time for reasonable cause shown is an issue which ultimately will depend on inference and possibly further evidence, and as there is some evidence in the plaintiff's favour, namely, the assertion in the objection that the assessments were only received on 18 August, it cannot be determined against the plaintiff on an application for summary judgment: General Steel
Industries Inc versus Commissioner for Railways (New South Wales)  <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125.] 
Finally, counsel for the plaintiff has submitted that his client can still apply to the Court under the former s38C of the LT Act, a provision only introduced in 1988 which provides that this Court could extend the time for doing anything under Part 5 within which fell s35, and he indicated that his client would seek to do so in the present proceedings. I see no reason why he should not be permitted to make such application. Not infrequently applications for extension of time under the [Limitation Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) or [Motor Accidents Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) are made in the substantive proceedings after the latter have been commenced:
Dandashli versus Dandashli (unreported - Court of Appeal - 16 December 1996); thus avoiding multiplicity of proceedings. This possibility is a further reason why summary judgment must be refused. I order that the Notice of Motion be dismissed.

Costs of the Motion are to be the plaintiff's costs in the cause.
 * * * 
