

Schwartz versus Bentwood [2002] NSWSC 1020 (28 October 2002) 
Last Updated: 31 October 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Schwartz versus Bentwood <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 5315/01  
HEARING DATE{S): 28/10/02  
JUDGMENT DATE: 28/10/2002  
PARTIES: 
Schwartz Family Co Pty Limited - Plaintiff 
Judith Joan Bentwood - First Defendant 
Jerry Leslie Schwartz - Second Defendant 
Eve Veronica Schwartz as executor of the estate of the late Bela Schwartz -
Third Defendant 
George Michael Kritzler as executor of the estate of the late Bela Schwartz -
Fourth Defendant 
Eve Veronica Schwartz - Fifth Defendant 
Adlen Investments Pty Ltd - Sixth Defendant 
Liliana Di Napoli-Schwartz - Seventh Defendant 
Kinky Holdings Pty Limited - Eighth Defendant 
Sophie Bentwood - Ninth Defendant  
JUDGMENT OF: Barrett J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr P Strasser - Plaintiff - Mentions Second to Sixth and Eighth Defendants 
Ms B Carroll, Solicitor - First Defendant 
Mr J Burreket, Solicitor - Seventh Defendant 
Ms J Needham - Ninth Defendant  
SOLICITORS: 
Lang Gellert & Noonan - Plaintiff 
Parry Carroll - First Defendant 
Turner Whelan - Second Defendant 
Teece Hodgson & Ward - Third and Fourth Defendants 
Anne Einfeld - Fifth, Sixth and Eighth Defendants 
Broun Abrahams - Seventh Defendant 
Tress Cocks & Maddox - Ninth Defendant  
CATCHWORDS: 
PROCEDURE - joinder of minor as defendant - appointment of tutor - whether solicitor should be appointed on the basis that he may act without employing another solicitor  
ACTS CITED: 
Supreme Court Rules  
DECISION: 
Orders made  
JUDGMENT:  - 4 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION  
BARRETT J  
MONDAY, 28 OCTOBER 2002  /01 - SCHWARTZ FAMILY CO PTY LIMITED versus BENTWOOD & ORS  
JUDGMENT  The plaintiff applies by notice of motion filed on 25 October 2002 for two orders: first, an order joining Sophie Bentwood as the ninth defendant; and, second, an order pursuant to Part 63 rule 7 of the Supreme Court Rules appointing a tutor for Sophie Bentwood for the purpose of the proceedings.  The proceedings involve ascertaining entitlements in respect of a family trust. Sophie Bentwood is a grand-daughter of the person who was instrumental in the establishment of the trust in 1977. Questions are likely to arise as to whether, in the light of minutes of meetings of the directors of the plaintiff purporting to specify the class of beneficiaries, she is or is not within the class. It is therefore appropriate that she be a party to the proceedings to ensure that everyone whose interests and entitlements may be in issue is before the court.  As to the appointment of a tutor, the evidence shows that Sophie is aged 14.
She therefore lacks legal capacity and a tutor is necessary. Two issues arise.  First, there is no evidence of service of the motion on Sophie Bentwood as contemplated by Part 63 rule 7(1A) of the Supreme Court Rules. I have been informed by counsel, however, that her father has been made aware of this application. Sophie's father is not a party to the proceedings but her mother is. The father has made no objection to the particular appointment proposed.
Given that Sophie is aged 14, it is unlikely that service on her would be a productive course as a person of that age would not normally understand the full ramifications of proceedings of this kind or of the application for the appointment of a tutor, although she would obviously have a general appreciation of the nature of the subject matter. Particularly in light of the attitude of the father, I am prepared to make an order dispensing with service on the person referred to in Part 63 rule 7(1A) as "the disable person".  The other point arises from the proposal that the tutor be Mr G J
Englefield, a solicitor, and that he should also act as solicitor in the interests of Sophie Bentwood as ninth defendant. Members of her family are, as
I have said, already interested in the proceedings.  Counsel have drawn my attention to the decision of Hodgson J in Deputy
Commissioner of Taxation versus P [(1987) 11 NSWLR 200] where his
Honour considered a rule or, at least, a practice said to have been adopted by the court in former times against the appointment of a solicitor as tutor where that solicitor will himself act as solicitor for the interests concerned. Under the old rule or practice, it seems that a solicitor appointed as tutor was required to employ another solicitor in accordance with the general rule that a tutor must act through a solicitor. Hodgson J canvassed the objections to the dual role mentioned by Bonney J in Loorham versus Loorham [(1947) 65 WN 98] and contrary indications in English cases and a Queensland case. His Honour proceeded to deal with Bonney J's objections one by one in a way that satisfies me that there should not today be seen to be any objection in principle to a solicitor playing the dual role, provided that the solicitor is free from conflicting duty or allegiance. In that respect, I note that Mr
Englefield is not acting for any other party to the proceedings and is not otherwise involved. A consent has been produced in which Mr Englefield states that he is not related to Sophie Bentwood and has no interest in the proceedings adverse to her interests.  Part 62 rule 3(2) states the general rule to which I have already referred that a tutor must act by a solicitor. The court may, however, dispense with this (or any other) requirement of the rules: Part 1 rule 12. Hodgson J dispensed with the Part 62 rule 3(2) requirement in Deputy Commissioner of
Taxation versus P (above) and it is appropriate to do so here also.  All existing parties are represented before me this morning. None of them has any objection to the orders I am about to make. The orders and directions of the court are as follows: 
Order 1 in the notice of motion joining Sophie Bentwood as ninth defendant. 
Grant leave for filing in court of the affidavit of Graham John Englefield sworn today, Mr Englefield's certificate of no adverse interest dated today and Mr Englefield's notice of appearance on behalf of the ninth defendant. 
Order that service of the notice of motion on Sophie Bentwood be dispensed with. 
Order that compliance with Part 63 rule 3(2) be dispensed with. 
Order 2 in the notice of motion appointing Mr Englefield to be the tutor of the ninth defendant. 
Order that the costs of this application be costs in the cause. 
Direct that the ninth defendant file and serve her defence and any cross- claim by 18 November 2002.  
LAST UPDATED: 30/10/2002 * * * 
