

Howell versus Haines [1996] NSWSC 546 (15 November 1996) 
HOWELL versus HAINES /93; CL 16827/90 (Defamation List) November 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ; CLARKE, SHELLER JJA 
CATCHWORDS: DEFAMATION - imputation of bribery - justification - qualified privilege - comment - implied freedom of publication in the course of political discussion - malice 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
The respondent brought an action in the Defamation List of the Common Law
Division to recover damages for injury suffered by reason of defamatory matter contained in two documents published by the appellant. At first instance, the defence of comment succeeded in relation to the first document, and the respondent did not cross appeal against this result.

In the second publication complained of, the appellant outlined facts surrounding the purchase of a new home unit by the respondent and his wife. He alleged that the respondent and his wife had received a gift from the builder of the premises in the form of a discount of the purchase price of the unit.
The respondent denied that there had been anything improper in the purchase or that he had obtained some advantage for any of the parties involved with the building project through his position as alderman.

Although the appellant conceded that this publication did give rise to the imputations that the respondent was open to, and involved in, bribery, and was dishonest, he offered no apology.

At trial, the appellant pleaded the defences of justification, qualified privilege and comment. He also sought to file a supplementary notice of appeal and to amend his defence to include the implied Constitutional freedom to publish material in the course of political discussion, in reliance upon the majority decision in Theophanous versus The Herald and Weekly Times Limited <case>; [(1994) 182 CLR 104.] 
Dunford J found that none of these defences had been made out, and further that the appellant's publication was motivated by malice in the sense of improper purpose. The appellant appeals against this decision.

HELD: . It is a defence to any imputation complained of that the imputation is a matter of substantial truth, and the imputation either relates to a matter of public interest or is published under qualified privilege; [Defamation Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) [s15(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s15.html) (the Act). Dunford J did not accept the appellant's argument that the sale price was at an undervalue, from which it should have been inferred that the respondent knew it was a bribe. His Honour found that the respondent's belief that the home unit was not sold at an undervalue was honestly held. Accordingly, the defence of justification was not made out because the truth of the imputation was not established. These findings were open to the trial Judge and should not be disturbed.
The defence of qualified privilege at common law and under the Act requires that the parties have an interest or apparent interest in receiving the published information, and that the conduct of the publisher is reasonable in the circumstances: [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) [s22](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s22.html);
Morgan versus John Fairfax and Sons Limited (No 2) [(1991) 23 NSWLR 374] at 387-8.
The trial Judge was correct in finding that the defence of qualified privilege was not made out in this case. The appellant failed to show that he had exercised reasonable care, by making proper inquiries and checking on the accuracy of his sources, to ensure that the allegations were true or that they followed logically, fairly or reasonably from the information he had obtained.
The implied freedom in the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) to publish material about the conduct or fitness of persons for office as members of Parliament did not extend to statements which were known to be false, made with reckless disregard for the truth or made irresponsibly; Theophanous v
The Herald and Weekly Times Limited <case>; <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 1]; Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd versus The Commonwealth of
Australia <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 106)], yet he did not raise this matter at trial. He should not now be able to rely on Theophanous to amend his defence and ventilate new issues which were not heard at trial.
The protection of qualified privilege will be lost when the desire to injure is the dominant motive for the defamatory publication. Even a positive belief in the truth of what was published may not be enough to negative express malice: Horrocks versus Lowe [[1975] AC 135] at 149ff;
McKenzie versus Mergen Holdings Pty Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 42] at 46. It was open to the trial Judge to find that the appellant was motivated by malice in that his dominant reason for publication was to hurt the right wing of the
ALP in general and the respondent in particular.
The defence of comment was not made out in this case, because the publication treated the allegations made therein as established fact. The reasonable reader would not have understood the publication as comment; Radio
UE Sydney Pty Limited versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR 448] at 464.

ORDER 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of Sheller JA. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders.
 
CLARKE JA: I agree with Sheller JA.
 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
The respondent, John Edward Haines, sued the appellant, Phillip Andrew Kent Howell, to recover damages for injury suffered by reason of the publication of defamatory matter contained in two documents, one dated 14 August and the other 16 October 1990. The text of these publications is contained in annexures `A' and `B' to this judgment. The respondent claimed that each of the publications gave rise in its natural and ordinary meaning to six imputations ((a) to (f)), each of which was defamatory of him. Dunford J, sitting without a jury, heard the proceedings and delivered judgment on 22 March 1993. The defence of comment succeeded in relation to the first publication. The respondent has not cross appealed against that result. In relation to the second publication the respondent did not press the first three imputations and the appellant admitted that the publication gave rise to the remaining three imputations, namely "(d) That the plaintiff was open to bribery; 
That the plaintiff was involved in bribery; 
That the plaintiff is dishonest." 
Dunford J rejected the appellant's defences in respect of the second publication and held the plaintiff was entitled to damages which he assessed at $75,000. His Honour allowed interest from the date of publication until the date of judgment in an amount of $3,625. The appellant appeals from this judgment.

THE PARTIES 
At the date of the trial the respondent, Mr Haines, was fifty-five years old and had been a member of the Australian Labor Party (ALP) and the party's Rydalmere branch since 1972. He had generally been associated with those regarded as belonging to the right wing of the party. Since 1980 he had been an Alderman of Parramatta City Council. In 1987 he was elected Deputy Mayor and in 1991, Mayor. Dunford J found that he had enjoyed a good reputation both in his private and public life. 
The appellant, Mr Howell, was a solicitor who had been a member of the ALP since 1977. He was a member of the left wing faction from about 1983 until
June 1989 when he allowed his membership of that faction to lapse. Thereafter he remained aligned with the left. In 1990 he was secretary of the Parramatta branch of the party.
 -9 ROBERTSON STREET, PARRAMATTA 
On 10 December 1984 an application on behalf of Coracam Pty Limited (Coracam), for approval to develop 7-9 Robertson Street, Parramatta, came before the Parramatta City Council. The application did not comply with the Council's building code and, notwithstanding representations made personally to the respondent by Barry Wilde (then State Labor Member for Parramatta and husband of Kathleen Wilde, a director of Coracam), the application was deferred. The respondent voted for the deferral. On 17 December 1984, after amendment of the application and recommendation in its favour by Council officers, the development was approved subject to conditions. On this occasion the respondent played no active part but, together with the other aldermen present, voted in favour of the approval. Subsequently Diane Properties Pty Limited, a company owned and substantially controlled by John Fayad, another member of the Rydalmere branch of the ALP, built a block of home units on the property, pursuant to a joint venture agreement between Diane Properties and Coracam.

In October 1985 the respondent, who worked as a taxi driver, while following that occupation, was looking for a home unit to purchase in the area. He saw and inspected the building in the course of construction. After some negotiations with Mr Fayad, the respondent and his wife entered into a contract dated 4 December 1985 to purchase unit 4 for $73,500. The sale was completed on 12 February 1986.

THE 1990 PRE-SELECTION 
In 1985 the appellant moved to Parramatta to seek ALP pre-selection for the
Federal seat of Parramatta. The ballot was held on 15 April 1989. The candidates were the appellant and Paul Elliott. The respondent actively supported Mr Elliott, who defeated the appellant by 76 votes to 52. Mr Elliott went on to become the Federal Member for the seat.

In 1988 Mr Wilde, the Labor member for the State seat, was defeated in the general election. A pre-selection ballot for a new candidate was scheduled for July 1990. The nominees were Mr Wilde and the respondent. After some consideration and negotiations the appellant and some of his associates agreed to support Mr Wilde in the pre-selection.

On or about 17 June 1990 Mr Wilde and the respondent met in a restaurant at
Parramatta. Mr Wilde confronted the respondent with an unsigned and undated document headed "Advice", and a form of letter to be signed by the respondent wherein he advised that he had decided to withdraw from the pre-selection and assured Mr Wilde of his full support in the campaign to regain Parramatta for the ALP. The "Advice" referred to the development application and Council meetings of December 1984, the joint venture agreement and the area and sale price of some of the units in the building. In the course of this the un-named writer said: "I am instructed that unit 4 was sold as above at the insistence of Mr Fayad" and later: "Documentation available to us also reflects a dispute between Coracam Pty
Limited and Diane Properties Pty Limited as to the final accounts of the Joint
Venture and in the course of that dispute Coracam Pty Limited obtained from
Parramatta Realty Pty Limited the attached market appraisal dated 20th June in relation to Units 4, 5, 8 and 11. The market appraisal for Unit 4 suggests a value between $128,000.00 and $130,000.00 at the appropriate period.

The above events give rise to concern. One would need to look to the parties therefore to clarify the circumstances giving rise to concern. There seems little doubt that Unit 4 was sold and transferred at a substantial undervalue on terms that are not reflected in the Agreement for Sale between the parties dated 4th December 1985." 
The "Advice" went on to refer to provisions in the Local Government Act 1919 and concluded: "Whether the conveyancing transaction involving the sale to Alderman and Mrs
Haines involves any offence under the Local Government Act 1919 clearly involves wider investigation than can presently be undertaken. Any investigation on the evidence available must necessarily take in far wider parameters than the present instance." 
Dunford J described Mr Wilde's action "as a cheap and blatant attempt at blackmail." The respondent refused to withdraw from the pre-selection and was successful in the ballot on 14 July 1990.

On the evening of the ballot Mr Wilde, his wife and the appellant dined together at a restaurant. They discussed the matter of the sale of the unit to the respondent. Mr Wilde told the appellant in effect that:
The Liberal Party was aware of something detrimental to the respondent;
Mr Fayad wanted to give one of the units to the respondent;
Ultimately they had agreed that the Wilde interests and the Fayad interests would each get two units out of the development for their own purposes and Mr Fayad would let the respondent have one of his units.

Mr Wilde said the sale price of the unit to the respondent was very low.

On 16 July 1990 the appellant helped Mr Wilde draft a letter to Mr Della
Bosca, the General Secretary of the New South Wales branch of the ALP, which the appellant delivered the following day. The document headed "Advice" was enclosed and described as "a draft legal advice which I obtained concerning a property transaction by" the respondent. Mr Wilde wrote that it was based on facts which were within his knowledge and which could be verified by publicly available documents.

At this time Mr Wilde told the appellant that if the respondent was not endorsed and a fresh pre-selection called, he would not stand but leave the way open for the appellant. The appellant claimed not to be really interested in a State seat. On 10 August 1990 the respondent was endorsed as the ALP candidate for Parramatta by the Administrative Committee of the party.

THE FIRST PUBLICATION COMPLAINED OF 
On 14 August 1990 a meeting of the Parramatta branch of the party was held.
Both the appellant and the respondent were present. Although Mr Wilde had returned from a holiday trip to Europe, which he had undertaken shortly after delivering the letter of 16 July to the party's head office, and the appellant had advised him that his allegations would be raised at the branch meeting, Mr
Wilde was not present at the branch meeting. At the meeting the appellant handed out the document, annexure `A', signed by him. The document was addressed "To ALP Members Only". It referred to the acquisition by the respondent and his wife of unit 4 and said that there was strong evidence that this property was bought for less "than market value". There followed material about the purchase of some of the other units in the block. The second page was headed "Questions John Haines Must Answer". Seven questions followed. The appellant wrote that there might be proper answers to these questions but said that, if there was no proper explanation and the respondent had received a gift from a local developer while on Council, he had, in the writer's opinion, no alternative but to resign as the State candidate, resign as an alderman and resign from the ALP. The document concluded: "I require John Haines to provide me with satisfactory answers to the above questions within 14 days. If he does not, I will take further action.

Finally, I ask Branch members to note the following: a. I have taken this action after hearing from two separate sources that the
Liberals have some dirt on John Haines.
 b. Senior Party Officers were notified of these matters on Monday July 16 1990 but have so far taken no action.
 c. It should not be assumed that the above is the only information I have about this matter." 
At the meeting the respondent attempted to defend himself but his defence did not satisfy the appellant.

RESPONDENT'S ANSWER 
On 20 August 1990 the respondent sent a letter to the branch members of the
ALP Parramatta State electorate. He referred to the approach made to him by Mr
Wilde and asserted that Mr Wilde had told him that if he did not resign Mr
Wilde would distribute the advice amongst the branch members. He said: "I did not resign and Barry did not distribute the advice prior to the pre- selection." He then referred to the ultimatum presented to him by the appellant at the meeting of the Parramatta branch and continued: "Had Barry presented his advice to branch members prior to the pre-selection I had prepared a letter setting out all of the circumstances surrounding the purchase of the unit by myself and my wife and essentially rebutting the conclusions reached in the advice.

In view of the fact that the matter has again been raised by Phillip Howell, I consider that I should now distribute the letter among yourselves so that you may be fully informed.

Party officers are fully aware of this matter and have read the advice and my letter and have advised me that, in their view, there was no impropriety." 
The attached letter dated 26 June 1990 to fellow Labor Party members went into some detail. In the course of it the respondent wrote: "You will note from the advice that the area of my unit is referred to as 210 square meters. This is perfectly correct, however 23 square meters is in fact a courtyard area outside of the unit block which is simply not used. The living area of my unit, including balconies, is only 172 square meters. In relation to the values I also advise that I purchased my unit by contract whilst the units were in the course of erection and the sale to me did not include curtains, carpets or light fittings. I had to pay for these in addition to the purchase price of the unit. As you are aware when you purchase a newly erected unit, light fittings, carpets and blinds are usually included." 
The respondent emphatically denied that there was anything improper in his purchase of the unit, or that he in any way benefited Coracam or the builder
Mr Fayad in relation to the application, or obtained for them as an alderman an advantage in relation to the application.

APPELLANT'S FURTHER CHARGES 
On 11 September 1990 the appellant wrote to Mr Della Bosca charging the respondent, his wife and Mr Fayad with being guilty of conduct contrary to the principles and solidarity of the party pursuant to Rule A 35 (a) and claiming that they were therefore liable to be expelled. He described their conduct as follows: "Mr Fayad caused to be sold and Mr and Mrs Haines bought a home unit in circumstances where either: a. a bribe was paid by Mr Fayad to Mr and Mrs Haines, or b. a reasonable person with knowledge of the facts would believe that such a bribe was paid, and in circumstances where either: c. Mr Haines as an Alderman voted on a development application in which he had a financial interest without declaring that interest, contrary to the provisions of the Local Government Act, or d. a reasonable person with knowledge of the facts would believe that Mr
Haines had so voted." 
He enclosed a background and outline of the alleged facts and statutory declarations made by Mrs Wilde on 1 September, and by himself and a valuer,
Kenneth Feltham, on 10 September 1990. In her statutory declaration Mrs Wilde said that Coracam was owned 50 percent by herself and 50 percent by Mr Fayad, that three of the units in the building, namely 5, 8 and 11, were sold to companies associated with the principals of Coracam. She also stated that unit was transferred to the original owner of the property and six units (2, 3, , 7, 9 and 10) were sold on the open market. The price for unit 4 was, in her opinion, below market value by many thousands of dollars. "I objected to the sale at that price, but it proceeded at the insistence of John Fayad." 
On 24 September 1990 the appellant wrote to Mr Bob Carr, then leader of the
State Opposition, alleging "that the pre-selected candidate for Parramatta,
Alderman John Haines of Parramatta Council, has received a bribe or secret commission from a local developer and builder, John Fayad." He enclosed his letter to Mr Della Bosca of 11 September 1990, the background and outline of the alleged facts, the three statutory declarations and the minutes of the
Parramatta branch meeting of 14 August 1990. He asserted that information concerning the matter had been with head office and senior party officers in the Parramatta area since about 15 June yet no action had been taken. He referred to the formal charge he had made under the Party's rules and wrote: "Just as they failed to act when initially advised of the matter, the Party's
Officers have now failed to act on the charge. Instead they have accepted and referred to the Disputes Committee spurious charges against me that I have disrupted the Party. These charges have been laid by those seeking to cover up the matter: Alderman Paul Elliott MHR, Alderman Phil Russo and a candidate for pre-selection, Gabrielle Harrison." 
A little further on he wrote: "In short Head Office and its right wing allies in Parramatta are covering it all up.

Their actions are of course completely dishonest and unprincipled. They fly in the face of all you have said about the need to eliminate corruption. They make a mockery of what you have said about the National Party on the North
Coast.

Allegations of corruption - where they are supported by some evidence - must be properly investigated. You have yourself indicated as much recently. In your press release of August 19 you made the following statement concerning the ICAC: `Any allegations made against my Government would be promptly referred to [the
ICAC] for investigation and I would act immediately on its recommendations.' 
This statement is either a statement of a principle which will guide your
Government or it is mere political expedience.

I sincerely hope it is the former, as I have no desire to see a Labor
Government elected in New South Wales unless that Government is honest.

Given your recent statements, I invite you to refer my allegations against
John Haines to the ICAC and other appropriate law enforcement authorities.

In view of the seriousness of this matter, I am forwarding copies of this letter to your Shadow Cabinet colleagues. If nothing is done within fourteen days, I will take further action to ensure that this Party acts honestly." 
RESPONDENT'S FURTHER ANSWER 
On 25 September 1990 the respondent wrote to branch members stating that at no time did he receive any favour or benefit as a result of the purchase of the unit. He attached documents to the letter which he said clearly outlined the true facts of the matter and showed there was no substance to "these scurrilous allegations which have been bandied around in Parramatta Branch by certain members of that Branch." Amongst those documents was a letter from Mr
Fayad to Mr Della Bosca dated 29 August 1990 in which he wrote: "1. Mr Haines did not derive any special benefit or consideration in his purchase of a unit in the development. The price he paid simply reflected the fact that the unit was situated on the ground floor and that the prices increased according to the level in the building.
There was no dispute of which I am aware concerning the sale of the unit to John and Lyn Haines.
I believe that the land area of the site would normally, according to
Parramatta City Council floor space ratio, permit 13 units to be developed but in this case, because part of the land was resumed for open space along the river and compensation was paid to the company which owned the land, Council took the view that only 11 units should be permitted. I accepted that decision.
Any units which were transferred to interests of the developing company were situated on different levels and with differing views which partly accounted for the differences in prices and the agreement for the sale of the unit to my company occurred much earlier than most of the other sales. I confirm that I have paid the full tax liability which as arisen in respect of that sale.
I was at all times aware that the known records from the Parramatta
Council show that Mr Haines had no financial or other interest in the project whilst the matter was being determined by Parramatta Council. Those records simply reflect what was the fact." 
The respondent also attached a letter from Mr Fayad to Mr Della Bosca dated 4
September 1990 referring to a discussion Mr Fayad had with Mr Wilde before the pre-selection over his allegations against Mr Fayad and the respondent. Mr
Fayad wrote: "Mr Wilde told me he agreed there was nothing in the allegations and it was simply a bluff to get John Haines to withdraw from the pre-selection contest.

I accepted Mr Wilde's assurance and during the pre-selection both Barry and
Kathy Wilde lobbied my wife Georgina and myself for support in the pre- selection.

I can publicly state that after heavy pressure from the Wildes we did in fact vote for Barry Wilde in the pre-selection.

I trust this provides further confirmation that at no stage have I done any special deals with John Haines." 
THE SECOND PUBLICATION COMPLAINED OF 
On 27 September 1990 Mr Della Bosca wrote to the appellant stating that in the view of the party officers, the matters referred to in the charge were outside the party rules. On 16 October 1990 the appellant published the second document, annexure `B', addressed "To ALP MLAs, MLCs, NSW MHRs and Senators and Administrative Committee Members" and headed "Re: Corruption Allegations". In that document, the appellant alleged that in 1986 the respondent and his wife received a gift from Mr Fayad in the form of a discount of over $40,000 on the purchase price of a new home unit. The two page summary entitled "Background and Outline of the Alleged Facts" was enclosed. The appellant wrote: "You may be wondering why I am referring this matter to you. It is because I have notified most other senior Party members in this State and they have either stalled or attempted to cover up these allegations. I ask you to use whatever influence you have to prevent a cover up. Consider the course of events so far:" 
The appellant set out in chronological order events from 15 June to 24
September 1990, the date he had written to Mr Carr, and said that twenty-two days had passed and no action had been taken by any party officer to have this matter properly investigated. "That is why I am notifying you of the matter.
Despite the weight of evidence, the Party is stalling and covering up. Who is creating a climate conducive to corruption now?" The appellant wrote that the matter would not go away and no deals could be made. He repeated that he had no desire to see a Labor Government elected in the State unless that government was honest. The letter concluded: "This mess will be damaging to the Party unless the Party itself takes a leading role in cleaning it up. I have been trying for months to get the Party to act. Given that Haines is not a `star' candidate, given that the Right have the numbers in the State seat anyway and that the seat will probably be adversely affected by the redistribution, it would have been comparatively easy for the Party to get rid of Haines and claim credit publicly for cleaning up its own ranks. The failure of the Right-wing power brokers to do this strongly suggests that Haines has something more damaging on some of them. If this is so, this must be investigated also.

Unless the Party takes appropriate action within 7 days, I will refer the matter to the Independent Commission Against Corruption and other appropriate authorities." 
The appellant conceded that that publication (annexure `B'), in its ordinary and natural meaning, gave rise to the imputations that the respondent was open to bribery, was involved in bribery and "is dishonest".

NO APOLOGY 
By letter dated 9 November 1990 the respondent's solicitors wrote to the appellant demanding an apology, an undertaking not to continue the publication of the documents complained of or any similar statement and an indemnity in respect of costs incurred to date. On the same day the appellant sent a further letter to ALP branch members in the Parramatta area repeating what he had previously published. In the course of that letter he described the recent events as events "which seriously endanger our chances of regaining government at the next State election". The appellant conceded that he could not show what the respondent did in return for the bribe. He wrote "I do not make allegations I cannot substantiate". He said that clearly Mr Elliott regarded honesty as just another political tactic, to be used or discarded when expedient. "Obviously Haines does too." The appellant offered no apology.

In March 1991 the respondent's endorsement was withdrawn. He was replaced by
Andrew Ziolkowski, who won the seat at the general elections in May 1991.

DEFENCE 
In answer to the claim made in respect of annexure `B', the appellant pleaded justification, qualified privilege and comment. Dunford J held that none of these defences was made out. In addition, his Honour found that the appellant was motivated by malice in the sense of an improper purpose, namely to hurt the right wing of the ALP in general and the respondent in particular, and advance the political fortunes of the left wing including possibly the appellant himself, and that this was the dominant reason for the publication of annexure `B'. 
JUSTIFICATION 
It is a defence to any imputation complained of that the imputation is a matter of substantial truth; and the imputation either relates to a matter of public interest or is published under qualified privilege; [s15](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s15.html) of the [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) (the
Act).

Some aspects of the evidence about the non-inclusion of the fittings in the contract for the sale of unit 4, 7-9 Robertson Street, Parramatta, to the respondent caused concern to Dunford J. These included the handwritten note of
Mr Bolster, the respondent's solicitor, of a telephone conversation with the respondent and the strange circumstance that an additional $3,800 was paid by the respondent to Mr Fayad not on settlement but a week later in cash with no receipt given. Nevertheless Dunford J found that the price of $73,500 paid by the respondent for unit 4 did not include "carpets, light fittings, curtains and stove" and that the non-inclusion of the fittings and the absence of agent's commission was sufficient justification for the reduction of the price from $80,000, the price first suggested by Mr Fayad to the respondent, to $73,500. He also found that the purchase price was well below the current market price and the respondent "certainly" got a very good bargain. The appellant submitted to his Honour that the Court should infer that the sale and purchase of the unit at the price of $73,500 was in the nature of a bribe.
Essentially the appellant's argument was that the sale was at an undervalue from which it should be inferred that it was a gift and that the respondent knew it was a bribe.

In his Honour's opinion these inferences did not logically follow. Even if Mr
Fayad hoped to secure an improper advantage in his dealings with the
Parramatta City Council through the respondent, and his Honour was not satisfied that he did, it had not been shown that the respondent was aware of such hope. It followed that the truth of the imputations said to arise from the second publication had not been established. In reaching this conclusion
Dunford J said: "Here, there was no evidence of any favour done by the plaintiff for Fayad (and Fayad denied any such favours had been done), nor evidence of any arrangement between Fayad and the plaintiff that the latter would do any favour for the former in the future. Barry Wilde did say that Fayad had told him that they had to let Haines have the unit cheaply because of all he had done for them, but Fayad in his evidence, denied saying this, and also denied
Haines had done anything for him. I found Wilde an unsatisfactory witness for a variety of reasons, and although I have some hesitation about Fayad, where I have to choose between the evidence of Wilde and Fayad, I found Fayad the more credible. In particular, I am satisfied that Wilde and his wife were happy for the sale to proceed at the agreed price, and it was only after completion, when there was a dispute about other outstanding moneys between Coracam Pty
Limited and Diane Properties Pty Limited, that the sale price to Haines was raised as a lever in the negotiations concerning the other disputed matters.
Wilde then let the matter rest for at least three years until he confronted
Haines with it himself on about 17 June 1990 in what I regard as a cheap and blatant attempt at blackmail; and when that failed he passed his information onto the defendant, who was only too eager to accept it and use it, whereas
Wilde, after writing (in conjunction with the defendant) the letter to Head
Office on 16 July 1990 left the country on holidays and on his return studiously avoided attending the meeting when he knew his allegations were going to be raised. Moreover, when Mrs Kathleen Wilde (who played only a nominal role in the affairs of Coracam Pty Limited on behalf of her husband) said in evidence that she objected about the sale price, I am satisfied that she intended to convey the impression that she objected to Fayad (with whom she did not in fact discuss the matter) and not, as was later claimed by her husband, that she objected to him.

Moreover the plaintiff denied that there was any arrangement for a favour between him and Fayad or that he was aware of any expectation on Fayad's part, and agreed that he would regard such a transaction as improper. In general, I found the plaintiff an impressive witness who appeared to be telling the truth as best he could and whose answers did not appear to be rehearsed. Admittedly he did in the early stages claim that he had paid market value for the unit, but I am not satisfied that he did not at that stage believe this to be the case, and whilst his explanation about the effect of the courtyard on the price was not convincing, it was not sufficient to displace the general impression of honesty that I got from his evidence and his demeanour. It is not, it seems to me, irrelevant that the plaintiff first inspected the units before they were completed and Fayad was probably keen to get at least some units sold early (even if not at the best price) in the hope that such sales would encourage sales of the other units." 
The appellant attacked these conclusions on several fronts. First he submitted that the trial Judge erred in finding that the respondent was an impressive witness, whose evidence conveyed a general impression of honesty, and should have found that he was without credibility and should not be believed on oath.
This part of the argument involved a detailed examination of the evidence given about the negotiations leading up to the sale and in particular the contemporaneous handwritten note made by Mr Bolster of the telephone conversation he had with the respondent.

The note was dated 1 November 1985, and referred to the unit and to the respondent and his wife. There then followed: "$73,500. Paid $5,000 to Vendor.
Light fittings, CARPETS, STOVE, & MICROWAVE, Blinds." The appellant argued that this note required a finding that the agreed purchase price of $73,500 included the fittings described in the note. Several points were made. From the time of his first written explanation in the letter of 26 June 1990 the respondent alleged that the purchase did not include curtains, carpets or light fittings and referred also to blinds. However, on the many occasions when specific items were discussed, he never mentioned the stove and, in his answers to interrogatories, agreed that the stove was provided pursuant to the contract whereas the carpet, light fittings, blinds and curtains were not. The appellant submitted that the conversation recorded in Mr Bolster's file note demonstrated that the respondent thought he was to receive the inclusions in return for the price of $73,500 and that his later account of the negotiations which led to the price being reduced on account of the omission of these items and "his far fetched story about a cash deal to buy them at settlement" were fabrications. Therefore, it was said, he was not to be believed on oath and
Dunford J palpably failed to use the advantage the trial process gave him. In particular it was said his Honour erred when he included the stove as a factor in the subsequent reduction of the price from $80,000 to $73,500.

The appellant called Mr Bolster who, when shown the note, and asked what the information was about, said: "They were presumably the inclusions." He said that the information was provided by the respondent and agreed that, except for the microwave, the inclusions referred to were of a fairly normal kind. He did not recall the telephone conversation at all. In cross examination, his attention was directed to item F (b) of the agreement for sale, which provided for the setting out of property ancillary to the land and consisting of furnishings and chattels and was left blank. Mr Bolster said that it was possible that the respondent told him on the telephone that those items were not to be included.

The appellant called Mr Fayad who said in chief "the price we talked about was $80,000 less the agent's commission and the final price was $73,500 and there was something about some carpets". In his letters of 29 August and 4 September he made no mention of the reduction of price on account of the omission of inclusions and said no more than that the price paid reflected the fact that the unit was situated on the ground floor and that the prices increased according to the level in the building.

There is no doubt that carpets, light fittings, curtains, blinds and the microwave were not included in the contract as exchanged. The answers to interrogatories acknowledged that carpet, light fittings, blinds and stove were in the unit at settlement and that the stove was provided pursuant to the contract. His Honour accepted that after settlement the respondent paid an additional $3,800 to Mr Fayad in cash and without any receipt being given. If the fittings, other than the stove, itemised in Mr Bolster's note had been excluded from the contract after the price of $73,500 was agreed, one would have expected a further reduction in price and not a later payment of $3,800 to be made for them. I see nothing inherently unlikely in the exclusion of these fittings and the absence of agent's commission being used as negotiating factors which led to a reduction from the price of $80,000. It is unknown whether a microwave was included in the price of $80,000.

The reference to a "stove", which was accepted as an inclusion in the contract, suggests that Mr Bolster's note was setting out inclusions rather than exclusions. However, this was never put to the respondent in cross examination. Having seen the respondent in the witness box for more than a day, the trial Judge found him to be an impressive witness who appeared to be telling the truth as best he could and whose answers did not appear to be rehearsed. The unexplained reference to a stove in somebody else's handwritten note or his Honour's reference to it as something not included are no grounds for overturning this finding.

Next the appellant submitted, in support of the claim that the respondent had deliberately lied, that Dunford J erred in finding that the respondent "in the early stages" claimed he had paid market value. The appellant submitted that his Honour should have found that the respondent claimed right up to and throughout the hearing that he had paid market value. This submission depends upon the assertion that when the respondent did not use the expression "market value" in evidence, "he merely fudged his words when describing that value to make his claim sound more plausible".

According to the minutes of the branch meeting on 14 August 1990, the appellant asked the respondent whether the unit had been purchased "at the low market value". The respondent denied this suggestion. The appellant stated that the respondent had not addressed the central issue, namely whether the unit was bought for below market value and asked him to explain how the second largest unit in the block had sold for the lowest price. The respondent said it was "a normal price" and that a large part of the area was courtyard. In his letter of 26 June 1990 the respondent used such expressions as: "I believe the impression that would be made on a person reading the advice would be that Mr Fayad sold unit 4 to me for a price less than its true value in return for a favour previously granted to Mr Fayad in respect to the development." "You will observe from perusal of that information that the transfers by
Coracam in respect of the units referred to in the advice, namely unit 1, 5, 8 and 11 were transfers that would seem to be below the market value." "The only specific allegation in the advice is that the unit was sold at a below value price." 
In his oral evidence the respondent said that he felt that $80,000 was a reasonable price. When asked whether he said that the market value of the property was round about $80,000 he replied: "That was the value we agreed to.
That's the value I thought was reasonable." Again he was asked: "Q. Are you satisfied you paid market price for the property at Robertson
Street? A. I am satisfied the price paid, $80,000, was reasonable." 
It was pointed out that that was not the price he paid to which he responded: "I paid the $73,500 less the agent's fees. I didn't actually pay the $80,000 but that was the price we were talking about. The builder deducted the agent's fees so it was $73,500." He was later shown Mr Feltham's valuation of the subject unit as at 4 December 1985 as $115,000 or $110,000 excluding carpets, light fittings and blinds and asked: "Q. Does that change your mind as to the market value of the property at the time you acquired it? A. No, no. This is actual fact I take it the date of the inspection of the unit is 8 August 1991, approximately four years after I purchased the unit, is that right? 
Q. Do you see the valuer has valued the property as at 4 September 1985? A.
Yes, that's the first valuation.

Q. You still adhere to your view after seeing that that the market value of the property was $80,000? A. The market value - I still adhere to my previous statement I thought $80,000 was a reasonable price for the unit." 
The respondent denied that he knew all along that the market value of the home unit was more than the price he paid for it. At the close of the cross examination he was asked: "Q. I suggest that Mr Fayad in particular did you a favour in relation to this transaction? A. I don't believe he did.

Q. He sold to you a property worth more than $73,500? A. I don't believe he did." 
The method by which the value of land is to be determined is well known (Spencer versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1907) 5 CLR 418] at 432) and was no doubt applied by Mr Feltham in reaching his opinion which, since the respondent did not challenge it in cross examination, must be accepted, though other valuers may have reached a higher valuation or a lower valuation on the same material. In what Mr Wilde described as the "draft legal advice" in his letter of 16 July 1990, which the appellant helped him to prepare, the market appraisal for unit 4 was said to suggest a value between $128,000 and $130,000 at the appropriate period. A lay person, like the respondent, cannot be expected to have the expertise of a valuer, though he may, like the respondent, have a belief as to what the particular property is worth and may describe this without technical accuracy as the market value or the true value or the reasonable price.

No doubt and understandably the respondent's belief about the price would have been affected when he was shown an expert valuation. But that does not mean that he did not hold the belief he claimed to hold and that he was deliberately lying in suggesting he did. This being so his Honour's finding that the respondent was an impressive witness who appeared to be telling the truth as best he could and whose answers did not appear to be rehearsed makes his Honour's statement that he was not satisfied that in the early stages the respondent did not believe that he had paid the market value for the unit unimpeachable.

Dunford J said: "It may be that the plaintiff did not regard the courtyard as being of much value to him although it may have been to others" 
In his written submissions the appellant referred to parts of the respondent's evidence about the courtyard and submitted that every reason he advanced for thinking the courtyard was useless was exposed as a lie. I have read the respondent's oral evidence and carefully re-read those parts of the cross examination to which the appellant made reference. His Honour heard that evidence and saw the witness. Even on the printed page I would not conclude that every reason he advanced for thinking the courtyard was useless was exposed as a lie. However that is beside the point. His Honour appreciated that the respondent's explanation about the effect of the courtyard on the price was not convincing but expressed the view that this was not sufficient to displace the general impression of honesty that came from hearing his evidence and watching him in the witness box. This Court cannot interfere with that conclusion on the basis suggested.

In his written submissions the appellant went on to identify various parts of the respondent's evidence concerning his denial that he was a right winger and what were described as miscellaneous inconsistencies and evasions. It was submitted that all these matters combined to show that his Honour's finding on demeanour was glaringly improbable. All this is material that Dunford J necessarily took into account in the conclusion he came to with the advantage of seeing and hearing the witness. Having re-read the cross examination that submission does not impress me. For example the following piece of evidence is referred to: "Q. What price range were you considering? A. The price range of the units that I looked at - I was looking. I didn't have a price range at that time. I was looking at the units.

Q. When you say you didn't have a price range, does that just mean that your range was fairly wide? A. No. My range - I don't know what they wanted. I didn't get to the point where I was asking people that. The range that I thought I could afford was between $70,000 and $90,000 at the time." 
The first of these answers was said to defy belief and then to be contradicted by the second. I disagree.

The respondent gave the following evidence: "Q. What role did your wife play in inspecting potential units? A. My wife doesn't drive a taxi cab. She didn't play a role at all in the inspection of the units.

Q. Did she look at any units at all? A. Not that I recall.

Q. Does your wife adopt a fairly subservient role in your marriage? 
OBJECTION. QUESTION DISALLOWED.

Q. You purchased the house with your wife, did you not? A. Yes. That's true.

Q. Did she have the opportunity to contribute to the choice of the unit that you were to acquire? A. She had the opportunity of discussing the purchase of a unit or town house and I believe on one or two occasions I showed her the actual unit that we eventually purchased and I may have shown her at times others or other areas that I had looked at." 
This was said to be initially evasive then a denial which was contradicted. It does not so impress me. It has all the hallmarks in the print of what his
Honour said about the witness, namely, that he was someone who was doing his best to tell the truth. The appellant said that the respondent's evidence about Mr Wilde approaching him before the development application, which he conceded was an important issue, was erratic and inconsistent. None of this material persuades me that there was any error in the conclusion that Dunford
J reached.

The appellant submitted that there was no evidence to support Dunford J's finding that Mr Fayad was probably keen to get at least some units sold early (even if not at the best price) in the hope that such sales would encourage sales of other units. It was said that his Honour would have to disbelieve Mr
Fayad's evidence to reach this finding.

In the course of his evidence in chief, the appellant put questions suggesting that the price of $73,500 was many thousands below the market value of the unit. Mr Fayad said: "It was not very low and I was obliged to sell it because I had mortgaged my house to the bank and I needed to get whatever price.

Q. Are you suggesting that this was a rushed sale so that you could get some quick cash? A. No, it wasn't a quick sale but it wasn't cheap.

Q. Well did your need to repay the bank have any influence on you when you first mentioned the price of $80,000 to Mr Haines? A. It didn't have any influence because I needed to sell. To whom, it didn't matter, the bank didn't care as long as I could prove to the bank that I was selling to him or any other person.

Q. So you were aware, were you, that you needed to provide proof to the bank that you were selling? A. Once the bank found out that I was selling and I was selling everything, then the bank would know that it would be getting its mortgage back.

Q. At the time you negotiated the sale price with Mr Haines, had the bank been pressing you for repayments of the loan. A. No.

Q. Did you anticipate that the bank soon would ask you to repay the loans? A.
Yeah, I would have had to pay it to the bank because it had loaned the money and I needed to pay it back.

Q. Well you would understand, Mr Fayad, everyone who borrows money from a bank has to repay it at some stage? A. Yeah, whatever was borrowed I had to pay back here, I know I had to pay back what I borrowed.

Q. When you took out the loan had the bank set for you any repayments schedule? When you took out the loan with the bank, did the bank set for you any repayment schedule? A. Bank just give me twelve months period in which I had to return $540,000 back to it.

Q. When did that twelve month period expire? A. It finished at the same time, it didn't take too long, about twelve months.

Q. When did that twelve month period expire, was it in late 1985, early 1986, when? A. I can't remember, I have not got the papers in front of me, I don't know.

Q. Mr Fayad, a moment ago you told us that you felt obliged to sell because you had mortgaged your house and needed to pay the bank, do you recall saying that? A. I wasn't obliged to sell to the bank, I just needed to show that I was selling and it wasn't a cheap price, so I tried to get as much as I could.

Q. Mr Fayad, did you reduce the price of the unit because of your concern about repaying your bank loan? A. No." 
Mr Fayad gave evidence through an interpreter. His answer to the appellant's question "Mr Fayad, a moment ago you told us that you felt obliged to sell because you had mortgaged your house and needed to pay the bank, do you recall saying that?" was "I wasn't obliged to sell to the bank, I just needed to show that I was selling and it wasn't a cheap price, so I tried to get as much as I could." On its face this answer, which was not subject to a transcript correction, appears to misunderstand the question, though it is possible that there was some error in translation or transcription. It was plainly open to his Honour to infer that Mr Fayad probably was keen to get at least some units sold early, even if not at the best price. It is logical to suppose, even though Mr Fayad did not give express evidence about this, that this was in the hope that such sales would encourage sales of the other units. As the appellant acknowledged it was only common sense that he needed to repay the bank.

A reading of Mr Wilde's evidence amply supports his Honour's conclusion that he was an unsatisfactory witness for a variety of reasons. In her statutory declaration, which the appellant furnished to various people and which he had prepared, Mrs Wilde said that she objected to the sale at the price of $73,500 but that it proceeded at the insistence of John Fayad. In cross examination she conceded that she did not have any conversations with Mr Fayad about the matter and that her husband was the spokesman for Coracam. Mr Wilde who, according to his evidence, was not prepared to make a statutory declaration, said that he objected to the sale and suggested to Mr Fayad that if he wanted to sell a unit to Mr Haines he do it in a block in which he, Mr Wilde, was not concerned. He gave evidence that Mr Fayad said: "He felt obliged to sell it to
Mr Haines because he had been of great assistance. He was always of great assistance to him." Although he conceded in cross examination that he regarded that piece of information as being of particular importance because it suggested the transaction may have been improper, corrupt or dishonest, Mr
Wilde apparently never told the appellant about it. It was not referred to in the "Advice", nor in any other document in evidence though Mr Wilde said it was his belief that he had told the appellant about the matter; "to the best of my recollection I did". I would have no doubt that if that piece of information had been made available to the appellant and if he believed it, he would have made use of it. However that may be, this part of Mr Wilde's evidence reads as a total fabrication. Not surprisingly, even though he had some hesitation about Mr Fayad, his Honour found Mr Fayad's denial that he had said this to Mr Wilde and his denial that the respondent had done anything for him more credible.

There was ample evidence on which Dunford J could be satisfied that Mr Wilde and his wife were happy for the sale to proceed at the agreed price, and it was only after completion, when there was a dispute about other outstanding moneys between Coracam and Diane Properties, that the sale price to the respondent was raised as a lever in the negotiations concerning the other disputed matters. Mr Wilde then let the matter rest for at least three years until he confronted the respondent with it on about 17 June 1990 in a cheap and blatant attempt at blackmail. If Mr Wilde objected to Mr Fayad about the sale to the respondent and Mr Fayad said what Mr Wilde alleged, there was nothing to explain his failure to reveal this to anybody and in particular to the appellant. Furthermore, there was nothing to explain his failure to do anything about it for three years and then use it in an attempt to blackmail the respondent into withdrawing from the pre-selection ballot and supporting him. These findings were open to his Honour and I agree with them.

I agree with his Honour's conclusion that the truth of the imputations was not established and that the plea of justification failed.

QUALIFIED PRIVILEGE 
The appellant relied on the defence of qualified privilege at common law and under s22 of the Act. A privileged occasion, in reference to qualified privilege, is "an occasion where the person who makes a communication has an interest or duty, legal, social, or moral, to make it to the person to whom it is made and the person to whom it is so made has a corresponding interest or duty to receive it. This reciprocity is essential": Adam versus Ward <case>; [(1947) 47 SR 357] at 362, Jordan CJ said that whether or not an occasion is one of qualified privilege depended upon considerations of public policy; Telegraph Newspaper
Co Limited versus Bedford <case>; [(1934) 50 CLR 632] at 655-8. The Chief Justice added: "All the circumstances in which the defamatory statement for which privilege is claimed was made must be taken into account, and, in the light of them, it must be determined whether it is in the interest of the community, that is, the good of society in general, that the statement, though defamatory, should be made with impunity. It is of course not necessary that the facts of the particular communication should be of interest to the public at large. It is necessary only that it should be for the general good of the community that such a communication should be made with impunity so far as the law of defamation is concerned: Howe versus Lees <case>; [(1910) 11 CLR 361] at 368-9." 
His Honour referred to the classification of the occasions of qualified privilege in Gatley on Libel and Slander, 3rd ed, at 214-5 and quoted the one "most commonly relied on in practice": "Statements made on a subject matter in which both the defendant and the person to whom the statements are made have a legitimate common interest." 
His Honour referred also to what Lord Esher said in Hunt versus Great Northern
Railway Co [[1891] 2 QB 189] at 191: "The (privileged) occasion had arisen if the communication was of such a nature that it could be fairly said that those who made it had an interest in making such a communication, and those to whom it was made had a corresponding interest in having it made to them." 
Section 22 of the Act, so far as material, provides: "(1) Where, in respect of matter published to any person: the recipient has an interest or apparent interest in having information on some subject; the matter is published to the recipient in the course of giving to him information on that subject; and the conduct of the publisher in publishing that matter is reasonable in the circumstances, there is a defence of qualified privilege for that publication." 
Annexure `B' was addressed and sent "To ALP MLAs, MLCs, NSW MHRs and Senators and Administrative Committee Members." Dunford J was satisfied that the members of the Administrative Committee, which had authority to withdraw the endorsement, had an interest in receiving information on the subject of any improper conduct by the endorsed candidate which would affect his suitability or which might harm the party's electoral prospects if it became public. His
Honour found that publication to members of that committee of the letter of 16
October was within the terms of s22 (1) (a) and (b). However, his Honour was not satisfied, even allowing for what the appellant claimed were previous "cover-ups" by head office, that other State politicians had an interest or apparent interest in receiving the information on the subject, except in the most strained and artificial way. Certainly the Federal members and senators had no such interest. There was therefore excessive publication which in itself destroyed the defence of qualified privilege: Chapman versus LD Ellesmere [[1932] 2 KB 431] at 465-7 and Andreyevich versus Kosovich at 362. This disposed of the defence of qualified privilege both at common law and under the Act.

Dunford J continued: "......in relation to such publication to the Administrative Committee, and in case I am wrong in relation to the publication to the state and federal politicians of 16 October ........ I am not satisfied that the [appellant's] conduct on (that) occasion was reasonable within s22 (c)." 
In Morgan versus John Fairfax and Sons Limited (No 2) [(1991) 23 NSWLR 374] at 387-8,
Hunt AJA, with whose judgment Samuels JA agreed, after reviewing the authorities set out propositions in relation to the requirement of s22 (1) (c) that the conduct of the defendant in publishing the matter was reasonable in the circumstances. Included amongst those propositions was the requirement that the defendant establish: "(a) that, before publishing the matter complained of, he exercised reasonable care to ensure that he got his conclusions right, (where appropriate) by making proper inquiries and checking on the accuracy of his sources; that his conclusions (whether statements of fact or expressions of opinion) followed logically, fairly and reasonably from the information which he had obtained; that the manner and extent of the publication did not exceed what was reasonably required in the circumstances;" 
The appellant did not plead that the matter complained of was published pursuant to the freedom guaranteed by the Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) to publish material in the course of political discussion, but sought to file a supplementary notice of appeal and to amend his defence to raise the matter and to rely upon the majority decision in Theophanous versus The Herald and Weekly
Times Limited <case>; [(1994) 182 CLR 104.] At 124 Mason CJ and Toohey and Gaudron JJ said that "political discussion" included "discussion of the conduct, policies or fitness for office of ........., public officers and those seeking public office." At 134 their Honours said that the implied constitutional freedom did not warrant the protection of statements which were known to be false or made with reckless disregard for their truth or untruth or made irresponsibly and, at 137, that a defendant "should be required to establish that the circumstances were such as to make it reasonable to publish the impugned material without ascertaining whether it was true or false. The publisher should be required to show that, in the circumstances which prevailed, it acted reasonably, either by taking some steps to check the accuracy of the impugned material or by establishing that it was otherwise justified in publishing without taking such steps or steps which were adequate.......

In other words, if a defendant publishes false and defamatory matter about a plaintiff, the defendant should be liable in damages unless it can establish that it was unaware of the falsity, that it did not publish recklessly (ie not caring whether the matter was true or false), and that the publication was reasonable in the sense described." 
At 140 their Honours concluded as follows: "The constitutional implication of freedom and qualified privilege 
The defence pleaded in the further further amended defence is not bad in law. Because it derives from the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), the defence is available in all Australian jurisdictions, whether the law to be applied is the common law or statute law. Its availability will inevitably have the consequence that the common law defence of qualified privilege will have little, if any, practical significance where publication occurs in the course of the discussion of political matters.

Common law qualified privilege must now be viewed in the light of the implied constitutional freedom. That does not necessitate a review of its essential feature, namely, publication on an occasion of qualified privilege, or of the common law requirement that publication be without malice. It does, however, require some consideration of the notion of reciprocal interest and duty. The public at large has an interest in the discussion of political matters such that each and every person has an interest, of the kind contemplated by the common law, in communicating his or her views on those matters and each and every person has an interest in receiving information on those matters. It is an interest which exists at all times; it is not confined to situations where it is publicly anticipated that a federal election will be called. It follows that the discussion of political matters is an occasion of qualified privilege. Even understood in this light, the common law defence does not conform to the constitutional freedom. As already explained, the freedom requires no more than that the person who publishes defamatory matter in the course of political discussion does not know that it is false, does not publish recklessly, and does not publish unreasonably, in the sense earlier explained." 
Deane J was unable to accept that the freedom which the constitutional implication protected was, at least in relation to statements about the official conduct or consequent suitability for office of holders of high government office, conditioned upon the ability of the citizen or other publisher to satisfy a court of matters such as absence of recklessness or reasonableness; 188. Even so he was part of the majority with Mason CJ, Toohey and Gaudron JJ in support of the answers given by the Court to the questions posed.

The decision in Theophanous was not given until eighteen months after
Dunford J's judgment but the constitutional freedom relied upon was explained in 1992 in Nationwide News Pty Limited versus Wills <case>; <case>; [(1992) 177 CLR 106.] To the extent the law was shown to be different from what was previously supposed in Australia, this occurred before the appellant filed his defence and Dunford J heard and decided the case. The appellant should not now be permitted to amend his defence to raise matters which were not ventilated at the hearing and which may have called for further evidence. The High Court decision in Theophanous does support the appellant's submission that the public at large had an interest in receiving a statement about the conduct or fitness for office of government of a person seeking such office corresponding to the appellant's interest in making it.

Even if the appellant had raised the guaranteed constitutional freedom at the trial, the first and probably the second of the three matters, which Hunt AJA held in Morgan the appellant was required to establish, would apply. The third becomes redundant. The question becomes, therefore, whether Dunford J was justified in not being satisfied that, before publishing the matter complained of, the appellant exercised reasonable care to ensure that he got his conclusions right, by making proper inquiries and checking on the accuracy of his sources.

The appellant submitted that Dunford J erred in finding that his conduct in publishing the second publication was not reasonable. He submitted he should not be criticised for not completing the inquiry he was trying to get others, who had a duty to inquire, to initiate. Dunford J based his conclusion on the following findings: * The only information the appellant had consisted of facts suggesting the sale was at a price below market price. * At the time annexure `B' was published both the respondent and Mr Fayad had emphatically denied any impropriety.
 * The appellant relied to a large degree on what he had been told by Mr Wilde, whom he did not trust, who clearly had an ulterior motive and who declined to be present on 14 August when he knew the appellant was going to launch his attack on the respondent based on information Mr Wilde had furnished.
 * Mr Wilde declined to furnish him with a statutory declaration.
 * The appellant failed to ask Mr Della Bosca or Mr Elliott whether the respondent had furnished any explanation in answer to Mr Wilde's letter of 16 July and, if so, what that explanation was.
 * From the facts alone which suggested that the sale was at a price below market value the appellant concluded there was bribery and corruption on the part of the respondent. 
Dunford J did not consider that the appellant had acted reasonably in checking his facts and, accordingly, the defence of qualified privilege failed.

In large measure the appellant's submissions re-agitated the conclusion that there could be no legitimate reason for the sale being at below market value.
Therefore, it was said, the reason must have been an illicit one and the respondent must have accepted a bribe. None of this addresses the point in issue. In the document of 16 October 1990 the appellant acknowledged that he was making "serious corruption allegations" against the respondent. Those allegations had their genesis in the appellant's discussion with Mr and Mrs
Wilde on the evening of 14 July 1990, after Mr Wilde had failed and the respondent had succeeded in the pre-selection ballot on that day. The "Advice" which went with the letter of 16 July 1990 and which the appellant helped Mr
Wilde to draft was unsigned. In the letter Mr Wilde wrote that it was based on facts which were within his knowledge. The appellant made no inquiry from the respondent about the matter but confronted him at the Parramatta branch meeting on 14 August 1990. Mr Wilde, the fount of knowledge, although advised that the allegations would then be made, was not present and refused to make a statutory declaration. The appellant accepted, in his written submissions, that the Advice was rubbish (but said "the facts it contained were not"), that he did not fully trust Mr Wilde (but said he "at least made Mr Wilde state that the facts stated in the Advice were true") and that he never asked Mr
Fayad about the transaction (but said this was of "no significance"). The situation was that both the respondent and Mr Fayad had an explanation for the price but the appellant, having confronted the respondent at the branch meeting, found the explanation unsatisfactory.

I have read the appellant's submissions carefully and listened to his oral submissions and am unpersuaded that he established, to adapt the words of Hunt
AJA, that, before publishing the letter of 16 October 1990 he exercised reasonable care, by making proper inquiries and checking on the accuracy of his sources, to ensure that the serious corruption allegations therein made or referred to were right or that they followed logically, fairly or reasonably from the information which he had obtained. In my opinion Dunford J's conclusion that the defence of qualified privilege in respect of annexure `B' was not made out was correct. This ground of appeal fails.

MALICE 
Qualified privilege was not available as a defence if the defamatory statement was animated by express malice. Since, in my opinion, the defence of qualified privilege cannot be sustained it is strictly unnecessary to deal with malice. However his Honour was satisfied that the appellant was motivated by malice in the sense of an improper purpose, namely to hurt the right wing (of the ALP) in general and the respondent in particular, and advance the political fortunes of the left wing including, possibly, the appellant himself. He also found that this was the dominant reason of the publication of the material complained of. The appellant challenged this conclusion and it is appropriate that this Court deal with that challenge.

The part played by malice, where a defence of qualified privilege is raised, is explained in the speech of Lord Diplock in Horrocks versus Lowe [[1975] AC ] at 149 and following. His Lordship said that in all cases of qualified privilege there is some special reason of public policy why the law accords immunity from suit - the existence of some public or private duty, whether legal or moral, on the part of the maker of the defamatory statement which justifies his communicating it or of some interest of his own which he is entitled to protect by doing so. If he uses the occasion for some other reason he loses the protection of the privilege. Lord Diplock said: "So, the motive with which the defendant on a privileged occasion made a statement defamatory of the plaintiff becomes crucial. The protection might, however, be illusory if the onus lay on him to prove that he was actuated solely by a sense of the relevant duty or a desire to protect the relevant interest. So he is entitled to be protected by the privilege unless some other dominant and improper motive on his part is proved. `Express malice' is the term of art descriptive of such a motive. Broadly speaking, it means malice in the popular sense of a desire to injure the person who is defamed and this is generally the motive which the plaintiff sets out to prove. But to destroy the privilege the desire to injure must be the dominant motive for the defamatory publication; knowledge that it will have that effect is not enough if the defendant is nevertheless acting in accordance with a sense of duty or in bona fide protection of his own legitimate interests.

The motive with which a person published defamatory matter can only be inferred from what he did or said or knew. If it be proved that he did not believe that what he published was true this is generally conclusive evidence of express malice, for no sense of duty or desire to protect his own legitimate interest can justify a man in telling deliberate and injurious falsehoods about another, save in the exceptional case where a person may be under a duty to pass on, without endorsing, defamatory reports made by some other person.
 ........

Even a positive belief in the truth of what is published on a privileged occasion - which is presumed unless the contrary is proved - may not be sufficient to negative express malice if it can be proved that the defendant misused the occasion for some purpose other than that for which the privilege is accorded by the law. The commonest case is where the dominant motive which actuates the defendant is not a desire to perform the relevant duty or to protect the relevant interest, but to give vent to his personal spite or ill will towards the person he defames. If this be proved, then even positive belief in the truth of what is published will not enable the defamer to avail himself of the protection of the privilege to which he would otherwise have been entitled. There may be instances of improper motives which destroy the privilege apart from personal spite. A defendant's dominant motive may have been to obtain some private advantage unconnected with the duty or the interest which constitutes the reason for the privilege. If so, he loses the benefit of the privilege despite his positive belief that what he said or wrote was true.

Judges and juries should, however, be very slow to draw the inference that a defendant was so far actuated by improper motives as to deprive him of the protection of the privilege unless they are satisfied that he did not believe that what he said or wrote was true or that he was indifferent to its truth or falsity. The motives with which human beings act are mixed. They find it difficult to hate the sin but love the sinner. Qualified privilege would be illusory, and the public interest that it is meant to serve defeated, if the protection which it affords were lost merely because a person, although acting in compliance with a duty or in protection of a legitimate interest, disliked the person whom he defamed or was indignant at what he believed to be that person's conduct and welcomed the opportunity of exposing it. It is only where his desire to comply with the relevant duty or to protect the relevant interest plays no significant part in his motives for publishing what he believes to be true that `express malice' can properly be found.

There may be evidence of the defendant's conduct upon occasions other than that protected by the privilege which justify the inference that upon the privileged occasion too his dominant motive in publishing what he did was personal spite or some other improper motive, even although he believed it to be true." 
Although partly obiter, the principles so stated have been applied in numerous cases in Australia; see, for example, McKenzie versus Mergen Holdings Pty Limited [(1990) 20 NSWLR 42] at 46 where Clarke JA said that Lord Diplock's speech was generally accepted as an authoritative exposition of the relevant principles;
Hanrahan versus Ainsworth [(1990) 22 NSWLR 73] at 102-3;
Pearce versus Hailstone [(1992) 58 SASR 240] at 254-5 and 266. The word "dominant" in the expression "dominant motive" should be understood as the most influential or paramount motive: Barbaro versus Amalgamated
Television Services Pty Limited [(1985) 1 NSWLR 30] at 51.

From this may be extracted the following propositions. Even a positive belief in the truth of what is published on a privileged occasion may not be sufficient to negative express malice if it can be proved that the defendant misused the occasion for some purpose other than that for which the privilege is accorded by the law. Such will be the case if the defendant's dominant motive was to obtain some private advantage unconnected with the duty or the interest which constitutes the reason for the privilege. However it is only where the defendant's desire to comply with the relevant duty or to protect the relevant interest plays no significant part in his motives for publishing what he believes to be true that "express malice" can properly be found.
Evidence may be given of the defendant's conduct upon occasions other than that protected by the privilege, which justifies the inference that upon the privileged occasion too the defendant's dominant motive in publishing the matter complained of was personal spite or some other improper motive, even though the defendant believed it to be true.

In McKenzie versus Mergen Holdings Pty Limited at 51, Clarke JA, with whom
Meagher JA agreed, said: "Proof of malice involves, in almost every case, the drawing of inferences from proven facts. What the plaintiff seeks to persuade the jury is that because of the defendant's conduct prior to and following the publication of the defamatory matter or, in some cases, because of the exaggerated terms of the defamatory statement itself, or a combination of both, the inference should be drawn that the defendant was actuated by malice in defaming the plaintiff." 
Dunford J was satisfied that the appellant honestly believed that his substantial allegation that the purchase of the unit at the price paid constituted a bribe was true and held that, although he found such belief unreasonable, an honest though unreasonable belief did not constitute malice.
The issue was whether the appellant had published the letter for a purpose other than the purpose for which the privilege was given and whether the foreign purpose was the dominant motive for the publication.

The appellant claimed that his only motive in publishing annexure `B' was to have possible corruption investigated and thus prevent electoral harm to the
ALP. However on two other occasions the appellant repeated the material to other persons. First, on 9 November 1990 the appellant wrote to ALP branch members in the Parramatta district advising "of recent events which seriously endanger our chances of regaining government at the next State election". He stated that he had made allegations that the respondent, the endorsed candidate for the State seat of Parramatta, "has taken a bribe or a secret commission from a local developer and builder John Fayad. I cannot show what
Haines did in return for the bribe." His stated reason was because branch members had the right to know about their representatives and that if branch members wanted the right to select their MPs, they must accept the responsibility of examining their performance. He concluded by saying that he would continue to fight on the issue whatever the consequences and regardless of whether or not he was expelled from the party.

Secondly, the appellant provided information for an article which appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald newspaper on 21 May 1991. That article, in modified form, recounted the history of the matter up to the time when the respondent lost pre-selection under the heading "Who Knifed John Haines?".

Dunford J said that the appellant wanted more than an investigation, he wanted the respondent dumped as candidate. This was particularly clear from the last two paragraphs of annexure `B' where the appellant wrote: "Given that Haines is not a `star' candidate, given that the Right have the numbers in the State seat anyway and that the seat will probably be adversely affected by the redistribution, it would have been comparatively easy for the party to get rid of Haines and claim credit publicly for cleaning up its own ranks. The failure of the Right wing power brokers to do this strongly suggest that Haines has something more damaging on some of them. If this is so, this must be investigated also.

Unless the party takes appropriate action within seven days, I will refer the matter to the Independent Commission Against Corruption and other appropriate authorities." 
This was an invitation, for reasons of expediency, to "dump" the respondent, whatever the merits of the allegations made against him. Thus some other investigation and the reference of the complaint against the respondent to the
ICAC "and other appropriate authorities" would be avoided. His Honour said that the appellant only wanted an investigation that found the respondent guilty. No other investigation would do.

Dunford J went on: "Haines was an ally of Paul Elliott who had defeated the defendant in the federal preselection ballot in 1989 and both were members of the so-called
Right Wing, whereas the defendant was a member of the so-called Left who was active in opposing members of the Right at all times and seeking out material to use against them, as evidenced by his investigation into the residential qualifications of those who established the Wentworthville [sic Westmead]
Branch (including the taking of photos, etc) and his complaints about Ms
Harrison and Mr Ziolkowski (other alleged Right-Wingers) registering allegedly false addresses on the electoral roll, and his threat to report them to the
Independent Commission Against Corruption ." 
The appellant attacked these conclusions in a number of ways. He submitted that the trial Judge should have found that the main motivation for his actions was to ensure that ALP candidates and officials acted honestly and to have possible corruption investigated and that an important but secondary motivation was to prevent electoral harm to the ALP. Both motivations were consistent with the appellant discharging his duty as an ALP member. The appellant argued that the two motivations mentioned were independent with no causal link. The second was subsidiary.

According to an answer given by him to interrogatories, the appellant was party to an agreement made at his flat in June 1990. The other parties were Mr
Wilde and Neil Gilchrist. The six terms of agreement were included in a document about which the appellant was cross examined. According to his evidence he met Mr Wilde at his home and Mr Wilde said to him that he could have the run of the office if Mr Wilde was re-elected as State member and would be allowed to choose or help to choose some of his staff members. All he wanted was co-operation in passing on things and sending things to branch members. At that time the appellant had hopes of being a candidate for parliament in the future and what was offered was of value to him. He accepted the "fairly remote" possibility that at the time he went to the branch meeting of 14 August if the respondent resigned as the endorsed candidate he might be the replacement candidate. He held the view that dishonesty was rife within the right of the party and the respondent in his view was a member of the right. He conceded in cross examination that on 16 July he did not trust Mr
Wilde in relation to the matter, in part because Mr Wilde has a very real personal motive for making up some of the allegations. He had just lost pre- selection. He was aware that the sale of the unit had occurred years before.
He agreed in cross examination that he proceeded with the publication knowing that there were other explanations for the sale at the price which were innocent explanations. Before the meeting of 11 August Mr Wilde had told him that he would not come to the meeting because he did not want to be part of any public attempt to confront the respondent. He agreed that he was taking the role of prosecutor. The appellant continued to maintain that the respondent was involved in bribery and, when cross examining him, asked him whether he was corrupt. He gave no undertaking not to repeat the allegations.

The respondent submitted that by the time of the trial the appellant had had his inquiry but did not accept the finding. In the course of cross examination the appellant said that if, following the second publication, the organisational wing of the ALP and the ICAC had had a full hearing and decided that the respondent had done nothing improper, he would not agree with their findings.

There were a number of matters which suggested that the appellant was not a true crusader against all corruption as he asserted. In 1988 and 1989 he believed that Mr Elliott, who won pre-selection and was eventually selected member for the Federal seat of Parramatta, was dishonest, was a person who cheated in setting up party branches, got developers in to assist him in rorting a branch, and was not to be trusted on some matters and for some purposes. The appellant said these comments were directed to the circumstances surrounding the setting up of the Westmead branch. He was prepared to say all of this in writing at the end of 1988. Yet on 15 April 1989 he put out a press release pledging his full support for Mr Elliott at the next Federal election.
The appellant's claimed justification for this change of heart was unimpressive and the rejection of part of his evidence in support of this justification of no significance.

The appellant agreed that he did not want any right wing member of Parliament lobbying branch members who were standing in opposition to himself or his friends but did not have any problem with left wing members of Parliament lobbying branch members to vote for candidates against himself and his friends. In 1988 he did Land Title Office searches on a number of right wingers but said he could not recall why. Dunford J rejected the tender of the minutes of a meeting of the Parramatta branch of the ALP held on 1 April 1986.
During this meeting the appellant moved a motion on notice which concerned the failure by the party to investigate allegations made against one party member and the failure to discipline other party members and attacks made on the
Director of Public Prosecutions for prosecuting yet another party member. The appellant submitted that this indicated that he was concerned about integrity even though this might reflect on the left wing of the party. I do not think his Honour erred in regarding this material as too remote from the issues to be admitted in evidence.

The appellant's justification for sending annexure 'B' to all Parliamentary members, that if the matter became public their electoral prospects could conceivably be affected, was, the respondent submitted, disingenuous. It was the appellant who was doing his best to make the matter public.

On 17 October 1990 the appellant wrote to Mr Ziolkowski and Ms Harrison. The letter was as follows: "Information in our possession confirms that at the 1988 State Election both of you deliberately placed your names on the Electoral Roll at a false address, namely 61 Cowper Street, Granville.

In the event of it becoming necessary for us to refer the allegations about
John Haines and John Fayad to the Independent Commission Against Corruption, this serious breach of the electoral laws will be included with the information given to the Commission.

In our opinion the appropriate course of action for you to take is for both of you to resign from the Party immediately and for Ms Harrison to withdraw her nomination for the Council by-election.

A copy of a letter to Head Office about this matter is enclosed." 
The purpose of the letter was obvious from its terms, namely to compel the addressees to resign from the party and Ms Harrison to withdraw her nomination for the Council by-election. If it were otherwise and the appellant believed it was an ICAC matter he ought to have referred it, whether or not the nomination was withdrawn. To like effect is the second last paragraph of annexure `B'. "It would have been comparatively easy for the party to get rid of Haines and claim credit publicly for cleaning up its own ranks." 
The appellant submitted that his Honour erred in finding that the appellant's being a source for the material contained in the Sydney Morning Herald article was evidence of malice and that the evidence concerning the 1988 Westmead branch dispute and the dispute about Ms Harrison and Mr Ziolkowski should not have been admitted, was not evidence of malice and was too remote. However the conduct evidenced by all this material was clearly relevant to the issue of malice and this submission should be rejected.

The appellant denied that the two publications were intended to cause the respondent harm. In speaking of the situation after the respondent had stood down as parliamentary candidate, the appellant said in re-examination: "The Herald article I hoped would make extensive reference to head office's actions because I saw their actions concerning Mr Ziolkowski as a repeat of what they had done in relation to John Haines.

So the focus of that article in the Herald, the final content of which - over which I had no control - that I hoped it would focus on head office and mention Mr Ziolkowski but it only did at the end and it was nevertheless important that it mention John Haines because he was still maintaining his position as alderman. Either he had done nothing wrong and he need not have stood down as the pre-selected candidate or he had done something wrong in which case he could not remain.

HIS HONOUR: Correct me if I am wrong - had he stood down or had someone stood him down as the pre-selected candidate or do you say that is a matter for debate? 
A. Yes, I think it is a matter for debate. So that was the context of that particular article." 
The statement that if the respondent had done nothing wrong he need not have stood down misrepresented the situation. As the appellant was aware the respondent did not stand down.

In my opinion, Dunford J was correct when he said that the appellant was motivated by malice in publishing annexure `B'. His dominant reason for publication was, as his Honour held, to hurt the right wing of the ALP in general and the respondent in particular and to advance the political future of the left wing and possibly of himself.

COMMENT 
To succeed in this defence at common law a defendant is required to show that the words were comment and not a statement of fact, that there was a basis of fact for the comment contained or referred to in the matter complained of and that the comment was on a matter of public interest; Gatley on Libel and Slander, 8th ed, para 692. In Petritsis versus Hellenic Herald Pty Limited [(1978) 2 NSWLR 174] at 348: "The defence of fair comment is no more than the law's recognition of the right of a person to express an opinion on matters of public interest which he identifies, and to attempt to convert others to his view. Comment must be an expression of opinion on identified facts. If the facts are not identified but are left to be implied from the expression of opinion itself, the only defence open is justification. The essence of the submission on behalf of the plaintiff as to the law of fair comment is that one is not entitled to comment on the conduct of a public man unless one sufficiently identifies the facts on which the comment is based so that the reader may form an opinion as to the validity of the comment." 
Reynolds JA said that that submission was accepted by the House of Lords but the principle was extended to cover the case where there was an affirmative answer to the question: "Is the subject matter indicated with sufficient clarity to justify comment being made?" In Goldsbrough versus John Fairfax &
Sons Limited <case>; [(1934) 34 SR 524] at 531, Jordan CJ said: "It must be indicated with reasonable clearness by the words themselves, taking them in the context and the circumstances in which they were published, that they purport to be comment and not statements of fact; because statement of fact, however fair, are not protected by this defence." 
Division 7 of the Act is headed "Comment". Section 29 (1) provides that the defence or exclusion of liability in cases of fair comment on a matter of public interest is modified as appears in the Division and is not available except in accordance with the Division. Section 30 (2) provides that a statement of fact which is a matter of substantial truth is proper material for comment for the purpose of the section, whether or not the statement relates to a matter of public interest. Section 30 (1) provides that for the purposes of the section but subject to subs (2) "proper material for comment" means material which, if the Division had not been enacted, would, by reason that it consists, inter alia, of statements of fact, be material on which comment might be based for the purposes of the defence or exclusion of liability in cases of fair comment on a matter of public interest. Section 30 provides that defences under the Division are available as to any comment if, but only if, (a) the comment is based on proper material for comment; or the material on which the comment is based is to some extent proper material for comment and the comment represents an opinion which might reasonably be based on that material to the extent to which it is proper material for comment. Section 31 provides that the defences under the Division are not available to any comment unless the comment relates to a matter of public interest. Section 32 (1) provides that subject to ss30 and 31, it is a defence as to comment that the comment is the comment of the defendant.

In Radio 2UE Sydney Pty Limited versus Parker [(1992) 29 NSWLR 448] at 464 and following, Clarke JA, with whose reasons Handley and Cripps JJA agreed, discussed the defence of comment and at 466 adopted the observation made by
Hunt J in Bob Kay Real Estate Pty Limited versus Amalgamated Television Services
Pty Limited [(1985) 1 NSWLR 505] that in order to decide whether what had been published would have been understood by the reasonable reader as comment, it was necessary to have regard to the form and context of the words used, not the form in which the plaintiff had expressed his imputation.

Dunford J held that the defence failed in relation to the second publication, annexure `B'. His Honour said that the material did not place facts before the reader and invite him or her to make up their own mind, but in the context treated the so-called allegations as established fact, and would be so regarded by the ordinary reasonable reader. The second paragraph stated without qualification: "The gift was in the form of a discount of over $40,000 on the purchase price of a new home unit." and enclosed a two page summary of the "alleged facts". The main letter went on to refer to a "cover up" of the matter and on the second page referred to a "climate conducive to corruption". It continued, "This matter will not go away. No deals can be made", and called for the respondent to be replaced as candidate. In his Honour's view all these considerations made it clear that the document treated the so-called allegations as established facts and there was no suggestion anywhere that there was any element of comment involved.

Despite the appellant's submissions, which I have carefully considered, a reading of annexure `B' leads me to the same conclusion as that which Dunford
J reached.

DAMAGES 
The respondent sought aggravated damages. Dunford J was satisfied that if he had remained the endorsed ALP candidate he would have won the election and become the State Member for Parramatta. He lost that opportunity and was not likely to get another chance at Parliamentary office. His Honour referred to the fact that the respondent's political opponents on the Council still bring the matter up from time to time thereby causing him considerable embarrassment and that he also suffers when he attends charity, sporting and social functions and has to spend time giving explanations about it. His Honour accepted that the respondent felt a cloud of suspicion continued to hang over him and he stayed awake at night worrying about the matter. His Honour rightly said that to say that a person in public life is guilty of bribery and corruption is a most serious defamation. After the letter of 16 July, Head Office had accepted the respondent's explanation and endorsed his pre-selection. Dunford J said that the publication of 14 August and the letters of 11 September, charging the respondent and others, and of 24 September to the party leader and members of the Shadow Cabinet had not changed the position. But the letter of 16 October, annexure `B' widely disseminated as it was to all New South Wales Labor politicians was the turning point, the "straw that broke the camel's back" which apparently caused the administrative committee to change its mind and ultimately to withdraw the respondent's endorsement. His Honour found the appellant's allegations to be false and that he was actuated by malice. The respondent relied on his failure to apologise and the subsequent repetitions of the defamatory matter earlier referred to. In my opinion the award of damages of $75,000 was well within the range of a damages appropriate to the facts his Honour found.

CONCLUSION 
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
