

Sondra Jean Sinclair and Ors versus William James Hudson and Ors No. 2980/91
Principal and Agent - Contracts - Estoppel [1995] NSWSC 71 (10 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
WINDEYER J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30, 31 August and 1 September 1995 #DATE 1:9:1995 #ADD 10:10:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff          S. White 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff        John M.
Fitzgerald and Associates 
Counsel for the 1st Named Defendant     K. Smark 
Solicitors for the 1st Named Defendant   Marsdens 
Counsel for the 2nd Named 1st Defendant   J.E. Armfield 
Solicitors for the 2nd Named st Defendant                 Gordon Cavanagh 
Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd Defendants   S.
Reuben 
Solicitors for the 2nd and 3rd Defendants  Corrs Chambers
Westgarth
ORDER
Judgment for the plaintiffs
JUDGE1
WINDEYER J The plaintiffs, Mr and Mrs Sinclair, sue the defendants, now Mr
Hudson and Mrs Clissold for an unpaid deposit under a contract for sale for a real property named as "Glenburnie" near Uralla. In the alternative, they sue the auctioneer and selling agent for damages for breach of warranty of authority and for negligence as selling agent for the vendors.
Mr and Mrs Sinclair between them owned "Glenburnie". They instructed
Elders Real Estate at Armidale to submit it to auction on 20 March 1991. The third defendant was the proprietor of Elders Real Estate. The second defendant, Mr Bremner, was employed by
Elders and was an auctioneer. Mr Hudson was interested in moving to the country. He was at the relevant time in 1991 married to Mrs
Clissold, named in the proceedings as Doreen Hudson. The marriage had broken down but he at least thought there was some chance of it being put together again in some new location.
Mr Hudson thought his wife was entitled to a substantial inheritance from the estate of a lady called Tutty Walker. Here, what seems to be at times a fairy story, begins. He had been told by her, so he said, of the addresses of numerous properties which, if they existed and were held by the estate, were obviously of very significant value.
He said his wife went to visit those properties from time to time with a Mr McAllister.
According to Mrs Clissold, she was told in 1973 after Mrs Walker's death, that she was a very substantial beneficiary in her estate. She had been told that first by
Mr Warrington Connolly, a solicitor, who in fact had paid her $5,000 from the estate but who had subsequently said there was a mistake and she was required to hand that money back. Subsequently she had meetings over about seven years with a Mr Rasmussen who she said was a solicitor. He apparently died in about 1981 after which Mrs Clissold said the estate was handled by a Mr O'Reilly, another solicitor.
Later on in 1985 a Ms Swan from the Public Trust Office came into the picture. She looked after the estate until about 1988 or 1989. Mrs Clissold says she attended a number of meetings with this lady in this court building.
She says they met in the vestibule and went up in the lift to confer in some private room. She said Ms Swan spoke of a Mr McAllister whom she took to be Ms
Swan's superior. Later on Mr McAllister took over and things went on in the same way, on about ten occasions meetings taking place in this court building.
Sometimes Mr McAllister took his secretary Carmel Murphy with him. Mr
McAllister said he would send notes of the meetings but he never did.
In March 1991, after discussions about the Armidale property, Mrs Clissold says that she spoke to Mr McAllister asking if moneys were available in the estate to buy it and he said they were. Mr Hudson inspected the property with
Mr Bremner on 16 March 1991, having seen it advertised in "The Land" newspaper. He liked it and he told Mr Bremner that and that money was coming from the Walker estate and that Mr McAllister would probably bid for him and his wife. He said his wife rang him on 20 March, being the auction date, to say the money was available, that he then rang Mr Bremner to tell him that
Mr
McAllister would be bidding for him and his wife. Mr Bremner asked for a fax giving McAllister authority to bid and giving his telephone number. This was forwarded. Shortly thereafter Mr Bremner said that he needed an additional authority authorising him to sign the contract if they, the Hudsons, were the successful bidders. He spoke to his wife about this and she agreed that the fax should be sent. Mrs Clissold agreed that both faxes were sent with her authority, so no point turns on that.
Mr Bremner could not contact McAllister on the telephone number given which was 02 213611. He rang Mr Hudson who rang his wife who said that was the number she had. I should say, in the witness box she gave two other numbers.
He said that he would get Mr McAllister to ring Mr Bremner.
Mrs Clissold said that by this time she had told Mr McAllister he was to do the bidding. She said she told him through some unexplained knowledge she had that the price would be $960,000 although I think probably she meant it would be around that figure.
Mr Bremner did not get in touch with Mr McAllister but got a call from Mrs
Murphy who said she was Mr McAllister's secretary and there was trouble with the phone lines. He told her the telephone number of the hotel where the auction was to be conducted, showed the authority to bid to Mr Upjohn, an
Elders employee who was to take the telephone bids. Mr Upjohn tried to get through to Mr McAllister on the telephone but failed. However, just before .00 AM Mrs Murphy rang through and said, "I am Mrs Murphy, Mr McAllister's secretary". She remained on the line and the auction proceeded. Mrs Murphy made bids, having been told by Mr Upjohn what was going on in the auction room and those bids were relayed by Mr Upjohn to Mr Bremner. At one stage Mrs
Murphy said that she had to go to talk to her boss. She came back and said everything was in order and proceeded and finally made the successful bid of $960,000. It is not established it was the only bid she made after seeking instructions. On the fall of the hammer Mr Upjohn congratulated Mrs Murphy and put Mr Bremner on to talk to her. He instructed her to send the deposit by telegraphic transfer to the Elders account at Armidale. She said she realised this was urgent and would get Mr McAllister to arrange it.
Mr and Mrs Sinclair signed the contract and Mr Bremner said he had authority to sign for the purchasers and did so. There was some strange discussion about exchange and this was the first time Mr Sinclair realised there had not been arrangements made for the deposit to be received by them.
In any event, the evidence about the exchange was irrelevant because it was accepted, obviously correctly, that if a contract came into being it came into existence when Mr Bremner signed.
Mrs Murphy later on told Mrs Carruthers, the Elders receptionist, that rather than send up the money,
Mr McAllister would bring it the next day as he was coming to Armidale to inspect the property. A little later she rang to say the inspection trip was off and the deposit would be sent by telegraphic transfer by late the next morning. It did not arrive. On 21
March, which was the next day, Mrs Clissold rang Mr Bremner saying that were some problems, that the trustees were not in a position to pay but that Mr McAllister was expected to sort everything out. She rang again on 22 March to say that there were still problems about the money, that she realised that she was in trouble and that Mr McAllister had been sacked. Mr Bremner said that Mr Hudson rang him on the Saturday after the auction to say he had spoken to Mr McAllister who would fix things up. Mr Hudson, I should say, denies he had ever spoken to
Mr McAllister and I accept that to be the position. Probably what he intended to indicate to Mr Bremner was that he had spoken to his wife who had spoken to
Mr McAllister.
By Monday Mr Bremner was very anxious as Mr Sinclair was pressing him by then. On 25 March Mr Hudson told Mr Bremner that Mr McAllister was ill and had gone to hospital but things would be fixed up. The next day he said he was off to see the trustees himself, that he had had no contact with Mr McAllister and he told
Bremner about the estate and the dealings with his wife. There were several conversations on 26 March between Mr Bremner and Mrs
Clissold and also possibly with Mr Sinclair although I think it is more likely that the conversations were between Mr Sinclair and
Mr Bremner. It was, in any event, clear enough by then that Mr Sinclair thought the deal might not go through.
Mr Bremner had been told by then that the Public Trustee was unhappy with Mr
McAllister and that he had been sacked. In the long run, the vendors terminated the contract on 5 April 1991.
I had the feeling throughout this case that we were proceeding in some sort of wonderland or that there must have been some serious fraud. However, the allegations of fraud were withdrawn. The shadowy figures of Mr McAllister and Mrs Murphy have not been seen and there has been no believable evidence giving details about the Walker estate. There is nothing to corroborate the evidence about Mr Connolly, Mr Rasmussen or Mr O'Reilly and no evidence from anyone at the Public Trust Office.
As things are left, I must assume Mrs
Clissold has been the victim of some extraordinary hoax. Whether that is true or not I don't know but it is not necessary to take that any further.
These then are the basic facts. I turn to the legal questions. I should say at the outset that the case of the first defendants was that there was no contract binding on them because Mrs Murphy had no authority to bid for them at the auction as Mr McAllister had no authority to delegate that task to her.
As the authority to execute the contract was clearly conditional upon a valid authorised bid being received, that authority was never activated. The plaintiffs adopted this position, in effect abandoning their claim against the first defendants.
I consider this defence of the first defendants is made out. It was put that it was Mr McAllister who was doing the bidding and that Mrs Murphy was just his mouthpiece.
There is, however, no evidence of that at all, even accepting that Mr McAllister was the boss from whom instructions were obtained during the auction. At one stage it is clear that Mrs Murphy was bidding and there is nothing to suggest anyone else was with her at the time. It was also put that the bidding was no more than a mechanical or administrative act and that therefore delegation would be implied. I do not think that to be so. Mrs
Clissold said that she relied on Mr McAllister as he was a solicitor. She was not really challenged on that and I accept that to be a bidder at an auction is normally regarded as an important task. There was no express authority to delegate that task and it is not one such as would come within those where authority to delegate is implied. See Bowstead on Agency 15th Edition at page .
The plaintiffs did not argue that the proposed purchaser had ratified the contract but
I will have to return to that.
I move now to the claim against the second and third defendants for breach of warranty of authority based on the principle in Collen versus Wright 8
Ellis and Blackburn 647 <case>; , [120 ER 241.]
There is no doubt that Bremner warranted to the vendors that he had authority to sign for the purchasers. He had that authority at common law in any event if they did not sign. There can be no doubt that the vendors acted on the basis of such warranty as without that there would have been no sale and they would not have signed the contract. In giving the warranty it seems to me that it was given both personally and on behalf of Elders, as the faxed authority was in favour of Elders and in fact that was admitted on the pleadings. Thus, unless ratification is made out, the plaintiff is entitled to damages arising from the breach of warranty of authority from the second and third defendants.
I turn to ratification. I do so because the second and third defendants claim that the st defendants ratified the contract. The question is whether or not the first defendant adopted or ratified the unauthorised actions of Mrs
Murphy in purporting to bid on their behalf thus binding them as if performed by McAllister. That requires not only an acceptance of the auction price but knowledge that it was the action of Mrs Murphy which led to the winning bid.
It was put that this knowledge was not material for ratification. If that was so, ratification was never necessary at all but I do not accept it was as I consider it was a material matter.
The evidence is that knowledge came to Mr Hudson not earlier than 28
March and perhaps later if
Mr Sinclair's evidence on this is correct. Thus ratification would have had to occur between that date and the date of termination by Mr and Mrs Sinclair, namely, 5 April 1991. The acts of ratification relied upon by the pleadings are the conversations between 
March and 26 March relating to the deposit. What required ratification was the acceptance by Bremner of the unauthorised telephone bid of Mrs Murphy. I am in no doubt that the first defendants were happy with the purchase, at least on March. They considered they were bound by the contract and that explains their conversations about the deposit. But there is no evidence of any actions by them in affirmation of the contract once they became aware of the true facts. In fact there is no evidence Mrs Clissold herself ever knew of the true facts. Thus the claim for ratification fails.
I should add that there were submissions made on the basis of ratification by acquiescence. That must have been between 28 March and 5
April. It was, however, never pleaded and is not part of the case. There is, I should say, no evidence of anything done apart from some approach to Mr
Sinclair during that period. In any event, in view of the short period that elapsed if it had been pleaded and were part of the case, I do not think the time would have been sufficient to amount to acquiescence.
Finally, the estoppel claim. This is based upon conduct and is as set out in paragraph 16 of the cross-claim and once again is based on the conversations. I think that there is no doubt that the pleaded claim related to questions about the authority given to Bremner and were not directed to the sub-delegation at all. There is no be doubt that the parties conducted themselves on the basis that Mr Bremner was duly authorised to sign the contract, as he was, but he could only do so on receipt of an authorised telephone bid. He did not receive any such bid. Any other estoppel must be based on conduct or representations. The first defendants made no representations that Mrs Murphy had authority to bid; nor did they act on that basis, as they did not know of it. The estoppel claim fails.
I should say in reaching this decision I did so with some regret. It is difficult to accept all the evidence of Mrs Clissold about her extraordinary dealings with the non-appearing characters and had the deposit moneys become available there is little doubt that the contract would have been ratified upon the true facts relating to the bidding becoming known and it is always easy with hindsight to say what the auctioneer should have done. Nevertheless, without authority and without ratification the first defendant are not bound.
The claim against them fails and the cross-claim by the second and third defendants against them fails.
I should say there was another basis for that cross-claim based in some way on negligence and contribution which I do not understand but which was not, in any event, pressed.
I turn now to damages.
In an action for breach of warranty of authority the measure of damages is the loss which the parties should reasonably have contemplated as liable to result from a breach of warranty. Where a contract is repudiated by the person on whose behalf it was made on the grounds that it was made without his authority, such loss is prima facie the amount of damages that could have been recovered from him in an action if he had duly authorised and subsequently refused to perform the contract. See Bowstead on Agency
Article 113. This statement was approved by the Court of Appeal in New South
Wales in Boulas versus Angelopoulos (1991) 5 BPR p11,477 at 11,491.
In this case we are dealing with of course the contract was not repudiated by the first defendants on the ground it was made without authority because Mr and Mrs Sinclair purported to terminate it on 5 April.
Nevertheless, there seems to be no reason in principle why the same damages should not be recoverable so that the loss is the sum of $96,000, being the amount of the unpaid deposit which ought to have been paid had there been a valid contract. To that amount would be added interest from the date of termination, namely, 5
April 1991 to date.
Mr Hudson, by way of cross-claim, made a claim which was, in effect, one based on [s55(2A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s55.html) of the [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) for the return of the deposit.
This should presumably be considered to determine whether that would have had any effect on the real loss suffered by the plaintiffs as a result of the breach of warranty of authority. I have come to the conclusion that there would have been no basis shown for an order pursuant to that section, as there is nothing in the evidence which would have made it in any way unjust for the plaintiffs to have retained the full amount of the deposit. While it is true that as a result of the resale for the sum of $926,000 the plaintiffs would be seen to have made a profit, that is not in any way the determining factor.
Whatever else could be said about the extraordinary story, any loss which the defendants would have suffered had the contract been properly entered into and the deposit paid, would have really resulted from their actions. In any event, there is a certain sense of artificiality in dealing with this matter as on the case of an unpaid deposit and it is at least doubtful whether [s55(2A)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s55.html) of the [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) is applicable at all.
The result of this is that there should be judgment for the plaintiffs against the second and third defendants for $96,000 plus interest for an amount which I understand will be agreed. There should be judgment for the first defendants of the plaintiffs' claim with costs. The second cross-claim should be dismissed with costs.
In actions of this type where it is reasonable to sue the principles, the damages are sometimes said to include the costs of the unsuccessful action against those principles. That, however, depends upon the time up to which it was reasonable to pursue this action and I will hear some further arguments on that.
I make the following orders: Judgment for the plaintiffs against the second and third defendants for $96,000 plus interest of $50,029.94 making a total of $146,029.94. The second and third defendants to pay the plaintiffs costs. 
Judgment for the first defendants against the plaintiff. Plaintiff to pay the costs of the first defendants. 
First cross-claim dismissed.
No orders as to costs. 
Second cross-claim dismissed. Second cross-claimants to pay the costs of the second cross-defendants on that cross-claim. 
Third cross-claim dismissed with no order as to costs. 
Liberty to apply for variation of judgment re interest calculations by not later than 4 September 1995. 
Liberty to the plaintiff to apply for an order that the costs payable to the plaintiffs by the second and third defendants should include those costs which the plaintiff has been ordered to pay to the first defendants. 
Any such application is to be made to my associate to fix a date not later than Friday 8 September 1995. The exhibits can be returned.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/71.html  
