

Westpac Banking Corporation and Anor versus Morris and Ors Matter No 1171/98 [1998] NSWSC 666 (2 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 January 1999 
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION & ANOR versus MORRIS & ORS /98 December 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Prior to February 1997, interests associated with the Morris family owed Westpac Banking Corporation something in excess of $10 million. This debt was secured by mortgages and by guarantees given by members of the family and associated companies. During 1997, the Bank sold all but one of the mortgaged properties, and realised in all something over $360,000.00 in excess of the total debt owing to the Bank. One of the guarantors, Arthur Morris, claimed from the Bank assignment of the mortgage over the remaining property on the basis of a right of subrogation. 
In these proceedings the Bank, and a receiver appointed by the Bank in respect of one of the securities, seek determination by the Court concerning entitlement to the surplus, and also concerning of what should be done about the remaining mortgage.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
The Morris family relevantly comprises James and Voula Morris (the sixth and seventh defendants) and their three sons Arthur (the first defendant), Con (whose trustee in bankruptcy is the fourth defendant), and John (the eighth defendant); and also Litsa Morris (the third defendant), the ex-wife of
Arthur, and Dina Morris (the fifth defendant), the ex-wife of Con. There are also three relevant companies: James and Voula Morris Corporation Pty. Limited (the second defendant), J. & V. Morris Pty. Limited (the ninth defendant), and CAJ Investments Pty. Limited (which is in liquidation, and not a party to these proceedings).

According to Bank documents, the correctness of which in these respects is not now in issue in the proceedings, apart from about $7 million owing by the second defendant to the Bank and fully paid out of the proceeds of sale of the second defendant's shopping centre at North Blackburn, the relevant principal debtors to the Bank were as follows: second defendant $437,684.47; ninth defendant $895,739.05; Con $385,507.43; Con, Arthur and John $6,146.85; James and Voula $1,268,951.87. Relevantly, a total of $3,365,325.54 was realised from the sale of securities given by the relevant debtors (as principal debtors and/or guarantors) as follows: Arthur $460,995.65; Con $631,891.31;
John $23,311.18; James $787,727.70; Voula nil; second defendant $1,461,399.70; ninth defendant nil. Con's contribution included $608,580.13 from the sale of a property 15 Mansfield Street, Glebe, which had been registered in the names of James and Voula, but had been found in divorce proceedings between Con and
Dina to be beneficially owned by Con and Dina: this finding is not questioned in these proceedings.

On that basis, it appears that the ninth defendant, John, and Voula all contributed less than their share; while the other four contributed more than their share in the proportions 58.13% (the second defendant), 24.34% (Arthur), .49% (Con) and 6.04% (James).

The property which was not realised by the bank was a house at 10 Toxteth
Road, Glebe, registered in the name of Con. On 28th May 1996, Justice O'Ryan of the Family Court of Australia made a property settlement order in proceedings between Dina and Con, including an order requiring Con to transfer this property unencumbered to Dina.

On 30th July 1996, Con became bankrupt on his own petition, and the fourth defendant was appointed his trustee in bankruptcy.

On 13th December 1996, Justice O'Ryan made a costs order in favour of Dina in the sum of $132,226.26, against Con, James, Voula and the second defendant jointly and severally. No part of this has been paid, and with interest accrued under the Family Law Act and Rules, this now totals about $166,000.00.

The genesis of these proceedings is an application made in proceedings commenced in May 1997 in the Equity Division of this Court by Arthur against the Bank, claiming relief in respect of a mortgage given by Arthur over the property 234 Glebe Point Road, Glebe. In those proceedings, in October 1997,
Arthur put on a Notice of Motion seeking by way of subrogation assignment to himself of the Bank's mortgage over the Toxteth Road property.

There are in the documents tendered in these proceedings some documents alleging that on 12th November 1997 the second defendant, the ninth defendant, and CAJ purportedly executed an irrevocable authority directing that the proceeds of the North Blackburn Shopping Centre be paid to Arthur, and acknowledging that Arthur had the sole claim for subrogation to the mortgage over the Toxteth Road property.

These proceedings were commenced on 11th January 1998. Initially, only Arthur,
Litsa, Con's trustee, and the second defendant were made defendants. Dina
Morris was joined as fifth defendant on 6th April 1998; and James, Voula,
John, and the ninth defendant were joined, on the application of Dina, on 4th
September 1998. In the event, Litsa and Con's trustee did not actively participate in the proceedings.

The Bank paid into Court a sum of a little over $72,600.00, retaining $110,000.00 against further expenses. As at 7th October 1998, $83,396.50 was left of this $110,000.00, and is being held primarily on account of expenses that may be incurred in the proceedings brought against it by Arthur. The receiver paid into Court a little over $104,000.00, retaining $55,000.00 against possible future expenses. At present, it is estimated that $37,000.00 of this $55,000.00 will be available for distribution.

ISSUES 
The first issue concerns the claim for subrogation made by Arthur.

Next, there is the question of the entitlements of those who have paid more than their share to participate in the surplus funds. At one stage, it appeared that Arthur might be claiming that the share apparently due to the second defendant and to James should go to him by reason of the purported transaction of November 1997. However, no admissible evidence was led about that transaction, and, as I understand it, no submission to that effect was made on behalf of Arthur. The only substantial submission against the prima facie entitlements given earlier was raised on behalf of John Morris, based on a claim that his contribution was substantially in excess of that noted above, because the property 401 Glebe Point Road, which was sold for about $785,000.00, was beneficially owned by John, although registered in the name of James.

The third issue concerns an application made on behalf of Dina that, out of any money allocated from the fund to the second defendant and/or to James, there should be paid the debts due by the second defendant and James to Dina under the Family Court judgment for costs.

Finally, there was the question of provision for costs, and how the amounts retained by the Bank and the receiver should be treated in considering entitlements and costs.

SUBROGATION 
Mr. Hancock for Arthur adopted written submissions that had been provided in support of Arthur's claim to subrogation. He submitted that Arthur was subrogated to Westpac's rights, to the extent of the sum paid by Arthur towards the discharge of the debts, namely $437,684.00.

Extensive written submissions were also provided by Mr. Rares SC for Dina, and
Mr. Rares particularly relied on the case of Cochrane v. Cochrane [(1985) 3
NSWLR 403] at 405.

In my opinion, as shown by Cochrane, a right to subrogation is ancillary to rights to indemnity or contribution which a person who has paid a secured debt may have. In this case, Arthur is not entitled to any contribution from Con, and therefore is not entitled to subrogation to a mortgage given by Con over his property. Arthur is in no stronger position against Dina. Of course, if
Con and Dina had not been able to claim the benefit of the payment to Westpac made from the proceeds of sale of the property 15 Mansfield Street, Glebe, the position may have been different; but now there is no dispute against the proposition that those proceeds can be counted as a contribution made by Con.
Accordingly, Arthur's claim to subrogation must fail.

PERCENTAGE ENTITLEMENTS 
The only submission made contrary to the percentages calculated on behalf of
Dina and given earlier in this judgment was a submission made by Mr. Potts on behalf of the eighth defendant, John. Mr. Potts submitted that in the Family
Law proceedings, Justice O'Ryan had found that Con and Dina were beneficial owners of the Mansfield Street property on the basis that James intended to give a property to each of his sons; and that John was to get the 401 Glebe
Point Road property, which was sold for about $785,000.00. The property was in the name of James Morris, so this had been counted as a contribution from
James, whereas it should have been counted as a contribution from John.

The judgment of Justice O'Ryan of 28th May 1996 did contain a finding that Con had said to Dina that James was giving a house to each of his sons, and that
John had chosen the property 401 Glebe Point Road, Glebe. However, Justice
O'Ryan did not go on to make any finding that such a gift from James to John had actually taken place; and no evidence has been presented in these proceedings either by James or John that such a gift took effect. In circumstances where John in particular has chosen not to lead any such evidence, I cannot be satisfied on the balance of probabilities that this property was beneficially owned by John. In those circumstances, the percentage entitlements are as set out earlier.

DINA'S COSTS ORDER 
Mr. Rares submitted that an order entitling Dina to over $130,000.00 plus interest had been outstanding against the second defendant and James since
December 1996. It was appropriate that this Court order that money from the fund found to be due to the second defendant and to James should be applied in satisfaction of this judgment debt. He referred me to Pt.46 of the Supreme
Court Rules concerning garnishment; and to the cases of Re Combined Weighing and Advertising Machine Co. [(1889) 43 Ch.D. 99], Blacktown
Concrete Services v. Ultra Refurbishing & Construction [(1998) 28 ACSR ], and Bridgewater v. Leahy <case>, rd October 1998.

Mr. Potts for the second defendant and James submitted that Dina had no claim to their shares of the fund as such, and that to order payment of such shares to her would in substance elevate her from an unsecured to a secured creditor.
Dina had no priority over other creditors which would entitle her to such an order.

What is sought by Dina is not strictly garnishment as normally understood, because the order she is seeking to enforce is not an order of this Court but of the Family Court of Australia. However, this Court has control of a fund, some of which is due to the second defendant and to James; and in deciding what should happen to that part of the fund, the circumstance that Dina has an unsatisfied judgment against them, coupled with the analogy of garnishment, is pertinent. In the garnishment rules, there is provision for the Court to take account of claims by other persons to the money being garnisheed: see Pt.46 r.10. It is the garnishee's duty to acquaint the Court with any claim or lien of which the garnishee is aware. In this case, the money has been paid into
Court, so the Court itself is in the position of a garnishee, and the Court is unaware of any rival claim to the money. However, it could be that the second defendant and/or James have other creditors, perhaps even creditors who could claim some security over this fund.

On the whole, I think the appropriate course is for this Court to order that the share in the fund of the second defendant and James be used to discharge
Dina's judgment debt; but to stay that order for a short time so that, if there is any creditor (other than a party to these proceedings) with a claim to that part of the fund, this could be brought to the Court's attention.

COSTS, AND TREATMENT OF AMOUNTS RETAINED 
Mr. Rares for Dina submitted that so much of the Bank's retention as was held on account of expenses that might be incurred in the proceedings brought against it by Arthur should be treated pro tanto as Arthur's share of the fund. As regards costs, Mr. Rares submitted that Dina's costs should be paid out of the fund on an indemnity basis. Costs orders should not disadvantage
Dina in any way: the necessity for these proceedings had been brought about by a false claim of assignment to Arthur and a false claim of subrogation. Dina had not initially been joined in these proceedings, and had been successful because she had been able to establish that no contribution was due from Con because 15 Mansfield Street was beneficially owned by Con and Dina.

Mr. Hancock for Arthur submitted that Arthur's costs should be paid from the fund. No order had been made against him in the Family Law proceedings, and
Arthur had been successful in the interpleader proceedings in showing that part of the fund was due to him. The proceedings had been conducted on
Arthur's behalf by a tutor appointed in circumstances where Arthur was a disable person. It was Westpac who had selected what it thought were the appropriate parties in the interpleader proceedings, and it was inevitable that Dina would get notice of them.

Mr. Potts submitted that the second defendant's costs should be paid from the fund: it had been brought into the proceedings, and had been shown to be entitled to some of the fund. The sixth to ninth defendants had been brought into the proceedings by Dina, and their costs should be paid either by Dina or out of the fund. They had never sought any share in the fund.

Mr. Rares submitted that the sixth to ninth defendants had supported Arthur's claim for subrogation, and indeed had apparently purported to assign their rights to Arthur. If in these proceedings the assignment had been set aside, they could possibly have made claims on their own account. It was necessary to ensure that all persons with possible claims should be bound by these proceedings.

In my opinion, there is some force in a submission that prima facie all participants would be entitled from the fund to the costs of presenting reasonable evidence and submissions concerning how that fund should be distributed. However, some issues raised by the defendants, or some of them, went far beyond this and were unequivocally lost: the suggestion of an assignment to Arthur, which was initially raised and supported by evidence that was not read before me; Arthur's claim for subrogation; and John's claim on the basis of contribution. These claims, in which all defendants other than
Dina who actively participated in the proceedings played some part, added to the costs of the proceedings.

In my opinion, rather than attempting to dissect issues and ordering these defendants to pay some of Dina's costs and on the other hand get some of their own costs from the fund, I propose to order that Dina's costs be paid from the fund and that the other participating defendants have no order as to costs.

There may be some application by the non-participating parties for submitting costs, but these should be minimal.

Before making calculations based on my findings, it is necessary to provisionally set aside some of the fund on account of the fifth defendant's costs: I have no evidence about this, but I would propose to set aside $30,000.00 on account of her costs.

In those circumstances, the best estimate I can presently make of the total fund to be distributed (assuming Arthur's claim against the Bank does not go ahead, so that about $80,000.00 of the amount retained by the Bank becomes available) is $72,600.00 plus $104,000.00 plus $37,000.00 (from the receiver) plus $80,000.00 (from the Bank) less $30,000.00 (set aside for the fifth defendant's costs), giving a figure of $263,600.00.

Arthur would be entitled to 24.34% of this, namely $64,160.24. In my opinion, this should be treated as part of the money retained by the Bank, unless and until Arthur abandons his claim against the Bank. This means that the percentages of the other participants must be proportionately increased to determine their shares of the amounts presently available. Thus, the second defendant's 58.13% share becomes 76.83%; Con's 11.49% becomes 15.19%; and
James' 6.04% becomes 7.98%. The amount presently available for distribution is $176,600.00 less $30,000.00, namely $146,600.00. Applying the percentages I have just given to this, one has $112,632.78 for the second defendant, $22,268.54 for Con, and $11,698.68 for James.

I note that the total of the shares of the second defendant and James is $124,331.46, considerably less than the costs which they owe under the Family
Court order to Dina. Accordingly, in my opinion, Dina should get $124,331.46 on account of the costs order in the Family Court, and Con's trustee in bankruptcy should get the other $22,268.54 presently available for distribution. As more money becomes available from the amounts held back by the receiver and the Bank, it should be dealt with on the same basis; and similarly any balance of the $30,000.00 left over after the plaintiff's costs have been assessed.

As foreshadowed, I would propose to stay the order in favour of Dina for a short period in case the second defendant or James wish to assert that they have creditors other than parties to these proceedings whose interests should be taken into account.
 * * * 
