

Regina versus Tsoukalos Matter No Cca 60449/97 [1998] NSWSC 778 (7 December )

Last Updated: 10 February 1999 
REGINA versus THEOPHILOS TSOUKALOS 
CCA 60449/97 December 1998 
McInerney J, James J, Bruce J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus THEOPHILOS TSOUKALOS 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: Theophilos Tsoukalos has appealed from his conviction following a trial before Acting District Court Judge Sinclair and a jury on three charges of supplying a prohibited drug on 23 July 1994. On each of the three charges the appellant was sentenced to a sentence of imprisonment for four years, consisting of a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year, the three sentences to be served concurrently. In the event of his appeal against conviction being dismissed, the appellant seeks leave to appeal against sentence. 
The two principal Crown witnesses at the trial, whose names were Starr and
Kane, were members of the police service in July 1994. By the time the trial was held in July 1997 Starr had left the police service.

Starr and Kane each gave evidence to the following general effect. On the night of 23 July 1994 they were travelling in a police vehicle in Alexandria.
They observed a vehicle which was being driven by the appellant. The appellant appeared to be using a mobile telephone while he was driving. The appellant's vehicle was stopped by the police. According to the evidence of the police officers, Starr asked, "Are there any drugs in the car or on you?" The appellant replied, "A small amount of Procaine", which the appellant said was in the back of the car. Starr announced that the police would search the car.

Kane found in the boot of the car a black zip-up mens toiletry bag. There was a plastic bag containing cannabis inside the toiletry bag. The appellant was thereupon arrested for possession of cannabis. Starr searched the toiletry bag and found a number of bags or envelopes containing powder or tablets. Starr asked the appellant whether he had a licence and the appellant produced a licence. The appellant apologised for talking on the mobile telephone whilst driving. The appellant was asked whether the car was his. The appellant replied, "Yes, but it is registered in my father's name. I lease the car." The appellant said that he had been at a friend's restaurant that night helping the friend. The appellant claimed that all the powder and tablets were
Procaine, which he had bought in a hotel in Newcastle. The appellant said, "All I do is put it in coffee because I am a diabetic and it gives me a lift."
The appellant was asked a number of questions to which he made no reply or replied "I don't know".

The appellant was taken to his home and then Redfern Police Station. At the police station he declined to be interviewed. Kane gave evidence that after he returned to the Redfern Police Station he made notes of the conversation which had occurred between Starr and the appellant. The appellant was asked whether he wanted to read the notes and he replied "no".

Starr carried out a preliminary test on some powder which was in one of the envelopes found in the toiletry bag and ascertained that the powder tested positively as being amphetamine. When told of this result the appellant said, "It should be Procaine." The contents of the toiletry bag were subjected to analysis and found to contain, inter alia, quantities of amphetamine, cocaine and heroin, which became the subject of three charges of supplying a prohibited drug. In the Crown case at the trial Dr Moynan, a director of the
Clinical Forensic Unit of the New South Wales Police Service, gave evidence that Procaine is a local anaesthetic commonly used by doctors and dentists in minor surgery.

The appellant gave evidence in his own case at the trial. The appellant said that on the night of 23 July 1994 he was using a mobile telephone while driving. He was pulled over by police and asked to produce his licence. The appellant said that his licence had been cancelled and he was able to confirm that his licence had in fact been cancelled some years previously. The appellant pulled out his wallet to obtain some document of identification.
Inside the wallet was $1500 consisting of wages and commission earned by the appellant. Starr "took", that is stole, the wallet. The police searched the car and opened the boot of the car. One of the police officers then waved a black toiletry bag which the appellant had never seen before. The appellant was taken to his home and then the police station. He did not see either of the police making notes and he was not shown any notes. He did not say anything to the police about Procaine and the first time he had ever heard of
Procaine was when he read the statements in the police brief.

I have so far summarised the Crown case and the defence case at the trial. The appellant was represented on this appeal by senior counsel, who had not appeared at the trial. A very large number of grounds of appeal were raised, many of which resulted from a close analysis of the transcript of the trial and had not been the subject of any complaint at the trial.

The first ground of appeal relied on was that the trial miscarried. This ground of appeal was based on what was submitted to be an accumulation of the errors alleged in the later grounds of appeal. I have concluded that this ground of appeal, that the trial miscarried, should be upheld. It is not necessary for me to refer to all the grounds of appeal, some of which, it is fair to say, lacked substance. I will simply refer to the grounds of appeal which have been most influential in leading me to the conclusion that the trial miscarried.

GROUND OF APPEAL 3(a): The trial judge erred in giving wrong and confusing directions on possession and failed to properly direct the jury on the mental element of possession.

In summing up the trial judge explained to the jury that the Crown case on each of the three charges was based on an actual supply under <case> of the Drug
Misuse and Trafficking Act or a deemed supply under <case> of the Act. The trial judge gave, inter alia, the following directions.
 "...the only essential element of this case is whether or not you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that drugs that are in the exhibits were found in the boot of the car...
 * * * 
You ask yourself are we satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was in possession of those drugs. In other words they were in the boot and he knew it".

No complaint or request for a redirection was made by counsel for the appellant at the trial. It has been submitted on the appeal that the trial judge was required to give the jury full directions on the concept of possession, including the physical element of control, the mental element and the need for the appellant's control to be exclusive. The court was referred, inter alia, to He Kaw Teh versus The Queen <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 523], R versus Popa [(1991) 53 A.Crim.R 102], R v
Filippetti [(1978) 13 A.Crim.R 335] and R v Solway [(1984) 11 A.Crim.R 449.] 
It has been held a number of times in this court that in cases of this sort, for example, where a deemed supply of drugs is relied on by the Crown, the jury should be instructed, even if only briefly, on the meaning of the concept of possession (see, for example, R versus Popa). On the other hand, it has been held in a number of cases that an omission by the trial judge to give such directions does not necessarily require an upholding of an appeal against conviction on the ground that such directions were not given (see, for example, R versus Hudson, unreported, 24 May 1995; R versus Cross, unreported, December 1995.) Much will depend on whether in the way the trial was conducted there is an issue for the jury which the jury could not decide without receiving directions on the concept of possession.

In the present case I have already quoted a part of his Honour's summing up in which his Honour, without objection, identified the issue upon which the jury's verdict would depend, that is, whether the drugs were in the boot of the car. No issue was explicitly raised as to whether, even if the drugs were in the boot of the car, the appellant might not have been in possession of them. I would not have upheld the appeal against conviction on this ground alone, but it is one matter that I have taken into account in deciding that overall the trial miscarried.

GROUNDS OF APPEAL 3(d) AND 3(e): The trial judge erred in not giving proper directions pursuant to <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) and McKinney v
The Queen <case>; [(1990-91) 171 CLR 468.] 
At the trial counsel for the appellant applied for directions pursuant to
McKinney versus The Queen and pursuant to <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). The Crown
Prosecutor did not oppose the giving of directions pursuant to McKinney v
The Queen. The Crown Prosecutor did oppose the giving of directions pursuant to <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). The trial judge ruled that <case> was applicable and that accordingly he should give directions pursuant to McKinney versus The Queen and <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).

The directions that the judge gave were not subject to any complaint by counsel at the trial. The trial judge told the jury that the Crown case depended on the evidence of the two police officers. The trial judge several times told the jury to scrutinise the evidence of the police officers with great care. The trial judge pointed out that the only persons present had been the two police officers and the appellant and that the appellant did not have an opportunity to bring anyone to confirm his evidence. The trial judge said that there were a number of things the jury must give heed to in assessing the evidence of the two police officers and the appellant. He said that the police officers are not novices in the giving of evidence. He said that there was no confirmation of the police officer's evidence and that any tribunal is "much happier" if there is confirmation.

In my opinion the giving of these directions was central in a trial, where the result of the trial depended on whether the jury would be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that they should accept the evidence of the two police officers, including their evidence of the alleged admissions by the appellant.
As regards the directions under <case>, it is true that by subsection (4) it is not necessary that a particular form of words be used in giving the warning required by the section. However, notwithstanding the absence of a requirement to use a particular form of words, I consider it essential that it be conveyed to the jury that the evidence in respect of which the warning is given may be unreliable. Notwithstanding his Honour's directions to scrutinise the evidence of the police officers with care, I consider that it was not conveyed, or at any rate clearly conveyed, to the jury that the evidence by the police officers of admissions allegedly made by the appellant, the making of which was not corroborated, was evidence of a kind that the law regards as possibly unreliable.

GROUND 4: Fresh or new evidence.

On the hearing of this appeal the appellant sought to rely on fresh evidence.
In cross-examination the Crown witness Kane was asked why he had not made any notes of the alleged conversation between Starr and the appellant in his,
Kane's, official police notebook. Kane did give evidence that he had made notes of the conversation in a spiral notebook. Kane said in cross-examination that prior to 23 July 1994 his notebook had been seized by officers of the police Royal Commission, who had executed a search warrant at the Redfern
Police Station. The additional evidence sought to be relied on by the appellant is evidence from the Police Integrity Commission that no search warrants were executed by the Royal Commission in 1994 and that the Royal
Commission had never held a notebook belonging to Constable Kane. It was submitted that Kane had lied or, at the very least, had been inaccurate in his evidence given at the trial about not having his notebook, that is, his police notebook, on 23 July 1994.

The Crown sought to rely on additional evidence from an acting inspector of police tending to show that while on 23 July 1994 Constable Kane still had his police notebook, on 4 August 1994 his notebook and his duty book had been seized pursuant to an order from the Professional Integrity Branch of the New
South Wales Police Service. Accordingly, it was argued, the evidence given by
Kane at the trial seeking to explain why no notes of the alleged conversation between Starr and the appellant had been entered in Kane's official police notebook, although inaccurate, may not have been deliberately false.

In a case such as this, where the resolution of the case depended, as I have said before, on whether the jury would have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that they should accept the evidence of the police officers, the additional evidence sought to be relied on could, in my opinion, have had a significant effect on the jury's reasoning.

As I have already said, a large number of other grounds of appeal were relied on, to which I have not expressly adverted. In my opinion, there is no substance in a number of those other grounds of appeal but some of the other grounds of appeal increase my uneasiness with the verdicts of guilty.

In my opinion the appeal against conviction should be upheld on the first ground, that is, that the trial miscarried. I would propose that the appeal against conviction be upheld and that there be a new trial of the charges.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed for the reasons advanced by James J. 
BRUCE J: I agree. * * * 
