

Nagle and Anor - as Executors, Estate Late Marie Jewell Lodge versus Lavender [2002] NSWSC 611 (16 July 2002) 
Last Updated: 25 July 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Nagle & Anor - as Executors, Estate Late Marie Jewell Lodge v
Lavender <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Equity  
FILE NUMBER(S): 4475/99  
HEARING DATE{S): 24/6/02-28/6/02  
JUDGMENT DATE: 16/07/2002  
PARTIES: 
Patricia Nagle & Richard Patrick Nagle as Executors of the Estate Late
Marie Jewell Lodge (Plaintiffs/Cross Defendants) 
Geoffrey Lavender (Defendant/Cross Claimant)  
JUDGMENT OF: Campbell J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
M Ashhurst (Plaintiffs/Cross Defendants) 
R Lovas (Defendant/Cross Claimant)  
SOLICITORS: 
Blackshaw Lindsay (Plaintiffs/Cross Defendants) 
George Loupos & Associates (Defendant/Cross Claimant)  
CATCHWORDS: 
EQUITY - fiduciary obligations - misappropriation of money by fiduciary agent - no question of principle decided - EVIDENCE - burden of proof, presumptions and weight and sufficiency of evidence - claims against deceased's estate -
EVIDENCE - burden of proof, presumptions and weight and sufficiency of evidence - effect of destruction of documents - EQUITY - fiduciary obligations - claim for "damages for breach of fiduciary duty" - meaning and availability  
ACTS CITED:  [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)  [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/)  
DECISION: 
Misappropriated money to be repaid with interest  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
EQUITY DIVISION 
EQUITY LIST  
CAMPBELL J  JULY 2002  /99 PATRICIA NAGLE - AS EXECUTOR OF THE ESTATE OF MARIE JEWELL LODGE - & ANOR versus GEOFFREY LAVENDER  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: Miss Marie Jewell Lodge ("Miss Lodge") died on 3 June 1998, aged 97. The defendant in this case, Mr Lavender, says he had been her trusted accountant and financial adviser for over 30 years. He had authority to operate on two of her bank accounts. On the day she died, he closed one of those accounts by withdrawing all money from it. Three weeks after she died, he withdrew all the money from the other account of which he was a signatory.
He had, over a period beginning in August 1994, regularly withdrawn money from one of these accounts.  The plaintiffs in this litigation are the executors of the Estate of Miss
Lodge. They seek to recover from Mr Lavender all the money which he withdrew from Miss Lodge's bank accounts, plus interest. They say that Mr Lavender's actions in withdrawing this money amounted to a breach of fiduciary duty.  There is no dispute about the amounts of money which were withdrawn. Mr
Lavender defends the action by contending that each and every one of the withdrawals which he made, was one which he was authorised to make. He says that, for many years, Miss Lodge did not pay the amounts of fees which were due to him. Rather, by arrangement between them, Mr Lavender was given authority to operate on two of her bank accounts, on the basis that he could withdraw amounts from those bank accounts from time to time, as he chose, in reduction of the amount owing to him for fees. As well as this general authority, he says Miss Lodge was informed of, and approved, the specific withdrawals which he made.  Mr Lavender contends that the withdrawals which he made from Miss Lodge's account during her lifetime, and shortly after her death, did not completely extinguish the debt he was owed. He brings a cross-claim against the executors of Miss Lodge's estate to recover the amount of fees which had accrued to him, and which remain unpaid.  
The Two Relevant Accounts  Miss Lodge had an Advance Bank Savings Account number 144993208 (the "Savings Account").  
The following withdrawals were made from the account:  
Date 
Cash? 
Cheque payee/transferee 
Amount  ---|---  September 1993 
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation .00  December 1993 
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation .00  August 1994 
Yes .00  August 1994 
Yes .00  August 1994 
Yes .00  August 1994 
Transferred to account 335036069 ,000.00  October 1994 
Yes .00  September 1994 
Yes .00  October 1994 
Yes .00  October 1994 
Yes .00  November 1994 
Yes .00  December 1994 
Yes .00  January 1995 
Yes .00  March 1995 
Yes .00  March 1995 
Deputy Commissioner .00  March 1995 
Yes .00  April 1995 
Yes .00  May 1995 
Yes .00  May 1995 
G. Lavender .00  June 1995 
Yes .00  June 1995 
Yes .00  July 1995 
Yes .00  July 1995 
Yes .00  July 1995 
Yes .00  August 1995 (?) 
Yes .00  September 1995 
Yes .00  October 1995 
Transferred to account 0414 36231 .00  October 1995 
Yes .00  November 1995 
Yes .00  November 1995 
GD Lavender .00  November 1995 
Transferred to account 041436231 .00  December 1995 
Yes .00  January 1996 
Yes .00  February 1996 
Yes .00  February 1996 
Transferred to account 041436231 .00  February 1996 
Yes .00  March 1996 
Yes .00  March 1996 
Yes .00  April 1996 
Yes .00  April 1996 
M Bloom .00  May 1996 
Yes .00  June 1996 
Deputy Commissioner .60  June 1996 
Yes .00  June 1996 
Yes .00  July 1996 
Deputy Commissioner .35  July 1996 
Yes .00  July 1996 
Yes .00  August 1996 
Yes .00  September 1996 (?) 
Yes .00  September 1996 
Yes .00  October 1996 
G. Lavender .00  October 1996 
Yes .00  October 1996 
Yes .00  October 1996 
Yes .00  November 1996 
Yes .00  December 1996 
Yes .00  ? December 1996 
Yes .00  January 1997 
Yes .00  February 1997 
Yes .00  February 1997 
E Lavender .00  February 1997 
Yes .00  March 1997 
Yes .00  April 1997 
Yes .00  April 1997 
Transferred to account 041436231 .00  ? May 1997 
Yes .00  May 1997 
Yes .00  May 1997 
Yes .00  June 1997 
G. Lavender .00  June 1997 
Yes .00  July 1997 
Yes .00  July 1997 
Yes .00  August 1997 
Yes .00  August 1997 
Yes .00  August 1997 
Yes .00  September 1997 
Yes .00  October 1997 
Yes .00  October 1997 
Yes .00  November 1997 
Yes .00  December 1997 
Yes .00  ? December 1997 
Yes .00  January 1998 
Yes .00  January 1998 
Yes .00  January 1998 
Yes .00  February 1998 
Yes .00  February 1998 
Deputy Commissioner .00  March 1998 
Yes .00  ? April 1998 
Yes .00  May 1998 
Yes .00  June 1998 
Yes .00  June 1998 
GD Lavender ,000.00  June 1998 
Yes 
GD Lavender in trust for MJL ,244.65  
TOTAL $230,102.60  All of these withdrawals, except for the first two, were made pursuant to bank forms signed by Mr Lavender. There was only one signatory for each form.
Some of these withdrawals - for instance, at least some of the cheques payable to the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation, and at least one of the transfers between bank accounts - were for Miss Lodge's benefit. It is admitted that the total amount withdrawn or transferred by Mr Lavender from the Savings Account during the period 5 August 1994 to 3 June 1998 (inclusive), and kept by himself or applied for his purposes, was $208,093. The withdrawals made on 3
June - that is, the day of Miss Lodge's death - removed all money from that account.  On or about 24 August 1994 Miss Lodge deposited approximately $60,000 into a
St George Bank Term Deposit Account number 335036072 (the "Term Deposit"). On June 1998 - that is, three weeks after Miss Lodge's death - Mr Lavender withdrew from the Term Deposit the sum of $59,718.64, being the total amount standing to its credit that day. The withdrawal took the form of a bank cheque in favour of "Lavender Business Enterprises".  
Mr Lavender's Evidence About Tasks Performed  Mr Lavender says he was first engaged by Miss Lodge in early 1964 when she had the following conversation with him:  
LODGE: "Can you be my Accountant, and help generally with my investments and affairs?"  
LAVENDER: "Yes, I am happy to act for you and work for you in any way possible."  
LODGE: "How much would you charge?"  
LAVENDER: "Well I have hourly rates and charge for all out of pocket disbursements in addition, but just for looking after your general investments, accounts, and Banking, and business advices generally, it would just be charged at the usual applicable rates for Accountants/advisors from time to time".  
LODGE: "That's fine, you just charge me what ever you think is a fair thing, and you can just keep a tally of your time spent, and the money for your fees will always be available."  
LAVENDER: "That's fine, I'll do that."  Mr Lavender says that he had a conversation to that general effect with Miss
Lodge on countless separate occasions between 1964 and 1998. He says she would always say:  "Thank you for looking after (some specific project/instruction, or generally)
Geoff, make sure you have kept a tally of your time, and just charge me for the amounts due when ever you want".  Mr Lavender says that he provided extensive accounting services, business advice and management services to Miss Lodge, from the time he was first engaged. The nature of the tasks which Mr Lavender says he performed can best be appreciated from invoices which Mr Lavender produced after Miss Lodge's death. Those invoices are in substantially the same form for each year. An invoice for the half year ended 31 December 1964 lists the following tasks:  "MANAGEMENT OF BANKING INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO:  * Monitoring of the various accounts held with Commercial Banking Company of Sydney  - continual review of interest rate levels  - calculation of interest rate gains & effects, if any, of fluctuations  - discussions with you of any desirable changes to said accounts.  * Liaison with the Bank  (Commercial Banking Company of Sydney)  - quarterly visits to the Bank, where approaches were made to gain any available advantage in increased interest rates to accounts, where applicable.  
Sub-Total: £ 5  
MANAGEMENT OF SHARE PORTFOLIO:  * Visits to the Stock Exchange  - two visits per week to observe and note share activity, approximately ½ hour duration each time (inclusive of travel).  * Research of share market activity  - daily examination of share market activity in press reports of the Stock
Exchange, and associated articles, where applicable: approximately 1 hour duration each time for 21 days per month.  * Review of share holdings  - regular monitoring of stocks/shares to ensure portfolio is meeting appropriate performance benchmarks.  - discussions with you to ascertain whether any holdings should be sold, and where there were any poor performers whether they should be further reviewed and/or replaced with better prospects.  - continual market surveillance to observe changing economics or market conditions.  - regular monitoring of stocks/shares and discussions with you to ascertain whether any new stocks/shares should be purchased.  - regular monitoring of any share bonus offers and discussions with you to ascertain whether offers should be taken up (ie accepted) or rejected.  - regular monitoring of any share rights issues and discussions with you to ascertain whether offers should be taken up (ie accepted) or rejected.  * Perusal of annual company shareholder information  - annual reports - examinations of all annual reports and accompanying information, advising you of relevant matters contained in such documentation and discussion of pertinent matters contained therein  - annual meetings - examination of all agenda and accompanying information, advising you of relevant matters contained in such documentation and discussion of pertinent matters contained therein.  
Sub-Total: £ 900 
INCIDENTAL EXPENSES ASSOCIATED WITH MANAGEMENT OF PORTFOLIOS  * Telephone calls etc Sub-Total: £ 2  
Grand Total: £ 907"  Invoices for later years differed slightly, by recording a change in the identity of the bank with which Miss Lodge dealt, and, from 1991 onwards, adding to the entry "Research of share market activity" an additional item, "weekly calculation of fluctuations in the following shares: - BHP - National
Australia Bank - Colonial Sugar Refinery - Westpac - Burns Phillip [sic]".  The fees shown in those invoices are as follows:  
Year ended 
December 
Incidentals 
Total  including incidentals  ---  from June only £ 2 £ 907  £ 2 £ 1,812  
TOTAL £ £ 4 £ 2,719  
Convert 1964 & 1965 total to $ $ 8 $ 5,438  $ 5 $ 3,625  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,044  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 5 $ 6,055  $ 6 $ 8,506  $ 6 $ 8,506  $ 6 $ 8,506  $ 10 $ 8,510  $ 10 $ 8,510  $ 10 $ 8,510  $ 10 $ 8,510  $ 10 $ 8,510  $ 12 $ 8,512  $ 12 $ 8,512  $ 12 $ 8,512  $ 12 $ 14,522  $ 4 $ 14,514  $ 185 $ 14,695  $ 185 $ 14,695  $ 185 $ 14,695  1st half year $ 175 $ 7,430  2nd half year $ 185 $ 7,440  $ 185 $ 14,695  $ 185 $ 14,695  $ 185 $ 14,695  y/e 3 June '98 $ - $ 6,500  
Total 1964 to 1998 $ 1,658 $ 307,848  Miss Lodge lived at Burwood, in her own home, until 1 February 1991. She then moved to a serviced apartment at Springwood, in an aged care complex.
After Miss Lodge moved to Springwood, Mr Lavender says that he visited her about every three weeks to deal with her business affairs. On such visits he says that:  "Quite often I would arrive there sometimes 9.30, 10.00am in the morning and I would never very rarely leave before 3.30, sometimes it got to 5.00 before I left." (T64)  Mr Lavender was, at the time he first started working for Miss Lodge, employed in the Australian Taxation Office. He became a Chief Taxation
Inspector in about 1980. He retired from the Australian Taxation Office on 31
January 1990. Prior to his retirement from the Australian Taxation Office, it had not been possible for him to act as a tax agent, but he assisted Miss
Lodge to prepare taxation returns which she signed and lodged herself. Fairly soon after his retirement, he became registered as a tax agent, and also undertook all of the preparation and lodgement of Miss Lodge's income tax returns. For preparing and lodging the income tax returns, he charged her a separate fee. For the year ended 30 June 1993 the precise amount of that fee cannot be established from the evidence, but it is not more than $850, being the amount shown in Miss Lodge's tax return for that year under the heading, "Other Deductions". For the year ended 30 June 1996 he charged $985. This was paid by a cheque written by Miss Lodge on 25 November 1996. Her notation on the cheque butt is, "Mr Lavender accountant for submitting tax return".
For the year ended 30 June 1997 Mr Lavender also charged $985. This also was paid by a cheque which Miss Lodge wrote on 27 October 1997. The notation which Miss Lodge wrote on the cheque butt of that cheque, is "To Mr Lavender accountant for tax return expenses".  
Issues, Onus, and Principles About How the Evidence is to be Evaluated  That the defendant made the various withdrawals from Miss Lodge's account was admitted. It was also admitted that at all material times Miss Lodge relied on the advice, expertise and financial assistance of Mr Lavender, and that Mr Lavender owed Miss Lodge a fiduciary duty. The only allegations in the
Amended Statement of Claim which were denied were allegations in paragraphs 11 and 12, that the monies withdrawn were not paid for the benefit of Miss Lodge, and that the withdrawals constituted a breach of fiduciary duty on the part of the defendant. On the first day of the hearing, after some discussion about which of the parties should appropriately go first, the Court made the following note:  "The Defendant stated, subject to the matters and allegations raised in his
Defence, which was the Further Amended Grounds of Defence, the defendant admitted paragraphs 11 and 12 of the Amended Statement of Claim."  The trial then proceeded with the defendant going first.  The allegations made by the defendant, in his Further Amended Grounds of
Defence, included the following:  "3 ...  a. those funds were withdrawn by the defendant with the full agreement and understanding of (Miss Lodge), and in accordance with her written authority and explicit instructions ...  b. the funds were used for purposes fully agreed to and approved by her, and were made out to payees in accordance with those agreements and approvals. The defendant denies having benefited by the withdrawals of funds referred to
OTHER THAN in strict accordance with the contractual Agreements for Services rendered, and his said entitlement to be paid, how and when in his complete discretion, from the said Accounts, and  c. the funds were withdrawn pursuant to the terms of an explicit Contractual arrangement(s) between the Deceased and the Defendant, WHICH THE defendant was at all material times performing: particulars of which are set out in paragraphs 2 to 14 inclusive of the Further Amended Cross Claim ..."  That Further Amended Cross Claim pleaded an agreement under which Mr
Lavender was entitled to charge for all of his professional time, expertise and disbursements at his usual rates. It alleged that, throughout the period
June 1964 to June 1998 charge rates were discussed and explicitly agreed between the parties from time to time. It was pleaded that it was an explicit term of the agreement that the fees were to be assessed and charged at fair and reasonable rates, and that Mr Lavender could draw on the accounts of which he was a joint signatory in his complete discretion to reduce the total indebtedness at any time. It was also alleged to be a further explicit term that Mr Lavender,  "was to be entitled to all and any monies in the 'joint accounts', to ensure that his accrued fees and charges were fully paid, in his complete discretion, and at such time and manner of withdrawal as he deemed appropriate."  Mr Ashhurst, counsel for the plaintiffs, submitted that this defence was far more narrow and precise than a defence of consent to the withdrawal of the money; rather, he submitted, it was a defence which required Mr Lavender to prove a very particular contract if he was to succeed. I do not read the defence so narrowly. It seems to me that the various matters pleaded in paragraph 3 of the Further Amended Notice of Grounds of Defence ought fairly be taken as alternatives, rather than as being cumulative.  Counsel did not agree about who bore the onus of proof. In my view, it is an essential element of the plaintiffs' claim that they establish that the withdrawals were made without authority. If the plaintiffs were to raise a case from which an inference of a lack of authority could be drawn, an onus of adducing evidence might well shift to Mr Lavender, but the legal onus of proof remains with the plaintiffs throughout. I do not regard the Defendant's statement, that I have referred to in paragraph 15 above, as effecting a change in what would otherwise be the onus of proof. It was a statement made for the specific purpose of deciding which party should go first, and with comparatively little opportunity for reflection.  The allegation that Mr Lavender has, regularly and over many years, taken
Miss Lodge's money without authority, is an allegation of very serious wrongful conduct on his part. When the plaintiffs' allegation is of that type of conduct, the standard of proof remains the ordinary civil standard of balance of probabilities; however, if a court is to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities about such a serious matter, it must also take into account the seriousness of the allegation which has been made. As Dixon J expressed it in Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] at 361-362:  "The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it can be found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independently of any belief in its reality. No doubt an opinion that a state of facts exists may be held according to indefinite graduations of certainty; and this has led to attempts to define exactly the certainty required by the law for various purposes. Fortunately, however, at common law no third standard of persuasion was definitely developed. Except upon criminal issues to be proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is attained or established independently of the nature and consequences of the fact or facts to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the question whether the issue has been proved to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. In such matters "reasonable satisfaction" should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences."  Mr Ashhurst submitted that the present case was one like Simon versus NRMA
Insurance Ltd (NSW Court of Appeal, 22 October 1991, unreported). That was a case where the plaintiff sued his insurer, alleging that the insurer had not paid a claim which the plaintiff had made following the theft of his vehicle.
The insurer called evidence which gave reason to believe that the plaintiff himself had been implicated in the disappearance of the vehicle. The trial judge had found for the insurer, holding that the plaintiff had failed to prove that the vehicle was stolen, but refraining from making any finding of fraud against the plaintiff. From that decision the insured appealed. Samuels
AP said, at 7-8:  "The appellant's primary argument was that the finding that the appellant had failed to discharge the onus of proof on the balance of probability was, in the circumstances of the case, necessarily a finding of fraud so that the learned judge had fallen into error by failing to apply to it the requirements of Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [60
CLR 336.] However,
I entirely fail to see how Briginshaw has any bearing upon the failure of the appellant to discharge the onus which clearly rested upon him.
Moreover, I do not think that the finding that the learned judge made is necessarily equivalent to a finding of fraud. It was perfectly open to the learned judge to say, as he did, that he was not satisfied that the appellant had proven that the car was stolen, on the footing that the probability was that it was exactly equal to the probability that it was not ..."  That was a case where, to make out his claim, it was necessary for the plaintiff to prove that the vehicle had been stolen. Satisfying the tribunal of that element of his claim did not involve satisfying the tribunal that anyone (other than the thief) had engaged in any wrongful conduct. Nor did it involve the plaintiff in proving that he was not the thief. Likewise, for the insurer to succeed in raising enough doubt about whether the vehicle had been stolen to prevent the plaintiff from discharging his onus of proof did not require the defendant to convince the court that the vehicle actually had been stolen by the insured.  The present case is different. Here, the plaintiffs need to persuade the court that the taking of the money by Mr Lavender was indeed without authority. It is an intrinsic part of their claim that the court needs to be satisfied that there has been conduct which is seriously wrongful. Thus, in the present case, the court needs to take into account the requirements of
Briginshaw versus Briginshaw in deciding whether the plaintiffs have made out their case.  There is another factor which also needs to be taken into account in evaluating the evidence in the present case. In Hunt versus Barlow <case> Bryson J summarised it as follows:  "Where a claim is made against the estate of a deceased person and knowledge of the facts on which the claim is based is not available to those who represent the estate, judicial experience requires a careful approach to fact- finding, although there are no special legal rules relating to the burden or to the standard of proof. In Plunket versus Bull <case>; [(1915) 19 CLR 544] at 548-549 observations of Isaacs J show how such cases are scrutinised. Isaacs J said:  "Then we come to the question how far the onus of proof which lay upon the plaintiff was satisfied. She had the burden of establishing the original creation of the indebtedness of the deceased to her, and undoubtedly it is established that in cases of this sort the Court scrutinizes very carefully a claim against the estate of a deceased person. It is not that the Court looks on the plaintiff's case with suspicion and as prima facie fraudulent, but it scrutinizes the evidence very carefully to see whether it is true or untrue. In the case of Lachmi Parshad versus Maharajah Narendro Kishore Singh
Bahadur some observations were made by the Privy Council with reference to the sufficiency of proof. In that case their Lordships were not satisfied that the plaintiff had established a reasonably clear case. For instance, he had failed to bring forward evidence which he ought to have brought forward, and which was available. That was a material circumstance, and having regard also to some other circumstances of the case their Lordships thought that his appeal should fail. Lord Morris said: 'In an action brought to recover money against an executor, or, as in this case, the heir, of a deceased person, it has always been considered necessary to establish as reasonably clear a case as the facts will admit of, to guard against the danger of false claims being brought against a person who is dead and thus is not able to come forward and give an account for himself.'"  
Other members of the High Court did not refer to this subject and the authorities cited by counsel (at 545) do not appear to relate to it.  
There were also expressions of caution in Birmingham versus Renfrew <case>; [(1937) 57 CLR 666], which related to mutual wills; Latham CJ referred to the need for care at 674 and Dixon J at 681 said: "Such an agreement can be established only by clear and satisfactory evidence." There is no legal requirement for corroborative evidence: see In Re Cummins (dec'd); Cummins v Thompson [[1972] 1 Ch 62] at 68-69. See too Grundel versus The Registrar General [(1990) 5 BPR 97-340] at 11,219 (McLelland J). These cases express the results of much judicial experience in fact-finding.  
In dealing with the facts in Lachmi versus Maharaja , (1891) LR 19 IA 9, to which Isaacs J referred, the Judicial Committee took a remarkably exacting approach and showed an expectation that all persons involved in the transaction in any way should be called. It would not always be appropriate to make such exacting requirements, but in the present case the plaintiff in fact called all persons allegedly involved in making the agreement who could be called, and reasonable limits have to be accepted to the expectation that the plaintiff will call witnesses who might be able to deal with corroborating circumstances."  In Clive Eggins & 2 Ors versus Allan Robinson <case>
Sheller JA (with whom Powell JA agreed) said, at 26:  "The respondent's case was based on conversations that had taken place between him and Mr Ellis when alone and depended upon the acceptance of his evidence.
Mr Ellis was no longer living and could neither accept nor rebut what the respondent said. The nature of the respondent's claim called for it to be carefully scrutinised in accordance with the principle exemplified by
Plunkett versus Bull <case>; [(1915) 19 CLR 544] and described by McLelland CJ in Eq in Eyota Pty Ltd v
Hanave Pty Ltd [(1994) 12 ACSR 785] at 789 as follows:  "...in a claim based on communications with a deceased person, the court will treat uncorroborated evidence of such communications with considerable caution, and will regard as of particular significance any failure of the claimant to bring forward corroborative evidence which was, or ought to have been, available." "  This approach to evaluation of the evidence, when a claim is made against a deceased's estate, arises from the fact that the deceased is not able to give his or her account of the transaction; the other party to the transaction therefore has an opportunity, often not available in litigation, to give evidence knowing it cannot be checked or contradicted by the deceased. The approach to the evaluation of evidence is not connected with who, in any particular piece of litigation, bears the legal onus of proof. Thus, even though in the present litigation Mr Lavender is, in one sense of the expression, "making a claim" against a deceased's estate only insofar as he brings a Cross-Claim for unpaid fees, these principles for evaluation of facts apply also to the scrutiny of the evidence which he brings in defence of the claim which the plaintiffs bring against him, to recover the money he has already received.  
Miss Lodge's Estate, and Will  Miss Lodge's Estate was disclosed for probate purposes as follows:  
Money in bank accounts $178,657.69  
Monies due from Endeavour Retirement Villages $175,000.00  
Shares in Burns Philp & Co Limited $2,668.50  
Shares in National Australia Bank $481,296.00  
Shares in Westpac Banking Corporation $79,079.00  
Shares in CSR Limited $13,672.39  
Shares in BHP Limited $245,087.10  $1,175,460.68  Miss Lodge's Will had been made on 16 April 1991. She appointed her niece
Patricia Nagle, and Patricia Nagle's son Richard Nagle, as executors and trustees. She gave her furniture and household items to Mrs Nagle. She left $28,000, in the form of 11 legacies, for various charitable institutions and purposes. A further $4,500 was left in legacies to three members of her extended family. The residue was divided equally between nine people, one of whom was Mrs Nagle. She recorded the desire, "that my stockbrokers Dickson
Limited be employed in relation to the disposal of my stock and shareholdings." She directed her executors to use the services of Mr Hogan, should he still be a practicing solicitor at the time of her death, in proving the Will and implementing the trusts created by it. She made no mention of Mr
Lavender.  
Correspondence After Miss Lodge's Death  On 6 August 1998 Mr Hogan, who was then the solicitor for the executors of
Miss Lodge, wrote to Mr Lavender saying:  "Mr Nagle Snr recently spoke to one of my secretaries demanding to know what had happened to the proceeds of two accounts numbers 144993208 and 335036072.
I understand my secretary then spoke to yourself before returning a call to Mr
Nagle Snr who expressed dissatisfaction with the explanation which she passed on to him and he was quite unpleasant to her.  
Before I speak to the Executors would you mind putting to me in writing the explanation which you gave to my secretary. I feel I am going to have difficulty with them and I want to be very careful that I do not give them any inaccurate information."  Soon after Miss Lodge's death, Mr Lavender had been asked to prepare Miss
Lodge's taxation return to the date of death. Mr Lavender wrote to Mr Hogan on August 1998 enclosing some documents relating to Miss Lodge's affairs, but not answering the request made in Mr Hogan's letter of 6 August 1998.  On 20 August 1998 Mr Hogan wrote to Mr Lavender saying:  "I have your letter of the 11th August, 1998 enclosing the dividend cheque from BHP and also the Taxation Refund. However you did not mention my letter of the 6th August, 1998.  
I have now received Probate in the Estate and am in the process of collecting in the assets. The Executors will be wanting an answer in relation to the two
Advance accounts mentioned in my letter to you of the 6th instant and I would be grateful if you could let me have a reply."  Mr Hogan wrote to Mr Lavender again on 27 August 1998, and 11 September , on each occasion dealing with matters concerning Miss Lodge's estate, but making no further mention of the request for an explanation of what happened to the proceeds of the two bank accounts. Mr Lavender did not provide the explanation.  By 11 December 1998 the Executors had changed solicitors, and Mr Lindsay was acting for them. Mr Lavender had not prepared the Estate tax return. At some time - the evidence does not establish precisely when, but I gather it was before the end of 1998 - the executors took the task of preparing that return out of Mr Lavender's hands, and gave it to another accountant. Mr
Lindsay wrote to Mr Lavender on 11 December 1998, saying:  "We refer to the writer's telephone conversation with you on 3 December 1998 and would be pleased to receive your letter setting out the details of the withdrawals from the bank accounts."  On 18 December 1998 Mr Lavender replied to that letter, saying:  "The bank accounts that you referred to, that were closed by me, were in respect of loans made to the late Marie Lodge by myself.  
These funds were not on a fixed time period for repayment to myself and were to be repaid at any time chosen by me and at my discretion.  
Please be advised that this information has previously been given to both Mrs
P Nagel and her husband along with the Secretary of Mr J Hogan, Solicitor, on his behalf."  It is to be observed that this letter says nothing about how it came about that Mr Lavender had made loans to Miss Lodge. It may be, however, that he had told Mr Hogan's secretary that the loans arose from unpaid fees.  On 14 January 1999 Mr Lindsay wrote to Mr Lavender, saying:  "We thank you for your letter of 18 December 1998 and have now been instructed by the executors to request that you forward to the estate the monies that were withdrawn from the deceased's bank account.  
Would you kindly confirm that this will be done to save any proceedings being taken."  On 10 February 1999 Mr Lavender wrote to Mr Lindsay saying:  "In response to your letter dated 14 January 1999 I wish to advise that all monies withdrawn from the respective accounts were done so, with the full prior knowledge, and consent of Miss M Lodge.  
The monies concerned were rightfully funds correctly due to me."  On 19 February 1999 Mr Lindsay wrote to Mr Lavender saying:  "We thank you for your letter of 10 February 1999 and would advise that the executors have requested evidence that the monies that you withdrew from the deceased's accounts were in fact your monies.  
If you are not able to produce this evidence we understand that the executors will be commencing court proceedings."  On 27 October 1999 the Statement of Claim in the present matter was filed.
It claimed relief concerning $24,229.65 which had been withdrawn from the
Savings Account on 3 June 1998, and $59,718.64 withdrawn from the Term Deposit on 24 June 1998. Mr Lavender filed a Notice of Grounds of Defence on 19
January 2000, which articulated the claim that at the time of the withdrawals he was owed a total of "approximately, and not less than, $255,835" by Miss
Lodge, which arose from accrued fees and charges due and payable by Miss Lodge to him, which had accumulated since 1964, and which he was entitled to draw upon to repay his loan to her. The amount of fees owed was quantified by reference to a document called the Defendant's Exhibit 1. This was a bundle of invoices of the type which I have earlier described, containing the amounts which I have shown in paragraph 12 above, down as far as the entry for "1994 first half year". At the same time, a Notice of Cross-Claim was filed in which Mr Lavender made a claim for $171,886.71 plus interest, being the amount outstanding.  An Amended Statement of Claim was filed by the plaintiffs on 29 March 2001, which expanded the claim to cover the various sums of money which had been drawn out of the Savings Account prior to 3 June 1998. Following the filing of that Statement of Claim, Mr Lavender filed a Notice of Further Amended Cross-
Claim, which asserted that by June 1998 the accrued fees which Miss Lodge owed him had totalled $313,860, and that the various withdrawals had been by way of him reimbursing himself, in part, for those outstanding fees. The amount of $313,860 in fees was said to be shown by reference to Defendant's Exhibit 1 and Defendant's Exhibit 2. Defendant's Exhibit 2 was an additional set of invoices, which contained the entries for the period "1994 second half year" to the end of the list which I have set out in paragraph 12. The invoices in
Defendant's Exhibit 1 and Defendant's Exhibit 2 in fact total $307,848, rather than $313,860, but no one has suggested that this difference arises from anything other than a simple mathematical error. He accepted that he had been paid $267,811.64 during Miss Lodge's lifetime, and made a claim against the
Executors to be paid the unpaid balance of $46,048.36. The invoices in
Defendant's Exhibit 1 and Defendant's Exhibit 2 were not, however, documents composed and delivered to Miss Lodge around the time of the date each bears, but rather were documents which Mr Lavender had put together after Miss
Lodge's death. I will examine those invoices in more detail later in this judgment.  
Some Unusual Features of Mr Lavender's Case  There are some aspects of Mr Lavender's case which attribute unusual behaviour to himself and Miss Lodge. The first of these is that, on Mr
Lavender's case, he allowed fees to accrue without being paid over a period from 1964 to when he made the first of the deductions from Miss Lodge's bank account, in August 1994. It is odd for a man with experience of financial matters, as Mr Lavender was, to allow this debt to remain outstanding for such a long period, without any provision for the payment of interest, and over a time when inflation was significantly eroding the value of money.  The second is that it is unusual that Mr Lavender should have been paid for the work he did in preparing Miss Lodge's tax returns in 1996 and 1997, by cheques written within a few months of the end of the financial year to which the tax return related, yet he was not paid for his general advisory and professional work.  The third arises from evidence, which both parties accepted, that Miss
Lodge was a frugal woman who was meticulous about financial matters. It seems inconsistent with her meticulousness that she should allow an arrangement of the kind Mr Lavender asserts to go on for such a long period of time when she had no documentary record of it. It also seems inconsistent with her frugality that she should have Mr Lavender perform the extensive tasks which he claims to have performed for her, given the income she had. The memoranda of fees, on which Mr Lavender has based his case, show the fees set out in the following table as due to him. The Notices of Assessment of Miss Lodge for the years 30
June 1991 and following show that her taxable income was as set out in the fourth column of this table:  
Year ended December 
Incidentals 
Total fees claimed by Mr Lavender including incidentals 
Taxable income of Miss Lodge y/e 30 June 
Percentage of taxable income paid to Mr Lavender  ---|---|---  $185 $14,695 $72,125 .37%  $185 $14,695 $60,978 .09%  $185 $14,695 $50,957 .83%  $360 $14,870 $50,148 .65%  $185 $14,695 $57,210 .68%  $185 $14,695 $74,940 .60%  $185 $14,695 $69,508 .14%  -
 $6,500 $64,619 The percentage figure in the fifth column of this table can be used as providing only a very rough indication of the proportion of Miss Lodge's available income which was spent on Mr Lavender's services, because Mr
Lavender's memoranda were calculated on the basis of calendar years, and the taxable incomes are calculated on the basis of financial years. Even bearing that imprecision in mind, Miss Lodge was, on Mr Lavender's case, spending a very large proportion of her taxable income on his fees as they accrued due.  A further oddity, is that Miss Lodge did not claim any tax deduction for the amount which she spent on Mr Lavender's services of a general accounting and advisory nature. She claimed a deduction for the expenses of preparing and lodging a tax return, but not for the general accounting advice and services which Mr Lavender provided. Mr Lavender agreed in cross-examination that the cost of accounting services to assist her in the production of her income would be a tax deduction. Mr Lavender was asked in cross-examination how it came about that the taxation returns which he had prepared for Miss Lodge did not make a claim for a deduction for these services which he had provided:  "Q. Mr Lavender, is there any reason why, that you are aware of, that Miss
Lodge could not have properly claimed your fees as a proper tax deduction if the services had been rendered? 
A. There was a reason in her mind. Not my mind. Her mind. I have told you, I informed her she was entitled as a legitimate taxation to claim that fee.  
Q. You claim what you said is that she told you she wouldn't for some reason? 
A. Yes.  
Q. What reason? 
A. Miss Lodge didn't tell me the reason. She said she had the reasons. She didn't want to embroil me in the reason. That's the reason I would understand.
I never pursued further. She kept saying she didn't wish to claim. I can't force a person to claim fees they don't want to claim."  ("Fees", where last occurring in this extract, is clearly a mistake for "deductions"). No reason was suggested in submission why Miss Lodge would decline to claim a substantial tax deduction she was entitled to.  I have already set out the share portfolio which Miss Lodge had at the time of her death (see paragraph 28 above). This share portfolio is one which remained unchanged from, at least, the time that Miss Lodge moved to
Springwood in 1991. It seems odd that, given this inactivity in her portfolio, she would have insisted that Mr Lavender visit the Stock Exchange twice a week to observe and note share activity, and perform daily examination of share market activity. It is odd that she would have required Mr Lavender to read press reports of the Stock Exchange and associated articles, and engage in regular monitoring of her portfolio, and weekly calculation of fluctuations in the shares which made up the portfolio, when the portfolio was so simple, and so stable.  Mr Lavender was asked, in cross-examination, about how the fees he had claimed for the 1993 calendar year related to Miss Lodge's income for the year ended 30 June 1993, and it was pointed out that he was claiming almost a third of her taxable income in fees. His first reaction was to say, "I think that there's been a mistake with due respect in that invoice because I certainly would not have claimed $14,400." Once he had been satisfied that he had indeed claimed roughly that amount, he said  "The intention was to claim what was the fair market value and at the same time give some apportionment discount but at a later date when all these matters were all resolved and paid to me I was then going to reduce the debt again in the form of a substantial discount. So that meant those amounts would never have worked out to those amounts. Probably would have worked out to about 50%." (T124)  
This intention on his part strikes me as a strange one. Given that he now brings a Cross-Claim in which he claims the total amount of the invoices, he must have had a change of heart, but no explanation is given of what brought about that change of heart.  I have set out, (in paragraph 0 above) all of the withdrawals which Mr
Lavender made from the Savings Account of Miss Lodge. It can be seen that, by and large, the pattern is that amounts are withdrawn in cash, usually in amounts of $2,000, with considerable regularity. It is unusual for a large debt to be repaid in this fashion. Mr Lavender was asked about this.  "Q. Any reason why you withdrew these sums in small amounts rather than in one go? 
A. Yes, because Marie Lodge insisted if I could withdraw not all the amounts owing to me at one time, if I could progressively withdraw the amounts because she had to be continually reassured there were funds there. She was continually worried whether she had money to subsist on. At that time she was paying somewhere between $8,000 and $10,000 that year for the retirement village, for the upkeep of her unit and her food.  
Q. That may explain why you do not close the account on one particular [day], that is 5 August 1994, but does not explain why the month of August 1994 instead of withdrawing at one time $4,500 you split it up into three small withdrawals? 
A. There was sometimes a reason. I would say I may do this. I may not take , 3000. I may take one thousand, fifteen hundred, two thousand.  
Q. Why is what I am asking you? 
A. I have explained. It was just to tell her, to show her that I only wished at my discretion to take these amounts. She gave me authorisation to take these amounts at my discretion, which really meant any amount I desired.  
Q. Why for the month of August 1994 instead of withdrawing $4,500 did you split it up into three considerably smaller amounts? 
A. No particular reason."  It is most unusual for Mr Lavender to go to the trouble of making these repeated small withdrawals, for no particular reason.  One of the withdrawals was a cheque drawn on 22 April 1996 to M Bloom for $1,800. "M Bloom" was Mr Lavender's dentist. The payment to Mr Bloom had been treated, in the way that Mr Lavender quantified his case prior to the commencement of the hearing, as a payment made on account of fees. Mr Lavender gave some supplementary oral evidence in chief on this topic, as follows:  "Q. Did you discuss that payment with Ms Lodge either before or after it was made? 
A. That was discussed before.  
Q. What did you say? 
A. I told her that - she was asking me how's, you know, the physical condition and that and I told her I was visiting the dentist shortly at the time and she said, "Oh well, would you like to accept a gift whatever the dentist might charge and I would be prepared to pay the fee" and so when that did transpire
I showed her, took that up and showed her and then she said that was quite all right, the fee was all right, and she was prepared to pay that out of one of those accounts and that consequently is what happened. I had told her what I was doing, what type of payment would come out and that was taken out in the form of a bank cheque.  
Q. Did you accept that money as a gift or account for that in your own mind as part of payment towards your fees? 
A. No, I accepted that as a gift.  
Q. As a gift. 
A. It could have been a bit of both, I suppose, when you think about it, she may have looked on that; perhaps it should have come off what she owed me."  It is unusual for Miss Lodge to offer to pay the dentist's bill of her accountant at all, and even odder that she should offer to pay it without knowing how much it was. (I recognise that Mr Lavender says he showed her the account before he actually paid it.) It is also strange that there should have been any uncertainty in Mr Lavender's mind about whether it was really a gift, or really a payment to reduce his outstanding fees.  
Miss Lodge's Access to Financial Records  Mr Lavender gives evidence that Miss Lodge never kept any documents or records at her residence. He says she did have a small notebook/diary in which she made notes,  "but she never maintained or recorded her own financial matters, which she left entirely to me. As she feared that her private business documents might be found by those who visited her, she always insisted I take with me all documents after a visit, and she never kept any accounts or financial records of any kind at her home."  Mrs Nagle can recollect one incident when she was present when Miss Lodge received a dividend cheque in the mail, and she saw Miss Lodge write down something which she took to be related to that dividend cheque, in a small book. There is no evidence to show that the bank statements relating to the
Savings Account (which inevitably would have shown the withdrawals which were being made by Mr Lavender from time to time) were sent by post to Miss Lodge's home address, and the only evidence that any such bank statements were brought to Miss Lodge's attention in any way is the evidence of Mr Lavender.  
The Invoices  I have earlier mentioned (paragraph 41 above) that Mr Lavender had produced to the executors a set of invoices, covering the entire period during which he had worked for Miss Lodge. He said, in an affidavit, concerning those invoices:  "Neither myself nor my solicitors have ever suggested that the invoices ...
were issued to the deceased at the time the work was done. Those exhibits are documents which I have drawn up from my recollection of work completed and which now set out a break down of item particulars for the fees I paid to myself ... from the two accounts."  He also gave evidence, by affidavit, in which he swore to the truth of a statement of facts which an accountant had adopted as the basis for an expert report which was prepared and served for the purpose of these proceedings.
That statement of facts included the following:  "3.7 During the course of Lodge's lifetime, Lavender did not prepare memoranda of fee for his services for Lodge ... After Lodge's death and after destroying his workpapers relating to Lodge and after commencement of these proceedings,
Lavender prepared a memorandum of fee for each year of his service. Lavender particularised those services in his defence and cross claim.  
Those memoranda were based upon his overall assessment of an appropriate fee reflecting the time provided in each year at a reasonable, but low, charge rate.  
Detailed calculations of estimated hours and hourly charge rates were not performed by Lavender.  
Lavender considered the proportion of his work week usually devoted to
Lodge and, in so doing, arrived at a fee for the year that he considered to be consistent with applicable market conditions and that covered his costs and overheads and provided a level of personal income consistent with his skills, responsibility and time involved.  
Having arrived at a fee that he considered reasonable for the first year of service, Lavender kept that fee constant (subject to minor variations) over a number of further years, before then increasing the annual fee to allow for a rate adjustment to apply for a further block of years. Thus, there are several blocks or bands of years, whereby the annual fee within the one band is approximately the same. The bands are as follows: 1964 to 1966 inclusive, to 1977 inclusive, 1978 to 1988 inclusive, and 1989 to 1998 inclusive.  In oral evidence in chief Mr Lavender was asked about the process by which the invoices were prepared. He said:  "Q. When you drew each of these invoices up did you - what did you draw first?
Did you prepare the list of jobs you did first or the quantum annexed? 
A. I prepared the list of the jobs I had done first. They were prepared first and then the quantum was put to that as soon as I knew it. Coverage I done over that period of time and then I transferred the quantum on some notes I kept over that period of time which unfortunately has been subsequently destroyed and all those notes had been taken at the time when Ms Lodge was alive. They had all been shown to her. She knew.  
Q. I am just dealing at the moment with the preparation of the invoice? 
A. Yes.  
Q. You had those notes before you? 
A. I did.  
Q. From those notes what did you draw, what information did you gather? 
A. I drew the information I had was the approximate time I carried out all the duties and I had a rate, an hourly rate and I transposed, calculated all out and transposed to calculate the final result on the invoices."  
These two accounts of how the invoices were prepared differ concerning:  * whether or not the invoices were derived from an overall assessment without reference to documents, or by drawing upon contemporaneous records;  * whether any contemporaneous records were still in existence at the time the invoices were prepared;  * whether the invoices were the result of application of an hourly rate to a number of hours worked.  Mr Lavender gave evidence in chief that he always showed Miss Lodge, when he went to visit her, an accounting statement which showed the amount of fees outstanding from time to time. That accounting statement is one which Mr
Lavender said he destroyed along with his work papers relating to Miss Lodge between February 1999 and October 1999. His account in chief as to why he destroyed them was:  "Well sometime after a communication from the then estate solicitor, I hadn't heard for some time in reply back to the last letter I wrote about the reasons why I had taken these various monies from Marie Lodge's accounts, and I presumed that those explanations that I had given had been accepted by the executors of the estate and also the estate solicitor and I felt I had no need to keep any of those. The final tax return as far as I was concerned had been completed. I understand later from Mr Hogan's associates that her date of death had been completed by then under instructions from the executors of the estate, and I was informed by the Tax Office I would not have to keep any of those records.  
So I didn't feel I needed them. Miss Lodge was deceased, there was no further communication with her, nothing further I had to do with her, the matters had been taken out of my hands by the executors of the estate. Therefore they indicated to me that I was completely finished with anything pertaining to the estate. So I considered there was no reason to keep those records, and that's what usually happens in a deceased estate matter, I just usually dispose of the records."  In cross-examination, Mr Lavender was asked about the differing accounts he had given of the preparation of the invoices. He said that, while the invoices themselves were prepared after the commencement of these proceedings, he had prepared rough memoranda of fees prior to the commencement of these proceedings, from the notes that he had shown to Miss Lodge from time to time.
He had destroyed the notes he showed Miss Lodge from time to time between
February and October 1999 but not destroyed the rough memoranda, and it was from those that he had drawn up the invoices. This strikes me as being another aspect of Mr Lavender's evidence which is unusual.  Mr Lavender was, later in the cross-examination, asked about how his evidence that the invoices had been prepared from rough memoranda of fees squared with his affidavit evidence that the invoices had been drawn up "from my recollection of the work completed". His response to that was, "No.
Recollection means, infers, that they were drawn up from some type of records, and they were drawn up from those records that I have already informed you."
I cannot accept that answer as truthful.  Later in his cross-examination, Mr Lavender said that the draft memoranda were:  "A. ...not prepared specifically for the Australian Taxation Office. They were prepared for the estate. Not for the Australian Taxation Office because they made no request.  
Q. Prepared for the estate? 
A. That's right, for their benefit.  
Q. When did you send them to the estate? 
A. They were not prepared at the time. If they requested -- there was no request for these documents until this court proceedings came about. There was only a request for the return of money and the reason why the money had been taken.  
Q. Don't you think that being told in January 1999 that the solicitors - by the solicitors of the estate that the estate was going to take action against you for recovery of these moneys, would have been a good time to send to the estate any records you claim you had proving your entitlement? 
A. No, because they had not been requested, so I wouldn't know what was required, unless specific request was made from the estate solicitors."  For Mr Lavender to prepare the invoices for the Estate, but not make them available to the Estate when the executors were asking for an explanation of his taking of the money, and evidence to support his story, strikes me as another strange aspect of his evidence, notwithstanding that the Estate solicitors had not specifically requested those particular draft memoranda.  
The Withdrawals on 3 June 1998  Mr Lavender says that he was not aware of Miss Lodge's death until he was informed of it on 5 June 1998 by Mr Nagle. He says it was just a coincidence that he made three withdrawals from the Savings Account, which completely emptied that account, on the very day that Miss Lodge died. I do not accept that evidence. The amounts withdrawn on 3 June 1998, totalling $24,244.65, well exceeded the usual run of withdrawals made on one day from the account.
Mr Lavender would have the court accept that the withdrawals that were made on that day were in payment of fees due to him - yet one of the withdrawals was by a cheque payable to, "GD Lavender in trust for MJL". Such a trust for
Miss Lodge would be completely inappropriate if the money belonged beneficially to Mr Lavender.  
The Withdrawal of 24 June 1998  Mr Lavender gave oral evidence in chief that, on the occasion of this withdrawal,  "I presented a statement to the bank of why the reason I was making this withdrawal, and with Miss Lodge's approval. I notified the bank that Miss
Lodge had passed away and was there any restriction on taking these funds out.
I said I had the approval of the Estate solicitor ...".  
That evidence in chief was allowed as evidence only of what Mr Lavender told the bank.  In cross-examination this topic was opened up further. Mr Lavender said that the withdrawals,  "... were all done with the approval of Mr John Hogan and he informed me that, he said he was going to close, to freeze the accounts but because, I explained to him over the phone and there would be a record of that telephone conversation, explained to him what they were for, he was satisfied and it was in order to go ahead and he would leave the accounts unfrozen till I received the amounts I felt should be taken."  and later in the cross-examination:  "... on 24 June, 1998 having been aware Miss Lodge had passed away, it was relevant I obtain fees after I spoke to Mr Hogan and told him what I was doing, and I went to the bank and closed that. I even presented an account to the Advance Bank. I had prepared an account especially for them, and they said, that didn't matter to them because I was still authorised to operate the account. I had already told them Miss Lodge had died and I told them there was an estate solicitor then Mr Hogan they could phone. I do not know if they phoned him or not, or they may not have, but they said, you are still the authorised signatory on this account and still entitled to withdraw funds, and even though Miss Lodge had died, you still have authority to operate on those accounts."  Mr Lavender gave an even more elaborate account in re-examination:  "Q. You have mentioned these telephone conversations with Mr Hogan that took place after the death of Miss Lodge? 
A. Yes.  
Q. How many were there? 
A. There were at least two telephone conversations, possibly three, maybe even four. But there were at least two I can recall.  
Q. And each of those two in part at least concerned itself with permission to make withdrawals, is that right? 
A. Most definitely.  
Q. At whose instance was that subject raised, his or yours? 
A. Well that was raised by me to him first, because as he was the recognised estate solicitor acting for the estate, the executors of that estate, I considered that I had authority merely to operate those accounts as given me by Marie Lodge in her lifetime, up to her date of death. After that time, I considered I didn't have authority, even though the authorities were still current, registered with the Advance Bank.  
I went to the Advance Bank and asked them was I entitled to withdraw moneys.
They said yes, they had not been notified by the estate's solicitor, or the executor of the estate, the accounts had not been frozen, I was still entitled to withdraw in accordance with the authorities. I then phoned Mr Hogan. I told him what I wished to do. I told him I had went to the Advance Bank and what they told me, and he said, "I have been thinking about freezing the account concerned, but because the moneys are owing to you and you wish to withdraw those, I won't freeze them - I was considering freezing them - until you take the moneys that you consider are necessary to take from those accounts"."  Mr Hogan, called to rebut this, gave succinct evidence in chief:  "Q. Did Mr Lavender ever tell you by telephone call or any other means, that he was intending to take money from Miss Lodge's bank account? 
A. No.  
Q. Did you ever authorise Mr Lavender, whether by way of telephone, letter, or any other form of communication, for him to take money from Miss Lodge's bank account? 
A. No."  Mr Hogan was cross-examined to the following effect:  "Q. I suggest to you that Mr Lavender indicated his desire to withdraw those monies out of that account and be able to do so before the bank accounts were frozen as a result of the administration of the estate commencing. Do you recall any of that? 
A. No.  
Q. And I suggest to you that in whatever words you used at the time, you made it appear that you concurred that he could do that? 
A. No, I wouldn't concur with that and I definitely would not have concurred with such an arrangement."  I accept the evidence of Mr Hogan on this topic. Mr Hogan is an independent witness, with no motive to misrepresent the truth in any way. Further, the evidence which he gives is in accord with what one would expect from a solicitor administering the Estate. The probate was not granted until 10
August 1998. The idea that an estate solicitor would, prior to the grant of probate, authorise someone who telephoned him and said he was a creditor of the Estate to withdraw money from the estate bank account involves a degree of irresponsibility that I would not readily attribute to a solicitor.  
Failure to Provide an Explanation for the Missing Money  I have set out, at paragraphs 30 and following, the requests which were made by Estate solicitors for explanations of the missing money. Mr Lavender's failure to provide a prompt explanation in writing, when requested, arouses suspicion. One explanation which he gave in oral evidence for that failure was that he had explained the situation to Mrs Nagle on the telephone, that she said, "I don't know. It seems alright", and that he took this as being a retraction of the request which the executors had made for a written explanation. Mrs Nagle denies that she said any such thing on the telephone. I accept Mrs Nagle's evidence in this respect.  In oral evidence, Mr Lavender said at one stage that he did not receive the letter of 19 February 1999 (set out in paragraph 39 above). That letter had been annexed to an affidavit sworn by Mr Lindsay (solicitor for the plaintiffs) on 22 September 2000. In none of his subsequent affidavits did Mr
Lavender deny having received that letter. As well, before he gave oral evidence saying he had not received the letter, he had had the text of the letter placed in front of him, whereupon the following exchange occurred.  "Q. Pretty clear to you by now that if you had any documents which supported what you claim was your entitlement to those moneys you ought to be getting them off to the solicitor for the estate? 
A. I felt that was not necessary because, as I said, the moneys that were taken by me were a catch up of funds owing to me for a debt incurred by Miss
Lodge in her lifetime. I did not feel I was obliged to forward some material or evidence of money withdrawn that did not refer to some time after she died.
She was then alive and had full knowledge. I did not want to send something in writing when Miss Lodge was not there to confirm the information.  
Q. You told his Honour that you prepared what you said were drafts of those documents, which are now exhibits 4 and 5, for the estate should they ask for them; is that what you told his Honour? 
A. I wouldn't be sending little rough drafts to the estate."  I draw two things from this passage in evidence. The first is that the answer which Mr Lavender gave to the first question is consistent only with his having received the letter. The second is that the explanation which he gave for not providing any documents which he had to the solicitors for the
Estate is not one which I can accept.  
The General Authority  Miss Lodge executed a document which reads:  "To Whom It May Concern 
I, Marie J. Lodge hereby authorise Mr G Lavender my Accountant and Financial
Advisor to re-invest or withdraw funds held in investment accounts in my name, and to apply such funds at his absolute discretion.  
Signed:  [Marie J Lodge]" In his affidavit evidence, Mr Lavender said that he typed this document up and gave it to her. In oral evidence he said, concerning it:  "A. ... I didn't make the document out. I don't know who made it out. She put the document in front of me and she told me what that document really meant.  
Q. If there really was an arrangement between you and Miss Lodge whereby she said she would open accounts which would include only your money and you could withdraw your money at any time why didn't you ask her to put that in the document? 
A. I said I didn't prepare the document. Miss Lodge prepared it and I did not try to advise her to change that whatsoever because Miss Lodge always told me that she was the manager and I was to do whatever she told me at my sole discretion but subject to any advice I relayed back, so I couldn't say to her alter this. Of course, I couldn't."  ...  "Q. Miss Lodge prepared the document? 
A. I don't know who prepared it. I didn't. I don't know who. She didn't tell me."  ...  "Q. Who prepared the document, Mr Lavender? 
A. I did not prepare that particular document. She asked me first, some time before, to prepare a document. I said I preferred not to prepare the document initially. It should be done by her or see a solicitor and then put the document in front of me. So I didn't prepare that document. I merely said that that's what she said before, and I referred to her as that general authority that she asked me to prepare, which she said she asked me to prepare firstly that document and I denied, like, any involvement with the actual preparation of that document. I said, no I wasn't prepared to do that "I think you should go to a solicitor or have somebody like prepare it properly for you", but she was not prepared to do that and then let me have a look at it which she did and she signed it there, so I didn't prepare that actual document."  While not at the core of the case, it is seriously damaging to a witness's credit when he denies his own affidavit evidence in this fashion, and gives an elaborate account, complete with direct speech conversation, which is inconsistent with his own earlier testimony.  I mention that the topic of how it happened that Mr Lavender had retained this general authority from Miss Lodge, when his work papers had been destroyed, was not explored in the evidence.  I also mention here another example of evidence, on a matter not at the core of the case, where Mr Lavender gave differing accounts. There was an occasion, on 27 October 1997, when Mrs Nagle and Mr Lavender met for the first time. Mrs Nagle came to Miss Lodge's apartment, and found Mr Lavender and Miss
Lodge both there. There was an emotional scene, the precise details of which do not matter. Mr Lavender gave affidavit evidence that:  "When I left that day she cried as she said goodbye, and for the first time
EVER she gave me a spontaneous hug with both arms."  
In his oral evidence concerning this occasion, he said:  "She spoke to me quietly when they were in another part of the room. She always wanted to be confidential, and while they were there she threw her arms around me and kissed me. That was sometimes a term of affection, she had done that before. She at one time said that I was like a son to her."  
The Destruction of Documents  Mr Lavender says that he destroyed his work papers relating to Miss Lodge.
While some of the work papers he had accumulated over the years had been destroyed in the ordinary way in which old files are regularly destroyed, he says that, when he destroyed his working papers in 1999 he still had 8 or 10 years of working papers. In Allen versus Tobias <case>; [(1958) 98 CLR 367] at 375 a joint judgment of the High Court (Dixon CJ,
McTiernan and Williams JJ) held that the court should conclude that a document, all copies of which had been destroyed by the defendant, had been executed by the defendant. One basis on which that conclusion was reached was that:  "... to presume the fact against the defendant seems but a proper application to the circumstances of the principle omnia praesumuntur contra spoliatorem.
It is a far cry from the municipal warfare of the present case to a case in
Prize but no statement of the principle could be more apposite than that of
Sir Arthur Channell delivering the opinion of the Privy Council in The
Ophelia [(1916) 2 AC 206:] "If any one by a deliberate act destroys a document which, according to what its contents may have been, would have told strongly either for him or against him, the strongest possible presumption arises that if it had been produced it would have told against him; and even if the document is destroyed by his own act, but under circumstances in which the intention to destroy evidence may fairly be considered rebutted, still he has to suffer. He is in the position that he is without the corroboration which might have been expected in his case' (1916) 2 AC at 229, 230."  This is not a case in which the intention to destroy evidence may fairly be considered to have been rebutted. Thus, I approach the fact-finding on the basis that the strongest possible presumption arises that if the work papers had been produced they would have told against Mr Lavender. That presumption having arisen, I see nothing in the evidence to displace it.  
Mr Lavender's Tax Returns  Mr Lavender did not tender his tax returns in evidence. His tax returns would have been business records of his business as an accountant and tax agent. If his tax returns had included, year by year, the income he was receiving from Miss Lodge, that could have provided some contemporaneous documentary corroboration of his account of the relationship between them.
(The evidence did not go into whether Mr Lavender prepared his accounts for taxation purposes on an accruals basis, or was somehow able to have the benefit of a cash basis, but, on his account, fees accrued due from Miss Lodge each year of her lifetime from 1964 onwards, and also amounts in payment of fees were actually received during the period from late 1994 onwards, so on either method of tax accounting, fees from Miss Lodge ought have been included as income in his taxation returns for the years ended 30 June 1995 to 30 June .)  In cross-examination Mr Lavender was asked whether he had paid tax on the income which he had received from Miss Lodge. He claimed a privilege against self-incrimination. I expressed the view that it seemed that there were reasonable grounds for the objection, and enquired whether counsel sought that
I should do anything further. The requirements of section 128 of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) were present to the minds of both counsel at that time, because there had been some discussion between counsel and myself concerning [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s128.html) earlier that day, in relation to another question concerning which Mr Lavender had raised a privilege against self-incrimination. Upon my expressing the preliminary view that the question of whether Mr Lavender had paid tax on the funds received from Miss Lodge was one where there would be reasonable grounds for the objection, counsel did not take the matter any further.  Mr Ashhurst invited me to draw inferences unfavourable to Mr Lavender from the fact that he had claimed the privilege. I decline to do so (Cross on
Evidence, current electronic version, paragraph [25040]). The fact remains, however, that by not making his tax returns available, Mr Lavender is without corroborative evidence, that in the ordinary course of events would have been available, for his version of the facts.  
Conclusion  Mr Lavender's evidence about the circumstances which led to his withdrawal of the money contains numerous elements which, when each is considered alone, is unusual. When the combined effects of those unusual elements is considered, his account is a very unusual one indeed. His own evidence contains internal contradictions. The one concerning the circumstances of the preparation of the invoices is a particularly significant one. There are some instances where I have already said that I do not accept his evidence.  Taking all these matters together, I come to the conclusion that I cannot accept Mr Lavender's evidence on any point of significance in this case.  Apart from the general authority document, Mr Lavender's evidence depends entirely on the acceptability of his own testimony. The general authority document is one which would not justify Mr Lavender in removing money from the bank accounts in circumstances where Miss Lodge had not authorised it, or it was not for her benefit. Whether these particular withdrawals were authorised by Miss Lodge, or for her benefit, comes back to whether Mr Lavender's word is accepted. When I am not able to accept Mr Lavender's evidence, it follows that he has not made out any of the defences which I have set out in paragraph 17 above, nor has he made out his Cross-Claim.  It remains to consider whether the plaintiffs have made out their case. The taking of the money is admitted, and once I have rejected Mr Lavender's evidence, it follows that it was a taking without authority, and without any other entitlement to take it. Recognising fully the seriousness of the finding which I am making, I am persuaded that Mr Lavender, systematically and over a period of years, removed money from Miss Lodge's Savings Account without her authority, and also took the proceeds of her Term Deposit after her death, without authority.  There remains one argument to be considered. The remedy which the plaintiffs claimed was, "Damages for breach of fiduciary duty", together with interest and costs. Mr Lovas, counsel for Mr Lavender, submits that the remedy which has been claimed is one which cannot be granted. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s68.html) [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) provides:  "Where the Court has power--  to grant an injunction against the breach of any covenant, contract or agreement, or against the commission or continuance of any wrongful act; or  to order the specific performance of any covenant, contract or agreement,  the Court may award damages to the party injured either in addition to or in substitution for the injunction or specific performance."  However, the submission goes, [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s68.html) cannot apply in the present circumstances, because there is no question here of damages being awarded in lieu of, or as well as, an injunction or specific performance. Further, the submission goes, the remedy which is granted in equity's exclusive jurisdiction for breach of a fiduciary duty is a remedy called "Equitable Compensation".  It is true enough that a distinction is often drawn between damages, and equitable compensation. Meagher, Gummow & Lehane, Equity
Doctrines & Remedies, 3rd edition, paragraph 2301 say:  "Damages is the term used to describe the monetary compensation awarded for invasion of the plaintiff's common law rights or failure to perform obligations owed him at common law by the defendant. The term is used throughout this work with that meaning; damages was never an equitable remedy for breach of purely equitable obligations."  While it is correct that equity awards monetary compensation for breach of different obligations to those for which the common law awards damages, and assesses that compensation using different principles to those which the common law uses to assess damages, it is still a common enough, although loose, use of language to talk about damages being awarded in equity when one is talking about equitable compensation being granted. In In Re Leeds and
Hanley Theatres of Varieties, Limited [[1902] 2 Ch 809] the English
Court of Appeal considered a breach of fiduciary duty by a company promoter.
At 833, after the Court had given judgment explaining why there had been a breach of the fiduciary duty, Vaughan Williams LJ said, "We are all of opinion that the true measure of the damages is the amount of the profit which was made by the promoting company." In Seager versus Copydex (No2) [[1969] 1
WLR 809](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1969%5d%201%20WLR%20809 "View LawCiteRecord" ) the English Court of Appeal held it was appropriate for damages to be awarded for breach of an equitable obligation of confidence. I give these examples, not with any wish to blur the conceptual distinction which undoubtedly exists between equitable compensation and common law damages, but to show that, in a loose sense, the notion of damages being awarded for breach of an obligation arising in equity's exclusive jurisdiction is not unheard of.  Here, the real question is one of construction of the prayer for relief in the Amended Statement of Claim. There can be no real doubt that what was asked for was payment of money, by reason of breach of the fiduciary duty. There can likewise be no real doubt that the defendant so understood it.  It follows that the plaintiffs are entitled to an order that Mr Lavender pay them money to make good his breach of fiduciary duty. The plaintiffs are entitle to recover back the amount which Mr Lavender admits taking, namely $267,811.64.  The plaintiffs are also entitled to interest on that amount. Interest will be payable on each wrongful withdrawal, from the date of withdrawal, to the date of repayment, at the rates in Schedule J to the Supreme Court Rules. It will be necessary for those amounts of interest to be calculated before a judgment can be entered.  The only order I shall make is to direct the plaintiff, within 28 days of the handing down of these reasons for judgment, to bring in Short Minutes of
Order to give effect to these reasons for judgment. If the parties are able to agree on the amount of interest, I will act on their agreement. If they are not able to agree, the plaintiffs should produce an affidavit containing worked calculations of the interest payable, and serve that affidavit on the solicitors for the defendant in sufficient time before the matter is brought back before me again.  When the matter is brought back, I will deal with any outstanding questions concerning costs.  
Order  
Direct the plaintiff to bring in Short Minutes of Order to give effect to these reasons for judgment, within 28 days of the date of these reasons for judgment.  
Stand the matter over to a date which the plaintiffs arrange with my
Associate, and of which not less than three days notice is given to the defendant, for the making of orders and any argument concerning costs.
 
LAST UPDATED: 19/07/2002 * * * 
