

Regina versus Talbot Matter No 60511/97 [1997] NSWSC 669 (19 December 1997) 
Regina versus Leonard John Talbot /97 December 1997 
Grove J, James J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales 
Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court (Flannery DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60511/97 
DELIVERED: Friday 19 December 1997 
HEARING DATE: Wednesday 10 December 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus LEONARD JOHN TALBOT 
JUDGMENT OF Grove J, James J, Simpson J 
COUNSEL 
APPELLANT: P G Berman 
RESPONDENT: P M Strickland 
SOLICITORS 
APPELLANT: S E O'Connor 
RESPONDENT: T A Murphy 
RESULT: Appeal allowed 
CATCHWORDS 
CRIMINAL LAW & PROCEDURE - SENTENCE - CROWN APPEAL AGAINST INADEQUACY -
MULTIPLE OFFENCES IN CIRCUMSTANCES OF AGGRAVATION 
NO OF PAGES: 22 
REGINA versus LEONARD JOHN TALBOT 
The respondent was one of four offenders who, when armed with knives, a tomahawk and a shotgun, broke into a farmhouse near a village. They intended to rob the owner but he was absent. A twenty year old employee at the residence was wounded by a shotgun discharge. A fifteen year old girl acting as a nanny to three small children was abducted and in an isolated place subjected to brutal sexual violation. In the District Court the respondent received an effective sentence of seven years penal servitude divided into minimum and additional terms of four and three years respectively.

HELD: The sentence was manifestly inadequate and new sentences imposing an effective term of ten years penal servitude consisting of minimum and additional terms of seven and three years respectively substituted. The length of the new sentence itself reflected restraint derived from principles applicable where an appellate court is increasing sentence. 
REGINA versus LEONARD JOHN TALBOT 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of James J in draft and I agree with the orders which he proposes. I wish to make some brief observations myself. 
The effective sentence imposed by the learned judge at first instance constructed of a minimum term of four years penal servitude and an additional term of three years failed to reflect the gross objective seriousness of the appellant's crimes by such a margin as to render it manifestly inadequate.
Reading his Honour's remarks on sentence persuades me that this may have occurred largely because careful and commendable attention to the details of the precise involvement of the appellant in the violence and carnality inflicted on the victims diverted attention from the fuller picture of the appellant's criminality. In the circumstances, it is also perceptible that too much weight was attributed to subjective factors.

It is apt to remind oneself of the stark reality of the context in which these crimes were committed. The appellant was one of a gang of four who descended with arms upon a house in a remote part of the village of Baan Baa for the purpose of robbing the owner. They arrived in the night. The owner was away.
Three of his children aged eight years, six years and fifteen months respectively were sleeping and a fifteen year old girl who was acting as a temporary nanny until the end of the cotton chipping season had also gone to bed. The entry of the intruders was met by the other occupant of the house, a twenty year old employee of the owner referred to on occasions as "Big Steve".
In the course of the criminal activity of the appellant and his accomplices "Big Steve" was wounded by a discharge from a shotgun.

The baby had started to scream and the nanny grasped her securely to seek to comfort her. An assailant grabbed the nanny by the throat seeking information of the whereabouts of the owner. Later she was forcibly taken away by these four males in their truck. Her tearful plea "Don't hurt me, I'm just the nanny" was met with brutality. Taken to an isolated spot she was subjected to the serial sexual depradations referred to by James J in his judgment. Like him, I refrain from specifying each and every detail of the terrifying ordeal and grievous bodily abuse of this defenceless young girl.

As I have commented, it is important not to lose sight of the aggravation offered by the appellant's having acted in company with the other three by taking too narrow a focus upon individual acts perpetrated by him.

Giving full and due allowance for the appellant's subjective situation I consider condign punishment for his offences required sentences even greater than those now to be imposed, however, it is appropriate to exercise sentencing restraint to recognize the double jeopardy, as it is frequently called, when a successful Crown appeal leads to a new and higher imposition.

R versus Leonard John TALBOT 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: This is an appeal by the Crown pursuant to s5D of the Criminal Appeal Act against sentences imposed on the respondent, Leonard John Talbot, by his Honour Judge Flannery QC in the District Court on 2 September 1997, after the respondent had pleaded guilty to:- 
A charge of breaking and entering a dwelling house in circumstances of special aggravation, the circumstances of special aggravation alleged being that a man named Canfell was wounded. This was an offence under s112 of the
Crimes Act (see also s105A of the Crimes Act) and carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for twenty-five years.
A charge of taking away a female with intent to carnally know her. This was an offence under s89 of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for fourteen years.
A charge of sexual intercourse without consent, knowing that the other person did not consent, in circumstances of aggravation. The circumstances of aggravation were that the respondent was in the company of other persons when the offence was committed and that the victim of the offence was under the age of sixteen years. This was an offence under s61J of the Crimes Act and carries a maximum penalty of penal servitude for twenty years.

The victim of the second and third offences, that is the offence of abduction and the offence of aggravated sexual assault, was the same person, a fifteen year old girl, who I will refer to simply as the complainant.

On the third charge of aggravated sexual assault Judge Flannery sentenced the respondent to a sentence of penal servitude for seven years, consisting of a minimum term of four years commencing on 30 November 1996, the day the respondent had been taken into custody, and an additional term of three years.
On the second charge of abduction Judge Flannery sentenced the respondent to a fixed term of penal servitude for three years commencing on 30 November 1996 and on the first charge of breaking and entering in circumstances of special aggravation the respondent was sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude for two years, also commencing from 30 November 1996. It can be seen that the sentence on the third charge was the effective sentence.

The notice of the Crown appeal against the sentences was filed on 8 October and served on the respondent on the same day.

In his remarks on sentence Judge Flannery said that in the proceedings on sentence the respondent's legal representative had not challenged the accuracy of the statement of the facts of the offences in a summary prepared by a police officer or the accuracy of a statement made by the complainant to the police. The statement of the facts of the offences in his Honour's remarks on sentence was adapted from the police summary. The following statement of the facts of the offences is based on what his Honour said in his remarks on sentence but also incorporates some further details from the complainant's unchallenged statement.

All the offences were committed in the company of three co-offenders, being two adult offenders and a juvenile aged approximately seventeen years who I will refer to as JW. I will also refer to the adult co-offenders by initials as RS and MW, because each of them has been charged and has not so far pleaded guilty and may stand trial, although this Court was informed at the hearing of the appeal that MW may have died while in custody. As at 29 November 1996 the respondent was twenty-five years old and RS and MW were both in their early thirties.

At about 11 o'clock on the night of 29 November 1996 the four offenders drove in a utility from a country town to an isolated place outside the town, where a man named Atkin lived. The object of the group was to go to Atkin's home and rob him of some cannabis. MW was armed with a shotgun and RS was armed with a tomahawk. There were also knives in the vehicle. During the journey the vehicle was stopped, the shotgun was fired several times by way of testing it and the shotgun was then reloaded. All of the group were wearing gloves.

When the group arrived outside Atkin's home the juvenile JW remained in the vehicle but the other three including the respondent forced an entry into
Atkin's home by kicking open a number of doors. Atkin himself was not at home.
However, inside the house were Steven Canfell, aged twenty, who was staying at the house, the complainant who as I have said was a fifteen year old girl and
Atkin's three children aged eight years, six years and thirteen months. The complainant had been acting as a nanny to the three children.

As the group of offenders gained entry to the front porch of Atkin's house, one of them fired a shot with the shotgun. In an attempt to protect himself and the other occupants of the house, Canfell fired a shot from a 22 rifle at the floor near the front door. One of the group of intruders then fired another shot with the shotgun, which struck Mr Canfell in the foot, wounding him. The wounding of Mr Canfell was the circumstance of special aggravation in the offence of breaking and entering.

The complainant who was in the baby's bedroom holding the baby heard the gunshots. RS saw the complainant, grabbed her around the throat with his left arm, while he was holding the shotgun in his right hand, and dragged the complainant still holding the baby through the house as he looked for Canfell who had run from the house. The complainant was then dragged outside the house. She said, "don't hurt me. I'm just the nanny". One of the group of offenders said, "just shut up and get in the truck". The complainant was forced into the utility and the utility was driven off. MW was driving. The complainant was seated on either RS's or the respondent's lap. The complainant could see the shotgun on the dashboard of the vehicle.

About two kilometres from Atkin's house the vehicle was stopped. The complainant was told by one of the group to drop her pyjama pants and underpants. She refused and one of the group pulled her pyjama pants and underpants down. She said, "don't hurt me". All of the offenders were laughing. She was told "you've got four to go here, give us head jobs". MW held a knife to the side of the complainant's neck and said, "just do it". The complainant was made to get on her knees and perform fellatio on MW and RS, as each of them sat in the front of the vehicle. While this was happening the complainant was on her feet, leaning into the vehicle and others in the group, the complainant could not say which, penetrated her both vaginally and anally.
Another vehicle approached and there was a respite in the sexual assaults.

The vehicle was then driven into a paddock where it stopped. The complainant's clothes were pulled off. MW held a knife to the complainant's throat. The complainant was forced to perform fellatio on the respondent and the others.
She was too exhausted to struggle. The complainant was told to climb on to the tray of the utility. While the complainant was sitting on the edge of the tray with her legs hanging down, RS had vaginal intercourse with her and the respondent had vaginal intercourse with her. The complainant was subjected to repeated sexual assaults by the group, in which her arms were held and her mouth and her vagina were concurrently penetrated. Either MW or JW urinated over the complainant. Another member of the group, using course language, expressed regret that, this having happened, the group would be unable to engage in any further sexual activity with the complainant. The complainant's clothes were collected and thrown to her. A threat was made to her that she would be shot if she told anyone. The group then drove off in the utility, with the complainant also in the utility.

In the meantime Mr Canfell had run to a house near Atkin's house and had got the occupier to contact the police. The offenders' vehicle was trapped in a road block formed by the police. The respondent said to the complainant while all the offenders and the complainant were still in the utility, "don't say nothing or we'll shoot you". After the complainant had left the vehicle, police observed that she was in an hysterical state and crying uncontrollably.
The four offenders were arrested.

At about 3 o'clock on the morning of 30 November 1996 a doctor examined the complainant. The doctor noted that she was upset, crying and dishevelled. She had abrasions on her back, thighs, perineum and anus and a bruise on her pelvis. Her external genitalia were oedematous. There was dirt on external parts of her body and in her anus and vagina.

In her statement given to the police on 30 November and 1 December the complainant said that she was sore, aching and tender in many parts of her body. She also said that as a result of the offences committed against her she felt embarrassed, scared and humiliated, was having flash backs and was crying "heaps".

As I have indicated, the four offenders were arrested early on the morning of November 1996. The respondent was first interviewed by police that day.
After answering a number of introductory questions and admitting that he knew the co-offenders and that he had been with them the previous night, the respondent declined to answer any further questions. As at 30 November 1996 the respondent was being held in the same cell as the co-offenders.

Subsequently, the respondent made a request to speak to police further about the events of the night of 29 and 30 November and he was interviewed in an electronically recorded interview on 27 January 1997. In this interview the respondent answered over 800 questions, making extensive admissions and giving detailed accounts of the acts of the co-offenders. The respondent was interviewed by police again on 31 July. In the course of this interview he undertook to give evidence at the trials of MW and RS.

Of the co-offenders, RS has refused to be interviewed and has been committed for trial. MW answered some questions when interviewed by the police and then declined to answer further questions. At the time the respondent was sentenced committal proceedings for MW were still pending. As I have previously said, this Court was told at the hearing of the appeal that MW has since died while in custody.

The juvenile JW pleaded guilty and was sentenced to an effective sentence of four years with a minimum term of two years. JW was a "child" for the purposes of the Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act and although in being sentenced he was dealt with according to law, he was nevertheless to be sentenced in accordance with the principles stated in s6 of the Children (Criminal
Proceedings) Act. In any event, the role he had played in the commission of the offences was substantially less than that of any of the adult offenders.
Judge Flannery rightly rejected an attempted parity argument based on the sentence passed on JW.

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge described the events which had happened as "appalling", as they obviously were. However, his Honour considered that in sentencing the respondent it was necessary to determine the role in those events which had been played by the respondent, as compared with the roles which had been played by the co-offenders. His Honour considered that in general, although the respondent had been a participant, he had not been the ring leader or the "leading hand" and his role had been less serious than that of either MW or RS. A concession to that effect had in fact been made by the Crown in the proceedings on sentence.

As regards the aggravated sexual assault charge his Honour considered that he could sentence the respondent only for an act of fellatio and an act of vaginal sexual intercourse, which were acts the respondent had admitted in his interview of 27 January 1997. As I have already indicated, the complainant was unable to say who it was at certain stages that was sexually assaulting her.

In favour of the respondent, the sentencing judge found that he had not been armed, that he had not fired a shot and that he had not had anal intercourse with the complainant and also found that he had not participated in the episode of concurrent sexual assaults by different assailants described by the complainant.

It was submitted by the Crown on this appeal that some of the findings made by the sentencing judge in favour of the respondent were incorrect or should at least have been qualified. One such finding was the finding that the sexual attack on the complainant was not premeditated on the part of the respondent.
The Crown submitted that while a sexual attack on the complainant was not premeditated when the offenders entered Atkin's house, the only finding which could be made was that, at least from the time the complainant was abducted from the house, the respondent knew that she was going to be sexually assaulted. I would accept this submission by the Crown.

Another finding by the sentencing judge which was challenged by the Crown was the finding that the respondent did not himself make any threat to the complainant. The sentencing judge said in his remarks on sentence that no challenge had been made to the complainant's statement and in her statement the complainant had clearly said that at the police road block it was the respondent who said to her "don't say nothing or we'll shoot you". I accept the Crown's submission that this finding by his Honour was erroneous.

A further finding by the sentencing judge which was challenged by the Crown was that the respondent had not himself fired the shotgun. The respondent admitted in his interview of 27 January 1997 that he had fired the shotgun, but only on the way to Atkin's house, and the sentencing judge was entitled to find that the respondent had not fired the shotgun at Atkin's house.

Apart from the matters I have mentioned, the Crown did not challenge his
Honour's statement of the facts of the offences or his further findings about the facts of the offences.

The respondent was twenty-five years old at the time of committing the offences. He had a de facto wife with whom he had been living for four years and a young child. He is an aboriginal and the sentencing judge found that he had the common "sad" background. His parents had separated early in his life.
His mother had formed a relationship with another man, who mistreated her and the children. The respondent had lived in an environment of drugs and alcohol.
The respondent had a fairly large number of criminal convictions, both in the
Children's Court and since becoming an adult, but had no previous conviction for serious violence or for a sexual offence. Most of the crimes the respondent had been convicted of had been committed to get money for alcohol or drugs. At the time of committing the present offences the respondent had been considerably affected by alcohol.

The sentencing judge took into account in favour of the respondent that he had pleaded guilty at the earliest reasonable opportunity.

The sentencing judge noted that the respondent had provided assistance to the authorities by supplying information in the interview of 27 January 1997 and the later interview and had undertaken to provide assistance in the future by giving evidence at the trials of RS and MW. As a consequence of giving assistance, the respondent would suffer harsher than usual custodial conditions. While in custody the respondent had been threatened by RS. The sentencing judge was mindful of s442B of the Crimes Act and referred to it extensively in his remarks on sentence.

His Honour was impressed by evidence by the respondent's brother-in-law that the respondent was a "follower" and not a "leader" and by evidence of progress towards rehabilitation that the respondent had made while in custody, including the taking of courses and the development of his talent as an artist.. His Honour found that there were special circumstances within [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) relating to the respondent's efforts to rehabilitate himself and imposed a sentence in which the additional term substantially exceeds one third of the minimum term.

On this appeal it was submitted by the Crown that the total effective sentence of seven years was manifestly inadequate, either because the sentencing judge had underestimated the objective gravity of the offences or because he had given undue weight to favourable subjective circumstances of the respondent, or because of both factors. It was submitted that, although the sentencing judge might have been entitled to find special circumstances, the minimum term of four years was much less than the minimum amount of time the respondent should be required to serve in custody. Attention was drawn by the Crown to the recent creation of the offence of breaking and entering in circumstances of special aggravation and to the high maximum penalty of penal servitude for twenty-five years. Attention was also drawn to the increases since 1989 in the maximum penalties for sexual assault and aggravated sexual assault.

In regard to the offences of abduction and aggravated sexual assault, the
Crown submitted, correctly, that the offences had been committed at night in an isolated place in company with other offenders, one of whom was armed with a firearm and who had fired shots in Atkin's house, that the complainant was only fifteen years old, that she had been abducted from a house in which she was caring for young children, that the respondent would have realised the complainant was going to be sexually assaulted no later than the time of her abduction, that the complainant had been subjected to many gross sexual assaults, that the complainant was aware of the previous assaults by the co- offenders when he himself had the complainant perform fellatio on him and when he himself had sexual intercourse with the complainant and that the respondent, contrary to the sentencing judge's finding, had himself threatened the complainant with violence.

It was further submitted by the Crown that the sentencing judge, while he had summarised the evidence of the doctor who examined the complainant on the morning of 30 November 1996, had not referred in his remarks on sentence to the almost inevitable serious, long term impact of the offences on the complainant.

As regards the offence of breaking and entering, apart from pointing to the circumstances of special aggravation and the high maximum penalty provided for the offence, the Crown pointed out that, even if the offences of abducting and sexually assaulting the complainant had not been long premeditated, the offenders had intended for at least a couple of days to enter Atkin's house and commit a felony in the house. The co-offenders and the respondent had on each of the two previous nights gone to Atkin's home intending to rob him of cannabis, only to be told by Atkin that he had not yet received any cannabis.
On the night of the offences the group had taken weapons which they intended to use in robbing Atkin.

It was further submitted by the Crown that the respondent's pleas of guilty should not have been given much weight because of the strength of the Crown case against him and because the respondent had initially declined to admit his guilt and that the assistance which the respondent had provided and had undertaken to provide should not have been given much weight and should certainly not have attracted a discount of the magnitude sometimes allowed before the enactment of s442B of the Crimes Act.

Counsel for the respondent relied on the sentencing judge's finding that the respondent had played a less serious role in the commission of the offences than the co-offenders RS and MW and that the offences of abduction and sexual assault had not been premeditated.

It was submitted by counsel for the respondent that it was clear from his
Honour's remarks on sentence that his Honour was mindful that the respondent would have known that the complainant had already been sexually assaulted before he himself engaged in fellatio or sexual intercourse with the complainant. It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that it was not to be inferred, from the absence of any express reference in his Honour's remarks on sentence, that such an experienced sentencing judge as his Honour would have overlooked the probable long term serious impact of the offences on the complainant. Reliance was placed by counsel for the respondent on the absence in the respondent's criminal history of any previous conviction for a sexual offence or any offence of serious violence.

It was submitted that the respondent was entitled to receive some credit for his pleas of guilty. It was true that when he was initially interviewed by police on 30 November 1996, the respondent had refused to answer other than introductory questions but at that stage the respondent had been sharing a cell with the co-offenders. In January 1997 he had indicated that he was prepared to supply information to the police. Even if the Crown case against the respondent was strong, the respondent's pleas of guilty entitled him to some discount on utilitarian grounds, as saving court time and resources, on the grounds that they showed some contrition and on the grounds that the complainant would be spared the ordeal of having to give evidence against him at a trial. The co-offenders RS and MW, on the other hand, had not admitted their guilt and, unless there was a change of plea by RS, a trial would have to be held, in which the complainant in giving evidence would be subjected to the ordeal of reliving her experiences on the night of 29 and 30 November .

As to assistance, it was submitted by counsel for the respondent that in his interview on 27 January 1997 the respondent had provided very full information, specifically implicating the co-offenders in a number of acts.
This information would be useful in the prosecution of the co-offenders. At the time it was given the assistance was timely; neither of the co-offenders had yet been tried. As a result of providing assistance the respondent would spend his sentence on protection in more than usually onerous conditions of custody. While in custody the respondent had already been threatened by RS.

It was further submitted by counsel for the respondent that the sentencing judge had been entitled to find special circumstances, in that inter alia the respondent would spend his period in custody on protection and his problems with alcohol would require a longer than usual period of supervision and, as his Honour had found, the respondent had prospects of rehabilitation.

Counsel for the respondent relied on the well known principles of restraint which govern courts of criminal appeal in determining Crown appeals against sentence. R versus Allpass <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 295.] 
It is clear that this Court is obliged to respect his Honour's finding that the respondent played a less important role in the commission of the offences than his adult co-offenders. I would not accept that so experienced a sentencing judge as his Honour would not have taken into account that at the time the respondent committed each of his sexual assaults, he would have been aware that the complainant had already been sexually assaulted by the other adult co-offenders or would have overlooked the probable long term, serious impact of the offences on the complainant. I am also satisfied that the respondent was entitled to credit for his pleas of guilty and for the assistance provided and undertaken to be provided by him.

I have, however, come to the conclusion, having regard to the fact that the respondent was being sentenced for the three offences, the grave objective seriousness of each of the offences even if the respondent did play a less important role than that played by the other adult co-offenders, the circumstances of aggravation which were present in the offences of breaking and entering and sexual assault and the maximum penalties provided for each offence, that the sentence of seven years with a minimum term of four years was manifestly inadequate and that the Crown appeal against sentence should be upheld.

Accordingly, this Court is required to re-sentence the respondent. I have already stated the objective facts of the offences and the subjective circumstances of the respondent at some length and I do not propose to repeat what I have said. In re-sentencing the respondent this Court should take into account the sentencing judge's finding and the Crown's concession that the respondent played a lesser role than either RS or MW. The respondent should be allowed some discount for his pleas of guilty and for the assistance provided and to be provided by him. This Court should also observe the principle that in re-sentencing after a successful Crown appeal against sentence the Court should impose a somewhat lesser sentence than it considers should have been passed in the first instance. Following the course taken by his Honour, I would propose making the third charge the subject of the principal sentence.
Consequently, fixed terms of penal servitude should be imposed on the other charges. For the same reasons as were relied on by his Honour, I would find that there are special circumstances.

In my opinion the Crown appeal against the sentences pronounced by Judge
Flannery on 2 September 1997 should be allowed and the sentences imposed by
Judge Flannery on 2 September 1997 should be quashed. In lieu thereof, the respondent should be sentenced as follows:-
On the third charge of aggravated sexual assault the respondent should be sentenced to a sentence of penal servitude for ten years, consisting of a minimum term of seven years commencing on 30 November 1996 and expiring on 29
November 2003 and an additional term of three years.
On the second charge of abduction the respondent should be sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude of four years, commencing on 30 November 1996 and expiring on 29 November 2000.
On the first charge of breaking and entering a dwelling house in circumstances of special aggravation the respondent should be sentenced to a fixed term of penal servitude of four years commencing on 30 November 1996 and expiring on 29 November 2000.

The earliest date on which the respondent will be eligible for release on parole will be 30 November 2003.
 -------- 
REGINA versus Leonard John TALBOT 
JUDGMENT 
SIMPSON J: I have read in draft the judgment of James J and, after some hesitation, agree with the orders he proposes. My hesitation stems from concern as to whether the increased sentences are adequate to deal with the level of criminality involved in this case. It is unnecessary to restate the horrifying facts of this criminal episode. 
Parliament has clearly stated its intention that offences of sexual assault be met with penalties that properly reflect the true nature of the crime, that properly reflect the community's abhorrence thereof, and that reflect the need to offer protection to their potential victims.

By amendments to the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) that received Royal assent in 1989 and commenced in March 1991 significant changes were made to the statute law concerning sexual offences. Relevantly, the introduction of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61.html) J created a new offence of aggravated sexual assault replacing the offence the subject of the former <case>. One effect was to increase the penalty for sexual assault accompanied by the circumstances of aggravation here present from fourteen years to twenty years, or by almost 50 percent. Such was the stated intention of the legislature: see NSW Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) (Third Series) Vol DCCX1, 28 November 1989 p 13569.

It is, of course obligatory on courts to give effect to the clearly stated intention of the Parliament. Occasionally a court is confronted with a crime that can properly categorised as in the worst class of case for which the maximum penalty is reserved. Parliament must have contemplated that, on such occasions, the maximum penalty may be imposed: R versus Holder and Johnston [[1983] 3 NSWLR 245] at 271 per Priestley JA.

In my view the present case in its objective features may readily be characterised as within the worst category justifying consideration being given to the imposition of the maximum sentence provided by the statute. The overall criminality is at a level scarcely imaginable. The victim was fifteen years old, barely more than a child. She had the care of three young children, one of them a baby, who was in her arms at the commencement of the assaults.
She observed the only adult in the house shot in the foot by one of the respondent's co-offenders. There were knives, a tomahawk and a shotgun present. She was subjected to an unremitting and vicious assault over a period of about two and a half hours, in an isolated location, far distant from any chance of obtaining assistance. It difficult to imagine an attack of greater depravity, callousness or brutality. There is nothing that mitigates the seriousness of the crime. It is artificial too finely to distinguish the precise acts of the respondent from those of his co-offenders. Everything he did was done in the context of what they had done and were continuing to do.
It was a single, extended, brutal episode.

There are, of course, circumstances that entitle the respondent to some mitigation of sentence and these have been detailed in the judgment of James
J. Specifically, they are his plea of guilty, and his offer of assistance to the authorities and to give evidence in the trials his co-offenders. I doubt that these alone would be sufficient to reduce the appropriate total sentence to a mere half of the maximum. It is appropriate also to recognise the unfortunate circumstances of his early life, although in this regard I note that there is evidence that he comes from "a large, extended, very respected and highly thought of aboriginal family" in the district. In every sentencing decision the sentencer has the difficult task of balancing those features personal to the offender, which sometimes are compelling, against the objective circumstances of the crime and, particularly, the expectation that due regard will be paid to the position of the victim. To over emphasise the former at the expense of the latter is to undervalue the victim. This is of particular significance where the offence is one of violence. It requires very little imagination to envisage the effects of this episode on the victim, and in any event there was evidence of her continuing psychological state. Only passing reference was made by the sentencing judge to the impact of the crime upon her, and although I do not for a moment consider that he entirely overlooked it, I am satisfied that it was relegated to an unacceptably minor place in the overall sentencing judgment.

It is the considerations that apply peculiarly to Crown appeals, ultimately, that lead me to agree with the orders proposed by James J.
 * * * 
