

Speedy Tyres Pty Limited versus Ring Tread Systems (Australasia) Pty Limited (Receiver and Manager Appointed) Matter No Ca 40284/98 [1998] NSWSC 450 (20
October 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 November 1998 
SPEEDY TYRES PTY LIMITED versus RING TREAD SYSTEMS (AUSTRALASIA) PTY LIMITED (RECEIVER AND MANAGER APPOINTED) 
CA 40284/98 October 1998 
Mason P 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: Listed next Friday for hearing is an appeal brought by the opponent, Speedy Tyres Pty Limited. The respondent to that appeal, Ring Tread Systems (Australasia) Pty Limited, has filed a notice of motion seeking the dismissal of that appeal for non-compliance with the Court's orders, and for want of prosecution. 
The evidence establishes that the appeal is not in a position to be heard. The opponent has not filed or served its black and blue appeal books. It has not responded to the objections from the claimant about the contents of the red appeal book. It has not paid the security for costs that was first ordered to be paid on 7 September 1998, and was the subject of a peremptory order yesterday by the Registrar. Mr O'Hagan, who has appeared on behalf of the opponent has informed the Court that his instructions are that his client will not pay that security for costs. Nor has the opponent filed and served in accordance with the Rules the chronology and the outline of submissions that are necessary to enable the appeal to proceed in a proper way. Mr O'Hagan has frankly acknowledged that there is nothing that can be advanced against the making of the orders that are sought.

Accordingly, in view of the evidence that I have recited, I order that the appeal be dismissed for non-compliance with the Rules and for want of prosecution.

I order the opponent to pay the costs of the appeal, which include the costs of the motion.

Mr Rofe what's going to happen then with the other appeal as you see it at the moment? The appeal books have been filed in that? 
ROFE: Yes, the other appeal is, as far as we understand it, ready to proceed. Whether there'll be an appearance of course is another matter, finding the respondent. But we are ready to proceed on Friday. Our submissions are already lodged. We would expect in the normal course to get submissions in reply no later than tomorrow, or the end of today I think, but as to whether that's going to happen I can't say your Honour. 
MASON P: Mr O'Hagan do you have instructions to appear for Mr Tubb 
O'HAGAN: No I don't your Honour. To assist the Court at this stage your Honour, I may be able to indicate that apparently Mr Tubb is going to appear in person on the Friday. 
MASON P: Is not? 
O'HAGAN: Is going to appear in person on the Friday. That's as far as I'm aware of it. 
MASON P: Yes, thank you. I appreciate your courtesy in coming and assisting the Court Mr O'Hagan. 
ROFE: Your Honour that order for costs I take it will include the reserved costs of yesterday, to save us going back before Registrar Jupp? 
MASON P: Yes. The order for costs includes any reserved costs. * * * 
