

Regina versus Marlin Matter No Cca 60340/97 [1997] NSWSC 392 (10 September )
 
Regina versus Mark Marlin /97 September 1997 
Priestley JA, Cole JA, Sperling J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA V MARK MARLIN 
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCING - DANGEROUS DRIVING OCCASIONING DEATH - WHETHER
SENTENCE IMPOSED WAS MANIFESTLY INADEQUATE - The respondent was the driver of a vehicle in which his friend and two year old daughter were passengers.
The vehicle was deliberately being made to skid sideways on the slippery grass surface of a paddock. The vehicle rolled over and the respondent's friend and daughter were both killed. The respondent pleaded guilty to two counts of driving a motor vehicle in a dangerous manner occasioning death. He was ordered to perform two hundred hours community service and was disqualified from driving for twelve months.

On appeal the Crown submitted that the sentence was manifestly inadequate, and that: (1) the sentencing judge had been wrong in considering that the case was not one in which alcohol could be said to be a factor; (2) the sentencing judge accorded too great a weight to the subjective features relating to the accident itself.

Held:
The facts in the present case were of a kind rarely seen in the cases from which a general sentencing pattern could be discerned.
The sentencing judge properly considered the matters included in the
Crown's submissions on the topic of what the sentencing judge should take into account.
There is no sign of appellable error in the sentencing judge's reasons, nor does the sentence itself indicate that some error must have been made.

Cases 
R versus Martin (Unreported NSW CCA 19 March 1992) 
R versus McIntyre <case>; [143
CLR 458] 
ORDER 
Appeal dismissed.
 ----------------- 
REGINA versus Mark MARLIN 
PRIESTLEY JA: This is a Crown appeal against the sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Ford QC on the respondent on 16 June 1997 in the District Court. The respondent pleaded guilty to two counts of driving a motor vehicle in a dangerous manner occasioning death. The sentence consisted of an order that the respondent perform two hundred hours of community service. The respondent was also disqualified from driving for twelve months. 
In both written submissions and oral submissions today the case for the Crown has been fully put in a way helpful to the court in understanding the nature of the appeal. The written submissions set out the relevant facts in a commendably dispassionate way and I draw to a large extent on the statement of the facts set out in the Crown's written submissions.

The facts on the basis of which the respondent pleaded guilty were that in the night of 9 December 1995 he was driving a 4-wheel drive vehicle the roof of which had been removed in a rear paddock behind where he lived at Leppington.
He had two passengers, one a friend Mr J D Tsiliris, aged twenty-six and the other the daughter of himself and his de facto wife, aged two and a half years, Tenille Eather. The respondent drove the vehicle around in circles accelerating as he did so intending that the vehicle should skid sideways on the slippery grass surface of the paddock. Neither he nor his passengers were wearing seat belts The vehicle rolled over, his friend and his daughter were both thrown out of it and it landed on top of them and killed them. The respondent was not seriously injured. The accident happened about 9pm. Between and 7 pm earlier that night the respondent had drunk about five "twist tops" of Tooheys beer. Blood for alcohol analysis was taken from the respondent about three and a half hours after the accident. Expert evidence concerning the analysis was before the sentencing judge. Dr Moynham, a witness in the prosecution case, estimated the blood alcohol concentration would have been not less than .065 and not more than .11 grams of alcohol per 100 millilitres of blood. His evidence was that at the lower level most persons were said to be under the influence of intoxicating liquor with impairment of driving ability although a firm opinion about the impairment of the respondent was not possible.

Dr Starmer, a witness in the respondent's case, gave his opinion that the most likely range at the time of the accident would have had a lower end of .055 grams and an upper end of .090 grams per 100 millilitres. He also said the extent of the respondent's impaired driving ability would have depended on his acquired tolerance to alcohol.

Evidence for the respondent was to the following effect: he was thirty-four years old at the time of the accident. At the time of sentence he was employed as a truck driver with a landscaping firm at Fairfield earning about $450 net per week. He was described as a reliable and conscientious worker. The respondent is the eldest of three children and appears to have had a stable family life. He was the de facto husband of Cindy Lee Eather. They had two children: Tenille, and a son aged nine months at the time of sentence. The respondent had a son from a previous relationship aged about twelve at the time of sentence. This child visits the respondent during the Christmas school holidays each year for two to three weeks. The respondent was described in the pre-sentence report as being a good father to his children. It was reported that after the accident the respondent had resorted to heavy drinking for a time but that had scaled down to merely occasional drinking. The pre-sentence report noted that the respondent had stated that the accident had left him "shattered" and that he still suffered deep remorse as a result of it.

A psychologist, Mr Borenstein, gave the opinion that the respondent suffered a "complicated grief reaction because of the loss of his daughter to whom he was strongly attached". He pointed to a difficulty which the respondent had first experienced in forming a bond with his new son. He considered that the impact of the accident upon the respondent would be life long and that he would be prone to depressive periods which might interfere with his capacity to work and function within a family concept. Although the respondent was working hard at the time of Mr Borenstein's report, Mr Borenstein forecast that the respondent would lapse into depressive episodes and would require further counselling. His opinion was that if the respondent were incarcerated he would be acutely depressed, if not suicidal.

In a report from an accredited grief counsellor it was said that as a result of the accident and the death of his daughter the respondent had suffered deep emotional pain which was continuing.

The respondent's de facto wife gave oral evidence that since the accident she had forgiven the respondent for the death of their daughter and had reconciled with him; further, her evidence was that she had had conversations with the mother of the late Mr Tsiliris from which she understood that the mother had forgiven the respondent for the death of her son. She also stated that the respondent worked six days a week and was the sole breadwinner of the family.

The respondent gave evidence concerning his drinking habits. He said that before the accident he would on average drink a dozen "twist tops" on a weekend. He said he had not felt affected by alcohol at the time when he was driving the car when the accident happened. He agreed in cross-examination that he would not have driven a car on the road after drinking the amount that he had drunk that evening because he might have been "picked up" for being affected. He also agreed that when the accident happened he had been trying to make the "wheels slide" and had no idea how the car was going to react on the surface of the paddock.

For the Crown it was submitted that the sentence by the sentencing judge was manifestly inadequate. Various principles and legal propositions were then referred to about which I do not think there can be any serious dispute: 
A sentence imposed must reflect the objective seriousness of the crime (R v Rushby [(1977) 1 NSWLR 594:] Veen versus R (No 1) <case>; [143 CLR 458).] 
Deterrence, both special and general, is an important aspect of sentencing. One of the main purposes of punishment is to protect the public from the commission of crimes by making it clear to the offender and persons with similar impulses that if they yield to them they will meet with severe punishment (R versus Radich [(1954) NZLR 86] at 887).

A sentencing judge must maintain a reasonable proportion between the need to impose a sentence which deters others and the need to temper the effect of the sentence with humanity. But it is the former to which the latter is usually subsidiary. Subjective features must not be allowed to blind justice to the objective seriousness of the case (R versus Martin (unreported) NSW CCA 19
March 1992).

By Act No 78 of 1994 the maximum penalty for the offences to which the respondent pleaded guilty was doubled from five years to ten years imprisonment (Crimes Act section 52A(1)).

The action of the legislature in substantially increasing the maximum sentence for a particular type of offence must be taken by the Courts as reflecting community standards in relation to the seriousness of that offence and the Courts are required to give effect to the obvious intention of the legislature that the existing sentence patterns should move upwards (R versus Tanii
Hartikainen (unreported) CCA 8 June 1993; R versus Slattery (unreported) NSW CCA 19
December 1996).

The gravamen of the offence of dangerous driving occasioning death is not just the dangerous driving. It is the dangerous driving in association with the taking of a human life (R versus McIntyre [(1988) 38 A Crim R 135] at ). It is to be regarded as a crime of some seriousness (R versus Murnin
CCA 16 August 1985).

As I have said, I doubt whether anyone would want to quarrel with the foregoing statement of considerations relevant to arriving at a penalty in dealing with charges of the present kind. However, a reading through all the various considerations taken together with other accepted considerations makes it obvious that not every one of them can be applied to its full literal effect at the same time as all the others are applied. When taken all together, the relevant considerations must inevitably produce results which may vary considerably from case to case according to the particular circumstances of the case.

The Crown then submitted that the sentencing judge had been wrong in saying in his reasons for sentence that the case was not one in which alcohol might be said to be a factor. Dr Starmer's evidence, it was submitted, did not justify such an observation. However, taking into account what Dr Starmer said together with what the respondent himself said concerning his state at the time of the accident, I think what the sentencing judge said was well open to him.

The next submission was that the sentencing judge accorded too great a weight to the subjective features relating to the accident itself. The Judge said, on the material before him, that it seemed to him the danger involved in driving on the paddock in the way the respondent was driving must have been perceived as being non-existent if not minimal, notwithstanding that the vehicle was being driven at an estimated speed in second gear of about thirty kilometres per hour and with the respondent, driving it for the first time, seeking to make it slither or slide around. The Judge had added that the accident had happened after the vehicle struck a hump and that what followed was totally unexpected. This remark by the sentencing judge was based on a view he took of the materials before him, including what had been said by the respondent in a record of interview that had been tendered.

It was submitted today that whether the respondent expected the accident to happen or not was irrelevant and it was also noted in the written submissions that in any event the respondent had accepted by his plea that at the time of driving the vehicle he was driving it in a manner dangerous to another person or persons. The Crown submission was that the Court had to proceed on the basis that the respondent deliberately embarked upon a course of action fraught with danger.

This is probably an accurate way of stating one aspect of the case but it doesn't mean that the Judge was not entitled to consider the state of the respondent's intentions in the light of the circumstances in which he was driving the vehicle. The Judge was bound to consider, in my opinion, for the purposes of penalty, the actual mental state of the respondent at the time of the accident in regard to his manner of driving and in doing so had, of course, also to consider whether his expectations and intentions at the time should be given any weight in the light of the circumstances in which those expectations and intentions were being formed. I do not think it can be said to be an error for the Judge to have considered the matters complained of in this submission for the Crown.

It was also submitted that it was a foolhardy course of conduct for the respondent to drive the car in the circumstances and in the manner in which he did with passengers in it unrestrained by seat belts. I do not think there can be any argument with this. The same point was put in another way by the submission of the Crown in which it was said that the obvious inference was that the vehicle was driven completely inappropriately. In light of the events that took place on the night, this also seems to me to be a justifiable inference.

However, all that being said, after reading the reasons of the sentencing judge for imposing the sentence which he did, it seems to me that he had well in view the matters which I have above listed from the Crown's submissions on the topic of what the Judge had to take into account. The matters listed do not lead to any inevitable conclusion as may be the case with a mathematical problem. A wide range of evaluation and judgmental decision-making is necessarily involved in their application. I do not see any sign in the
Judge's reasons of his having overlooked any matters that he should have taken into account or of not taking into account matters that he should have or of having formed any views on the facts which were not supported or which the evidence before him did not leave properly open to him to arrive at or of his having misunderstood the evidence before him.

It is true that many persons pleading guilty to such charges as those here would receive considerably heavier sentences and that those would be custodial sentences.

Amongst the material put before us today were a schedule listing sentences for offences of the present kind and also a number of recent decisions. On the basis of this material and also of the intention of the Parliament in increasing markedly the penalties for offences such as these by the 1994 legislation it was submitted that in the very great majority of cases a custodial sentence of some kind would be required and that the pattern of sentencing shown in all the materials demonstrated this was a case which fell within the range which began with some form of custodial sentence even at the lower end. The submission, however, also properly recognised that although cases of this kind would, in general, require custodial sentencing of some kind, this could not be said to be a proposition applicable to every case of the present kind.

The facts behind the charges in the present case are quite different, in my opinion, from those in the general run of cases of which the schedule and the other authorities put before us today provide many examples. The sentencing judge clearly had in mind this aspect of the case, that is, that the facts were of a kind rarely seen in the cases from which a general sentencing pattern could be discerned.

As I have already indicated, I do not see any sign of appellable error in his
Honour's reasons for the sentence he imposed nor, bearing in mind the nature of the case, do I think the sentence itself indicates that some error must have been made even though what it was cannot be pinpointed.

In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed.

COLE JA: I agree. 
SPERLING J: I wish to emphasise this is a special case in a number of respects not least of which is the additional penalty suffered by the respondent in the loss of his daughter and the burden of guilt associated with that. 
I agree that the appeal should be dismissed for the reasons given by Mr
Justice Priestley.

PRIESTLEY JA: The order of the Court is that the appeal should be dismissed. --------------------- * * * 
