

Regina versus Douglas Matter No Cca 60576/98 [1998] NSWSC 670 (11 December )

Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus TREVOR ANTHONY DOUGLAS 
CCA 60576/98 December 1998 
Ireland J, Dunford J, Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Crown appeal against inadequacy of sentence. (Moore DCJ) 
FILE NO: 60576/98 
DELIVERED: 11 December 1998 
HEARING DATE: 11 December 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Trevor Anthony DOUGLAS 
JUDGMENT OF: Ireland, Dunford, Simpson JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPELLANT - L M B Lamprati 
RESPONDENT - P Hastings QC 
PJ Livingstone 
SOLICITORS: 
APPELLANT - S E O'Connor 
RESPONDENT - Meehans, Solicitor Corporation 
RESULT: Appeal allowed. Sentences quashed, new sentences imposed. 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - sentencing - dangerous driving causing death - inadequacy of periodic detention 
NO. OF PAGES: 14 
R versus Trevor Anthony DOUGLAS 
JUDGEMENT 
IRELAND J: Dunford J will give the first judgment. 
DUNFORD J: This is an appeal by the Crown on the ground of inadequacy of concurrent sentences of twelve months periodic detention imposed following the respondent's pleas of guilty to two counts of dangerous driving causing death. 
On 25 May 1998 the respondent pleaded not guilty to two counts of dangerous driving causing death by driving under the influence of drugs: <case>(a) [Crimes Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/); and guilty to two counts of dangerous driving causing death by driving in a manner dangerous: [s
A(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html), before Keleman DCJ in the District Court at Campbelltown, which pleas were accepted by the Crown in full satisfaction of the indictment.

On 4 September 1998 he was sentenced by Moore DCJ at Campbelltown to concurrent terms of imprisonment of twelve months to be served by way of periodic detention to commence on 18 September 1998 and was disqualified from holding any licence under the Traffic or Transport Acts for a period of twelve months from that date.

By letter dated 9 September 1998 the respondent and his solicitor were advised that the Director of Public Prosecutions was considering an appeal against the inadequacy of the sentences, and a notice of appeal signed on 25 September was served on the respondent on 28 September 1998. In the meantime he has commenced to serve his sentence of periodic detention, having first attended on 18 September 1998, and his attendance has been consistent and regular.

At about 1.20pm on 28 September 1996 the respondent was driving a Western Star prime mover and trailer in a northerly direction in lane 1 on the Hume Highway near Bargo, and when approximately 500 metres south of the exit to that village the front of his prime mover collided with the rear of a Datsun station wagon which was also travelling in lane 1. As a result of the impact the Datsun became airborne and collided with a large advisory sign on the side of the road. Gunther and Waltraud Mellenthin, who were seated in the rear of the Datsun, were killed instantly. The driver and his wife were airlifted to hospital where they remained for four days suffering from cuts and bruising.
Whilst at the scene the respondent underwent a roadside breath test that proved negative. As a result of observations of the respondent he was conveyed to the Campbelltown Hospital where blood and urine samples were obtained. The blood sample was positive for the presence of methylamphetamine and ephedrine.

The section of the highway where the collision occurred is a straight stretch of roadway. It runs in a generally north/south direction and includes two lanes in each direction with extensive shoulders at the side of the bitumen.
North and southbound traffic is divided by a large grass median strip. At the time of the collision it was daylight, the weather was overcast and the bitumen road surface was dry and in good condition.

There was evidence, which apparently his Honour accepted, from the driver of the Datsun, that he was travelling at about 100 kilometres per hour, and from the driver of another vehicle, also travelling north behind the respondent's vehicle, Mr Leslie, that he was travelling at about 110 kilometres per hour; and from these witnesses his Honour drew the inference that the respondent's truck was unlikely to have been travelling at more than 110 kilometres per hour, although he noted that the speed limit for heavy vehicles on that stretch of roadway was 100 kilometres per hour. He also noted the truck was of considerable weight and fully laden.

Notwithstanding that it was a flat open dry road on a clear but cloudy day at about 1.30pm, the respondent did not see the Datsun until the last moments before the collision. He then applied his brakes very heavily in an effort to avoid the collision and left 24 metres of skid marks on the roadway.

The dangerous nature of the driving by the respondent was that he was not keeping a proper lookout, but there was a contributing factor, because he volunteered that he had taken methylamphetamine and amphetamine earlier in the day, both at 7.30am when he left Broadford near Melbourne, having slept there for four hours, and about one and a half hours before the collision when he had stopped at Marulan.

There was evidence from two highly qualified pharmacologists concerning the effect of amphetamines on the respondent. Dr Judith Perl, whose report was tendered by the Crown, expressed the view that the respondent was in a reactive drug-induced fatigue stage with a slowing of reactions and impairment of perception and judgment, and therefore his driving ability was in that way impaired.

Professor Starmer in a report tendered on behalf of the respondent concluded that whilst the proposition that the respondent's driving ability may have been adversely affected by the drug could not be dismissed, from information before him he found it difficult to believe that he was grossly impaired by stimulants. He considered that in the case of a person such as the respondent, who would be highly tolerant of the drug because of its constant use, it was most unlikely he would have been experiencing amphetamine withdrawal symptoms at the time of the collision.

The respondent quite frankly conceded before his Honour that the drug which he had used may well have contributed to his poor lookout and expressly conceded, through his counsel, that there may have been a contribution to his lack of proper lookout coming from the drug which was in his system.

His Honour's finding was that it was clear enough that there must have been some contribution by the drug for there to have been such a dismal failure to keep a proper lookout. His Honour noted there was no suggestion that the respondent had been distracted, or that there was any other cause for his failure to see the station wagon.

There were a number of positive subjective features in the respondent's favour. He was twenty-seven years of age, married with two young children. He has been for many years a professional truck driver, driving interstate since
Although he had various employers in that occupation, he has been in continuous regular employment, but had commenced using amphetamines soon after his driving took him interstate. He had pleaded guilty apparently when first offered the opportunity to plead to the two offences in full satisfaction of the indictment. He had no previous convictions for criminal offences except driving matters and, in respect of those, for an interstate truck driver his record could fairly be described as not bad.

He also had expressed remorse for the death of Mr and Mrs Mellenthin and his
Honour found that such remorse was absolutely genuine. As a result of the consequences of the collision he had been depressed and emotionally upset. He immediately gave up interstate truck driving and the use of amphetamines and obtained another driving job but was unable to continue that work because he was so upset. He had, however, obtained other employment and had continued in that up to the time of sentencing. We were informed he is still with the same employer and has been offered an apprenticeship as a boilermaker.

At the time when his Honour passed sentence, 4 September 1998, there were in existence a number of decisions of this Court to the effect that, persons convicted for an offence under [s
A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s52a.html) of causing death as a result of driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or driving at a speed or in a manner dangerous to the public, could avoid a full time custodial sentence only in the most exceptional circumstances, particularly since the section had been redrafted and penalties increased by the Crimes (Dangerous Driving Offences) Act, 1994 (No 78): R v Savka [(1996) 88 A Crim R 393] at , R versus Milson (unreported, CCA, 10 December 1997), R versus Musumeci (unreported, CCA, 30 October 1997), R versus Kalanj (unreported, CCA, 8
December 1997), R versus Byrne (unreported, CCA, 5 August 1998).

In R versus Musumeci, Hunt CJ at CL said (p 4): "This Court has held that a number of considerations which had to be taken into account when sentencing for culpable driving must also be taken into account when sentencing for this new offence of dangerous driving:
The Legislature has always placed a premium upon human life, and the taking of a human life by driving a motor vehicle dangerously is to be regarded as a crime of some seriousness.
The real substance of the offence is not just the dangerous driving; it is the dangerous driving in association with the taking of a human life.
Such is the need for public deterrence in this type of case, the youth of any offender is given less weight as a subjective matter than in other types of cases.
The courts must tread warily in showing leniency for good character in such cases.
(Relates particularly to more youthful offenders than the present respondent).
Periodic detention has a strong element of leniency built into it and, as presently administered, it is usually no more punitive than a community service order.
The statement made by this Court in relation to the previous offence of culpable driving - that it cannot be said that a full time custodial sentence is required in every case - continues to apply in relation to the new offence of dangerous driving. As that offence is committed even though the offender has had no more than a momentary or casual lapse of attention, there must always be room for a non-custodial sentence (although that does not mean that a non-custodial sentence is ordinarily appropriate in such a case), but the case in which a sentence other than one involving full-time custody is appropriate must be rarer for this new offence." 
In the present case his Honour acknowledged the existence of this principle but found what he considered were a number of factors which enabled him to impose other than a full time custodial sentence. Apart from the subjective features and the plea of guilty to which I have referred, his Honour noted that the respondent recognised that he should not have been such a consistent user of amphetamines, that he had volunteered that it was a feature of the interstate truck driving industry that persons doing the driving that he did were obliged to take amphetamines to maintain their deadlines imposed upon them by their employers, and would lose their jobs if they failed to maintain such deadlines, that the amphetamines were provided to him by his employer and that he named the employer who did it.

I am satisfied that by adopting this approach his Honour fell into error. None of the matters adverted to by his Honour, either individually or in conjunction, would justify a sentence as lenient as one of periodic detention in the circumstances of this case. The fact that he recognised that he should not have been such a consistent user of amphetamines went to remorse and the desire not to offend again, a common feature of cases of this nature. The other matters were really matters which sought to partially explain the use of amphetamines by interstate truck drivers, including the respondent, and if anything was a reason for the imposition of a salutary sentence in order to deter other interstate truck drivers from following such a course. On the authorities which applied at the time, the sentence was in my view manifestly inadequate and such as to justify the intervention of this Court.

Before proceeding further, I wish to say something about the fact that in the case of this respondent, not only did the employer impose deadlines which could only reasonably be met by the taking of amphetamines or other stimulants, and encouraged the use of such drugs, but in fact supplied them.
This course of conduct on behalf of employers is totally reprehensible. It calls for the strongest condemnation and, notwithstanding the drugs were supplied in Victoria, in my view provided the evidence can be properly obtained in an admissible form, it calls out for the prosecution of this employer or any other employers who are minded to act in a like manner. It is not the employer who supplies the drugs who is liable to be involved in an accident and face the dire consequences which this respondent is facing. As I say, if this conduct can be established by admissible evidence in a proper form, the authorities should give most serious consideration to prosecuting employers who embark upon such a course.

Having found that the sentence was manifestly inadequate, the matter has now been simplified by the subsequent "Guideline" judgment of this Court by a bench comprising five judges in R versus Jurisic (unreported, CCA, 12 October ) where Spigelman CJ (at 29) set out the considerations which I have quoted from Musumeci and (at 36) listed a number of factors relevant to the imposition of a penalty for this type of offence, namely: "(i) Extent and nature of the injuries inflicted.

Number of people put at risk.

Degree of speed.

Degree of intoxication or of substance abuse.

Erratic driving.

Competitive driving or showing-off.

Length of the journey during which others were exposed to risk.

Ignoring of warnings.

Escaping police pursuit." 
His Honour went on: "Paragraphs (i) and (ii) focus on the occurrence, whereas paragraphs (iii) to refer to the conduct of the offender. The presence of these latter factors may indicate that the offender has abandoned responsibility for his or her own conduct. When the presence of such a factor can be so described, then it can be said to be present to a material degree for purposes of determining an appropriate sentence." 
His Honour then promulgated the following guidelines with which the other members of the Court (except possibly with reservations by Adams J) agreed: "1. A non-custodial sentence for an offence under section 52A should be exceptional and almost invariably confined to cases involving momentary inattention or misjudgment.
With a plea of guilty, wherever there is present to a material degree any aggravating factor involving the conduct of the offender, a custodial sentence (minimum plus additional or fixed term) of less than three years (in the case of dangerous driving causing death) and less than two years (in the case of dangerous causing grievous bodily harm) should be exceptional." 
His Honour said: "The period of three or two years, once the threshold of abandoning responsibility has been reached, is a starting point. The presence of additional aggravating factors, or their increased intensity, will determine the actual sentence." 
In this case items (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) are relevant. Two people were killed (items (i) and (ii)). The respondent's vehicle was travelling at about kilometres per hour when it should not have been exceeding 100 kilometres per hour and was a heavy vehicle fully laden (item iii). The driver was apparently to some degree affected by the drugs he had taken that day (item iv). On this last point there is simply no other possible explanation for his failure to see the Datsun directly in front of him before it was too late.

However, in relation to this last matter, Mr Hastings SC, on behalf of the respondent, has submitted that to find the respondent was affected by the consumption of drugs to the extent that he has concluded he had abandoned responsibility for his conduct for the purposes of the test laid down in
Jurisic called for a finding that he drove his vehicle under the influence of drugs, and that it was not open to the Crown to run that case on a plea under <case>(c) as opposed to a count under <case>(a), and The
Queen versus Meaton <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 359], and Anderson versus The Queen <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 520] were referred to.

It was also submitted that to have regard to the effect of drugs on the respondent's driving in relation to charges under <case>(c) constituted a breach of the principles laid down by The Queen versus De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383], because it amounted to having regard to matters in aggravation which would have warranted conviction for a more serious offence.

He submitted by reference to Meaton and Anderson that where matters of aggravation are alleged or sought to be relied upon, those matters should be included in the indictment; and that as the effect of the guidelines in Jurisic was to increase the appropriate penalty where those matters of aggravation existed, similar principles applied and they should have been included in the indictment.

In my view this submission is not valid. The guidelines set down in
Jurisic do not have the force of statutory law and should not be so treated. They merely set out the matters which are appropriate to be taken into account, and indicate a range of sentences which are appropriate where the relevant considerations are applicable well within the maximum sentences prescribed by the Parliament .

Moreover, a number of the matters set out above (from p 36 of the judgment of
Spigelman CJ) could not be included in the indictment, e.g. under any circumstances of erratic driving, ignoring a warning and so on. If such matters were included in the indictment no doubt an application would be made to strike out the indictment as disclosing an offence not known to the law.
Meaton and Anderson, on the other hand, were cases where the statute provided for matters of aggravation and for increased maximum penalties where those matters of aggravation were established. The effect of
Meaton in particular is that in such cases the matters of aggravation must be included in the indictment because they are matters to be determined by the tribunal of fact, usually the jury.

The more general submission that reliance by the Crown on the effects of alcohol or drugs when the charge is specified as arising out of driving in a manner dangerous was expressly put and rejected in R versus Norris (unreported, CCA, 13 October 1989) at 6, a case arising under <case> in its former form, which has recently been followed in R versus Walsh (unreported,
CCA, 27 October 1997) at 6.

The principle referred to in De Simoni is that a sentencing judge cannot take into account matters of aggravation with which the offender has not been charged and which would render him liable to a greater penalty. It can have no application in a case such as the present where the so called matters of aggravation are merely variations of the same offence, and do not render him liable to a greater penalty. Dangerous driving causing death under <case> has three variations, namely, driving a vehicle (a) under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a drug, or (b) at a speed dangerous to another person or persons or (c) in a manner dangerous to another person or persons; and each variation carries the same penalty, unlike the situation in De Simoni where the matters of aggravation were relied upon and gave rise to a substantially increased penalty. (See in particular De Simoni, per Gibbs
CJ at p 392; R versus Overall [71 A Crim R 170] at 177).

Not only is there no legal objection to the Court having regard to the effect of the drugs taken in sentencing under <case>(c) but the two pleas were expressly accepted in full satisfaction of the indictment on that basis (see transcript 25 May 1998, p 2).

Having regard to the circumstances of the offences already referred to, and having regard to the guidelines laid down in Jurisic, there was present in this case the aggravating circumstances of drugs and, to a lesser extent, speed; and so a minimum full-time custodial sentence (comprising minimum and additional terms) of not less than three years was an appropriate starting point. Those matters of aggravation would tend to increase the appropriate penalty and, it would also be appropriate to increase it because two, and not one, persons were killed. But it is also appropriate for this Court to reduce it in accordance with the principles of double jeopardy which apply to Crown appeals.

In my view the element of double jeopardy also amounts to special circumstances within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/).

Another matter which does cause me some concern is that the learned sentencing judge imposed a period of disqualification of one year, although the automatic period of disqualification prescribed by the [Traffic
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ta77/) in those circumstances is three years. It can be reduced but not below a minimum of six months. His Honour gave no reason for reducing it below the automatic period and that is unfortunate, but it has not been made an issue in this appeal, and
I do not intend to say anything further about it.

Taking into account the matters to which I have referred, in my opinion the appeal should be allowed. I would quash the sentences imposed by his Honour, and in lieu thereof sentence the respondent to imprisonment for a minimum term of eighteen months to be deemed to have commenced on the date of sentencing, 4
September 1998. I would fix an additional term of eighteen months on each count, those sentences to be concurrent and to be deemed to have commenced on September 1998. Accordingly, the first day on which the respondent will be eligible for release on parole will be 3 March 2000, on which day I would order that he be released on parole, subject to the conditions prescribed by the regulations.

IRELAND J: I agree. 
SIMPSON J: I also agree. 
IRELAND J: The orders of the Court will be as set out by Dunford J. (Mr Hastings asked if the court could recommend that the respondent serve his sentence at Grafton.) 
IRELAND J: We make that recommendation, that the sentences be served at Grafton. * * * 
