

Zeus Chemical Products Pty Ltd versus Jaybee Design and Marketing Pty Ltd
Matter No 3595/97 [1998] NSWSC 69 (13 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 `

ZEUS CHEMICAL PRODUCTS PTY LTD versus JAYBEE DESIGN & MARKETING PTY LTD` ` 3595/97` `13 March 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` `
 `
 `JUDGMENT` 
HIS HONOUR: This very interesting case is only in the list today to decide the question of costs, but it does in fact raise very awkward problems of law. 
The plaintiff is a manufacturer and distributor of aerosol paints which it uses, amongst other things, for marking lines, underground mines and for survey and other associated purposes.

In early 1993 there were discussions between Mr Zeuschner, of the plaintiff on the one side, and Mr Barry Stead, and another person who was interested in marketing and selling this sort of product and had experience in that field on the other. The parties came to an arrangement that Mr Stead would do what the plaintiff required, but Mr Stead insisted that he would not work as an employee but he would be engaged by the defendant company and the defendant company would enter into an agreement with the plaintiff company. Mr Stead said: "You don't need to worry about losing out on anything because I won't be your employee. Any work we do for you will always remain your property." 
Mr Zeuschner agreed to this.

The parties then entered into a written agreement whereby the defendant was to provide a comprehensive sales and marketing service for five years. The obligation of the defendant was to provide such a comprehensive service, encourage expansion of the marketing of the plaintiff's product and not provide services of a similar nature to any opposition enterprise.

The document was one of the type which commercial people put together rather than lawyers and it did not cover all the matters that lawyers experienced in this field would ordinarily have put in the agreement. Significantly it did not deal with the obligation of the defendant to have any designated employee work any designated time or to devote his or her full efforts to the plaintiff's enterprise, though it did provide that it would cease on the death of Barry Stead. There was nothing in the agreement which fleshed out what was stated in the original conversation, that is, that any work that was done "for you" would remain the plaintiff's property.

The defendant then set about its work in a professional way and in connection with that work the defendant compiled a card index system. That system contained details, and I am assuming that many of the details were confidential details, about the customers and sales of the plaintiff's products.

The plaintiff in later years also marketed some of its products directly, principally through one of its officers, a Mrs Spargo, and when she serviced clients she would let the defendant know the details of her sales so that they could be entered upon the card system.

The agreement between the parties came to an end sometime in July 1997. The plaintiff demanded initially from the defendant that the defendant deliver up the cards and any other lists containing the confidential information. This demand was not met. One of the reasons it was not met was that Barry Stead was seriously ill and for some part of the relevant period of the demand was in hospital.

The plaintiff, doubtless after consulting its lawyers, varied its demand to requiring access to the card index. The solicitors for the parties sent faxes and letters to each other about that demand.

It is not necessary to set all these out, but I will commence with a fax from the plaintiff's solicitors to the defendant's solicitors at 3.24pm on 12
August 1997 in which the former demanded access or else the commencement of litigation. The reply at 4.16pm that day was to deny that there had been a refusal of reasonable requests for access, and further instructions would be sought as to the number of cards relevant to clients serviced by Mrs Spargo, and that there was a problem because Mr Stead was in hospital.

That was followed by a further fax on the same day at 5.02pm from the defendant's solicitors that it was willing to grant access to the cards relating to clients serviced by Mrs Spargo at a suitable time after Mr Stead returned from hospital.

The next day, 13 August, the present summons and the accompanying affidavits were filed and these were served about 6pm that day. Mr Stead was released from hospital that day.

On 14 August the defendant's solicitors sent the plaintiff's solicitors a fax which offered to settle the matter. The reason given in that fax for settling the matter was Mr Stead's current state of health.

The offer was in six points, 1 to 5, dealing with access to all the information and photocopying of the cards, point 6 being that each party would bear its own costs. The letter concluded that the offer was open until midday the next day at which time it would lapse. Reference was then made to the
Calderbank decision.

The offer was not accepted. The plaintiff said that it would not agree that everyone pay their own costs and the reaction of the defendant's solicitors was that it was a package deal, take it or leave it.

The matter came on before me on 18 August 1997 shortly after 2 o'clock. Mrs
Stead got into the witness box at 2.17pm and she said in answer to her own solicitor that the defendant was prepared to give access to the card file system for the purpose of photocopying and that she had already agreed to do that on 15 August.

The transcript then says "discussion ensued. Witness retired." My recollection is that I made certain remarks as to what we were all doing there if the parties had agreed on the orders, and shortly after orders 1 to 5 were made by consent, with the matter of costs being reserved. It is that reserved question that I come back to today.

Mr Haffenden for the plaintiff says that the information on the cards was confidential information, it was information which was gathered by the defendant and regarded as part of the work which it was doing for the plaintiff, albeit under a contract for services, that the information was obtained in the course of doing the work for which the defendant was paid, it could not be used for any purposes other than the plaintiff's own purposes and it is information that an agent gathered on behalf of its principal.
Accordingly, it followed that the plaintiff was entitled to at least access to the information, it was denied that access after proper demand and had to commence proceedings and, accordingly, it was entitled to its costs of the suit.

Mr Haffenden relied on Article 48 in Bowstead & Reynolds on Agency, th ed (Sweet & Maxwell, London, 1996). This reads: "An agent may not, without the informed consent of his principal, use his principal's property, or confidential information acquired during the course of the agency, to acquire a benefit (ie a secret profit) for himself." 
The text is supported by words of Pearson, LJ in Phipps versus Boardman [[1965] Ch 992], 1030, "It is quite clear that if an agent uses property, with which he has been entrusted by his principal, so as to make a profit for himself out of it, without his principal's consent, then he is accountable for it to his principal... . Likewise with information or knowledge which he has been employed by his principal to collect or discover, or which he has otherwise acquired, for use of his principal, then again if he turns it to his own use, so as to make a profit by means of it for himself, he is accountable ...".

However neither passage applies to the situation where the agent is not seeking to make a secret profit from holding information collected and collated by the agent in the course of the agency.

Mr Haffenden further submitted that the defendant's solicitors' final fax shows that there was an admission that the plaintiff was entitled to the information because, as he pointed out, that letter was not written on a piece of paper which was headed "without prejudice", it was an open offer to settle and there was no reservation of the offer being without admission.

Then Mr Haffenden says the agent having admitted that the principal was entitled to access both in the fax and by Mrs Stead giving evidence to her own solicitor in the witness box, the orders were made in due course and the plaintiff is entitled to costs.

Mr Taylor for the defendant says that that is not the situation at all. He says that originally the demand was put far too high, that is, for the handing over of the card system. Then there was a demand for access and the response was that access would be given on the basis of Mrs Spargo's clients and later, provided there was no order for costs, there was an agreement to give the plaintiff what it wanted. The plaintiff should have taken that offer. It was warned that if it did not it might have to pay the costs from therein onwards.
The plaintiff in fact got no more than was offered. Thus it follows that the costs from 5pm on 14 August 1997 should be paid by the plaintiff.

There is little in the authorities as to what is to happen in this type of situation. This is not a case where the agent is threatening to use the information in breach of any fiduciary duty of confidence. The agent has the information, but says that it has no obligation to give access to it, though in actual fact in this particular case because of the health of the parties it raised no objection. Notwithstanding that, it says it was not liable to lose these proceedings and should not have to pay the costs.

Mr Haffenden, with his usual telling advocacy, said that the defendant was a fiduciary agent. So it was but, with great respect, the use of those tags does not really take the matter any further. He also submitted that there was an admission of liability. It is true that from the way the letter was presented a court could infer an admission of liability, but in view of the last paragraph dealing with the reason for settlement being the ill health of Mr
Stead I would not in fact infer that in the instant case.

What then is the status of information which is recorded by an agent in the course of the agent's agencies but which it had no obligation to record? 
The nearest authority on point was found by Mr Taylor, International
Scientific Communications Inc versus Pattison & Ors [[1979] FSR 429.] In that case the plaintiff appointed the defendant to solicit advertising for its magazine. The defendant was not soliciting advertising as a full-time job and pursued other trades at the same time as doing what was required for the plaintiff. He recorded the dealings with the plaintiff's customers and other material on what he called a promotion list.

One of the questions before Goulding J in the English Chancery Division was whether the plaintiff was entitled to access to the list after the termination of the relationship. His Lordship says at 434 that it was evident that the plaintiff was entitled to have a copy of the list during the subsistence of the agency or forthwith upon termination. With great respect to his Lordship there is nothing in his judgment to show why he took that view, and the only conclusion must be that it was an implied term of the particular contract before him. However, his Lordship did in actual fact decline to imply wider terms or impute equitable obligation, so that he held that both parties were free to use the list for any legitimate purpose after the termination of the agency.

The point does arise on occasions with respect to doctors and solicitors. With respect to doctors the matter was dealt with by the Court of Appeal and by the
High Court of Australia in Breen versus Williams [(1994) 35 NSWLR 522 (Court] of Appeal) and (1996) 186 CLR 71 (High Court of Australia). I think all the judges, even Kirby P who dissented in the Court of Appeal from the general view that the plaintiff was not entitled to the records, took the view that (page 538): "Normally the right of ownership of the paper would afford the owner the right to provide or refuse access to a third party, either freely or at a fee." 
I think with great respect that states the general law.

With solicitors one has always got to classify the sort of document which the solicitor has. Where the solicitor has prepared a document in the course of his or her work for a client which he was under no duty to prepare, and which was not in fact prepared for the benefit of the client but for the solicitor's benefit, then not only is the client not bound to pay but the client does not have access to that material, unless the access is obtained under some statutory provision dealing with solicitors and clients or under a discovery process; see Cordery's Law Relating to Solicitors 7th edition (Butterworths 1981) p 100.

Dean on The Law of Trade Secrets (Law Book Company 1990) pp 224 to 225 when dealing with the present sort of problem says that where there is an independent contractor who records information, even if he or she does so while working on a specified product for somebody else, the contractor may still have property in the information. There may be superadded a duty in confidence not to use the information against the client, but, generally speaking, it becomes part of the property of the independent contractor. So in Cope Allman (Marrickville) Ltd versus Farrow [(1984) 3 IPR 567] a contractor who was building poker machines, who worked out software for computers to enable them to be programmed, did not have to hand the software over to the clients whose work was being done when this process was actually discovered by the defendant. 
However, it is a different matter if the contract for services expressly or impliedly contains the obligation on the contractor to provide all the information which he or she has for the benefit of the "client".

I do not believe that the contract on its true construction requires the information to be able to be accessed by the "employer" upon demand. Certainly there was the conversation that I have already referred to, but that is a fairly vague conversation and when it is followed by a written agreement one would not usually read that conversation as implying a term in the contract that the information generated was to be treated in the same way as if it had been generated by an employer, and I do not so read it.

In the absence of a contractual provision, and in the absence of showing that the defendant was paid for the card system and for the work done on the card system, or that it was part of its fee under the contract, it does not seem to me the plaintiff, had the case gone to trial, would have made out a case.

Mr Haffenden protests that it is a bizarre result that one can have confidential information yet not be able to access it, even though the information may be vital to the plaintiff's business and cannot be used by the defendant. The answer to that proposition is that it is not the case if the contract with the independent contractor is appropriately worded in the "client's" favour, and that it is not at all exceptional in commercial situations for people like estate agents or superannuation consultants, and the like, to compile records of the client's affairs in the course of their duties which they are only too happy to make available to the client but only for a fee.

Accordingly, the plaintiff's motion for costs should fail.

The defendant's motion is for costs after 14 August. I think that also should fail. It is really based on the false premise that there was an offer to give the plaintiff more than the plaintiff obtained. In actual fact the litigation being carried on before me on 18 August was, as Mr Haffenden put it, ridiculous. The defendant, via Mrs Stead, had made it quite clear in her evidence given to her own solicitor in the witness box that she was prepared to give the plaintiff everything it wanted, except the matter of costs, yet notwithstanding that the case was contested before me for about twenty-five minutes on 18 August.

Accordingly, in my view there should be no costs of either party of the proceedings.
 * * * 
