

R versus John WALSH [2009] NSWSC 764 (7 August 2009) 
Last Updated: 10 August 2009 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: 
R versus John WALSH <case>  
JURISDICTION: 
Common Law  
FILE NUMBER(S):  /4014  
HEARING DATE(S):  July 2009  
JUDGMENT DATE:  August 2009  
PARTIES: 
REGINA (Crown) 
John WALSH (Offender)  
JUDGMENT OF: 
McCallum J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): 
Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: 
Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
P Barnett SC (Crown) 
P Boulten SC (Offender)  
SOLICITORS: 
S Kavanagh (Solicitor for Public Prosecutions) (Crown) 
S O'Connor (Legal Aid Commission) (Offender)  
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW- particular offences - murder - attempted murder - offender pleaded guilty to three counts murder and one count attempted murder - sentence - domestic killing - husband murdered wife - grandfather murdered his two young grandchildren - father attempted to murder daughter - whether worst case category - whether life sentence warranted - offences remain unexplained - whether objective criminality tempered by absence of certain features - comparison with other cases unhelpful - offender's extreme culpability not mitigated by any subjective circumstances of the offender - life sentences imposed  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)  [Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/)  
CATEGORY: 
Sentence  
CASES CITED: 
Gonzales versus R <case>; <case>; <case>; <case> 
R versus Jang <case> 
R versus Kalajzich <case>; <case>; <case> 
R versus Thomson; R versus Houlton <case>; (2000) 49 NSWLR 383 
R versus Velevski (Supreme Court of New South Wales, 26 September 1997, unreported) 
R versus Way <case>; [60 NSWLR 168]  
TEXTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
For the murder of JH the offender is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life. For the murder of KH the offender is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life. For the offence of causing grievous bodily harm to SW with intent to murder SW, the offender is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment with a non-parole period of 12 years commencing on 30 June 2008 and expiring on 29 June 2020 and a balance of term of 4 years. For the murder of JW, the offender is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment with a non- parole period of 15 years commencing on 30 June 2011 and expiring on 29 June and a balance of term of 5 years.  
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION: 
Statutory non-publication forbidding publication of names of children until further order.  
JUDGMENT:  - 15 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
McCALLUM J 
FRIDAY 7 AUGUST 2009 /4014 R versus John WALSH 
REMARKS ON SENTENCE HER HONOUR: On 10 July 2009 John Walsh pleaded guilty to the murders of his wife and his two grandchildren and to causing grievous bodily harm to his daughter with intent to murder her.
 There is a non-publication order in force in respect of the identity of the two children. It is therefore appropriate to refer to the four victims and the children's father only by their initials. I hope no offence will be caused by that approach.
 The offender was aged 69 at the time of the offences. His daughter, SW, is a serving New South Wales police officer who was then stationed at Parkes. She had been married to another police officer, DH, and they had two children together, a boy, KH and a girl, JH. At the time of the offences KH was seven and JH was five. Following the breakdown of her marriage, SW had a regular arrangement with her parents to leave the children with them overnight at
Cowra while she went to work. Her parents would take the children to school in the morning and she would return in the afternoon to collect them.
 On the evening of 29 June 2008, SW left the children with her parents as she had done on previous occasions. The following morning, she tried to call her mother from work a number of times, but there was no answer. She called again at around 11.00am and spoke to the offender, who told her that her mother was lying down. She left Parkes shortly after midday.
 SW arrived back at her parents' home at about 1.40pm. She went into her parents' room and saw her mother lying on the bedroom floor with her back leaning up against the bed. She thought her mother looked pale and that her hair appeared to be darker than normal. She went to find the offender and asked him if her mother was sick. He said that she was on the floor to get comfortable as she had experienced pains in her stomach. He also said that her mother had asked to be left alone to get some rest. SW asked the offender if her mother was dead, to which he replied "No, no, don't be stupid".
 The offender then made SW a cup of tea and invited her to come and sit down in the lounge room and have a chat. As he walked past his computer desk on the way into the lounge room he picked up a small axe. SW asked him why he had the axe. He told her that he had been using it to do some jobs around the house earlier in the day. She then noticed that the children's school uniforms were still laid out on the lounge where they had been left the night before. She asked the offender why the uniforms were still there. He told her that the children had gone to school in "mufti". She then went to the children's bedroom. She saw her daughter lying on the bottom bunk, partly covered by a quilt. She thought that she looked pale. She looked for her son on the top bunk but could not see him.
 While SW was in the children's bedroom, the offender approached her from behind, still holding the axe. She became concerned and said, "What is going on? What have you done?". The offender walked towards her and said, "No, she is sick. The doctor is coming in half an hour".
 SW then put her hand to her daughter's face. She was cold to the touch, and
SW realised that she had been dead for some time. Whilst SW had her back to the offender, he swung the axe and struck her to the head a number of times.
She managed to take hold of the axe and push the offender off balance. She asked him why he was doing this and he said "I am doing this because I love you. When I am done with you lot I am going to Newcastle to kill your ex- husband. We are all better off this way. This is the way it has to be".
 After a struggle, SW was able to escape to a neighbour's house where she contacted police. The offender left the house by car before police arrived.
Following an extensive media campaign, police were contacted at 7.00pm that evening by the proprietor of a motel in Hay, who informed them that the offender had checked into the motel. The offender was arrested shortly afterwards.
 SW was taken to hospital. She had three lacerations to the head that required sutures. She also had a depressed fracture of the skull, underneath which the lining of the brain was torn. That was repaired by surgery and part of her skull was replaced with titanium plates.
 In a statement tendered at the sentence hearing, SW said that she could not think of any reason for her father to do what he had done. She stated that he had a loving relationship with SW's mother and his grandchildren and had never displayed any symptoms to indicate that he was suffering from any mental illness such as could explain his actions. She did suspect that he had suffered from depression following the suicide of her brother in 2002, although it had never been diagnosed.  Following his arrest, the offender participated in a lengthy interview with police. He provided a curiously detailed account of the surrounding events, but declined to make any comment relating directly to the deaths of his wife and his two grandchildren or about the attack on his daughter. A month later, however, the offender was interviewed again at his own request. During the second interview, he made full admissions as to his commission of the four offences.
 The offender told police that he had killed his wife by hitting her on the head about three times with a hammer shaft, stabbing her with a knife and then hitting her on the back of the head with a lump hammer. The hammer shaft is a weapon that has been owned by the offender for many years, and he described it with a measure of pride. He refers to it by the name "Fred". After he killed
JW, the offender took the weapons to the kitchen sink. He then filled the bathtub with water and woke his granddaughter, JH, telling her that she had to go to the toilet. She was half asleep so he carried her to the bath where he pushed her underwater and held her down until she drowned. He said that JH had struggled against him but not strongly and that she had kicked a little and then she went quiet. He laid her body out on the bathroom floor to let the water drain out of her pyjamas before putting her back in her bed.
 The offender then woke his grandson, KH, and told him that he had to go to the toilet. KH got out of the top bunk and walked to the toilet. The offender told police he had put his weapons in place to reach them when he needed them.
As KH was walking back to the bedroom, the offender struck him to the back of the head with the hammer shaft causing him to fall to the floor. The offender then got the lump hammer and hit KH again to the back of the head. He then put him in the bath to make sure that he was dead. He placed his body with JH's body in the bottom bunk.
 After killing KH, the offender drowned the family dog in the bath, wrapped him in plastic and placed him under the children's bed. He told police that he did so because, after he left the house, there would be no one to look after the dog.
 At around 4.00am the offender typed a note on his computer which stated, among other things, "Sorry that it had to end this way" and "I would like to have a go at [SW's] ex, I may even yet...". At some stage, he packed a bag of clothes. At around 9.00am he went to the children's school and told staff that the children were sick and would probably not be able to attend school for a few days. He also withdrew $800 from an ATM and filled his car and two jerry cans with petrol.
 The offender told police that he had packed the bag because he intended to go to Newcastle to kill SW's ex-husband after he had killed SW. A search of his car revealed a handwritten note recording the address of SW's ex-husband, which was in the Newcastle area.
 The offender told police that he regarded his wife's death as "a mercy killing" but that "the other two are murder". His wife had, it appears, suffered from poor health from time to time, but there is no reliable evidence that she had grown tired of living, nor that she was in so much pain that it could be described as merciful to make such a decision on her behalf. The offender told police that his wife had sometimes wished she were dead but he added, "she never actually asked me to do it". I am not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the offender genuinely believed it was merciful to kill his wife.
 The offender also attempted to explain his decision to kill his wife by reference to a concern about the cost of repairing some minor damage to his car caused by an accident a few days earlier, and his ongoing concerns about money generally. The financial situation he described was, however, not so dire as to provide any explanation for the course he took.
 The offender told police that the reason he killed JH and KH was because he was concerned about what would happen to SW and the children once he had killed his wife. He knew that he would be locked up which would leave no one to help look after his daughter and her children so he decided that it was best if they were "added to the list". He said that it was his intention, after killing SW, to travel to Newcastle to kill SW's ex-husband, after which he had originally also intended to kill himself.  The admissions made by the offender to police disclose that he intended to kill each of his victims and I am satisfied of that matter beyond reasonable doubt. He first formed the intention to kill his wife the night before the offences, but had managed to dismiss it. The intention to kill SW, JH and KH was formed some time during the following day or night. I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was a degree of planning and premeditation of the offences, having regard to the steps taken by the offender to collect the weapons used and the filling of the bath. The offence against SW entailed more careful planning, including the visit to the children's school and the lies told to SW on the phone and when she returned to the offender's home.
 A disturbing feature of this case is the absence of any explanation for the offences. The offender did not give evidence at the sentencing proceedings. As noted by his counsel, he gave an unusually detailed account of the circumstances of each offence in his second interview with police but has been unable to give any explanation as to why he did what he did.
 Four expert medical reports were tendered on the offender's behalf but none of those sheds any light on that troubling question. There were two reports from a clinical forensic psychologist, Mr W John Taylor. In his initial report, he suggested a possible diagnosis of a depersonalisation disorder but indicated that he would need to obtain more information before stating a firm opinion as to the offender's state of mind at the time of the offences.
Following a second consultation with the offender, Mr Taylor reported that he was not able to state with any confidence that the offender was suffering from an abnormality of mind resulting in significant impairment over his control at the time of the offences. He described this as a "most troubling and disturbing case" and suggested neuro-psychological assessment as a further avenue of inquiry.
 The offender's representatives duly arranged to have the offender assessed by a neuro-psychologist, Dr Susan Pulman. She provided a report in which she concluded that there was no evidence of any decline in overall intellectual functioning as a result of dementia or any other neurological disorder.
 The fourth expert report was from a psychiatrist, Dr Olav Nielssen. He gave a psychiatric diagnosis of "probable early dementia", but that opinion was expressed before the neuro-psychological testing undertaken by Dr Pulman. Dr
Nielssen expressed the following conclusion: "Mr Walsh was described as being severely depressed after his son's death in 2002, when he was reported to have become withdrawn and to have neglected the garden. However he did not report typical symptoms of severe depression in the period leading up to this offence, apart from insomnia the night before and his morbid account of his wife's illness. His belief that his memory was failing may also have been associated with a form of depression, although there was evidence of some memory impairment on clinical testing.

Mr Walsh did not report symptoms of psychotic illness at any stage that could leave open the defence of mental illness.

Moreover, he was not thought to have an abnormality of mind arising from an underlying condition within the meaning of [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s23a.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)." The mental state of an offender is relevant to an assessment of the degree of objective culpability involved in the commission of an offence, even where it is not of the nature or degree to provide a defence or excuse at law: R v
Merritt <case>; <case>. In the present case, however, the evidence before me does not establish any identifiable abnormality of mind that was causally related to the offences such as to reduce the offender's culpability. Nor does it establish any mental illness relevant to sentence in accordance with the well-known principles in
R versus Helmsley  <case> at <case>- <case> per
Sperling J.
 The circumstances of the offences themselves are disturbing enough to suggest that the offender was not in a normal state of mind, if such a paradigm exists, but it would be speculative for me to infer the existence of an underlying condition that extensive investigation by appropriately qualified professionals has failed to detect.
 The maximum penalty for each of the offences of murder is imprisonment for life. Pursuant to [s19A(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), a person sentenced to imprisonment for life for the crime of murder is to serve that sentence for the term of his natural life. In respect of the murder of the offender's wife, JW, there is a standard non-parole period of 20 years. In respect of the murder of the two children, JH and KH, there is a standard non- parole period of 25 years. As to the attempted murder of SW, the maximum penalty is 25 years imprisonment and there is a standard non-parole period of years.
 In determining the appropriate sentence for the three offences of murder, I am required first to have regard to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s61.html) of the [Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/), which provides: "A court is to impose a sentence of imprisonment for life on a person who is convicted of murder if the court is satisfied that the level of culpability in the commission of the offence is so extreme that the community interest in retribution, punishment, community protection and deterrence can only be met through the imposition of that sentence." If I am satisfied that the case falls within that section, there remains a discretion pursuant to [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s21.html) of the Act to impose a lesser sentence where that is justified by the offender's subjective circumstances: Merritt at [36]. It is necessary to give separate consideration to the exercise of that discretion.
 The burden of proving that a case falls within [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s61.html) rests on the Crown and the standard of such proof is beyond reasonable doubt:
Merritt at [35]. The section requires the Court to consider the community interest in four objectives: retribution, punishment, community protection and deterrence. The test looks to the combined effect of such of those four objectives as arise in the particular case. The fact that one or some of those objectives could be met through a lesser sentence does not mean that the Court cannot be satisfied in terms of the section. As stated by Hunt CJ at CL in R v Kalajzich [(1997) 94 A Crim R 41] at -51: "The maximum penalty for murder of penal servitude for life, meaning for the term of the prisoner's natural life, is ... reserved for cases falling within the worst category of cases, but it is not reserved only for those cases where the prisoner is likely to remain a continuing danger to society for the rest of his life or for those cases where there is no chance of rehabilitation; the maximum may be appropriate where the level of culpability is so extreme that the community interest in retribution and punishment can only be met by such a punishment." The Crown submitted that it would be open to the Court to be satisfied in the terms of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s61.html) in the present case, having regard to the considerations of retribution, punishment and deterrence. In light of the offender's age, the Crown did not contend that he would be a danger to the community upon his release and did not submit that the community interest in protection was a significant consideration in determining whether this case falls within the section.
 Mr Boulten, who appeared for the offender, submitted that the Court would not be satisfied in terms of [s (1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s61.html)
He submitted that the present case is very similar to the case of Merritt, where the objective criminality of the offences was regarded by the Court of
Criminal Appeal as being tempered by the absence of certain features.
 I accept that some of the circumstances identified in Merritt at [71] also exist in the present case. In particular, the present offences did not occur against a background of abuse or violence; they were not accompanied by the infliction of gratuitous cruelty or acts that prolonged the suffering of the children and they were not carried out for sexual gratification.
 Other examples may be found where the Court has approached the question whether a case falls within [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s61.html) (or within the "worst case category" on the common law test) by citing the absence of features which, if present, might have satisfied those tests. In R v Alexander <case>; [(1999) 107 A Crim R 449], the offender had been sentenced to two life sentences for murdering his landlady and her three year old daughter. The sentences were reduced on appeal to a minimum term of 21 years with a balance of 8 years. In coming to the conclusion that life sentences were not warranted, Kirby J cited the fact that the killings were not sequential, or serial murders; that they were not killings for financial gain and that there was no element of torture or sexual gratification, which are recurring elements in those cases which have been characterised as especially heinous: at [34].
 Each case must, however, be assessed on its own facts. Merritt is not authority for the proposition that the absence of particular features of wickedness such as sexual gratification or torture will necessarily produce the result that a life sentence is not warranted.
 Indeed, in Merritt, the Court acknowledged that the murder of three children by their father in their sleep, left unexplained and unmitigated by some reason for the offences, could properly fall within the ambit of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s61.html) so as to warrant life sentences: per Wood CJ at CL at [69], with whom Tobias
JA and Hidden J agreed.
 Mr Boulten further submitted that it is usual in cases of "domestic killings" for determinate sentences to be imposed. He provided a collection of authorities which he submitted disclose a pattern to that effect. Mr Boulten relied particularly on the decisions of R versus Velevski (Supreme Court of New
South Wales, 26 September 1997, unreported) R versus Alexander <case>,
R versus Jang <case> and R versus De Gruchy <case>; [(2000) 110 A Crim R 271.] I have given careful consideration to each of those decisions, and I accept that they are consistent with the submission put by Mr Boulten. I also note that, in Merritt, which was decided in 2004, the Court observed at <case>; <case>, however, the Court of Criminal Appeal resisted the characterisation of family or domestic killings as a discrete category of murder. I have come to the view that the comparison of other cases is ultimately unhelpful for the purpose of determining whether the present case does or does not fall within the worst class of case or the category described in [s (1):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s61.html) cf Kalajzich at 51.
 In my view, the murders of JH and KH stand within the worst category of case. The offender killed his young grandchildren when they had been entrusted to his care. He intended to kill them and planned their murders with grim attention. They were the second and third murders committed by him that night.
Although all three murders were committed during the one night, there was a distinct interval before the murder of each child during which the offender carried out the preparation for his next killing. He killed the children knowing that he had already killed the only person who might have come to their defence that night. He knew their mother was many miles away, trusting that her children were in safe hands. He abused the children's trust in him by coaxing them out of their beds. There was a high degree of violence in the murder of KH. The murder of JH involved a struggle, during which she must have experienced a level of terror no child should know.
 The offender's culpability is not mitigated by mental illness or any other circumstance which provides a reason for his conduct. The killings remain unexplained. The only reason stated by the offender for killing JH and KH is the baseless and arrogant assertion that his daughter would not have been able to care for them on her own. His acts were wicked in the extreme.  I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the offender's level of culpability in the commission of the murders of the two children is so extreme that the community interest in retribution, punishment and deterrence can only be met through the imposition of life sentences.
 As I have already indicated, I am required nonetheless to consider whether a lesser sentence is justified by the offender's subjective circumstances. I have regard to the fact that he has pleaded guilty to the offences. Another mitigating factor is the fact that the offender has no significant record of previous convictions. There is little material before me from which I can assess his character, except to say that he appears to have been in regular employment throughout his adult life. I accept, having regard to his age, that he would be unlikely to re-offend if released from prison. I also have regard to the fact that it will be more onerous for him to serve a term of imprisonment than it would be if he were younger: Holyoak [(1995) 82 A Crim
R 502] at 507. That consideration, however, must be weighed against the objective culpability of the offender's conduct: Holyoak at 508.
 I am not satisfied that the offender is remorseful to any significant extent. I am not prepared to conclude on the strength of the evidence before me that he has accepted responsibility for his actions. Although he expressed some regret to police, he has communicated no such sentiment to SW or to the children's father, DH, after taking their children from them. He expressed no remorse at the sentence hearing. In my view, there is little in the offender's subjective circumstances to mitigate his extreme culpability. Accordingly, I do not think it is appropriate to impose any lesser sentence than life imprisonment for the murders of the two children.  The murder of the offender's wife, JW, also displayed a high level of criminality. In respect of that offence, however, I am not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the level of culpability is so extreme as to require the imposition of a life sentence. I acknowledge, especially to JW's daughter, SW, that it must appear to be a callous exercise to have to make such comparisons but it is a task the Court is required to undertake in order to determine the appropriate sentence according to law.
 Although I do not accept that the offender genuinely believed it was merciful to kill his wife, her killing nonetheless lacks some of the worse features of the murders of the two grandchildren, in particular, their youth and vulnerability, the fact that they had been entrusted into the care of the offender and the fact that they were his second and third victims.
 It is accordingly necessary to fix a determinate sentence for the murder of
JW. I am required by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s44.html) of the [Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/) to set a non-parole period for the sentence, even though it will have no practical significance in the present context. I do not think that there are special circumstances for adjusting the statutory relationship between the non-parole period and the balance of term in the present case.
 In my view, the murder of JW was in the middle of the range of objective seriousness for offences of that kind. It involved a degree of planning and the violent use of three different weapons. The victim was in her home, but it has been held that that is not a matter of particular significance in the case of a victim and an offender who lived together: R versus Thawer <case> at <case> per Howie J. JW, was, however, entitled to trust that she was safe from attack at the hands of the offender. Accepting, as the offender says, that she was asleep when he attacked her, she was vulnerable on that account.
 I take into account the fact that the offender pleaded guilty to the offence and that it was his first offence. The Crown accepted that the pleas were entered in the Local Court at the earliest reasonable opportunity. It is accordingly appropriate to reduce the sentence that would otherwise have been imposed by 25% to reflect the utilitarian value of the plea: [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/s22.html) of the [Crimes (Sentencing Procedure) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1999278/); R v
Thomson; R versus Houlton <case>; (2000) 49 NSWLR 383.
 The plea also provides a reason to depart from the standard non-parole period of 20 years, but that period remains relevant as a guide to the appropriate sentence: R versus Way <case>; <case> and [122].
 I take into account the fact that the offender committed the offences at the age of 69 and apparently had regular employment and no significant criminal history up to that point. As already indicated, I accept that he would be unlikely to re-offend if released from prison.
 In respect of the attempted murder of SW, I note that the offence involved an attack at close quarters with a high level of violence and the use of an axe. The premeditation of the offence involved a series of lies and a gross abuse of trust. The offender planned the offence, and his subsequent escape, over a period of many hours. The injuries inflicted on SW were very serious but since grievous bodily harm is an element of the offence, I do not take that into account as an aggravating factor. The offender's attack on SW was the fourth in a series of brutal criminal acts. It was committed just as SW discovered that the offender had murdered her daughter, which must have exacerbated its emotional impact.
 In my view the offence against SW was well above the middle of the range of objective seriousness for offences of that kind. On that basis, although the standard non-parole period of ten years remains relevant, I should direct more attention to the maximum penalty of 25 years as a guide to the appropriate sentence: R versus Mitchell and Gallagher <case>; <case>. I have determined what I consider to be the appropriate sentences for the murder of JW and the attempted murder of SW. Turning to the question whether those sentences should be served concurrently, I am of the view that the attempted murder of SW was an act of significant criminality that was sufficiently discrete from the offender's earlier crimes to warrant some accumulation between the two determinate sentences.
 At the sentence hearing, victim impact statements were read to the Court by
DH, the father of the two children, and by their mother, SW. The law does not permit me to take the effect of death on family members of the deceased into account to increase the sentence that is to be imposed: R versus Previtera [(1997) 94 A Crim R 76] at
Nonetheless, the participation of DH and SW in the sentencing proceedings affords an opportunity for the Court to acknowledge the crushing impact of these offences on them and to pay respect to their extraordinary courage.
 John Walsh, please stand. For the murder of JH you are convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life. For the murder of KH you are convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for life. For the offence of causing grievous bodily harm to SW with intent to murder SW, you are convicted and sentenced to imprisonment with a non-parole period of 12 years commencing on 30 June 2008 and expiring on 29 June 2020 and a balance of term of 4 years. For the murder of JW, you are convicted and sentenced to imprisonment with a non-parole period of 15 years commencing on 30 June 2011 and expiring on 29 June 2026 and a balance of term of 5 years.
 
LAST UPDATED:  August 2009 * * * 
