

STEPHEN RESKYMER (KYM) MONKTON versus EDWARD ALLAN STEPHENSON& ANOR [2011]
NSWSC 67 (23 February 2011) # [![\[AustLII\]](67.1.gif)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/) Supreme Court of New
South Wales Decisions [[Index](index.html)] [[Search](/cgi-bin/sinoform.pl)] [[Download](67.rtf)] [[Help](/help/cases-help.html)] * * * 
STEPHEN RESKYMER (KYM) MONKTON versus EDWARD ALLAN STEPHENSON& ANOR [2011]
NSWSC 67 (23 February 2011) 
Last Updated: 27 May 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
STEPHEN RESKYMER (KYM) MONKTON versus EDWARD ALLAN STEPHENSON & ANOR  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): 
Friday 10 December 2010  
Decision Date: February 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Before: 
Hall J  
Decision: 
Appeal allowed. 
The Magistrate's decision and order made on 21 June 2010 are set aside. 
The proceedings are remitted to the Local Court for the determination of quantum of damages in respect of the loss or destruction of the plaintiff's vehicle identified in paragraph 1 of the annexure to the statement of claim filed in the Local Court at Coonabarabran on 20 October 2008 and any claim for interest).
 
Catchwords: 
STRIKING OUT - notice of motion - Local Court Judgment set aside - motor vehicle accident caused by negligently kept livestock - default judgment on non-attendance of plaintiff - striking out of defence 
ENFORCEMENT - stay of legal advice for plaintiff prior to default judgment - s.56 Uniform Civil Procedure Act - prejudice to creditor where monies already dispersed - error of law - default judgment of liquidated damages where claim for unliquidated damages - judgment in default obtained irregularly - to be set aside ex debito justitiae - no arguable case on liability - damages to be particularised in unambiguous terms - Local Court to re-determine damages  
JUDGMENT IS REFUSED ..." 
Submissions 
I have had the benefit of written submissions from Mr Niven of counsel, who, as I have earlier noted, appeared on behalf of Mr Monkton, and written submissions on behalf of the defendant by Mr D A Whetmore of counsel. These submissions of counsel were supplemented by oral submissions when the matter was heard on 10 December 2010. 
Evidence on the appeal 
The plaintiff, Mr Monkton, relied upon his affidavit sworn 19 August 2010. That affidavit essentially refers to and attaches the relevant documentation dealing with the history of the proceedings. 
The plaintiff also relied upon the affidavit of Patrick John Latham, solicitor, sworn 19 August 2010. Mr Latham's affidavit also attached relevant documentation relating to the history of the proceedings. 
Question(s) of law 
Mr Niven argued that the learned Magistrate erred and that the relevant error involved a question of law in that his Honour should not have had regard to or taken into account the claimed prejudice that Mr Stephenson would suffer if the judgment was set aside, given the fact that he had already received and distributed the judgment monies. This was said to be particularly so, given the reference to the existence of a defence on the merits by the Magistrate in his decision. Accordingly, the error involved a question of law insofar as an irrelevant consideration, namely, the abovementioned claim of "prejudice" was taken into account. 
Mr Niven also raised a further matter, said to involve a question of law. The argument was, as finally presented, as follows. In the event that the Local Court determined that it would not set aside the judgment so far as liability was concerned there was still an issue as to the quantum of damage. The claim was said to have been in the nature of an unliquidated damages claim. The argument was that the Magistrate should have considered whether the default judgment should have been set aside, at least so far as the issue of damages was concerned. Reference, in this respect, was made to the provisions of [Part 16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/index.html#p16) [Rule 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s7.html) of the UCPR. 
A further matter raised in the course of argument, although not strictly speaking put forward as involving a question of law, was that the award of interest was made on the basis of interest running from the date when the cause of action arose (4 November 2002). This involved a discretionary determination and no opportunity had been provided for Mr Monkton to be heard on the appropriate order for interest. I note that a liquidated demand for the purposes of the UCPR includes a claim for interest under [s.100](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s100.html) of the CPA: UCPR [Part 16.6(1)(b)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/index.html#p16.6) authorises a default judgment to include interest. 
Consideration 
The initial question is whether or not the decision by the learned Magistrate involved a question of law. This Court, of course, does not have jurisdiction to undertake any general review of the proceedings by way of appeal. It is limited to a question of law. 
It is necessary to consider the question as to whether there was any irregularity in the default judgment, having regard to the nature of the claim for damages. 
The damages claimed in the statement of claim filed in the Local Court at Coonabarabran (as particularised in paragraph 11 of the annexure to the statement of claim and which has been extracted above) was a claim in the nature of unliquidated damages, not liquidated damages. Mr Whetmore of counsel for the defendant, with respect, correctly did not contend to the contrary. [Part 16](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/index.html#p16) [Rule 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s7.html), Default judgment on claim for unliquidated damages , provides, so far as is relevant:- "16.7.1 If the plaintiff's claim against a defendant in default is for unliquidated damages only, judgment may be given for the plaintiff against the defendant for damages to be assessed and for costs " (emphasis added)
Accordingly, an issue arises in the present case as to whether or not a default judgment entered for a specified money (or a liquidated amount) in proceedings where the claim was for unliquidated damages, and not for liquidated damages, means that entry of default judgment in those circumstances constituted an irregularity. A similar question was considered in Gemini Property Investments Pty Limited versus Woodwards Investments Pty Limited  <case> J). In that case, his Honour noted:- "3. The defendants contended a default judgment was irregularly obtained, in that the plaintiff signed judgment on the footing that their demand was a liquidated demand. While there may be elements of a liquidated demand on the plaintiff's claim, it is beyond question that part of the claim is for damages for alleged misrepresentation." 
Debelle J proceeded to consider the question as to whether the judgment had been irregularly obtained and whether, on that basis, it should be set aside. His Honour noted that, where a judgment in default has been obtained irregularly, the defendant will normally be able to set it aside ex debito justitiae: Watson versus Anderson [(1976) 13 SASR 329] at 333. 
Debelle J then continued:- "16. The irregularity in this case is asserted to be the fact that the judgment was entered for specified amounts payable by each of the first, second, third and fourth defendants. The claims against the first and second defendants were not for liquidated demands ... 
I have not been able to ascertain any case in which it has been held that entry of the judgment on the footing that the judgment is for a liquidated demand, where in truth it is an unliquidated demand, constitutes an irregularity of a kind which requires that the judgment be set aside. Nor have researches of counsel disclosed such a decision. However, given that there is clear authority that a judgment entered for an amount in excess of the amount actually due is irregularly entered, there are strong reasons for concluding that the judgment in this case was also entered irregularly. For the purpose of this application, I am prepared to assume that it was. There remains the question whether the judgment should be set aside." 
In the circumstances in which the claim brought by the statement of claim was, as I have earlier indicated, an unliquidated claim and not a liquidated claim, I consider that the judgment entered for the specified amount in question could and should be regarded as an irregularity consistent with the principles identified and the approach taken by Debelle J in Gemini (supra). 
The questions that then arise is whether such irregularity constitutes an error on a question of law both in terms of the default judgment and in relation to the decision of the Magistrate on the application to set aside the default judgment. 
It is, of course, a fundamental principle of procedural fairness that a defendant to proceedings is entitled to receive proper notice of the precise claim made against him or her. In the case of an unliquidated damages claim, a defendant is entitled to be informed, whether by way of appropriate particulars in the initiating process or by subsequent notice, of the amount of the damages for which an order is sought against the defendant and the precise basis or bases for the claim. 
I have earlier extracted particulars from the annexure to the statement of claim. In paragraphs 10 and 11, the three relevant heads of claim were set out in sub-paragraphs (A), (B) and (C). Mr Whetmore properly conceded that there was an element of confusion or ambiguity in the way in which the claim is therein expressed. The claim in respect of paragraph 11(A) is stated to be loss associated with the loss or destruction of property, referred to as the "write-off" of the vehicle, that is, "costs of replacement of the tour bus (less salvage) being $39,000" . 
The claim in paragraph 11 (B) for $37,500 (the sum for which judgment was entered), is described not as loss of the bus, alone, but as a claim in relation to two matters, namely:- "Costs of temporary replacement tour buses being $37,500" "Value of old bus". 
The way in which the claim is expressed conveys the notion that the amount of $37,500 was a composite or combined amount embracing what might be referred to as "demurrage" claim or a claim for the temporary replacement of the tour bus and a claim for the destruction or loss of the bus itself. Insofar as the claim was intended to be a claim for loss of property (the Toyota Coaster bus) as Mr Whetmore confirmed it was intended to be, the value of that vehicle described as "value of old bus" specified in paragraph 11(B) must have been something less than the total sum of $37,500 which, as I have stated above, was expressed to be for both temporary replacement of the bus as well as for loss of the bus itself. 
As noted earlier, the judgment was entered by a Magistrate in chambers for the amount of $59,830.44. For that reason, there is no transcript of any proceedings recording the entry of judgment or explaining the basis upon which the Magistrate acted. Indeed, no notice of the notice of motion dated 26 February 2009 appears to have been given to Mr Monkton. 
On the hearing of the application to set aside judgment on 19 April 2010, as also earlier noted, Mr Monkton relied upon his "Defence" dated 14 January 2010. The Defence, apart from issues of liability, separately raised the question of quantum. In sub-paragraph (f) of the Defence, the following matter appears:- "(f) The first defendant disputes the quantum of the plaintiff's claim: the first defendant claimed that the pleading of the plaintiff in respect of damages is misleading and the amount claimed in the Statement of Claim, namely, $37,500 appears to relate to the cost of temporary replacement tour buses and value of old bus and not the cost of replacement of the tour bus (less salvage) .
 the first defendant claims that the claim of the plaintiff involves a claim for unliquidated damages and should have been commenced by a summons." (emphasis added) 
By this paragraph, Mr Monkton was specifically raising an issue as to damages, in particular, the basis upon which judgment had been entered against him in the amount of $37,500 which it was suggested embraced both damages referrable to the "value of old bus" and temporary replacement of the tour bus. 
At the hearing of the application to set aside judgment, Mr Stephenson was not legally represented. He, accordingly, does not appear to have raised the point as to any irregularity in the default judgment having been entered in respect of what was an unliquidated damages claim. 
The learned Magistrate could hardly be criticised for not having specifically considered the question of any irregularity involved in the entry of judgment for the amount specified, given that it was not raised as an issue at the hearing, although, as noted above, the proposed defence did raise an issue going to the quantum of damages. However, be that as it may, the fact remains that the judgment entered on 26 February 2009 was infected by an error of law. This, as I have earlier indicated, consisted of the irregularity in entering judgment for a specified amount on an unliquidated claim. Further to that, the default judgment was entered for an amount which included the sum of $37,500 in circumstances in which paragraph 11 did not make clear either what precise amount was claimed for the loss of the Toyota bus itself and the basis for the calculation of that amount. 
Mr Monkton's application before the Magistrate to set aside default judgment raised two quite separate issues. The first relates to the judgment entered by default on 26 February 2009 in relation to the issue of liability. The second issue concerns the amount of damages for which judgment was entered on 21 June 2010, that is, an issue of quantum. 
For reasons I will shortly state, I am of the opinion that there has been no error demonstrated on this appeal involving a question of law on the issue of liability determined by the default judgment of 26 February 2009. 
In relation to the question of the quantum of damages for which judgment was given on 21 June 2010, default judgments for particular or specified amounts in claims for liquidated damages are, of course, permitted and authorised by law: UCPR, [Part 16.6(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/index.html#p16.6)
However, where a default judgment is for unliquidated damages, [Part 16.7(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/index.html#p16.7) provides for a different procedure for determining judgment in the proceedings, namely, by way of assessment, "... judgment may be given for the plaintiff against the defendant for damages to be assessed ..." . 
The proposed defence dated January 2010 was before the Magistrate at the time of the hearing of the application to set aside the judgments entered in these proceedings and, as discussed above, it raised a specific issue as to quantum of the judgment (paragraph (f)) sought and obtained by Mr Stephenson. 
The application determined by the learned Magistrate on 21 June 2010 required a determination by the Magistrate. That, in turn, required consideration as to what precisely had been the claim made by Mr Stephenson and whether Mr Monkton was given proper notice of the claim and the basis for it. 
There is a further question remaining (as discussed above) as to what, given the confusion or ambiguity in paragraph 11, the claim for $37,500 represented. 
Upon consideration, I have concluded that by reason of what I have referred to as the confused or ambiguous claim made in paragraph 11 of the particulars of claim, an injustice arose in Mr Stephenson having obtained a judgment for an unliquidated claim in circumstances in which, although he was entitled to the default judgment which determined liability, an order ought to have been made for an assessment of damages, not final judgment for the amounts claimed. 
The issue of liability 
I will, as indicated above, return to deal separately with the question of liability. There was significant delay by Mr Monkton in seeking to set aside the default judgment. However, that said, delay was only one matter to be taken into account. The evidence relied upon by Mr Monkton did not, in my assessment, constitute evidence of a reasonably arguable case on the merits on the issue of liability. The affidavit before the Magistrate in other words did not provide any factual sub-stratum for the defence on the issue of primary liability which Mr Stephenson relied upon. The defence, in that respect simply constituted verified denials of the essential elements constituting Mr Stephenson's cause of action. 
In this respect, I consider that the observations of Debelle J in Gemini (supra) are also pertinent. His Honour stated at [8]:- "A party seeking to set aside a judgment must show that it has a defence which is fairly arguable in law and in fact. In other words, that party must not only state that it has a defence but say something about the merits of the defence. It is not sufficient simply to assert that the defence exists or to say that the defendant denies the claim made against it. As Bray CJ pointed out in Watson versus Anderson [(1976) 13 SASR 329] at 334 - , the defendant must show that it has a bona fide intention of defending and that there is a reasonably clear and bona fide case of legal merit. None of the affidavits filed in support of the application to set aside the judgment set out any defence on the part of the first defendant or give any hint of the grounds upon which the defence is to be advanced. In addition, the proposed defence does not set out any ground of the defence on the part of the first defendant. It simply puts in issue certain of the allegations made in the statement of claim as against the first defendant." 
Conclusions 
I have concluded that there is no basis for setting aside the default judgment by which the issue of liability was determined in favour of Mr Stephenson. 
I have, however, concluded that the judgment awarding damages in Mr Stephenson's favour was entered on the basis of an irregularity. In that regard the judgment was entered for an amount of damages which had not been properly particularised in the statement of claim and, in any event, was one to be determined by way of an assessment hearing. In that way, Mr Stephenson's entitlement to damages could be proved and established. 
Mr Monkton had before the learned Magistrate on his application to set aside the judgments entered against him clearly raised the issue as to the validity of the claim for $37,000. That issue in turn raised a question as to the regularity of the judgment in a claim for unliquidated damages. The fact that Mr Monkton was not legally represented probably explains why the learned Magistrate did not examine that aspect. 
It is a matter of fundamental importance in the administration of justice that any claim for damages must be particularised in unambiguous terms so that a defendant who suffers judgment will have been accorded procedural fairness by having received adequate notice of the claim against him or her. A defendant is entitled to have the Local Court determine an unliquidated claim for damages on the basis of evidence that enables damages to be assessed by the Court. 
Accordingly, I am satisfied that there is a question of law raised by the appeal and that there was an error in that respect in the learned Magistrate's failure to set aside the default judgment. 
By reason of the conclusion that the judgment entered on 26 February 2009 was vitiated by the irregularity to which I have referred, it is unnecessary that the issue of "prejudice" referred to in paragraph [43] be finally determined. 
Accordingly, the orders I make are as follows:- 
Appeal allowed.

The Magistrate's decision and order made on 21 June 2010 are set aside.

The proceedings are remitted to the Local Court for the determination of quantum of damages in respect of the loss or destruction of the plaintiff's vehicle identified in paragraph 1 of the annexure to the statement of claim filed in the Local Court at Coonabarabran on 20 October 2008 and any claim for interest).
In the circumstances in which the plaintiff has been successful in this appeal, ordinarily costs would follow the event. Unless written submissions are lodged with my associate seeking some other order as to costs within 14 days of the date of this judgment, then the order of the Court will be that the defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of the appeal on the ordinary basis. * * * 
