

Full Brick Homes P/L versus Consumer Claims Tribunal and Ors [1997] NSWSC 27 (13 February 1997) 
FULL BRICK HOMES P/L versus CONSUMER CLAIMS TRIBUNAL & ORS /95 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Orders made by the Consumer Claims Tribunal set aside on the ground that the plaintiff was denied natural justice in not being advised of the date of the original hearing and in not having the application for a re-hearing considered properly in all the circumstances.

Need for reform to the procedures of the Tribunal to provide for cross-claims.
Observations in Hutley versus Meigan & Ors (Rolfe J - 19 December 1996 - unreported) repeated.

JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings were commenced by way of a summons filed on 13 November 1995 whereby the plaintiff, Full Brick Homes Pty Limited, ("the plaintiff"), seeks relief against the first defendant, Consumer Claims Tribunal; the second defendant, Brett Heron; the third defendant, David Wynbergen; and the fourth defendant, Local Court of New South Wales.

The plaintiff seeks a declaration that the order made by the first defendant on 12 September 1995 was void for want of natural justice and that it be quashed; a direction that the decision of this Court be remitted to the first defendant, and that the claim of the second and third defendants, which was the subject of the order of 12 September 1995, be reheard and determined by the first defendant; and certain ancillary orders. One of the ancillary orders is that any judgment registered by the fourth defendant in respect of the order made by the first defendant on 12 September 1995 be set aside.

The proceedings came before Dunford J on several occasions. On 12 December his Honour noted an appearance on behalf of the plaintiff, the absence of an appearance on behalf of the first defendant, an appearance on behalf of the second and third defendants and that Mrs M.A. Gilmour of counsel appeared for the Minister. His Honour noted that the first defendant had filed in court a submitting appearance and he excused it from further attendance, and that the second and third defendants:- "Will file submitting appearance - excused from further appearance." 
On 13 December 1995 the second and third Defendants filed a notice of appearance submitting to the orders of the Court, save as to costs, and on 12 December 1995 the first defendant filed a similar notice of appearance.

On 15 November 1996 the matter came before Simpson J when there was an appearance on behalf of the plaintiff and her Honour fixed the hearing for today and directed the plaintiff to notify the defendants of that.

When the matter was called on for hearing before me today, it having been listed in The Sydney Morning Herald of today's date as being before me at .30am, Mr M.K. Meek of counsel appeared on behalf of the plaintiff and Mrs
Gilmour appeared on behalf of the first defendant. The second and third defendants were called three times outside the Court at approximately 10.45am and they did not appear, which is hardly surprising, in light of the attitude they had expressed in their notice of appearance.

Further, on 10 January 1997, the solicitors for the plaintiff wrote to the solicitors for the second and third defendants referring to previous correspondence and requesting confirmation by the execution of a copy of that letter:- "That you will not be tendering any evidence on behalf of your clients and that you therefore do not require any of our witnesses for cross-examination." 
That letter, which became exhibit A, purports to have been signed by a solicitor on behalf of Marriott & Oliver on 13 January 1997, whereafter it was returned to the solicitors for the plaintiff. There is no doubt that the second and third defendants were aware of the hearing date.

The dispute giving rise to the claim before the first defendant arose in this way. The plaintiff carried on the business of constructing houses. The second and third defendants carried on business as bricklayers and, on 24 September , they made a claim under the Consumer Claims Tribunal Act 1987, ("the
Act"), for the sum of $10,406 pursuant to an agreement made on 27 July 1994 at
Nowra in respect of laying bricks. That claim duly came to the notice of the plaintiff.

On an unspecified date, but probably 18 June 1995, Mrs Barrett, a director of the plaintiff, wrote to the Registrar of the first defendant on the letterhead of the plaintiff, which clearly stated its address by reference to a post office box at Nowra, requesting "A claim form for a cross-claim in relation to the claim presented from" the second and third defendants. She no doubt anticipated that if a cross-claim was to be brought, notice thereof should be given to the defendants in advance and probably was surprised to find out that that was not necessary. I have referred to the problems arising in this regard in my decision in Hutley versus Meigan and Others (19 December 1996 - unreported). On a subsequent date the registry wrote in response to her letter stating inter alia:- "The Building Disputes Tribunal is designed to enable a dispute to be adjudicated upon, at a hearing, by an impartial referee. You will be given an opportunity to attend the hearing and present your case at a date still to be determined.
 
Should you have any further queries, please do not hesitate to contact me at your convenience." 
The obvious inference was that the date, "still to be determined" would be advised to the plaintiff.

Bearing in mind that the plaintiff wished to raise, by way of cross-claim, defective workmanship and other such matters, the problems to which I adverted in Hutley would have applied if the procedure suggested in the letter from the registry had been followed. I simply repeat the hope that the legislature will give some attention to this aspect of the matter: i.e. to the high desirability of a party wishing to raise a cross-claim being afforded the opportunity of advising the other party well in advance, so that by the time of the hearing the parties are aware of the issues and are, accordingly, in a position to meet them. The objectives of cheap and speedy determination will be greatly assisted if this uncomplicated step is taken.

The next communication the plaintiff received, so far as the evidence disclosed, was a document entitled, "Notice of order." It indicated that the matter was heard on 12 September 1995 and that the referee ordered the plaintiff to pay the second and third defendants $10,406 on or before 12
October 1995. The printed form then continued:- "If you were not present or represented at the hearing and if you did not submit your evidence by affidavit, or statutory declaration, you may apply for a rehearing. To apply you must complete the affidavit on the bottom of this form, tear it off and get it to the office shown above within 14 days of receiving this notice. The affidavit must be signed by you in front of a Justice of the Peace. If a referee considers that you had a good reason for not attending the hearing your claim MAY be reheard." 
The power to grant a rehearing is to be found in s.25 of the Act and provides, in essence, that after receipt of an application for a rehearing, a referee may order the claim to be reheard, "if satisfied that there was sufficient reason for the party's absence." The statutory declaration of Mrs Barrett, in support of the application for a rehearing, said, in providing the explanation:- "I did not receive notification of hearing. Our address has changed but we had redirection order at post office until 12/9/95 - but no notification was received. We have every intention of attending hearing." 
There could hardly have been a more compelling prima facie reason put forward.

Subsequently the plaintiff was informed that the application for a rehearing had been refused. There is no evidence that the referee in any way examined the assertion by Mrs Barrett that the notification of the hearing had not been received.

In these circumstances the plaintiff asserts that there has been a denial of natural justice; such denial of natural justice being, firstly, that the plaintiff was never given notice of the first hearing, and secondly that there was no apparent investigation, involving the plaintiff, of the assertions by
Mrs Barrett in her statutory declaration, nor was there any attempt to check with Mrs Barrett the strength of her assertion. The conclusion that no notification of the hearing date was ever sent by the first defendant to the plaintiff is strongly supported by the failure of the first defendant to produce any evidence, either of a letter notifying the date of the hearing or, more importantly, of the sending of the letter.

Mr Meek has frankly conceded that on the first defendant's file there is a letter giving an indication of the hearing date but that has not been tendered by the first defendant and whether the plaintiff was so advised has not been sought to be proved. In light of the absence of any such evidence and of the uncontradicted evidence of the plaintiff of the non receipt of any such communication, I am totally satisfied that no notification was given to the plaintiff of the hearing.

It is fundamental to the concepts of natural justice that a party be made aware of when proceedings, which will affect that party's rights, are to be heard. This is particularly so when the first defendant had advised the plaintiff that that would be done. There is no suggestion that the plaintiff should have done anything more. It matters not, in my view, that the amount of $10,406 may be thought by some to be small. The first defendant has been set up to deal with claims involving maximum amounts of $25,000. It is apparently intended to provide justice in a cheap, speedy and efficient way to people with relatively small claims but which claims must, in my opinion, in very many, if not all cases be of extreme significance and relevance to the parties. In those circumstances, whilst the first defendant has very wide powers, they are circumscribed by the requirement of adherence to the rules of natural justice.

I can see no basis at all on which either the matter could have been heard in the absence of the plaintiff, which was given no notice of the hearing notwithstanding the first defendant's assertion that it would be and notwithstanding the plaintiff's statement that it wished to raise a cross- claim; or on which the explanation proffered on behalf of the plaintiff could possibly have been rejected, without the first defendant offering the plaintiff the chance to be heard. A rejection of the uncontradicted statement of Mrs Barrett, in circumstances where there is not a skerrick of evidence offered by the first defendant to show that notice was given, amounts to a denial of natural justice. My views on this matter are reinforced by the absence of the beneficiaries of the first defendant's order, namely, the second and third defendants, to seek in any way to support the orders made. In this regard I take into account that they were legally represented at least until shortly before the hearing and, I infer, they elected not to appear or call evidence in consequence of legal advice received.

In Hutley I referred at some length to the relevant authorities on the question of natural justice and I do not propose to repeat them. They apply with equal force to the situation which, in my view, is a very sad one, which presents itself in the present case. I do propose to repeat something I did say in that case, namely:- "However, having regard to the financial positions of the parties likely to find themselves before the Tribunal, the amounts may be relatively large. For example, in the present case there was a finding against the plaintiff in the sum of $25,000 and it seems to me that this is an amount the plaintiff could ill afford to pay, if he is liable to pay it, or to have set off against moneys owing to him. Accordingly, the Legislature has sought to protect the position of the parties and to ensure that justice is done by requiring adherence to the principles of natural justice." 
Those remarks apply with even greater force to the present case.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff was denied natural justice in both the ways to which I have referred, namely, that it was not given notice of the original hearing and that it was not given any opportunity in relation to the rehearing to press any submissions to the first defendant that because of the first breach of natural justice there should not be a compounding of that by refusing the rehearing.

Section 12(2) provides that a court is not precluded from granting relief or a remedy of the kind referred to in sub-s.(1) if, in respect of a consumer claim, a Tribunal has made an order under s.30 and the ground on which the relief or remedy is sought is that in relation to the hearing or determination a party to the claim has been denied natural justice. That has occurred in this case.

I, accordingly, declare that the orders made by the first defendant on 12
September 1995 and in refusing the re-hearing be set aside on the ground that they were made in contravention of the requirements of natural justice.
Insofar as it is necessary, I order that those orders be quashed. I decline to remit the matter to the Tribunal. If the second and third defendants are desirous of pursuing their claim they may do so and I will assume that the first defendant will then ensure that the requirements of natural justice in relation to that claim, as in relation to all other claims, are met.

In view of the fact that I have set aside the first order, I shall assume that no attempt will be made by any party to enforce it and I shall therefore not make orders in terms of paragraphs 4 and 5 of the summons.

The question then arises as to costs. The second and third defendants have not appeared today and make no submissions in relation to costs. However, it seems to me that the reasonable inference is that they presented themselves before the first defendant on the date on which the order was made. I do not expect the second and third defendants to have been aware of the requirements of natural justice. I, therefore, do not propose to make any order for costs as against those defendants and I see no basis for making an order for costs against the fourth defendant.
 (Discussion on costs ensued) 
I withdraw that part of my judgment, which so far deals with the question of costs. I think it must be correct, as Mrs Gilmour has submitted, that the first defendant should not be exposed to an order for costs. However, I think it may well be unfortunate that the second and third defendants should be called upon to pay the costs, which seem to me to have been incurred as a consequence of the conduct of the first defendant. On the other hand, the plaintiff has been successful and is clearly entitled to its costs and that entitlement is to an order against the second and third defendants.

The question of costs was considered by Yeldham J in Hughes versus Clubb [(1987) 10 NSWLR 312.] I respectfully adopt what his Honour said at pages 333 to 334. I order the second and third defendants to pay the plaintiff's costs of these proceedings and I grant to them a certificate under s.6 of the
Suitors Fund Act, if they are otherwise entitled to one, in respect of the costs of the application to this Court on the basis that I regard it as being an "appeal" in the circumstances of this case in relation to the denial of natural justice.
 * * * 
