

Crystal Palace Leisure Centres P/L versus S L Hutchesson [1996] NSWSC 377 (28
August 1996) 
CRYSTAL PALACE LEISURE CENTRES P/L versus Stephen Leslie HUTCHESSON /96; CLD10995/90 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
SHELLER JA, COLE JA, SIMOS AJA 
CATCHWORDS: DAMAGES-personal injury - jury award-not so perverse or unreasonable as to be set aside.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: The appellant contends that a jury's award of $273,000 damages is appealably excessive. To succeed the appellant must show that the amount is "so disproportionate to the injuries suffered that it was perverse and unreasonable and should be set aside"[1]. In addressing this question this
Court must adopt a view of the evidence most favourable to the respondent.

The evidence before the jury was that the appellant was born in 1948. He left school in 1964 aged 16. Thereafter he was intermittently employed developing some metalworking skills. In 1977 he enrolled in an Arts degree, but did not continue with that course. In order to earn income he thereafter commenced a metal polishing business and by 1984 after some financial struggle had established a business which was earning him approximately $220 to $240 per week. The work involved detailed skilled metal polishing.

In addition he obtained employment with the appellant working as an amusement arcade assistant. At the time of the accident he earned about $200 in that employment. The work involved him lifting and carrying pieces of equipment which required him to use his hands, in particular the hook-grip provided by his fingers.

On 8 April 1984 whilst working for the appellant he suffered a serious injury to his left hand when his fingers were cut by an electric circular saw. As he told the jury the saw cut a step out of the back of his three fingertips. This was a gross disfigurement of the left hand and there was evidence before the jury that it resulted in a 25 per cent loss of the efficient use of the left hand.

He was in hospital for four days before being discharged. As part of his treatment he was given penicillin and he developed an allergic reaction to this that resulted in pain, itchiness and swelling to various portions of his body which recurred on a roughly three day cycle. He was obliged ultimately to go onto a diet to seek to cure this problem, and he was no longer able to drink beer or wine.

He returned to his metal polishing business about a week after the accident.
Because of the injury to his fingers he was unable to do the detailed close metal polishing work which he previously had. He was however able to obtain a more coarse form of work which enabled him to re-establish the pre-accident earnings in his metal work business by about November 1984.

In February 1985 he was involved in a motor vehicle accident suffering serious injuries to his left leg and hip. He was in plaster and unable to do physical work until approximately September 1985. In January 1986 he had further surgery on his left leg and also surgery on his left hand. The leg injuries suffered in the motor vehicle accident resulted in him being unable to cope with the heavy work or coarse work in his metal polishing business which he had acquired in replacement of the finer work which he was unable to do because of his hand injury. He still had some residual capacity to do this heavier work, but his output was reduced so that it became unproductive.

The result of the two injuries was that restrictions were placed on the type of work that he could do in that business and it became unprofitable.
Ultimately in March 1988 it was closed down as being financially unsuccessful.
He thus lost the income which he had earned from that business in the order of $220 to $240 per week apart from his wages as an employee of the appellant.

Between 1988 and 1991 the respondent was unemployed other than in doing renovation work for his mother on her house. In 1991, having been awarded damages arising from the motor vehicle he sought to retrain himself as a computer programmer, but this did not yield him any effective income pre- trial. The medical evidence was in the form of evidence from a Dr Haertsch that, "He wouldn't be able to be involved in any occupation, in my opinion, where he has to use strong hook-grip and I mean like say a furniture removalist. He wouldn't be able to do that in my opinion. He would also have difficulty in using keyboards in that he wouldn't be able to use the normal touch pattern.
He'd have difficulty with any occupation where normal sensation of the tips of his fingers was important." 
Apart from losing the income from his metal polishing business he also ceased employment with the appellant, he being unable to do that work. He thus lost that income. The respondent had, for some fifteen years, learnt and acquired skills as a flamenco guitar player practising up to three hours per day. In consequence of the hand injuries he was unable to play for some time and his capacity in that respect is now restricted. He has lost a significant source of enjoyment and pleasure.

There was open to the jury in my opinion a view of the evidence that the respondent proposed to continue employment with the appellant indefinitely and in addition proposed to conduct his own business from which he earned up to $240 per week in 1984 indefinitely.

As I have said as a result of the hand injuries he lost his capacity to do the work with the appellant. It was an available view of the evidence that the additional business income from his metal polishing business would continue until the age of 65. Indeed on one view of the summing up that is the way in which the matter was left to the jury.

As the respondent was 36 years of age at the date of the accident the jury would have been entitled to award a present value of that sum until age 65 which would be a period of some 29 years from the date of accident. Indeed the claim as filed was that there was a continuing economic loss of $250 per week although it seems that the claim as left to the jury was slightly different.

The trial was held in February 1996. There was evidence before the jury from which they could have determined that the loss of past income earning capacity up to the date of trial bearing in mind that the respondent had in fact not been engaged in remunerative work since the date of the accident totalled some $195,000. In addition it was open to the jury to consider the amount which should be awarded in respect of future economic loss on the basis that there was a further 17 years until the respondent reached the age of 65 years.

Indeed the learned trial judge put to the jury multiplier figures which would permit the jury to do a mathematical exercise based upon the number of dollars which they thought should be awarded to him on a weekly basis for any loss of income earning capacity in that residual 17 years. Before any discounts, and the trial judge suggested there should be a discount, if the jury were of the view that the loss of future income earning capacity was in the order of $240 per week then that loss of future income earning capacity is in the order of $167,000.

Of course a jury would have been entitled and indeed obliged as his Honour indicated to reduce that figure for vicissitudes and they may have wished to make some other adjustment in relation to rounding a figure by way of a cushion. Nonetheless it seems to me that having regard to the possibility that the jury could have calculated past economic loss in the order of $195,000 and it could have had regard to a figure in the order of $160,000 in respect of future economic loss, it becomes apparent that the determination by the jury of a sum of $273,000 is not so unreasonable or perverse that this Court should interfere to set it aside.

I have not in these reasons mentioned the aspects of an appropriate award for general damages nor the evidence which was before the jury in relation to agreed out of pocket expenses or future medical expenses, but they are of comparatively modest sums. In the result it seems to me that a consideration of the economic loss factors both past and future having regard to the way in which the case was presented to the jury and left to the jury by the trial judge without any complaint on the part of the appellant, it cannot be said that the determination of $273,000 is perverse or so unreasonable that this
Court should interfere. I would propose that the appeal be dismissed with costs.

SHELLER JA: I agree.

SIMOS AJA: I also agree.
 <case>; [(1976) 135 CLR 651] at 673.
 * * * 
