

Regina versus Peter Patrick Schumacher [1996] NSWSC 60 (2 April 1996) 
REGINA versus PETER PATRICK SCHUMACHER /95 
TUESDAY 2 APRIL 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, ABADEE J, HULME J 
JUDGMENT 
HULME J: On 25 September 1995 the appellant was convicted of a charge that he, on 19 March 1994, at Gosford, did assault Kenneth Lloyd Hooker Johnston thereby occasioning to him actual bodily harm. The trial commenced on 18 September 1995 before Judge Maguire. 
Earlier in the afternoon on the second day a witness, one Marcus Nicholson, was called and, shortly afterwards, during the course of his evidence-in- chief, a note was passed to his Honour from a member of the jury which read, "This witness is my nephew, does this make any difference?" In fact, prior to the selection of the jury panel the Crown Prosecutor had read a list of proposed witnesses to the jury array and one may infer that his Honour had, at that time, indicated to members of the array if they recognised or knew persons on that list they should so indicate.

Upon being passed the note from the jury his Honour gave instructions to the jury - or perhaps advised them would be a better term - inter alia to the effect that the mere fact that a jury member knew a witness was of no moment at all unless that member considered that the knowledge of the witness would affect capacity to return a true verdict. His Honour invited the juror who had written the note to communicate again if he felt his capacity to return a true verdict was affected.

The evidence of the witness Nicholson, both in chief and cross-examination, then continued without any adjournment. After cross-examination had proceeded for some time counsel for the appellant asked Mr Nicholson a question concerning the note handed up from the juror. He commenced to ask another question which his Honour indicated he would not allow. There was then short discussion and his Honour asked the jury to retire with the instruction that there was to be no discussion between members of the jury "as to whether you know the witness. There is to be no discussion of what the jury's knowledge of the witness might be." 
After the jury retired application was made to discharge the jury. This his
Honour declined to do, although he made the decision to excuse the particular juror concerned. He made a ruling to that effect and released the juror. The transcript does not record precisely what happened then. It was the end of the day's sittings, at least so far as the jury was concerned, and one may infer that the jury retired together and then dispersed. On the following morning the jury, or the remaining eleven members, returned and the trial was continued.

It is submitted before us that his Honour erred in not discharging the jury as requested. The relevant test for his Honour to have applied in the circumstances was whether the incident was such that, notwithstanding the proposed or actual warning of the trial judge, it gives rise to a reasonable apprehension or suspicion on the part of a fair-minded and informed member of the public that the juror, or jury, would not discharge its task impartially -
Webb versus The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 41] at 53. Applying that test I see nothing in the facts of this case requiring that the jury should have been discharged. It is true that the juror should have spoken up before the jury itself was empanelled. Why he did not is not apparent. It may be that he was not attending as closely as he should have been at the time the list of witnesses was read out. It was suggested that, between the time of their selection and the juror's discharge, he may have exercised some influence on the balance of the jury panel. There is nothing to so indicate. Indeed, the speed with which the note was sent to his Honour after Mr Nicholson was called argues to the contrary. Furthermore, had anything by way of such influence occurred in light of his Honour's remarks, it is not unreasonable to suppose that some other juror would have spoken out.

In this regard it is not inappropriate to bear in mind that criminal trials and appeals are conducted upon assumptions, one of which is that juries understand and follow the instructions and directions they are given by trial judges - R versus Lansdell (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 22 May 1995).

The conclusion at which I have arrived to the effect that nothing was done to indicate that his Honour's decision not to discharge the whole jury was wrong makes it unnecessary that I consider the significance of any conclusion - had
I reached it - that his Honour's decision was wrong.

However, it would seem that the question would arise for this Court whether a substantial miscarriage of justice had occurred - see, for example Webb v
The Queen (supra) at page 96. The Court was not addressed on that question but it may be not inappropriate to remark that the Crown case seems to have been a strong one. For the reasons indicated I am of the opinion that the appeal against conviction should be dismissed.

There was also an application for leave to appeal against sentence. I take the facts conveniently from his Honour's remarks on that topic. It appears that the applicant, together with a number of fellow members of a football team, attended a nightclub in the main street of Gosford after another function. The applicant had been drinking but it would seem he was only mildly affected. At approximately 2.45am the nightclub was closing. One of the applicant's fellow footballers fell down several steps from a small landing immediately outside the club doors. The victim of the assault, a security officer or bouncer, was standing on the landing talking to some bystanders. It was claimed by the applicant that the security officer had pushed the fellow footballer down the stairs, a claim which was refuted by a number of the witnesses.

After a brief discussion with the footballer who fell the applicant approached the security officer and, without any real warning, struck him a heavy blow on the jaw. There was evidence that the applicant then continued to assault this person.

His Honour recorded that the applicant was some six feet four inches and weighed 108 kilograms by noting that the victim was also a large man. His
Honour accepted that the initial blow caused a fracture to the victim's jaw.
The victim required medical treatment in due course by way of operation to reduce the fractures and that treatment included wiring and the insertion of plates. His Honour observed that the attack was entirely unprovoked, a matter to which I shall return.

Other matters to which his Honour referred were that the applicant was not entitled to any discount from an otherwise proper sentence on the grounds of a plea of guilty or the contrition presumed to be shown thereby. His Honour recorded also that the applicant had a record which included two convictions for assault. One of these, I note, was in February 1988 in respect of which the applicant was fined $500. The second was the subject of a conviction on 29
June 1993 when the applicant was granted a recognisance to be of good behaviour for two years and fined $800. There had earlier also been a charge of assault police in respect of which the applicant had been fined some $100.
That charge would seem to have arisen out of an incident which led to some other charges not, I think, of any significant present relevance.

I indicated I would return to his Honour's remark to the effect that the attack by the applicant was entirely unprovoked. The applicant's primary defence before the jury was that he had acted in self-defence, a suggestion obviously rejected by the jury. As I would understand it, what is now sought to be said in criticism of his Honour's remark was that the applicant was responding to the push of his fellow footballer down the stairs.

For my part, even if it was the applicant's belief that a friend had been pushed down a few stairs and fallen to the ground, there was absolutely no justification whatsoever for, firstly, him interfering and, secondly, him striking the security guard and, thirdly, striking him with a blow strong enough to break his jaw.

In my view, even accepting the belief which it is suggested the applicant might have had, it is not inappropriate to describe the attack which he made upon the security guard as entirely unprovoked.

The fact that the applicant had two prior convictions for assault was a matter properly to be taken into account by his Honour, as was the fact that one was as recent as 1993 and the fact that the applicant had been given, despite his prior record, a recognisance on that occasion. The Applicant's conduct on the night in question demonstrated that he had not learnt from the chances that he had been given.

His Honour recorded that the incidence of violence in and about Gosford was widespread, a matter of which, given his Honour's experience in criminal courts of that community, he is entitled to notice. It is a remark which may be made, indeed, about the New South Wales community generally.

The sentence imposed was one of penal servitude for two years, comprising a minimum term of eight months and an additional term of one year and four months.

In my view, given the nature of the assault, given the nature of the charge and given the applicant's history, no grounds exist for concluding that his
Honour erred in the sentence which he imposed.

I would propose that the application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted but that the appeal in this respect be dismissed. I note that the applicant seems to have commenced his sentence on 25 September 1995 but was granted bail by this Court on 28 November 1995. In the event that my proposal is acceptable to the other members of the Court, these are matters which will require to be taken into account in the final orders.

HANDLEY JA: I agree.

ABADEE J: I agree.

HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court are, leave to appeal granted, appeal dismissed, time served to date to count and the applicant to serve the balance of sentence passed by the sentencing judge. The applicant is ordered to be taken into custody forthwith. * * * 
