

Guiseppe Valle versus Anthony Patrick Morrison (Maritime Services Board of NSW)
No. 60432/95 Environmental Law [1996] NSWSC 17 (31 January 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(2), ALLEN(1) AND SULLY(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 22 November #DATE 22:11:1995 #ADD 31:1:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant         A L Hill 
Solicitor for the Appellant  
Ebsworth and Ebsworth 
Counsel for the Respondent         J Sexton 
Solicitor for the Respondent    
Abbott Tout
ORDER
Appeal dismissed.
JUDGE1
ALLEN J On 14 January 1994 the appellant was the master of the vessel Beta
Crux which was berthed at White Bay in Sydney Harbour. It was being bunkered from a bunkering barge with fuel oil for the motor. During the course of that bunkering operation, fuel oil escaped onto the deck of the vessel and some of it flowed into the waters of the harbour.
The appellant was interviewed not long after the oil spillage and stated that he did not know how the spillage had occurred. The appellant, the master, and the owner appeared before Bignold J of the Land and Environment Court and each entered a plea of guilty to an offence under [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mpa1987200/s8.html) of the [Marine Pollution
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/mpa1987200/) which provides, so far as relevant, that if any discharge of oil occurs from a ship in State waters, the master and the owner of the ship, and any other person whose act caused the discharge, are each guilty of an offence punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding, if the offender is a natural person, 2000 penalty units or, if the offender is a body corporate, one million penalty units. Those units translate into a maximum money fine in respect of a natural person of $200,000 and, in respect of a body corporate, $1,000,000.
Bignold J fined the appellant $20,000 and the owner $40,000.
The master appeals to this Court against the severity of the fine of $20,000 imposed upon him. The grounds of the appeal are:
The penalty was too severe;
His Honour was in error in holding, a) that the fuel bunkering operation had been undertaken with want of operational care on the part of the appellant, b) that the discharge of oil was avoidable on the part of the appellant, c) that the appellant must be held accountable for the pollution incident, d) that the greater blame must be held to be with the appellant;
His Honour should have proceeded, pursuant to the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) <case> and not recorded a conviction.
It is necessary to bear in mind the nature of the jurisdiction of this
Court in the present appeal. The Court's jurisdiction comes from <case> and [s
AB](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5ab.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/). Pursuant to those provisions, the appeal is by way of re-hearing on the evidence, if any, given in the proceedings in the Court below and on any evidence in addition to or in substitution of any evidence so given (Camillieri's Stock Feeds versus EPA [(1994) 82 LGRA 21).] No evidence of any sort has been adduced to this Court. Accordingly, the Court must make its own determination by way of re-hearing on the evidence which was given in the lower court. That includes matters admitted by conduct.
I turn to the findings made by Bignold J on the evidence before him and admissions made by conduct. He found specifically that what had occurred was that fuel oil which was being taken aboard by the vessel had escaped through an air vent for the fuel tank. That air vent came up some distance above the deck level. Notwithstanding that it was so placed, the oil had forced its way up through the air vent and onto the deck of the vessel from where a small, but significant, quantity of the oil escaped onto the water.
His Honour further found that within the fuel tank itself there was, at the time of the spillage, space for taking into it further oil without the oil overflowing.
This left, of course, a problem as to how the accident had occurred. The prosecutor in opening the case to his Honour, suggested that, as a matter of common sense, there were only two possibilities. One was that too much oil had been taken aboard so that the tank overflowed. That possibility could be discounted because of the unused space in the fuel tank. The other was that excessive pressure had been induced into the tank, forcing the oil up through the air vent. He put, for his Honour's consideration, that the fuel oil might have been pumped aboard too fast.
There was nothing to indicate in the evidence any deficiency in the equipment which was used in the bunkering operation.
In the proceedings before his Honour, Mr Liddy, solicitor, who appeared with considerable competence for the appellant, put forward a different explanation. Bignold J, in substance, accepted that explanation. I now turn to it. Fortunately, what was said was recorded. Mr Liddy said: "I'm instructed that after the loading process the barge, in an attempt to clear its lines and the fuel lines to the ship, blew air through the lines and the only reason that my clients can give for the spill occurring is for the resultant pressure that that caused which then resulted in oil flying through the breather pipe on the opposite side of the ship and onto the deck." 
The breather pipe there referred to clearly is the air vent to which I have already referred.
Later in his submissions Mr Liddy said: "My instructions are your Honour that the fact that the oil emanated from the breather pipe was unexpected and my clients say that if air hadn't been blown through these lines at the pressure that it was, the spill would not have occurred."
Mr Liddy, having put that submission wholly unsupported by evidence to his Honour, Mr Hill, who was appearing for the Prosecutor, nevertheless impliedly accepted it. He said: "But the reality is that a vessel that is bunkering, it is incumbent upon the vessel to ensure what it receives and how it receives it. And it is their duty and one cannot easily escape by saying 'Well, we didn't know what was going to come from the other vessel.' That's exactly what they're supposed to know and maintain ... It's a spill that could have been avoided by due diligence, by simply ensuring that the bunkering barge .. did not clear its hoses in such a manner."
In the circumstances I agree with the course taken by Bignold J in finding, as he did: "It appears that the immediate cause of the spillage was the clearing, by a blast of air pressure from the bunkering vessel, of the connecting fuel line between the ships, rather than any cause referable to the equipment on, or operations of, the
Beta Crux."
He then dealt with the matter of penalty, saying he had taken into account in favour of the defendant mitigating circumstances including the finding to which I have last referred. He said that it was not, however, an appropriate case to give the master the benefit of <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) in that: "the Master must be held accountable for the pollution incident in what was a routine fuel bunkering operation which apparently had been undertaken with some want of operational care, resulting in an avoidable discharge of oil into the port waters ... The greater blame in the present case must be held to lie with the Master."
Accordingly, he imposed the fine of $20,000 upon the appellant and the fine of $40,000 upon the owner, notwithstanding the great disparity in the maximum penalties which were available as between the appellant and the owner.
It must be borne in mind that some latitude must be accepted, in pleas of guilty, in the finding by the sentencing Judge of mitigating circumstances.
This matter was dealt with by Gleeson
CJ in Traiconi, 49 A Crim R 417 at 418.
The Chief Justice said: "Sentencing proceedings which are, as in the present case, usually extremely serious in their consequences, are proceedings in which the rules of admissibility of evidence are frequently relaxed by consent and often for the benefit of the person being sentenced, but if matters of aggravation are to be proved and relied upon in sentencing an offence, they are to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and by admissible evidence." .
In the present case, Bignold J was perfectly correct in accepting an explanation offered on behalf of the appellant, notwithstanding the absence of evidence supporting it.
It is, however, necessary to bear in mind that the Prosecutor had no obligation to explain to the Court, by evidence or otherwise, how this oil spillage occurred. [S 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s8.html) of the Act provided an offence of strict liability, having attached to it maximum fines of extreme severity.
The case for the prosecution was complete upon proving the spillage and that the appellant was the master. The explanation given by Mr Liddy for the appellant was by way of mitigation. It was upon the appellant to prove, on balance of probabilities, those matters relied upon as mitigation. This was done by the informal means of the submissions of fact made by Mr Liddy and accepted by the Prosecutor. Obviously, the purpose was to show that the appellant had not exhibited any personal want of care or personal lack of skill. It must be said that Mr Liddy succeeded. His Honour did not find otherwise. Nor would I, this Court being charged with finding the facts for itself, come to the conclusion that the evidence established any personal fault by the appellant. The submissions advanced to this Court on behalf of the appellant accordingly are, to that extent, misconceived.
What his Honour did find was that there was want of operational care in a perfectly routine bunkering operation. That finding, in my judgment, is unassailable. I agree with it. There having been that want of care, in an operation for which the appellant was ultimately in charge and responsible in law, is a factor which goes directly to whether the penalty imposed by his
Honour was inappropriate.
The submissions put to us by Mr Sexton, in his able argument, carried with them a suggestion that it would be inappropriate to impose a penalty upon a master in any case where it was not some personal want of care or skill on his part which caused the spillage. That submission, understandable though it is in human terms, is clearly contrary to the purpose of [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s8.html) of the Act. It is a matter of notoriety that all too often it is not possible to sheet home to any individual responsibility for a spillage in the sense of establishing that it was his act or omission which caused it. The purpose of [s 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s8.html) in imposing strict liability upon the owner and upon the master, as well as upon any individual found to be responsible, is to deal with this potential disaster of oil spillage by making the owner and the master responsible without personal fault. In those circumstances an argument that no punishment should be visited on a master, unless personal fault is established, is clearly untenable.

I come then to the remaining submission of substance, namely that in the circumstances of the present case the penalty imposed upon the appellant was excessive. In my judgment it was not. The maximum penalty was $200,000. A penalty of $20,000 viewed in the light of the maximum, as it must be, was not severe. It is said that the penalty is inappropriate in comparison with the penalty of $40,000 imposed upon the owner, particularly bearing in mind that the maximum penalty which could have been imposed upon the owner was $1,000,000.
His Honour explained that on the basis that it was the master who was at the scene, not the owner, that there was no defect in equipment, that there was no defect in training and that there was no defect in system. What there was, was a want of operational care at the time when the master was in charge and in a position to exercise authority on the spot. I see no reason why that approach should be considered to be wrong.
There were two cases relied upon by Mr Sexton in support of the submission that it would have been appropriate to give the appellant the benefit of <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). The first was Morrison versus Peers, also a decision of Bignold J, delivered on 12 May 1995 (unreported). In that case the oil spillage came as a cargo of oil was being discharged by a hose connection to the Caltex refinery. The oil leakage was occasioned by the failure of a gasket. However, his Honour specifically found: "Although I am not entirely sure just how the failure occurred ..
I am satisfied that the failure did not occur as a result of defective equipment, or inefficient cargo handling procedures or negligence or carelessness on the part of the ship's master or crew."
In other words, it was not a case of the crew failing in the discharge of their duties with due care and skill. It was a case of unexplained accident with no fault to be attributed to anyone. In those circumstances, it is scarcely surprising that his Honour, while imposing a substantial fine upon the owner, gave the master the benefit of <case>.
The other case relied upon is that of Morrison versus Turner, also a decision of Bignold J, delivered on 13 June 1995 (unreported). In that case oil was being loaded and what occurred was that a gasket blew. His Honour, however, found that the master was only a relief master who could not be expected to have any inkling that anything was wrong with the ship. Indeed, the vessel itself had been acquired but some nine months earlier by the owner. His Honour placed heavy weight upon the fact that the master was only a relief master.
Again, I see no reason to quarrel with his Honour's decision that it was appropriate in those circumstances to apply <case>.
The last case to which reference should be made is Morrison versus Ausmarine
Fisheries Pty Limited, also a judgment of Bignold J, delivered on 6 October (unreported). In that case, what had happened was that the oil spillage resulted because the chief engineer, or someone under him, failed to turn off a cock at the correct time. It was argued before his
Honour that <case> should be applied because the master was personally blameless. The fault lay with the chief engineer or those under him. What his Honour said was this: "In this case, given the knowledge that the Chief Engineer undoubtedly had of the ship's bunkering facilities, especially in this technical capacity qua an engineer, and the apparent want of operational care associated with the failure to close the relevant valve in case, it cannot be said, (as I held in
Peers) that the conviction and fining of the Owner alone adequately vindicates the Act and the Prosecutor's enforcement of it. To 'go further and punish the Master 'is not' an excessive sentencing response' in the circumstances of this case, but is the required and just response.
In Peers, it was emphasised that the failure did not occur due to defective equipment or negligence. Such was not the case here. In Dilmun, (that is Turner's case), a case decided after Peers, I again invoked s556A. In that case it was also decided that merely punishing the owner, was a sufficient curial response to the pollution incident. That is, as I have said, not the case here.

Additionally, in that case the Master was a temporary or 'relief master', and that was regarded as an extenuating circumstance. Nothing could be further removed from this case, in which the Chief Engineer would in all probability be highly familiar with the ship and its operational requirements. The caveat expressed in Dilmun (at 7) to forestall the too ready application of the approach taken in those cases to materially different factual circumstances will be recollected: '... I would not wish my decision to be understood (either by itself or in combination with my earlier decision in
Morrison v Peers) as suggesting that where an owner is convicted and fined, the discharge of the master pursuant to
S556A of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) will follow as a matter of routine.
Far from it, and neither case (nor the cases taken together) can possibly justify such a proposition. Rather each case decided on its own facts.' 
Consistency in sentencing is desirable, and achievable, especially with respect to amounts imposed by way of fine.
But each case depends intrinsically on its own facts, and this principle has especial application in the case of the exercise of discretion under s556A. Section 556A is an exceptional discretion and is very much the exception to the rule. This view is supported by the most recent decision under this Act,
Morrison versus Valle and Interchem SRL, (a reference to his judgment in the present case) where the application of s556A was rejected in a case concerning bunkering operations held to have been engaged in without due care."
I entirely agree with what Bignold J said. In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed and the penalty confirmed.
JUDGE2
GLEESON CJ I agree.
 .
The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Allen J.
JUDGE3
SULLY J I agree.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/17.html  
