

Regina versus Thomas George Woodhouse [1996] NSWSC 645 (20 December 1996) 
REGINA versus THOMAS GEORGE WOODHOUSE /96 
Friday 20 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GROVE J, LEVINE J, BRUCE J 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - MALICIOUS WOUNDING - GUILTY PLEA - LEGAL ADVICE - PROPOSED ASSERTION OF SELF DEFENCE - NO MISCARRIAGE OF JUSTICE IN CIRCUMSTANCES - MINIMUM/ADDITIONAL TERMS 21 MONTHS/7 MONTHS NOT EXCESSIVE 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: The appellant appeared before his Honour Judge McGuire in the Newcastle District Court where he pleaded guilty to a charge of malicious wounding and was sentenced to a total of two years and four months penal servitude consisting of a minimum term of one year and nine months and an additional term of seven months. 
A single ground of appeal is relied upon namely: "The conviction of the appellant involves a miscarriage of justice in that the appellant's plea of guilty was as a consequence of acceptance of incorrect legal advice." 
The incident out of which the charge arose occurred near the Wangi Hotel on
New Year's Eve last. The appellant was armed with a knife and stabbed the victim several times in the arm. The injuries sustained were serious and two separate surgical interventions were later necessary. The short point raised on behalf of the appellant is that his plea of guilty was not accompanied by a genuine and informed acknowledgment of guilt because he had always maintained that he acted in self defence. In an affidavit filed in this appeal he claimed that he entered the plea of guilty on the advice of a solicitor who told him that it would be in his best interests so to do.

It would seem that a number of scuffles had broken out near the hotel and one of these involved a woman friend of the appellant. At some point the appellant is alleged to have spilled a glass of beer on the frock of a woman. He had left the hotel and was in a flat and claimed that he returned to the area of the hotel because he felt an obligation to make good the damage. He armed himself with a fish filleting knife which was an implement with a long sharpened blade. He secreted this in the trousers of his tracksuit.

There were undoubtedly confused challenges and insults being proffered among people present including the eventual victim.

After arrest the appellant participated in an ERISP interview. Significantly he was asked by police whether there was any reason that he could give as to why he stabbed the victim and his response was: "Just `cause he kicked, he kicked me in the face it was. And I chased him just in a rage; drunk." 
The solicitor who represented the appellant in the District Court interviewed a number of potential witnesses and his handwritten notes have been exhibited before this Court. It is unsurprising the witnesses do not present a cohesive detailed story. It is worth noting, however, that at least one witness suggests that the stabbing did not follow after any kick by the victim but rather that that witness perceived a kick as retaliation or a defensive strike against stabbing.

The fact is that the appellant made no claim to police that he had acted in self defence. He did give evidence at the proceedings in the District Court.
It is argued that his true state of mind - that is to say, his claim of self defence - was revealed in this exchange. The initial questioner was his solicitor and as the transcript shows, the judge intervened: "Q. And did you then arm yourself with any object? 
A. Yes, a knife.

Q. Could you tell his Honour why you did that? 
A. Scared, fear.

Q. What were you afraid of? 
A. Mr Oliveira.

HIS HONOUR: Q. I don't understand that. You've gone back to a flat, there's nobody near you, nobody threatening you, so you've armed yourself with a knife because you were scared? 
A. Yep.

Q. Scared of whom? 
A. Scared of Mr Oliveira.

Q. What, he was going to come into the flat was he? 
A. No.

Q. Well, what was your problem? Who were scared of? 
A. Well, he was over at the pub, I was scared, just fear, because of all of the people running around.

Q. But you were inside a flat? 
A. No, I've left the flat at that time.

Q. But why did you leave the flat with the knife? 
A. To go and see the girl, just for -- 
BAKER: Q. And where was that girl? 
A. Across at the pub.

Q. So you formed the view, the intention, to return -- 
A. Yeah.

Q. -- to the area of the pub, the hotel? 
A. That's right.

Q. And it was then, was it, that you armed yourself with a knife? 
A. Yes.

Q. And where did you put that knife? 
A. Down my trousers." 
The last evidence given by the appellant in chief involved this exchange: "Q. Yes, about what's happened, and how do you feel about your conduct that resulted in the injury to Mr Oliveira? 
A. It was wrong, it was wrong and it had a lot to do with alcohol." 
It can be observed that the claim made by the appellant does not involve a suggestion that at the time he wielded the knife he was in fear of physical harm at the hands of the victim and that would be fundamental to determining any question of self defence. Although required to be negatived by the Crown it needed to be shown that the appellant believed on reasonable grounds that it was necessary in self defence to stab Mr Oliveira several times in the arm.

The appellant was cross examined before this Court on his affidavit. He conceded that at the time of the stabbing he was well affected by intoxicating liquor and claimed that there were some matters which he did not recall.
Prominent among these were descriptions by witnesses, that prior to the return to the flat where he armed himself with a knife, he had been seen rummaging in amongst bottles in a disposal bin. I am satisfied that the assertion that the appellant acted in self defence is a matter of subsequent construction. I reject the contention that there has been miscarriage of justice.

In the alternative the appellant sought leave to appeal against the severity of sentence. The appellant's record offered no basis for the extension of leniency. In 1987 he was fined for assaulting a female. In 1991 he was convicted of using a firearm in a public place and was placed on a recognizance to be of good behaviour for three years. Later in the same year he was convicted of two offences of assault and assault occasioning actual bodily harm and ordered to perform community service and placed on recognizance for a further four years. In 1993 he was again convicted of assault occasioning actual bodily harm and two counts of assault. He was sentenced to further community service and placed on a recognizance to be of good behaviour for a further twelve months. The learned sentencing judge gave the appellant credit for his plea of guilty and the sentence imposed was in my view well within the range of the sound exercise of discretion and it reflects in full measure any leniency to which the appellant could have reasonable expectation.

I propose that the appeal be dismissed and the application for leave to appeal against sentence refused and the conviction and sentence accordingly confirmed.

LEVINE J: I agree with Grove J.

BRUCE J: I agree with Grove J.
 * * * 
