

Thompson versus Southwell [1996] NSWSC 130 (15 May 1996) 
THOMPSON versus SOUTHWELL /95 DC 21/94 MAY 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, BEAZLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS:DAMAGES - PERSONAL INJURY - MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENTS ACT 1988 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
DAMAGES - personal injury - motor vehicle accident - <case> [Motor Accidents
Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) - non-economic loss - future earning capacity.

Defendant's appeal against damages - respondent sustained significant whiplash injuries to neck and back - expert medical opinion supporting trauma long lasting and permanent - respondent suffered depressive reaction - inability to carry out ordinary tasks and functions, such as driving - no medical evidence called by appellant - medical evidence uncontradicted.

Appeal: All but $750 of trial judge's award of $118,588.89 was at issue in the appeal. The central criticism was directed at trial judge's assessment of non-economic loss and future earning capacity, and the out-of-pocket figure allowed for the possibility of a future operation.

Held: (1) Trial judge's findings were fully supportable on the evidence. The appellant's view of the facts and the evidence relied upon was not justified and taken together with the uncontradicted medical evidence, supported the opposite conclusion. (2) It was open for the trial judge to conclude the plaintiff's condition would probably continue without improvement. The award was within the range the trial judge was entitled to award. (3) On the evidence taken into account with other items related to the likelihood of the plaintiff incurring liability in the future, the out-of-pocket figure was a sound discretionary assessment.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs, such costs to be on an indemnity basis from 21 April 1996.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: In this appeal the defendant in a personal injuries claim arising from a car accident appeals against the amount of damages awarded to the plaintiff at the trial by his Honour Judge Mahoney of the District Court.

In my opinion the appeal fails and also in my opinion the reasons given by
Mahoney DCJ for the conclusions he arrived at are satisfactory and furnish a full and supportable explanation for the decision he arrived at.

I will however deal briefly with the main points raised in the appeal because although I think he had very unpromising material to work with from the point of view of presenting an appeal, counsel for the appellant defendant has put the case as attractively as it could be put, in my respectful opinion.

The plaintiff at the time of the accident, which took place in Cowra where she lived, was forty-eight, married, had six children and was a grandmother of nine. Mahoney DCJ found that she was enjoying her life as a wife and mother and home-maker. She was helping the family finances at the time by doing some part-time work which brought in a comparatively small amount of money each week.

Her physical state after the accident was described by an expert medical practitioner and consultant in rehabilitation as follows: "Mrs Southwell sustained a significant whiplash type of injury to her neck and back in the accident on 12 March 1994".

I pass over the next sentence and continue the quotation.
 "Although there are no obvious bony abnormalities Mrs Southwell sustained severe muscular ligamentous injuries at the time of this accident. This may well have involved sub-luxation of some of the facet joints. In my experience the disability resulting from this type of trauma is long-lasting and usually permanent. In addition to the physical symptoms outlined above I am concerned at the amount of the depression that Mrs Southwell suffers and strongly recommend that she seeks treatment for this. I have advised her to seek help from an occupational therapist in regards to her posture, work methods et cetera. I do not believe Mrs Southwell is fit for any kind of work at this stage." 
There was other medical evidence before the judge painting a picture equally as unpromising as that and which also provided further details of Mrs
Southwell's depressive reactions and the effect the accident had had on her so far as confidence in doing ordinary tasks and carrying out ordinary functions such as driving were concerned.

In regard to driving her confidence had been badly affected and driving at night caused her particular problems.

At the trial the defendant called no evidence. The medical evidence I have referred to is thus uncontradicted.

The trial judge said that he thought that the appropriate percentage figure under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) was thirty-five percent. He said he arrived at that taking into account the matters which this Court had identified as relevant in such an operation in
Southgate versus Waterford. That yielded a figure in money terms of $82,250.

The trial judge considered that an appropriate figure for compensation for diminished earning capacity and future loss of earnings was $25,000.

He also arrived at a figure of $10,588.89 for out of pocket expenses which included a figure he allowed for the possibility of a future operation.

There was a further figure for past economic loss of $750 which was not disputed in the appeal.

The total of the judge's award was $118,588.89. All except the $750 figure were put in issue in the appeal.

The criticism of the trial judge's figures was directed principally to the non-economic loss assessment and the future earning capacity assessment. Both of these were criticised on the basis that the physical condition of the plaintiff as revealed by the evidence at the trial, in light of her cross- examination, was not such as to warrant the gloomy view the trial judge took of her future, both in the non-economic and economic spheres.

To support these submissions the appellant defendant took the Court to various aspects of the evidence. The nature of the case was such that there was little more that counsel could do than point to the favourable aspects of the evidence and then submit that the figures were too high and too high to an extent that took them beyond the bounds of a reasonable discretionary assessment.

The trial judge took a different view of the evidence from that submitted to us today. He had the advantage of having before him the plaintiff who obviously from his judgment impressed him as a truthful person, not seeking to exaggerate the effect upon her of the accident and the sort of person who would do whatever was necessary to assist her family both at home and at work, particularly in the latter respect at times when her husband was unemployed.

The trial judge also appears to have taken the view that the plaintiff was now at a time in her life when the greatest burden of caring for children and home had passed and there would be more time available to her to earn amounts to supplement the family income and also for her to get the satisfaction of working outside the home.

When the medical evidence is taken into account and one looks at it with pessimistic eye as the judge did, rather than the optimistic approach urged upon us today, it seems to me that that evidence is quite sufficient to support the conclusions the trial judge arrived at.

No misunderstanding of the evidence was asserted in the course of submissions.
It was simply said the trial judge had failed to appreciate that things were not as bad as the plaintiff's case was painting them.

I will give one specific example of why I think the trial judge's findings are fully supportable upon the evidence. In regard to future economic loss, the trial judge's figure was $25,000 and he said in relation to that figure that he was compensating the plaintiff for the next ten years or so. He did not give any calculated explanation of his choice of that figure. Counsel for the appellant defendant took that figure and worked out that, using the appropriate five per cent tables, that lump sum would compensate a person receiving it today for loss of income of $60 a week for ten years.

The submission was then made that the evidence showed that there was work available which the plaintiff could do at the time of the trial which would return her approximately $60 a week indefinitely.

In my view that view of the facts is not justified. The evidence relevant to it to which appellant's counsel drew our attention seems to me to support the opposite conclusion from the one which he advocates, namely that the particular job was one that the plaintiff was not able to do after the accident.

Taking that together with the medical evidence which left it fully open to the judge to conclude that the condition of the plaintiff as it was at the trial would most probably continue without improvement and with possible deterioration, then once the facts are looked at in that way, it would seem to me that the award of $60 a week for ten years or a lump sum capitalised at present value to produce that figure is well within the range of what the judge was entitled to award on this aspect of the matter.

The only other item I need to deal with is the future out of pocket expense of $10,000 allowed by the trial judge. That was a figure he arrived at as a kind of buffer figure to guard against the possibility principally I think of the future operation to be performed upon the plaintiff.

The evidence supported that possibility and the figure when taken into account with other items the plaintiff would undoubtedly incur liability for in the future, again seems to me to be within a sound discretionary assessment range.

I am therefore of the opinion that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree.
 (Argument ensued as to costs.) 
PRIESTLEY JA: The full order that the Court makes then is that the appeal is dismissed with costs, such costs to be on an indemnity basis from and including 21 April 1996.
 * * * 
