

Currie and Anor versus Liston and Ors Matter No 16258/90 [1997] NSWSC 558 (13
November 1997) 
Currie & Anor versus Liston & Ors /90 November 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /90 - Currie & Anor versus Liston & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The hearing of these proceedings took place over some days in August 1997. A reserved judgment was delivered on 10 September 1997. I do not propose to repeat material that may be found therein. It records, inter alia, circumstances relevant for present purposes. Judgment was entered for the defendants. The plaintiffs were ordered to pay the defendants' costs. 
The defendants have applied for an order that costs be paid on an indemnity basis. In support of that application, the defendants relied on an affidavit sworn by Mr Lim (a solicitor in the employ of the solicitor for the defendants).

In substance, the affidavit annexes two copy letters forwarded by the solicitors for the defendants to the solicitors for the plaintiffs. The first letter is dated 14 July 1995. The second letter is dated 31 July 1997. Both letters have been headed "Without Prejudice Except As To Costs". Both letters raised the matter of "indemnity costs" in the event of non-acceptance of the offer made therein. Both letters have been referred to and regarded as
Calderbank letters. The plaintiffs did not accept either of the offers made in the letters.

The first letter offered to settle the proceedings for a sum of $20,000, inclusive of costs. The offer was expressed to remain open until 4pm on
Friday, 28 July 1995.

The second letter offered to settle the proceedings for the sum of $50,000, inclusive of costs. This offer was expressed to only remain open until 5pm on
Friday, 1 August 1997.

The claim for indemnity costs is put in the alternative. The first alternative is that the defendants should be entitled to costs on an indemnity basis from July 1995. The second alternative is that the defendants should be entitled to costs on an indemnity basis from 31 July 1997. The plaintiffs oppose any order for indemnity costs.

The question of indemnity costs has been argued but briefly. I have been referred to the judgment of Rolfe J in Multicon Engineering Pty Ltd versus Federal
Airports Corporation (unreported, 20 June 1996) and in particular to certain of the observations made therein. It is upon this judgment that the defendants found their claim for indemnity costs. The hearing appeared to proceed on the basis that I was bound by the principles enunciated in the judgment. A different approach has been taken by members of the Federal Court. I was referred to the judgment of Lindgren J in Mgica (1992) Ltd versus Kenny & Good
Pty Ltd & Anor (No 4). In that case, Lindgren J followed two earlier single judge decisions of that Court. The matter of the conflicting approaches was not explored during the course of submissions. In the circumstances, it is not necessary to pursue that matter further.

In opposing the application, Counsel for the plaintiffs has, inter alia, pointed out differences between the offers made and the nature of the Offer of
Compromise contemplated by the Supreme Court Rules (see Part 22). It has been said that the actions of the plaintiffs in not accepting the offers were reasonable.

In Multicon, Rolfe J made the following observations:- "The question, so it seems to me, when one is considering a case where an
Offer of Compromise has been made and the party rejecting the offer has not achieved a better result than that provided for by it, is not whether it was reasonable for the party rejecting the offer to fight on notwithstanding that the offer had been made, but whether it was reasonable for the party rejecting the offer to do so and, in that regard, I would suggest that the onus must be on the party rejecting the offer to establish in some way the reasonableness of the course it took. In my opinion that cannot be done by saying that litigation is uncertain and it was entitled, rather than accept the offer, to have the uncertainties, whether legal or factual, resolved by judicial decision. That, of course, is an entitlement any litigant has; but what must be understood is that if that litigant has received an offer, which it does not ultimately better, its desire for a judicial determination should, generally speaking, be made subject to its paying the other party's costs on an indemnity basis from the date the offer is made. It is the very uncertainty of the legal and factual issues propounded for decision, which makes settlement an appropriate course, a matter much stressed in suggesting that settlement be considered. If there is no uncertainty, if that can ever be so, there is no reason to settle. It also seems to me that the more difficult and complicated the legal and factual issues the greater must be the uncertainty and, accordingly, the greater must be the incentive to settle on a commercial basis. The greater the uncertainty the more that is being risked and the more the prospect of further litigation by way of appeals." "In my opinion the proper approach to take to an Offer of Compromise, whether made under the Rules or pursuant to a Calderbank letter, is that there should be a prima facie presumption in the event of the offer not being accepted and in the event of the recipient of the offer not receiving a result more favourable than the offer, that the party rejecting the offer should pay the costs of the other party on an indemnity basis from the date of the making of the offer. I proceed on the basis that the unreasonableness was the failure by the offeree to accept the offer, which unreasonableness is demonstrated, prima facie, by the ultimate result. This approach is consistent with the decisions to which I have referred, the policy evidenced by the Act and the Rules and the widely accepted philosophy that settlements should be encouraged. The relevant Rules provide that costs will be paid on the basis set out therein "unless the Court otherwise orders". My understanding is that the Court is required to proceed on the basis that it should make the order provided for by the Rules, unless the party rejecting the offer is able to establish good reason for having done so.

It seems to me anomalous that there is no provision whereby a defendant, which is totally successful, is placed in the same position as a plaintiff, which is totally successful. In my view the Rules should be reviewed. The decisions of this Court have overcome the anomaly by an application of similar reasoning in the event of an offer of compromise by way of a Calderbank letter. Cole J (in
Macquarie Bank Ltd versus National Mutual Life Association of Australia Ltd &
Ors (27 July 1994)) observed that by taking that step the defendant, which is ultimately successful, has done everything it can to extricate itself from expensive and extensive litigation, and it seems to me that if a defendant has done that and its prognostication of the case proves to be correct, in the relevant sense, it is totally unfair that it should be required to pay costs as if it had not acted in that way. In the circumstances the relevant unreasonableness of the recipient of the offer is the failure to accept what is established to be an appropriate offer. That is well illustrated in this case. FAC took, as it turned out, a very real commercial risk in making its offer on 17 March 1993. If that offer had been accepted MCE would have been immeasureably financially better off and, conversely, FAC would have been worse off." 
The Court has a discretionary power to award costs on an indemnity basis. The power is exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before the Court and so that justice between the parties is best served.

In the circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the course taken by the plaintiffs in not accepting either of the offers made by the defendants was reasonable.

It seems to me that, when regard is had to the relevant circumstances of this case, the interests of justice are best served if the plaintiffs are ordered to pay the costs on an indemnity basis from 14 July 1995. I am satisfied that such an order should be made. Further, it seems to me to be a position that may be reached whether or not the application is approached on the basis of the defendants having a presumptive entitlement to indemnity costs.

I order that the plaintiffs pay the defendants' costs on a party and party basis prior to 14 July 1995 and that they pay them from that day on an indemnity basis thereafter. The plaintiffs are to pay the costs of this application (for indemnity costs).
 * * * 
