

Ron Stafford and Associates versus Jacka [1996] NSWSC 160 (27 May 1996) 
RON STAFFORD & ASSOCIATES versus JACKA /95; CC 19748/94 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY, SHELLER, COLE JJA 
CATCHWORDS: WORKERS COMPENSATION - assessment of degree of injury - quantum of damages - discretion of trial judge - s66 [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed with costs 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I will ask Mr Justice Sheller to give the Court's reasons.

SHELLER JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Manser CCJ of 28 August 1995. The appellant, which was the respondent in the application, appeals against the quantum of the award his Honour made in favour of the applicant/respondent David Jacka. The thrust of the appeal is against his Honour's finding that the appellant suffered a permanent impairment of his back which resulted in his Honour's giving judgment in the amount of $23,166. This amount was the equivalent of 30 percent of the amount of compensation for a most extreme case at the relevant time.

The respondent was employed by the appellant as a garbage contractor and, as his Honour found, was involved in consistent active work as the driver/operator of a machine designed to pick up and empty garbage containers.
His Honour described in detail the nature of the respondent's work and the nature of the injuries sustained during the course of his employment by the appellant, as the result of which he suffered the back injury.

His Honour outlined the nature of the injuries and symptoms which the appellant suffered and summarised the medical evidence. It appears that after the injuries the respondent returned to full time work doing the same sort of work as he had been doing before he suffered the injuries.

The nub of the appellant's appeal is that the sort of activity that the respondent described, and his Honour accepted, indicates that an award in respect of his back injury, equivalent to 30 percent of a most extreme case, must in itself demonstrate that there was some error in the exercise of his
Honour's discretion in making the assessment he did. No other ground of attack is made upon his Honour's judgment.

There was medical evidence from three doctors who were of opinion that the impairment of the respondent's back was an impairment measured by a percentage of 30. This evidence was clearly evidence upon which his Honour could reach the conclusion that he did and indeed, as counsel for the appellant conceded, the argument would be that the activities of the respondent after his injury should have led his Honour not to accept the estimates made by the three doctors to whom I have referred.

In my opinion, taking account of what his Honour said, I do not think that it is open to the Court to come to that conclusion. In my opinion, it was well within the exercise of his Honour's discretionary judgment to accept what the three doctors said and, on that basis, to come to the conclusion in relation to the back injury that he did.

In saying this, I would add that I agree with his Honour's findings and his
Honour's conclusion. For those reasons, I would propose the appeal be dismissed with costs.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: I agree.

COLE JA: I also agree.

PRIESTLEY JA: The order of the Court is that the appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
