

Fisher and Anor versus McDonald and Anor [1996] NSWSC 444 (20 September 1996) 
FISHER & ANOR versus McDONALD & ANOR /95 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
BAINTON J 
JUDGMENT 
BAINTON J: 
The plaintiffs in this action by their Amended Summons claimed a declaration that they "are entitled to have the licence agreement between the Plaintiffs as licensees and the Defendants as licensors for the development and operation of a quarry on the Defendants' land known as "Oakvale" via Williamsdale, New
South Wales, specifically performed and carried into execution". I should state immediately that the substantial dispute was whether or not there was any agreement at all to that effect or alternatively whether the defendants were estopped from denying the existence of such an agreement. Alternatively to the claim for specific performance the plaintiffs claimed damages for breach of the alleged contract. The asserted damages fall into four categories. The first is for reimbursement of certain debts of the defendants paid off by the plaintiffs at the defendants' insistence as a condition of their agreement to grant the "licence agreement". They amount to $5,800. The second is out of pocket expenses for legal advice relating to the licence agreement, the cost of the preparation of an Environmental Impact Study (EIS), other consultancy fees, in total $40,878.94. The third is the plaintiffs' travel expenses and allowance for their time spent on this project. That totals $46,835.36. The fourth head of loss claimed is the present value of the profits which would have been derived from the quarrying arrangement during its intended 20 years of operation, asserted to be (at a 5% discount rate) $8,332,242.40. The total of these four amounts is $8,425,756.70.

A second alternative basis for relief which was pleaded was that the defendants made a number of misrepresentations to the plaintiffs in the course of trade or commerce and so in breach of [s42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) . It also asserted breaches of the Fair Trading Act 1992 (ACT) (that is the sole reference to that Act from start to finish of this case) and also of s52 of the Trade Practises Act 1974 (C'th).

The amended summons charged the making of such representations in paras C2,
C3, C4, C6, C7 and C9. Those paragraphs were in the following terms "C2 In October 1992, the Defendants represented, and agreed with the
Plaintiffs, that they would grant to the Plaintiffs, or their nominee, a licence to develop and operate a quarry on 'Oakvale', on the terms and conditions agreed between the parties.
 
PARTICULARS 
The terms and conditions were partly written and partly oral. Insofar as they are written or recorded in writing, they are contained in the draft Deed handed to the firstnamed Plaintiff by the Defendants' solicitor (Mr Morris
Owen) at Goulburn on or about 14 October 1992, and the letter from the
Plaintiffs dated 22 October 1993, which letter was handed to the Defendants at 'Oakvale' on 25 October 1993.
 
C3 It was a term of the agreement, and the Defendants represented to the
Plaintiffs, that the parties would thereafter execute a formal written contract in which the terms of their agreement would be stated more fully and precisely but no different in effect.
 
C4 It was a further term of the agreement, and the Defendants represented to the Plaintiffs, that they would transfer to the Plaintiffs the right to prospect and mine blue metal on the site of the proposed quarry.
 
C6 It was a further express (or alternatively, implied) term of the agreement, and the Defendants represented to the Plaintiffs, that the
Defendants would do all cooperative acts required of them to achieve the contractual result intended by the parties, namely the development and operation of the quarry on 'Oakvale'.
 
C7 On 25 October 1993, at 'Oakvale', the Plaintiffs handed to the Defendants a signed copy of their letter dated 22 October 1993, recording the terms of the agreement between the Plaintiffs and the Defendants, and requested that, in view of the significant expenditure then being incurred by the Plaintiffs in performance of the agreement, the Defendants sign a copy of the letter as the formal written contract contemplated by the parties as aforesaid in paragraph C3 above. The Defendants then represented to the Plaintiffs that there was no need for a written contract to record the terms of the agreement between the parties, and that the Defendants would honour their agreement with the Plaintiffs in respect of the quarry. The Defendants further represented, by their conduct, that the agreement between the parties was as recorded in the Plaintiffs' letter dated 22 October 1993.
 
C9 On 3 August 1994, following receipt of a letter from the Defendants' solicitor dated 21 July 1994 indicating that the Defendants had decided not to proceed with the matter any further, a meeting was held at 'Oakvale' between the Plaintiffs and the Defendants, during which the Defendants represented to the Plaintiffs that they were in fact proceeding with their agreement with the
Plaintiffs, and that the Plaintiffs should proceed to finalising the
Environmental Impact Study and submission of the Development Application to the Council. The Defendants further represented that, if required by the
Council, they would sign the Development Application." 
The defendants admitted that at all relevant times they were registered proprietors of the "Oakvale" property, that the plaintiffs handed to the defendants a particular letter and that the plaintiffs made two payments amounting to $5,800 at the request of the defendants. All other allegations in the summons were put in issue.

In fact there was never brought into existence any document purporting to record all of the contractual arrangements asserted by the plaintiffs, let alone one executed by all, or indeed any, of those who would have been appropriate parties to it. The plaintiffs' case depends upon acceptance of their evidence as to the agreements reached in discussions with the defendants. The defendants deny having reached any of the asserted agreements: they deny having said almost everything which those who gave evidence on behalf of the plaintiffs asserted was said or was done. They deny having met at all with the plaintiffs, or either of them, on some of the occasions on which the plaintiffs assert meetings were held and agreement reached. It necessarily follows that I must first determine whether I should accept the evidence of those called on behalf of the plaintiffs or whether I should accept the evidence of the two defendants.

I have no difficulty in reaching a conclusion on those questions. The principal witnesses for the plaintiffs were the plaintiffs themselves. The first plaintiff was the first witness called. His cross examination began on p3 of the transcript (Monday 27 November 1995). His cross examination went through to p110, that is to say after lunch on the second day, so that I had ample opportunity to observe Mr Fisher. The second plaintiff's cross examination began at p139 of the transcript, that is to say towards the end of the second hearing day. Another witness was interposed on the next morning and the second plaintiff's cross examination resumed at p180 and continued to the end of p245 which was on the fourth hearing day. Again I had ample opportunity to observe Mr Keogh.

As is customary in the Commercial Division of this Court orders had been made for the filing and service of witness' statements in advance of the date fixed for hearing. Each party accordingly knows what the evidence for the other side is before he enters the witness box. So does the judge if he reads, as I did, that material before the hearing commences. Knowing what defence witnesses will say before a plaintiff enters the witness box would give a plaintiff, minded so to do, ample opportunity to tailor his answers on cross examination to meet what his opponent asserts. Neither Mr Fisher nor Mr Keogh attempted to do that.

I formed the view that each was a careful, accurate and truthful witness.
Neither attempted to baulk in any way at questions asked of him, some of which must have appeared to each (each was obviously an intelligent man) to raise a matter which he would have preferred in the interests of the case propounded by the plaintiffs not to have been raised. Nonetheless these questions were all answered immediately and in my view completely frankly. I accept the evidence of each.

I regret I cannot make a similar statement regarding either of the defendants.
By and large the answer of each defendant to the questions asked of him was in my view dictated entirely by his appreciation of what would most help his case. I might add that his appreciation to which I have referred was more often than not misplaced. The view I formed of each of them is that I am unable to accept anything that either of them said, apart from his name and address, unless it was either admitted by the plaintiffs, consistent with documentary material whose authenticity is not in doubt, or inherently probable, with one exception. I regret the need to record in this judgment that very little of what either said falls into any of those categories. The one exception is the assertion of the second defendant, Brett McDonald that "I am notorious in the area with a bad temper".

I turn now to the issues of fact (by which I include who said what, when and to whom) raised for decision. By way of background I should record that the defendants have at all relevant times been the registered proprietors of the land known as "Oakvale" which is at Williamsdale. It is just south of
Queanbeyan and borders the Monaro highway. Oakvale has been in the ownership of the McDonald family since the 1850s or perhaps a little earlier. There is on it a large area of a particularly high quality basalt (in terms of hardness). In the mid 1989s the McDonalds had been approached by a representative of Leighton Contractors. Leightons were contemplating developing the quarry prospect to supply their requirements for stone of that quality for supply to the ACT and the Queanbeyan area. That proposal got to the stage of the preparation of a draft Environmental Impact Study (EIS) by
Coffey & Partners. That proposal was not implemented. Subsequently a person referred to as Geoff Schmidt approached the McDonalds with an expression of interest in developing the quarry prospect. The discussions between the McDonalds and Schmidt got to the stage of the McDonalds having their solicitor, Morris Owen, a partner in the Goulburn firm of solicitors practising under the name Johnson & Sendall, prepare a form of agreement intended to be, but not ever in fact, executed by Schmidt (or anyone else).
The plaintiffs were to be parties of the first part, they then being executors by way of representation in the estate of the late Vivian Vincent McDonald and entitled to be registered as proprietors of the grazing lands known as "Oakvale". Clause 1 of that document provided "1. The Licensors hereby transfer and assign to the Licensee all their estate interest and right to prospect and quarry blue metal on that part of the said land shown as 'Proposed Quarry' on the plan annexed hereto and marked with the letter A and shown as 'Quarry Site' on the plan annexed hereto and marked with the letter B." 
This document was never executed by any one but it has assumed importance in the case for the McDonalds in that they assert it contained the only provisions upon which they were prepared to agree to grant quarrying rights to anyone.

The first plaintiff Colin Nicholas Fisher ("Fisher") had been for many years employed by the Caterpillar dealer for New South Wales and South Australia. He rose to be the executive director of the Caterpillar dealer in South Australia and he later became the general manager of ANI Komatsu who were then the dealers for Komatsu in New South Wales and Queensland. From 1982 onwards, as an executive for his family company Fisher Mathews Pty Ltd, he provided consultancy services to the mining quarry and earthmoving industries, principally in respect of buying selling hiring and advising on suitability of earthmoving equipment. At the time of providing his witness statement (30 May ) he was the managing director of a company which held exclusive rights for the distribution throughout Australia of Powerscreen equipment imported into Australia for the purpose of grading products for the mining and quarrying industries. He struck me as an intelligent and competent businessman.

The second plaintiff, Robin Stanislaus Keogh ("Keogh") is an earthmoving contractor and has been since February 1962. He and Fisher have known one another since the latter part of 1980, Fisher being a consultant in financial matters to Keogh and a vendor to Keogh's company of earthmoving machinery.

I propose now to recount events relevant to the determination of the matters in issue in this action in the order in which they occurred. For the reason which I earlier indicated, where there is any dispute as to what occurred or when, I am accepting the plaintiffs' version.

On 7 January 1991 Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd with whom the McDonalds had earlier negotiations relating to the opening of the quarry, wrote to the
McDonalds' solicitors stating that "Unfortunately to date we have been unable to proceed with the development of the Williamsdale Quarry due to lack of demand for the product. I have spoken with Brett and Michael and advised that should the situation change we will seek discussions regarding an agreement." 
Johnson & Sendall, the McDonalds' solicitors throughout the whole of the period relevant to this action, replied to that letter on 5 March 1991 noting that the time within which Leighton Contractors was allowed to develop the quarry has expired and that the development consent has lapsed. They added "Accordingly the agreement between the parties herein has lapsed and is hereby terminated".

On 20 May 1991 Keogh, together with a Mr John D. Kilmartin, wrote a letter to
Mr Owen, the partner at Johnson & Sendall who acted for the McDonalds.
That letter begins "Your clients Mr M & B McDonalds has asked us to put our proposal to establish a quarry on his property directly to you so that he will have the benefit of your advice when he makes his decision.
 
It is our understanding that we are in competition with another bidder who has been promising since last October to put a proposal forward. Apparently that proposal should be forthcoming at 8.30am tomorrow." 
The proposal which followed put forward reasons why the quarry development should go to the writers of that letter. On the following day, Johnson &
Sendall sent a copy of it to the Messrs McDonald at Oakvale. They added "At the same time we may (sic) available to him a copy of the Agreement which we have proposed re Schmidt which seemed, so far as we are aware, cover (sic) all of the terms which you wanted in any agreement of any proposed development." 
The letter then suggested a joint meeting.

At much the same time a Mr Warren Alley (Alley) who had worked for Keogh's family company in the past indicated to Keogh that he had "a couple of mates who could have a quarry site available". He was obviously referring to the
McDonalds. Keogh advised Alley that he was interested and Alley indicated that "he would get back to me". A short time after that conversation Alley came back to Keogh stating that it was Brett McDonald and Michael McDonald who had the quarry prospect. He passed on information which he could only have got from the McDonalds, namely that Leighton Contractors had already had an
Environmental Impact Study completed and approved by Council to develop the quarry but had let it lapse. He added that the McDonalds wanted to talk to
Keogh. In consequence Keogh went with Alley to meet the McDonalds. His recollection was that that occurred in or about August 1991. Keogh was told at that meeting by the McDonalds that they had been negotiating with someone else who was arguing about the $1.40 per tonne royalty which the McDonalds wanted.
Michael McDonald said that before the negotiations could go further he and his brother wanted to talk to their solicitor to make sure they had no commitment "to this bloke". He added that if there was not and Keogh was willing to pay the $1.40 "then you can have the quarry". I take that latter comment to mean that the McDonalds would deal with Keogh on the topic of opening the quarry.
Shortly after that the McDonalds advised Keogh that their solicitor advised them that there was no commitment by them to the other party and that they were free to deal with Keogh. Keogh then saw them again at Oakvale and received from them a copy of the EIS prepared by Leighton Contractors and a copy of the development approval from the Yarrowlumla Shire Council in respect of the Leighton's proposed quarry development.

On 5 February 1992 there was a discussion at the office of McDonalds' accountants, Horwath & Horwath in Queanbeyan, concerning the development of the quarry. Keogh and Kilmartin were at that conference. At that time the
McDonalds were asking for a bond of $100,000 "as security for the quarry development". That request terminated Kilmartin's interest in the project.
Shortly after that Keogh had another meeting with the McDonalds at their property related to developing the quarry. He told them that it was beyond his means to do it by himself and that he wanted to involve Fisher in the project.
I have no doubt that he would have explained who Fisher was. The McDonalds, he said, agreed to his suggestion.

Fisher and Keogh and Keogh's son Chris called on the Yarrowlumla Town Planner on 14 October 1992 for his advice on the best way of obtaining approval for the quarry development. They got suggestions from him and then went to Oakvale and met with the McDonalds for about an hour. Fisher at that meeting told the
McDonalds something of his background and particularly his involvement in the mining and quarrying equipment industries and there was general discussion on
Fisher's and Keogh's proposal for developing and operating the quarry and on what would be necessary to attract investors to finance the project. I should add at this stage that some three to three and a half kilometres of access road needed to be constructed, fenced and sealed at a cost of something over $1.5m and that Fisher's estimate of the likely total cost to the point of commencement of production of the development of the quarry was in the vicinity of $7m. Fisher said at this preliminary discussion that he and Keogh had the experience to get the quarry operational to the commencement of production and to control the finance aspects but that it would be necessary to attract outside investors.

At a stage of this meeting (the evidence does not disclose precisely when, but
I have no doubt it was after Keogh and Fisher had made their interest clear) the McDonalds produced the Horwath & Horwath account to them for accountancy advice amounting to $5,000 and overdue. Fisher asserts that one of the McDonalds (he doesn't recollect which) said that they had to get "this monkey off our backs" and a part of the deal was that you (meaning I take it
Keogh and Fisher) must pay the $5,000. They agreed to do so and in fact have made that payment. Fisher at the meeting raised the subject of his wish for a signed heads of agreement as they were about to spend a lot of money. One of the McDonalds said that their solicitor, Morris Owen, had already prepared such an agreement in regard to previous dealings and he arranged for Fisher to collect it that evening from the office of Johnson & Sendall in Goulburn.
Fisher did.

As a great deal of what was subsequently said and done is best understood in the light of the provisions of this document, I set it out in full.
 "THIS DEED made the day of One thousand nine hundred and ninety one BETWEEN
MICHAEL VIVIAN COLL McDONALD and BRETT IAN GERARD McDONALD both of 'Oakvale'
Williamsdale in the State of New South Wales, Graziers (hereinafter called the
Licensors) of the first part AND LTD (ACN ) a company duly incorporated in New
South Wales and having its Registered Office at 'Riverview' Sutton in the
State aforesaid (hereinafter called 'the Licensee') of the second part and and of (hereinafter called 'the Guarantors') of the third part WHEREAS the
Licensors are the Executors by way of representation in the Estate of the late
Vivian Vincent McDonald and are entitled to be registered proprietors of grazing lands known as 'Oakvale' Williamsdale in the said State by virtue of the terms of the Wills of the said Vivian Vincent McDonald and their late father Ian Melbourne Vincent McDonald AND WHEREAS the Licensee desires to open a quarry on the said property known as 'Oakvale' AND WHEREAS the Licensors have agreed to allow the Licensee to carry out such quarrying upon the terms and conditions now hereinafter appearing AND in consideration of the Licensee agreeing to prospect the parcel of land situated at 'Oakvale' Williamsdale in the said State owned by the Licensors 
NOW THIS DEED WITNESSETH
The Licensors hereby transfer and assign to the Licensee all their estate interest and right to prospect and quarry blue metal on that part of the said land shown as 'Proposed Quarry' on the plan annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'A' and shown as 'Quarry Site' on the plan annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'B'.
The Licensee is granted full license to enter and remain upon the said
Quarry Site and to install and construct such buildings and structures as may be necessary to conduct such prospecting and quarrying including the right to pass and re-pass along such temporary roads as may now exist to the said
Quarry Site and such permanent roads as may be constructed to the said Quarry
Site as shown in the said plan annexed and marked with the letter'B'.
The license to enter, remain, install and construct referred to in
Clause 2 hereof extends to the Licensee's servants, agent, heirs and assigns.
(Sic.)
This license shall continue until it is terminated pursuant to either
Clauses 11, 12 or 16 hereof.
The rights and license conferred by this Deed shall extend to the entrance of all plant, equipment and motor vehicles onto the said (sic) and the construction of all such entrances, paths and roads as may be necessary in the implementation of the prospecting and quarrying that the Contractor may carry out PROVIDED HOWEVER that when the Quarry Site and permanent roads are established that this right shall be limited to a right of the Licensee its servants agents heirs and assigns to use such permanent roads as access to the
Quarry Site and shall not in any way be interpreted as a license for the
Licensee its servants or agents to use or be upon any other part of the said property 'Oakvale' other than the roads and Quarry Site.
In consideration of the rights and license hereby conferred the Licensee agrees to meet all costs and expenses associated with the application for the development consent, complying with all conditions of the development consent and the construction of the quarry site plus the Licensors' legal costs and disbursements of and incidental to this Deed and including the Licensors' costs and disbursements incurred by them in relation to joining in with the
Licensee in their application for the development consent and/or any proceedings before the Land and Environment Court in relation to such application.
The Licensee hereby agrees to pay the Licensors ONE DOLLAR FORTY CENTS ($1.40) per tonne for every tonne of quarry blue metal product transported from the said land by the Licensee for its own use or purchased from the
Licensee by any other person or body for their use. Such payment shall be made to the Licensors on a monthly basis at the last day of each month or within 30 days of the end of each such month and in the event that payment has not been made within the said period of 30 days then interest shall be payable upon any amounts then outstanding by the Licensee to the Licensors at the rate equal to the overdraft rate for advances made by Westpac Banking Corporation under $100,000 applying on the last day of each such month and any monies received in payment shall be applied first in payment of any such interest.
 
The payment of ONE DOLLAR FORTY CENTS ($1.40) per tonne remains fixed until the twelve (12) months from the date hereof (whether quarrying has taken place or not) and thereafter the payment will be increased by the proportion that the Consumer Price Index, all groups, Sydney published by the Australian
Bureau of Statistics for the quarter ending is greater than the said Consumer
Price Index last published on or before and thereafter the payment shall increase quarterly by the same proportion that the said Consumer Price Index last published before the end of each quarter is greater than the said
Consumer price Index last applicable under this Clause.
The Licensee shall not be obliged to make any payment whatsoever to the
Licensors should the Licensee decide not to proceed with a quarrying operation on the said land other than an amount of FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($5000) which the Licensee agrees to pay to the Licensors to compensate the Licensors for their loss of time and disturbance generally upon the said property 'Oakvale' and disruption in the management of the grazing business conducted upon the said property by the Licensors such amount to be paid by the Licensee to the
Licensors within fourteen (14) days of the termination of this Deed pursuant to either Clauses 11, 12 or 16 hereof.
The Licensee will install an approved weighbridge at the quarry site to determine and record the amount of blue metal product transported from the site. The data recorded by this weighbridge will be made available to the
Licensors or their representative on a monthly basis.
The Licensee has the right to assign or sell a part or all of its interest in this Deed to a solvent company or individual in which case the
Licensors shall continue to receive the amount specified in Clause 7 of this
Deed for the material transported from the land thereafter until the termination of this Deed PROVIDED HOWEVER that the consent of the Licensors will first be obtained by the Licensee to any such assignment.
 
The Licensee agrees to provide to the Licensors full details of any such proposed assignee. The consent of the Licensors shall not, however, be unreasonably withheld and the Licensors shall not be entitled to claim any premium or payment for the consideration of or consent to any such assignment.
 .(a) Subject to the provisions of clause 12 hereof and the provisions hereinafter set out the Licensee has the sole right to terminate this Deed by giving one (1) month's notice in writing delivered to the Licensors at their last known residence and in that event then the Licensee shall remove all of its chattels and fixtures from the said land and if required by the Licensors shall at the same time comply with any conditions set down in the development consent with respect to the operation and in particular as to the closure of the quarry.
 
This Deed shall be terminated forthwith upon the happening of the following events: 
Failure of the Licensee to gain development consent for the quarrying operations within a period of twelve (12) months from the date hereof or in the event that an appeal has been lodged with the Land & Environment Court against any development consent conditions then to obtain a final judgment in such appeal within a period of eighteen (18) months from the date hereof.
 
If the Licensee does not commence operations and produce blue metal products within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of development consent or the final result from the Land & Environment Court on any appeal.
 
If the Licensee continues operations at the quarry site for a period in excess of six (6) months. (Sic.) 
If the Licensee becomes insolvent or goes into liquidation.
 
In the event that the License (sic) herein is terminated for any of the above reasons then the Licensee has the right to enter upon and remove its chattels and fixtures from the said land for a period of one (1) month following the termination of this Deed. In the event that the Licensee has not so removed his chattels or fixtures within the said period of one (1) month then those chattels and fixtures shall become and be sole and absolute property of the Licensors.
In the event that monies due to be paid by the Licensee to the
Licensors remain unpaid for a period of 120 days then the Licensors have the right by giving one (1) month's notice in writing to the Licensee to terminate this licence in which case in the event that all monies outstanding to the
Licensors by the Licensee and as specified in the said notice are not paid then this Licence shall automatically be terminated at the expiration of the said period of one (1) month.
This Deed is subject to and conditional upon in all respects the licensee obtaining such consents as are necessary to enable the development to proceed and in the event that such consents are not obtained within a period of twelve (12) months from the date hereof then either party shall be at liberty to terminate this Deed by notice in writing provided that such notice is given within a period of one (1) month from the date of expiration of the said period of twelve (12) months. All costs and disbursements incurred in the gaining or seeking of any such necessary consents are to be paid and borne by the Licensee.
In the event that the quarrying proceeds then the Licensee will, at its expense, carry out all fencing works and road works as are specified in the more detailed plans lodged within the Shire Council and/or the Department of
Environment & Planning and it is further agreed that such works will include the following: 
As to any fences along any roadway (which roads are to be fully fenced) the fences are to be constructed to the ACT Government's standards for full netting fences and will include two barbed wires and three plain wires steel posts to a chain with wooden strainers where necessary the netting to be 42 inch standard gauge netting.
 
As to any gates to be 14 feet.
 
As to any roads to be tarred from the main road to the stock lane shown on the plan annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'B' and thereafter to be of gravel construction (except the access road to the house from the railway crossing which is to be constructed of a gravel surface and to provide an all- weather crossing facility).
 
As to any dams (of which three are to be constructed by the Licensee) the same are to be constructed so as to provide good watering for stock in any paddocks in which dams are located and to the standards specified by the
Department of Agriculture and/or the Soil Conservation Service.
 
As to the position of any fencing to be in accordance with the plan annexed hereto and marked with the letter 'B' and/or as may be otherwise agreed in writing.
 
As to the reinstatement of the land upon any termination of this Deed the Licensee shall be responsible for all costs associated therewith which shall be carried out in the standards required by the Department of
Agriculture or Soil Conservation Service so as to ensure the regeneration of permanent pasture in any area of land (except roads) so affected.
The licensee and the Guarantors hereby guarantee that they will abide by all terms and conditions of the development consent issued under the
Environment Planning & Assessment Act or any other associated or related
Act relating to the operations of the quarry and they will ensure that the quarry is at all times operated in accordance with all relevant legislation and keep indemnified the Licensors from any liability whatsoever in respect of any breach of the said conditions or any relevant Act regarding the conducting of quarry operations.
The Licensee shall comply with all notices issued by the local Shire
Council, the State Pollution Commission or any other Department whether State or Federal involving the use and operations of the quarry and in the event that any notice is issued which is not complied with within the time specified therein then the Licensors may terminate this Deed upon giving one (1) months notice in writing of their intention so to do. In the event that the Licensee has not complied with the notice issued within the said period of one (1) month then this Deed is terminated.
The Guarantors by their execution of this document hereby confirm that the Licensor has entered into this Deed of Licence with the Licensee at their request and direction and on the basis that the Guarantors personally guarantee the performance of the covenants herein contained on the part of the
Licensee and in the event that the Licensee fails to perform such obligations pursuant to such covenants the Guarantors acknowledge that they will be personally liable for the performance of such covenants.
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have hereunto subscribed their names and affixed their seals on the day and year first hereinbefore written." 
I would emphasise at this stage that this document contemplated that the licensee was to be a body corporate.

After the meeting at Oakvale, Keogh visited the Yarrowlumla town planner, Mr
Rouse, and got his advice in general terms as to how to go about submitting a development application and the need for the preparation of an EIS to accompany it. Rouse was obviously in favour of the development.

Fisher and Keogh's situation at this stage was that they thought in the light of the discussions at Oakvale that they had the McDonalds' agreement in principal at least to go ahead with the development. The costs involved being beyond their ability to provide themselves, they had to interest investors. It would not be realistic to expect investors to put up money unless the owners of the real estate had committed themselves to the quarry development: and by that I mean legally committed themselves. On the other hand a landowner would ordinarily be reluctant to commit himself to a quarry project on his property where the licensee was a company with but a small paid up capital unless he were offered personal guarantees as to its ability to perform. Mr Fisher was obviously aware of these problems because on 27 October 1992 he sought advice from the senior partner of Bird Cameron in Perth (a firm of Chartered
Accountants) seeking his view on how it should be done and his comments on
Fisher's preliminary thoughts, namely that the licence agreement (strictly a profit a prondre) would be granted to a company with but a small paid up capital, the shareholders being members of the Keogh and Fisher families, that that company would grant operating rights to an investment company in which again the same individuals would hold the ordinary shares but in which the investors would hold redeemable preference shares and that that investment company in its turn would own the issued capital of another company which would carry out the administration, the marketing and the actual quarry operations. The advice he sought was as to how that might appear to prospective investors.

The evidence does not disclose what advice he got. But his proposal was a sensible structure and thereafter discussion proceeded on the basis that Keogh and Fisher were seeking a grant of rights to a company which they would jointly control but which would not itself have a substantial paid up capital that company licensing an operating company funded substantially by investors.
That, from the Fisher/Keogh point of view, was a sensible arrangement, but I do not think that either of the McDonalds were, or are, capable of understanding it. That inability may well explain some of their subsequent actions.

Rankine & Hill who prepared the earlier EIS had by this time become
Connell Wagner Rankine & Hill. They quoted by letter of 27 November 1992, $32,510.33 to redo that job for Messrs Keogh and Fisher.

On 9 December 1992 Johnson & Sendall wrote to Mr Christopher Keogh (Robin
Keogh's son) saying "At the request of Brett McDonald we fax herewith a copy of the draft agreement prepared in this matter". The exhibit does not annex the copy document but it was the same as that which I have set out earlier in this judgment. Chris Keogh prepared a draft heads of agreement and faxed it to
Johnson & Sendall. That draft was in the following form.
 "HEADS OF AGREEMENT 
THIS Head of agreement is between MICHEAL VIVIAN COLL McDONALD and BRETT
IAN GERARD McDONALD both of 'Oakvale' Williamsdale and Oakvale Quarrys who desires to open a quarry on the 'Oakvale' property. The McDonalds have agreed to allow Oakvale Quarrys to carry out quarrying on the 'Oakvale' property under the following conditions.
 
CONDITIONS
The McDonalds give Oakvale Quarrys the right to prospect and quarry blue metal on that part of the land known as the 'Proposed Quarry'.
Oakvale Quarrys are granted full license to enter and remain upon the
Quarry Site and to install and construct such buildings, structures and roads necessary to conduct prospecting and quarrying.
Oakvale Quarrys have the right to appoint servants or agents to access the Quarry site.
This license shall continue until it is terminated pursuant to either
Clauses 11., 12. or 16. hereof.
Oakvale Quarrys have the right of access for all plant, equipment and motor vehicles to the Quarry. This access will be via permanent roads when established and not via other routes on the 'Oakvale' property.
Oakvale Quarrys agrees to meet all costs and expenses associated with the application for the development, and the construction of the quarry site plus the McDonalds' legal costs. It is agreed that these costs shall include costs already incurred by the McDonalds with their Accountant not exceeding $5000.00.
Oakvale Quarrys agrees to pay the McDonalds One Dollar Forty (1.40) per tonne for every tonne of quarry blue metal product transported from 'Oakvale'.
Payment shall be made to the McDonalds on a monthly basis at the last day of each month or within 30 days of the end of each month. In the event that payment has not been made within 30 days, interest shall be payable upon any amounts outstanding at a rate equal to the overdraft rate set by the Westpac
Banking Corporation for amounts under $100,000.00.
 
The payment of One Dollar Forty ($1.40) per tonne remains fixed for twelve months. Increases in the amount per tonnes will be a fixed percentage governed by the sale price of the Quarry material.
Oakvale Quarrys are not obligated to pay the McDonalds any money if they decide not to proceed with a quarrying operation on the 'Oakvale' Property other than an amount of FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($5,000.00) to compensate the
McDonalds for their loss of time and disturbance on 'Oakvale' Property. This amount will be payable within fourteen (14) days of the termination of this
Heads of Agreement pursuant to either Clauses 11., 12. or 16. hereof.
Oakvale Quarrys will install an approved weighbridge at the quarry site to determine and record the amount of blue metal product transported from the site. The date recorded by this weighbridge will be made available to the
McDonalds or their representative on a monthly basis.
Oakvale Quarrys has the right to assign or sell a part or all of its interest in the quarry to a solvent company or individual. In which case the
McDonalds shall continue to receive the amount specified in Clause 7 of this
Heads of Agreement for the material transported from the quarry.
Subject to the provisions of Clause 12. Oakvale Quarrys has the sole right to terminate this Heads of Agreement by giving one (1) months notice in writing delivered to the McDonalds. In the event that the contract is terminated, Oakvale Quarrys shall remove all of its chattels and fixtures from the 'Oakvale' Property and if required by the McDonalds and at the same time comply with any conditions set down in the development consent with respect to the operation and in particular as to the closure of the quarry.
 
The contract shall be terminated forthwith upon the happening of the following events: 
Failure of the Oakvale Quarrys to gain development consent for the quarrying operations within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the contract or in the event that an appeal has been lodged with the Land and
Environment Court against any development consent conditions then to obtain a final judgement in such appeal within a period of eighteen [18] months from the date hereof.
 
If Oakvale Quarrys do not commence operations and produce blue metal products within a period of twelve [12] months from the date of development consent or the final result from the Land & Environment Court on any appeal.
 
If the Oakvale Quarrys discontinues operations at the quarry site for a period in excess of six months.
 
If the Oakvale Quarrys becomes insolvent or goes into liquidation.
 
In the event that Oakvale Quarrys' contract is terminated for any of the above reasons then they have the right to enter and remove its chattels and fixtures from the quarry site for a period of three [3] month. In the event that the Oakvale Quarrys have not removed their chattels or fixtures within three [3] months then those chattels and fixtures shall become the sole and absolute property of the McDonalds.
In the event that the monies due to be paid by Oakvale Quarrys to the
McDonalds remain unpaid for a period of 120 days then the McDonalds have the right by giving one [1] month's notice in writing to Oakvale Quarrys to terminate the contract if the monies remain outstanding, the contact will be automatically terminated at the expiration of one [1] month.
The contract is subject to Oakvale Quarrys obtaining such consents as are necessary to enable the development to proceed and in the event that such consents are not obtained within a period of twelve [12] months from the contract date, then either party shall be at liberty to terminate the contract.
In the event that the quarrying proceeds then Oakvale Quarrys will carry out all fencing works and road works as are specified and will include the following: 
Any fences along roadways (which roads are to be fully fenced) are to be constructed to the ACT Government's standards for full netting fences.

Gates to be 14 feet wide.

All roads to be constructed as per the development plans.

Any dams constructed should provide good watering for stock in any paddocks in which dams are located.

Oakvale Quarrys will be responsible for the rehabilitation of the land on termination of the contract.
Oakvale Quarrys will abide by all terms and conditions of the development consent and any other associated or related Act or legislation relating to the operations of the quarry. The McDonalds will be indemnified from any liability regarding the operation of the quarry.
The Oakvale Quarrys shall comply with all notices issued relating to the operations of the quarry. In the event that any notice is not complied with within the time specified the McDonalds may terminate the contract.
The Guarantors personally guarantee the performance of the covenants contained in a contract and in the event that the Oakvale Quarrys fails to perform such obligations in the contract, the Guarantors acknowledge that they will be personally liable.
The Oakvale Quarrys shall not sub-let or assign their interest in the quarry without the consent in writing of the McDonalds. If Oakvale Quarrys sell their interest in the quarry, 15 percent of the nett price received shall be paid to the McDonalds.
The Oakvale Quarrys agrees that in the event of the McDonalds seeking to operate its own rigid truck then employment for that truck at the quarry site will be granted at the contract prices for similar trucks carting quarry from the quarry.
Oakvale Quarrys will maintain all public liability, workers compensation and all risks insurances in their names as operators.
 
Certain points in the Heads of Agreement may need to be discussed and expanded on before the actual contract is entered into to.
 
SIGNED ) by MICHAEL VIVIAN COLL ) 
McDONALD and BRETT IAN ) 
GERARD McDONALD ) presence of: ) 
SIGNED by BOB KEOGH for OAKVALE ) 
QUARRYS ) and in the presence of: )" 
This document does not depart significantly from the Johnson & Sendall draft. The differences were for an increase in royalty payments geared to the selling price of the blue metal, rather than to the CPI: a change which Keogh wanted; it also permitted an assignment of part or all of the interest granted, which Keogh needed to be able to finance the development. On the other hand it gave the McDonalds the personal guarantees which they wanted, and 15% of the net sale price if Keogh & Fisher sold their interest in the proposed quarry, and employment for their friends at the quarry site.

Christopher Keogh's effort to be helpful was not well received by the
McDonalds because on the same day Johnson & Sendall sent a fax to him stating " 18 December, 1992 
Dear Mr. Keogh, 
RE: McDONALD - QUARRY PROPOSAL 
We refer to your fax received this morning and advise that our clients are not happy with the document rather presumptuously re-prepared with considerable changes. They insist that the document be in the form or as close as possible to the form that we submitted on their behalf.
 
If the matter is urgent in terms of our clients consenting to any application for development consent then they are prepared to give such consent immediately.
 
They would prefer to enter into a binding and final agreement and not some document which seems to pre-suppose that a further agreement will be entered into.
 
One matter of particular concern in the document submitted is that an
Agreement cannot be made with a body such as Oakvale Quarries. The Agreement must be entered into with natural persons or a company but in the case of a company the obligations of the company would need to be guaranteed by the directors.
 
We await your response. " 
There was a meeting of Yarrowlumla Shire Council on 28 January 1993. Keogh and one of his sons and both of the McDonalds attended that meeting. Keogh addressed the Council on a submission to the Council which Fisher had provided and which the McDonalds had seen and to which they sought no alterations or additions.

The Council appeared receptive and Keogh and Fisher were invited to lodge a development application. At the conclusion of the Council meeting Brett
McDonald said to Keogh and Fisher "Thank God for that. Now we'll get somewhere so get stuck into it and get the quarry opened". Two days later the McDonalds gave to Keogh on his visit to them at Oakvale a large bundle of the objections submitted to Yarrowlumla Council when Leightons application to develop the quarry was put on display. That could only have been a forewarning of the type of objections that the current application might provoke so as to enable Keogh to deal with them timeously.

By early February Manion McCosker (Keogh's and Fisher's solicitors) were writing to Johnson & Sendall with enquiries as to title. Those enquiries were answered on 15 February.

On 19 February 1993 Johnson & Sendall found themselves having to write to
Manion McCosker to advise "that our clients are not prepared to instruct us to release a full copy of the previous agreement to you". The letter continues "We are instructed, however, that our clients would be prepared to warrant any rights pursuant to the previous agreement dated 27 September 1984 have now ceased to exist".

Fisher and Keogh had another meeting with the McDonalds at Oakvale on 1 June
At that meeting the McDonalds raised a number of matters of concern to them. They included long term control of the quarry (which Fisher answered by saying in effect that his children would be well equipped to takeover), the development of the access road and fencing of it, the installation of a boom gate where the quarry road joined the highway, insurances, a sound barrier around the McDonalds' mother's house (which was not far from the access road), stock fencing around the quarry area and how Keogh/Fisher would maintain control. At that stage Fisher said that there would probably be a holding company which would have the licence agreement and an agreement with a second company which would be the operating company and which would include investors and shareholders. The McDonalds also raised queries as to how they could check tonnages to ensure they got their royalties. The duration of the licence agreement was also discussed, Fisher arguing for escalating the $1.40 per tonne royalty in accordance with any increase in the price of gravel rather than with CPI increases. He suggested that the McDonalds should discuss this with their solicitor.

Not surprisingly Keogh and Fisher differ slightly in their recollections of the meeting. Fisher's recollection is that "One of the McDonalds (I do not now recall which one) said words or words to the effect: 'How long are we going to have the licence agreement for?' I replied words or words to the effect: 'The quarry should last for 50 years or more and I would like to see an agreement for 20 years at least, with a 10 year option. We have to bear in mind that the Council has to re-approve the quarry every 5 years. You should talk to Morris Owen about any additions you want to the agreement he has given us so that they are included in the final agreement when we sign it." 
Keogh's recollection is that "NF said words or words to the effect: 'We are very concerned at the considerable time and expense we are incurring with this, especially now
Connell Wagner are coming up here shortly for an on site inspection. We still would like to have a heads of agreement signed.' Both the McDonalds in turn said words or words to the effect: 'Heads of agreement are not necessary. We know you are spending money. There has to be mutual trust in a long term association." 
I find that on this occasion the McDonalds did represent that they then intended to enter into an agreement for the development of the quarry and that they would do so when it had been prepared.

On 21 July 1993 Christopher Keogh with representatives of Connell Wagner met the McDonalds at Oakvale and were taken to inspect the quarry site. Fisher was present also. On that trip one or other of the McDonalds pointed out the boundaries of the proposed first stage of the quarry to the Connell Wagner representative.

On 31 July 1993 Keogh paid the McDonalds a visit for a general discussion relating to the proposed quarry. On that occasion he sought the McDonalds' permission to have some machinery and steel that would be used in setting up the quarry operation to be stored at the proposed quarry site. The McDonalds agreed and the steel and machinery was delivered the next day. It is still there.

On 8 October 1993 Fisher on the letterhead of Pacific Earthmoving Pty Ltd wrote to the McDonalds. The letter begins "Dear Brett and Michael, Thought we should communicate with you on just where we are up to with the quarry". The letter then sets out the progress for the preparation of the EIS. Under the heading "Finance", Fisher stated "All up, and dependent upon the new approval, we will be looking at around $6.5m. Of that, we have already organised $4m under our own control". The letter then continued "One of the reasons we have not pushed the agreement has been the fact that we did not wish to fool you around unless we were sure we could do what we all wish to accomplish, ie, get the quarry open quickly as soon as we receive the necessary approvals.
 
Our main problem with the agreement was to come up with an acceptable escalation on the royalty that was fair to you but that did not jeopardise the viability of the quarry.
 
Now that it has been done we think it is a reasonable solution however if you dont share that feeling, please tell us. Some of the solutions we came up with were so complicated we could hardly understand them ourselves." 
The letter enclosed a copy of the instructions which Fisher/Keogh had given to
Peter Sendall, their solicitor at Manion McCosker and it concluded with the statement. "If we have misunderstood any of you (sic) wishes along the way, please let us know".

The copy of instructions to Manion McCosker suggests a number of amendments to the agreement "as supplied by the McDonalds". The comments make it obvious that that is a reference to the copy agreement which Fisher picked up from the office of Johnson & Sendall in Goulburn. Those instructions canvas in some detail paragraph 7 in the Johnson & Sendall draft. It provided for a royalty of $1.40 per tonne "for every tonne of quarried blue metal product transported from the said land by the licensee for its own use or purchased from the licensee by any other person or body for their use". The suggested alteration which Mr Sendall was instructed to discuss with Mr Owen was "A royalty of $1.40 per tonne will be paid on the average price of aggregate and road base being $15 or less, per tonne. An escalation will apply on a percentage basis of any increase in price of aggregate or road base over $15.
 
Should the price consistently fall below $15 per tonne to the point where the viability of the quarry was brought into question, then the Licensees would have the right to put a proposal to the McDonald to reduce the royalty by an appropriate amount. (We are only seeking a right to put the proposal - there would be no obligation on the McDonalds to comply) 
Should dust become a source of sale, then an appropriate royalty would be negotiated." 
Morris Owen was called but he was not asked whether there was any discussion between himself and Peter Sendall on this subject.

On 25 October 1993, Fisher and Keogh had a meeting that lasted about an hour with the McDonalds in the kitchen of the homestead at Oakvale. This is an important occasion. Each of the McDonalds denied any meeting on or about 25
October 1993 with either Fisher or Keogh or indeed on any other occasion when the discussions asserted by Fisher and Keogh occurred. As I have earlier indicated I simply do not believe their denials. I find there was a meeting and that at it there were discussions to the effect of those recorded by
Fisher in his statement which became Exhibit P1.

Messrs Fisher and Keogh had with them a document bearing the typed date 22
October 1993 that Mr Keogh's son Christopher had prepared. It was in the following terms "Messrs Brett and Michael McDonald 'Oakvale' 
Monaro Highway 
Williamsdale NSW 2620.
 
Dear Brett and Michael, 
Thank you for the time you took to discuss the opening of the Quarry on your property with Nick Fisher, Chris and myself.
 
We confirm that we are keen to develop the quarry subject to obtaining the necessary approvals and confirming viable financial backing for the project.
 
The conditions outlined to us are acceptable to us and we repeat them, as understood by us, below.
Fencing of the road from the Highway to the quarry site to be carried out as per the EIS.
Boom gate to be provided at the Highway end of the fence to restrict after hours access.
Gates to be installed on both sides of the access road to allow transfer of stock etc.
A royalty of $1.40 per tonne to be paid. We would like to discuss annual increases with you further. We have no objection to increases as a matter of course however, over a twenty year period this could cause us some problems.
The price of gravel may not necessarily increase over that period. Undoubtedly there are precedents in the payment of royalties to cover such situations and we would appreciate some guidance from Mr Owens in this matter so that an equitable solution is found.
The access road to be bitumenised as determined by the EIS.
All necessary insurances, including public liability insurance, to be put in place.
Suitable sound barrier and shrubs to be erected on the side of access road passing Mrs McDonald's house.
Stockproof fence to be erected around Quarry, as per EIS.
Control of the site to remain in the hands of the Keogh/Fisher families.
This agreement to cover a period of twenty years with a ten year option. This agreement would be subject also to Yarrowlumla Council renewing the licence every five years.
A weighbridge to be installed to record quarry blue metal to be transported from the property.
 
We look forward to receiving a draft agreement from your Solicitor and further discussions where necessary to assure you of our good intentions.
 
Yours sincerely [signature] [signature] [signature] 
R.S. Keogh S.S. Keogh C.M. Keogh Monkman St 3 Turnbull Pl 12 Axford Pl 
Chapman ACT Wanniassa ACT Kambah ACT [signature] 
C.N. Fisher Lochville Street 
Wahroonga NSW.
 
These conditions accepted as a basis for a formal agreement between the parties for the operation of a Quarry proposed in the EIS for the Oak Vale property at Williamsdale.
 
Brett McDonald Michael McDonald" 
It had been signed by Mr Keogh and two of his sons and by Mr Fisher.

Fisher handed this document to the McDonalds on this occasion and said words to the effect "We are still concerned that we are spending money and we cannot finalise the formal agreement until we know the conditions of the development approval.
This letter, which we have all signed, contains the additions we have discussed to your original requirements as set out by Morris Owen. We would appreciate it if you would sign it." 
He continued "BM glanced at the heads of agreement document and said words or words to the effect: 'We appreciate that you are outlaying a large amount of money but we are not prepared to sign anything until the final agreement is prepared.
There is no use continuing with a project that is going to last somewhere between 20 and 50 years if we cannot trust one another. There has to be mutual trust between the parties. We have given you our word that you can develop the quarry. We will not go back on our word. You will just have to accept that we will keep our word.' 
I then said words or words to the effect: 'We should just discuss what is in the letter (ie Annexure 'L') so that we are all clear on where we are heading.'" 
There followed discussion on a variety of matters including whether or not boom gates were necessary at the highway end of the road through Oakvale, the building of some simple stockyards at the quarry end of the road and whether or not the McDonalds could do the fencing work if their quotes were competitive. Agreement on all of these subsidiary matters was reached. I observe that all of these discussions assumed that the quarry would be developed by the Fisher/Keogh interests. I express it that way because they had not at that stage finalised by what entity they would acquire their interest in the quarry development.

On 4 November 1993 Mr Owen wrote to the McDonalds. The typed date on the letter is 4 November 1992, but it was agreed that it should have been 4
November 1993. The contents certainly so indicate. The letter began by stating:- "We have had the opportunity of perusing the letter which has been faxed being a letter from the Keogh family and Fisher to yourselves. It is apparent that the letter was prepared on the basis that you should sign the same and return it. We do not suggest that this be done at this stage." 
It then made comments on four matters in the Keogh/Fisher letter and concluded:- "Subject to the above matters we feel that an Agreement should be prepared and signed similar to the previous Agreement signed by Leightons if this matter is to proceed. Certainly the letter is too wide and we would like to see a more precise Agreement signed before the matter proceeds. No doubt the
Keoghs and Fisher would want such an Agreement before they are prepared to make the necessary application to the Council. Obviously any costs relating to the Agreement should be borne by them." 
On 25 November 1993 Mr Owen wrote to Manion McCosker. He said "We refer to our letter of 14 May and previous correspondence in this matter and advise that although our clients have received some correspondence from your client direct they have no idea as to whether or not your client is intending to proceed with this matter. They have been assured that we would receive something from you in the near future but this has not occurred.
 
Our clients are therefore concerned as to whether or not your clients have any intention to proceed with the matter and we would therefore appreciate your letting us know the current position regarding the matter so far as your clients are concerned. We understand that an environmental impact statement has been completed. Is this correct? Can we have a copy of the same? 
We look forward to hearing from you." 
In early December 1993 (Mr Keogh thought it was the 4th), he was again at
Oakvale talking to the McDonalds. The subject of the discussion on this occasion was the construction of a noise barrier and the planting of trees to shield their mother's house which was close to the proposed line of the quarry access road.

On 13 December 1993 Manion McCosker responded to Owen's letter of 25 November
He said "We thank you for your letter dated 25th November 1993.
 
We are instructed that our clients are proceeding with the proposed quarry on the property at Williamsdale. They are in the process of completing the environmental impact statement ("EIS"). Although it is hoped that the draft
EIS will be available before Christmas our clients expect that it will be issued in the first two weeks of January 1994.
 
The last study required to be completed for the EIS, namely that of the aboriginal archaeologist, has been finalised. There are apparently no major problems arising from the archaeologist's report. There are two aboriginal sites on the land that are as a result of aborigines travelling through the area. Permission will be sought to destroy the sites. Our clients understand that they are not of significance.
 
We apologise for the delay in finalising the licence deed. In view of the proposed term of the licence deed it may have to be interpreted well into the future when none of the parties currently negotiating its terms are still living. It is most important that so far as possible all issues likely to arise are covered by the deed and are dealt with unambiguously.
 
Further, our clients are concerned to ensure that the terms of the licence deed are consistent with the details incorporated in the EIS. To that end our clients have retained a geologist and mining engineer to ensure the EIS and the proposed quarrying licence are in accord.
 
As soon as the draft EIS is to hand we will be in a position to finalise our client's instructions in relation to the quarrying licence and advise you of the additions and alterations required to the deed submitted by you." 
That letter was sent by fax to Johnson Sendall on that day. Johnson Sendall responded on 14 December. That letter said "Thank you for your facsimile of the 13th December, a copy of which we have forwarded to our clients to-day.
 
In discussions with our clients they have indicated some concern to know the identity of the people with whom they are dealing. They are concerned to be assured that there is substance in your client and they therefore wish to know the exact identity involved in the proposal together with details as to their current financial position and credit rating.
 
We look forward to hearing from you at an early date." 
Manion McCosker responded on 24 December 1993 saying "We thank you for your letter of 14th December, 1993.
 
We are instructed by Mr Nick Fisher that he will contact and correspond direct with your clients concerning the issues raised in paragraph 2 of your letter. That will enable your clients to satisfy any queries they may have arising from information to be provided by Nich Fisher." 
Mr Owen responded on the same day saying "Thank you for your fax of today's date however, we point out that we have the distinct impression that our clients are uneasy about dealing directly with your clients concerning this matter and we therefore ask that information be provided to us in an appropriate form so that our clients can have the benefit of our advice in relation to any information provided. They would like to consider the responses." 
On 4 January 1994 Mr Fisher, on the letterhead of Fisher Mathews Pty Ltd wrote to Mr Owen saying "My apologies for the mix up over the financial information you requested through Peter Sandell. Because Peter was going on holidays I told him I would send the information direct. He assumed that I meant direct to Brett and
Michael.
 
In fact, I was going to send a copy to them because there is a brochure from
Hambros Bank attached however I will send both copies to you.
 
Incidentally, all the studies for the EIS have now been completed and are in the hands of Connell Wagner and we are awaiting the completion of the draft
EIS which we will forward to you immediately we have it." 
On 12 January 1994, Mr Owen wrote to Manion McCosker saying "We refer to previous correspondence and the writer's subsequent discussions with Mr Sandel's partner and confirm that we have now received a rather detailed statement from Fisher Mathews Pty Ltd regarding that company and also
Mr Fisher personally. Nevertheless, we are still not aware of the proposed identity of the Licensee. Is it to be Fisher Mathews Pty Ltd, Mr Fisher or some new entity involving Keogh. If it were a new entity then our clients would need guarantees from your substantive clients.
 
We would appreciate a similar document to be provided by Mr Keogh if he is to be involved." 
On 4 February 1994 Mr Owen again wrote to Manion McCosker saying "We refer to our letter of 12 January and note that since that time that Mr
Fisher contacted the writer directly indicating that he would provide a complete dossier on Mr Keogh and more than that a precise statement as to the proposed licensee. We note that although Mr Fisher anticipated some delay in providing that information, that the period he anticipated has now expired and accordingly our clients are now anxious to hear further regarding the matter." 
Manion McCosker responded on 8 February 1994 saying "We thank you for your letter of 4th February 1994.
 
We are instructed by Mr Fisher that he is in the process of putting together financial details concerning the establishment and operation of the quarry. He advises that the information should be available by Thursday, 10th February, .
 
Mr Fisher instructs us that he will provide considerable financial details including five year projections for the quarry operations. It is those projections that have held up a response as he wished to obtain the advice of a former state manager of a major quarry operator before issuing the figures.
 
A further issue has arisen in relation to the EIS. Our client has had to apply to the State Rail Authority for permission to construct a new rail crossing to carry quarry traffic away from the residence of your clients. We are instructed that the Australian Railway Historical Society has lodged an objection to our client's proposal to develop a new crossing and State Rail has to adjudicate on that issue.
 
Finally, we seek your assistance in identifying the ownership of a small portion of land between the railway line and the main Cooma-Canberra road. For your assistance we enclose a copy of portion of a plan for the area. The land we seek to identify is described on the plan as portion or lot 100. Although our clients understand it forms part of the property owned by your clients it does not appear to be included in any of the land referred to in the various titles previously advised by you.
 
Please advise whether the land referred to is owned by your clients and, if so, provide a title reference. Alternatively, if not owned by your clients would you please advise whether they are able to identify the land and advise who is the current registered proprietor.
 
We look forward to hearing from you." 
Two days later (10 February 1994), Fisher sent Mr Owen the information he had been seeking. That letter began with the following comments "Following is information pertaining to the development of the quarry on the
Oakvale property owned by Brett and Michael McDonald (the McDonalds).
 
The information is an attempt to cover all aspects of the development of the quarry so that we can clear up any misunderstandings that may exist.
 
The licence for the operation would be held by a company with limited capital (Company A) with the Keogh family holding 51% of the shares and the
Fisher Family holding 49% of the shares. It is our impression that the
McDonalds would favour the 51/49 split as opposed to a 50/50 split because they do not know the Fisher family.
 
The operation of the quarry would be carried out either on a Joint Venture arrangement or by Company B in which Company A would have the majority and controlling interest. The capital to operate the quarry would be raised through Company B, which would also be responsible to provide all the guarantees and insurances either specified in the Approval or which were thought necessary.
 
Questions have been raised regarding the financial viability of the Keogh family in the development of the quarry.
 
Bob Keogh's financial viability is obviously not good occasioned by the biggest problem we all face in business these days, that of being paid for work carried out. He is owed some $600,000 which he most likely will never see.
 
His financial problems have not been caused by an inefficient operation, in fact the work he has carried out in the main has been recognised as being of a very high standard, and it is from that quality of work that we seek his contribution in the development of the quarry. We are not concerned with his financial contribution but if there are further issues in the regard that you wish to raise, we are open for discussion." 
The letter then set out the proposals relating to management, some pros and cons of the quarry development and with financing options open. In that part of the document there is repeated what had earlier been indicated, namely that the development costs were estimated to be $7m of which Fisher was able to organise $4m, leaving $3m to be raised as further capital. The letter then goes on to set out the finance raising options which it did under the headings "Private Investors", "Venture Capital" and "Public Float". The letter concludes with the following three paragraphs "I regret that I am not able to say to you that the money is in the Bank just waiting for us to get the approval but it really is a complicated process and at the moment, there are a plethora of investment opportunities with which we have to compete. Despite that we believe we have it as well in hand as is possible at this stage of development.
 
I am attaching two five year projection models for your information. I compiled these from various sources but have now been able to confirm them against rules of thumb for extraction and crushing and they appear to be in line.
 
I will be only too pleased to answer any questions generated by this letter and I hope we have been able to give you a full explanation of what we are proposing." 
The accompanying projections were worked out on five different annual production estimates and various tonnage extraction rates and they set out in very considerable detail the estimates of costs in each of the five bases analysed.

On the same day as Fisher sent that information to Mr Owen, Mr Owen faxed a deal of title information to Manion McCosker. That letter also said "We have also been asked by our clients once again to request that you provide to us(so that they may consider the same) a copy of the EIS statement which your clients have had prepared. Please let us have this copy urgently.
Our clients have also asked that the previous EIS statement prepared by Coffee & Partners which was made available by them to your clients be returned." 
On or about 14 February 1994, Keogh by chance met the McDonalds at a place he identified as "Chisholm shops". On that occasion Michael McDonald asked if they had got the EIS yet and suggested "You had better get into it and get it to Council so you can get going". Brett McDonald on the same occasion said "We are about to have the tenth anniversary since this whole thing started, so hurry them up so you can get it going". Keogh explained to the McDonalds what they had been doing and the delays there had been and why.

On 2 March 1994 Mr Owen wrote to Manion McCosker. In that letter he said "We refer to previous correspondence in this matter and advise that whilst our clients have been provided a considerable amount of information concerning the project they have still not been provided with a copy of the EIS statement which your clients have presumably undertaken and by now completed. They seek that that document (as previously requested) be made available to them.
 
They also noted with some concern that the original copy EIS statement by
Coffee & Partners which was held by them previously has not been returned to them and that the document returned to them was only a copy.
 
Finally, they have asked us to raise the issue of an outstanding payment. It was agreed when these negotiations were originally entered into that certain payments would be made to our clients to cover their costs and in particular the costs of their Accountant, $500 of which amount remains outstanding and they would be pleased to receive this amount urgently." 
Two days later Keogh went to Oakvale and gave to Michael McDonald a cheque for $500 to complete payment of the Horwath & Horwath account. He also reported to Michael McDonald that Connell Wagner had told him (Keogh) that the draft EIS was almost completed and should be available in a week or so.

On 31 March 1994 Connell Wagner informed Manion McCosker that the probable completion date for the draft EIS for the quarry would be Monday 18 April 1994 (a date subsequently revised to 22 April 1994). On 19 April 1994 Johnson
Sendall wrote to Manion McCosker asking for a copy of the EIS statement as soon as it became available. The letter concluded by stating "We have also been instructed to forward herewith a copy of the account which we recently rendered to our clients. Our clients request that these costs be paid by your client as has apparently been provided." 
The account was for $800.80 of which $35.80 was for disbursements. A cheque for the $800.80 was sent by Manion McCosker to Johnson Sendall on 4 May 1994.

On 5 May Mr Keogh delivered two copies of the draft EIS to Mr Owen's office in
Goulburn. He then went on to Oakvale but the McDonalds were not at home so he left a message that the draft EIS had been completed and two copies had been left with Morris Owen. A few days later he telephone Brett McDonald to obtain his reaction to the EIS. He was told that neither of the McDonald brothers had read it in detail, but that there didn't appear to be too many corrections that needed to be made. A copy of the draft EIS was delivered by Mr Keogh to
Mr Rouse the Yarrowlumla Shire Town Planner on or about 19 May. Also during the latter part of May Keogh had discussions with the McDonalds about the draft EIS. They told him that they had only seen three small mistakes in the draft.

On 21 June 1994 Manion McCosker wrote to Johnson Sendall. They said "We refer to our previous correspondence.
 
Our client has been advised to submit the finalised EIS and development application as quickly as possible as Readymix will be submitting a similar application to Yarrowlumla Shire in the near future.
 
We are instructed that it would be disadvantageous to the Quarry proposal for your clients' property if the Readymix application goes to Council first.
 
We are further instructed that the draft EIS has been submitted to a number of people for their comments and the reaction has been quite favourable.
Consequently our client would like to submit the development application to
Council no later than Friday, 1st July, 1994.
 
We note that the draft EIS has been submitted for comment and approval by you and your clients. Please advise if there are any additional or alterations you or your clients consider appropriate.
 
We would appreciate a reply prior to 1st July, 1994 so that the EIS may be finalised." 
Johnson Sendall responded the next day saying that they had sent a copy to their clients seeking instructions.

On 15 July 1994 Manion McCosker wrote to Johnson Sendall advising "that to date our client has been unable to contact your clients concerning the draft
EIS". It asked "Will you please contact your clients as a matter of urgency and let us have their respose (sic) to the draft EIS". Johnson & Sendall replied on 18 July simply saying that the had sent a copy of the letter to their clients seeking instructions. Three days later Johnson & Sendall wrote again to Manion McCosker simply saying:- "We refer to previous correspondence in this matter and advise that regretfully our clients have lost confidence in your client particularly in its ability to perform and/or honour any contract. Accordingly our clients have decided not to proceed with the matter any further. Please advise your client accordingly." 
There was another meeting between Fisher and Keogh and the McDonalds at the
Oakvale homestead on 3 August 1994. Again their account of what occurred differs in almost all significant details from the account of the McDonalds.
Again I accept the evidence of Messrs Fisher and Keogh. I will quote Mr
Keogh's statement of what occurred.
 "NF said words to the effect: 'We have spent a great deal of money so far to develop the quarry. Could you tell me the reasons why you do not wish to proceed and I will attempt to answer your questions. We are visiting you personally. The EIS is ready for your finalisation and needs to be put in before an EIS from Readymix for extension to their quarry at Queanbeyan. If we leave it to solicitors' letters to try and sort out any problems, it would take too long and is too expensive.' BM said words or words to the effect: "Okay. We will have a talk about it and sort it out between us. Then we will tell the solicitors what we have agreed to.' 
I said words or words to the effect: 'That's exactly why we are here, because this is what we had agreed to in the first place.' 
NF said words or words to the effect: 'So what problems do you have and how do we address them?' MM exploded and became very angry. He thumped the refrigerator with his fist and the magnets from the fridge flew everywhere. MM said words or words to the effect: 'We don't know what you are doing, where the buck stops and where the money is going to come from to develop the quarry. The property has been in our family since 1840 and it is a big risk for us to proceed with the development of the quarry if we don't have the capability to protect ourselves from risks involved with the environment. We don't want a situation where you walk away after developing the quarry if environmental problems have occurred and it is going to costs millions of dollars to fix the problems. Where is the money going to come from?' 
MM queried my financial situation. He said to me words or words to the effect: 'You always want to have the biggest and the best. You always have to have the biggest dozer and the biggest grader and now you want to have the biggest quarry in the district.' MM referred to the EIS and the fact that we have applied for a quarry to produce 350,000 tonnes per year.
 
NF said words or words to the effect: 'We have engaged Connell Wagner, who we regard as one of the leading engineering consultancy firms in the country.
After their discussion with Council, their advice was to go for the maximum, even though we may only produce 60 to 100,000 tonnes in the first year. Then if we are able to expand the quarry further, a new EIS won't be needed. We will only be subject to the normal revisions from time to time.' 
MM then said words or words to the effect: 'The figures you have mentioned for $1.8 million as the cost of the road is bullshit. Warren and Brett could push a road through in a bit over a week, pushing each way over the hills and over the flat. It is a piece of cake to the bottom of the "gap" and some bloke down the road could run three or four loads of tar up and its finished.' 
NF replied in words or words to the effect: 'We have no objections to you building the road, however it will have to be done to Council specifications, otherwise Council will hold up the final approval to open the quarry. Connell
Wagner have calculated the costs of the road based on current estimates used throughout the construction industry. We do not feel that we can go against that advice. But if you could show that you could build a road at a competitive price and to the standard required by the Council, then we have no objections.' 
MM replied with words or words to the effect: 'It is only a private road and basically Councils don't know what they are doing anyway.' MM mumbled something about a garbage pit somewhere close. It made no sense to me but was intended to demonstrate that the Council was incompetent.
 
MM said words or words to the effect: 'This property has been in our family since 1840. What the fuck happens if you cunts cause a major environmental disaster? You will be able to walk away and leave us the mess to clean up and maybe cost us a $1 million.' 
NF said words or words to the effect: 'That is precisely why Environmental
Impact Statements are carried out. These are not only done in Australia but all over the world. From the experience that engineers and planning bodies now have worldwide, engineers are able to study a proposed project and assess the risk. If the risks are too high, then invariably the project will not be approved. Where there are risks involved, Council will nominate what has to be done to protect against those risks. On top of that, the risks are covered by very expensive insurance and bank guarantees.' 
MM said words or words to the effect: 'Bank guarantees aren't any good.
There is no guarantee that the bank will make the payment even if called on to do so. A bank guarantee is not worth a pinch of shit.' 
NF said words or words to the effect: 'This is how bank guarantees work.
With the Reserve Bank control over the other banks there is little chance of one of the major banks collapsing. This is what would have to happen for a bank not to pay out on its bank guarantee. But the bank isn't faced with any risk whatsoever because in the first place securities or cash have to be placed with the bank before a guarantee is issued.' 
NF said words or words to the effect: 'I will go through the previous EIS and DA. I will consult with our insurance broker and endeavour to cover all the risks that need to be covered to protect both you and us.' 
NF also explained that there would be regular inspections of the quarry by the relevant authorities and that if we were not running the quarry to the satisfaction of those authorities, they would simply cancel our licence and not let us continue if we did not comply with directions.
 
I said words or words to the effect: 'The licence agreement Morris Owen has given us contains time limits for performance that protect you. They also enable you to cancel the licence agreement.' 
MM then said words or words to the effect: 'We aren't sure of the $1.40 royalty that has been put in the agreement and we might want to increase that.' 
A discussion ensued details of which I cannot now recall. NF then said words or words to the effect: 'That would be difficult in view of the requirement to interest investors into putting the money up for the quarry. It is not an established investment where investors can look at the return that they are going to receive on the money they put in. Until the approvals are obtained it is not possible to finalise the cash flow projections for the quarry. It is possible that higher royalties would mean that the quarry is not viable.' 
MM said words or words to the effect: 'Stiff shit, you should have done all that before.' I said words or words to the effect: 'We couldn't because we haven't even got the final requirements of the Council yet.' 
NF undertook to send to the McDonalds copies of the cash flow projection, done for the quarry over a five year period showing different average prices per tonne for the gravel. This would show the McDonalds the difficulty when presenting unproven figures to investors.
 
A discussion then ensued regarding the operation of the quarry under a $2 company. NF explained to the McDonalds how the protections worked for them, not from the fact that it was a $2 company, but through guarantees, insurances and personal liability of the operating company.
 
BM then said words or words to the effect: ' Okay, you go ahead and finish the EIS. We will go to the Council and sort out David Rouse and talk to Morris
Owen. Our father didn't have to sign Leighton's EIS, they done the lot.' 
NF said words or words to the effect: 'I don't think that is correct but you check it with the Council. Once the EIS is finalised, it will be sent to
Morris Owen with the development application for your signature.' 
BM then said words or words to the effect: 'We will go and talk to the
Council to see if our father signed the application. If that was the case, we would then be prepared to sign the application.' 
The McDonalds both engaged in conversation using words or words to the following effect: 'Why don't you put up Pacific Rim. We want to see what worth is behind you blokes, balance sheets, etc. We are putting up a property worth $10 million,' 
NF replied with words or words to the effect: 'I will endeavour to get some balance sheets from our potential backers'. BM said words or words to the effect: 'Don't bother. There is no need.' 
I said words or words to the effect: 'The first step will be for us to finish the EIS and you will approach Rouse and Owen on signing the D.A. on their say so. The next step is for the signed D.A. and the EIS to go to
Council for approval'. Both MM and BM agreed with what I had said." 
Sometime later in that month the McDonald brothers went to the office of the
Yarrowlumla Council and spoke to Mr Rouse. Their enquiry of him was whether they had to sign a development application in respect of the quarry. Rouse told them that they did have to sign such an application.

On 25 August 1994 Fisher wrote a long and detailed letter directly to the
McDonalds. After some introductory remarks he said "In view of the discussions we had at the meeting on August 3 1994 when you confirmed that our quarry proposals as previously agreed were to proceed, we must now arrange to proceed to achieve those objectives as rapidly as possible and in this letter I will cover the main concerns that you seem to have had at the meeting. That is the elimination of as much risk as possible." He then reported that he had told
Connell Wagner to proceed with the completion of the EIS and went on to discuss the "risks" involved and what was proposed to be done to minimise them. He also attached cash flow projections for a five year period. The final two paragraphs of his letter said:- "Brett and Michael, this has been a sincere attempt to cover the concerns you expressed. I will push Connell Wagner for finalisation of the draft of EIS and the Development Application and get it to you as quickly as possible. We did check with the Council and they advised us that as land owners you will be required to sign the Development Application, as your father did when
Leighton's put in their Application.
 
Should you wish me to come to 'Oakvale' to discuss the matter contained in this letter, I would be only too pleased to do so. I will send you the insurance information as soon as I receive it." 
On 21 September 1994 Fisher wrote again to the McDonalds with "a quick update on progress". He ended that letter with the following statements:- "With regard to the financing of the project we have three definite groups who are interested on the basis of the estimates I have put to them on funds needed and the five year projections made.
 
As soon as we receive the development approval and the conditions attaching thereto we can firm up the investment costs and more readily prove or disprove the viability of the Quarry.
 
Should it prove to be viable as we would expect it to be, we will be in a position to negotiate the financing." 
The EIS was completed and signed on behalf of Connell Wagner on 10 October .

Then on 17 October 1994 Johnson Sendall wrote to Manion McCosker simply stating "We refer to previous correspondence in this matter and advise that our clients have once again requested that we contact you and ask that you pass on to your clients that they have no interest in dealing further with your clients regarding the quarry. We understand that your clients have recently contacted our clients direct and they would prefer that this cease immediately." 
Manion McCosker replied to that letter on 28 October 1994. I will set out that letter in full. The assertions in it correspond substantially with my findings as to what had occurred.
 "We refer to your letter dated 17th October, 1994 upon which we have taken our clients' instructions.
 
Our clients are most surprised at the advice contained in your letter. On rd August, 1994 there was a meeting at 'Oakvale' between the parties. The meeting was arranged as a consequence of your letter dated 21st July, 1994 advising the McDonalds did not wish to proceed with the proposed quarry.
 
At the meeting of 3rd August, 1994 following discussions of various matters of concern to your clients they confirmed (a) that our clients' quarrying proposals as previously agreed were to proceed, (b) that Connell Wagner were to finalise the draft Environmental Impact Statement ('EIS') and (c) the development application and EIS were to be prepared for submission to
Yarrowlumla Shire Council. For your information we enclose copies of two (2) letters from our clients to the McDonalds dated 25th August and 21st
September, 1994 confirming matters agreed, addressing issues of concern and advising on progress.
 
Your clients should appreciate that, induced by the representations and promises of your clients, our clients have incurred considerable expense in investigating and taking appropriate action to obtain all necessary approvals to enable the proposed quarry to proceed. Very briefly, we note the following: 
It was your clients who approached Bob Keogh with a general proposal for the development of a quarry on their land. They explained that they did not wish to be associated with large corporations whom they did not trust.
 
On 28th January, 1993 application was made to Yarrowlumla Shire Council with a view to confirming Council had no objections, in principle, to a quarry. Council was informed that an environmental impact statement was to be prepared concerning the proposed quarry site. Your clients, together with Bob
Keogh, attended the Council meeting at which those matters were canvassed.
 
From early 1993 onwards there were numerous meetings between the parties to discuss various aspects of the proposed quarry and its operation.
Those discussions included the following: 
On 1st July, 1993 at a meeting at 'Oakvale' with your clients, Nick
Fisher requested that heads of agreement be signed due to the fact that our clients were incurring considerable expense in relation to the EIS. Your clients responded that heads of agreement were not necessary. The McDonalds said they were committed to granting permission to our clients to operate the quarry as our clients were spending money on, inter alia, the EIS. Your clients stated that if there was to be a long term association there had to be complete mutual trust between the parties. As a consequence, our clients continued to incur expense in relation to the project including the cost of preparation of the EIS; 
On 21st July, 1993 there was a meeting at 'Oakvale' attended by Stacey
Gould of Rankin & Hill concerning various matters including showing the proposed quarry boundaries. On that day Nick Fisher advised the McDonalds that the proposed licence agreement for the quarry would be difficult to prepare before finalisation of the EIS. The period of the licence proposed namely 20 years or more meant that care had to be taken to ensure that all issues were covered by the agreement. The requirements of the various authorities needed to be known and provided for. Nick Fisher again expressed his concern that our clients were expending a considerable amount of money without the licence agreement being able to be put in place. The McDonalds reiterated that they had every intention of giving our clients the right to operate the quarry.
 
As you are aware, a draft licence agreement was prepared (presumably by your firm) and submitted to our clients covering, inter alia, quarrying operations, payment of royalties, expenses etc. As evidenced by your firm's faxed letter to C. Keogh dated 18th December, 1992 your clients' preference was to have a single final and binding agreement. It was apparent that it was not possible to settle the terms of that licence until the development application had been lodged with the Council and approval had been granted.
The conditions attaching to that approval would then be known and could be incorporated into the proposed licence. Nevertheless, in your letter dated th December, 1992 you confirmed that your clients were prepared to give consent to any application for development consent. In keeping with the spirit of the agreement recorded in the draft proposed licence agreement, our clients paid, at the request of your clients, $5,000 on account of expenses of your clients' accountants Horwath & Horwath incurred with regard to previous dealings in relation to development of a quarry. A copy of that account dated th June, 1992 is enclosed. Our clients also paid your legal costs of $800.80 in accordance with your account dated 28th March, 1994.
 
Our clients have spent a considerable amount of time talking to possible investors concerning finance for the quarry project. As explained to your clients on a number of occasions whilst favourable expressions of interest have been received it has not been possible to finalise financial arrangements until the development is approved and the conditions of approval are known to investors.
 
The EIS and development application are now complete and ready to be lodged with the Yarrowlumla Shire Council. The application requires the signatures of your clients as owners of the land. Our clients are confident that they are able to have the quarry approved, "up and running" and be paying considerable royalties to your clients within a reasonable period of time.
 
If, notwithstanding the above matters, your clients are still unwilling to proceed then our clients have been advised that they are entitled to recover from your clients the substantial expense they have incurred to date in relation to the proposed quarry development. Such expense includes the cost of investigating the proposal, commissioning the EIS, preparing information for potential investors, legal costs, accounting expenses and the like. The claim has not as yet been precisely calculated but is estimated to be of the order of $100,000. Our clients would also be entitled to damages.
 
You will appreciate that the above claims arise from the fact that in reliance upon representations made by your clients on a number of occasions, our clients were induced into making substantial investments of time and money to commission and finalise the EIS and obtain the necessary approvals and finance to establish and subsequently operate the proposed quarry.
 
We are instructed to emphasise that it is our clients' preferred option to proceed with the proposed quarry project. Please advise within fourteen (14) days whether your clients will agree to proceed. If so, we will arrange for our clients to forward the completed EIS and development application for final approval and, if approved, execution.
 
We await your reply." 
Johnson & Sendall sent a copy of that letter to the McDonalds for their instructions on 31 October 1994. They replied to Manion McCosker's letter on November 1994 saying:- "We refer to your letter of 28th October 1994 and advise that our clients deny that there was ever any intention to proceed with an Agreement to Quarry.
Our clients deny that they ever induced your clients to believe that a Quarry would proceed. At no time was there any concluded Agreement between the parties. It is quite clear from the correspondence that our clients had not agreed upon any facet of an alleged Agreement. The correspondence deals in particular with the identity of the Licensee and the uncertainty as to entering into any arrangement when they did not know who the Licensee was.
Accordingly as we see it there was no clear decision ever to enter into an
Agreement with any party in particular let alone any decision or Agreement as to the terms of any Quarry Licence.
 
Your claims are therefore denied." 
The Summons in this matter was issued on 21 March 1995. By it the plaintiffs claimed:- "1. A declaration that the Plaintiffs are entitled to have the licence agreement between the Plaintiffs as licensees and the Defendants as licensors, for the development and operation of a quarry on the Defendants' land known as 'Oakvale' via Williamsdale N.S.W, specifically performed and carried into execution.
An order that the Defendants specifically perform and carry into execution the said agreement.
Damages.
Interest pursuant to s.94 [Supreme Court Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).
Costs." 
Their principal contentions were pleaded in the following terms:- "C1. The Defendants are, and were at all relevant times, the registered proprietors of the land known as 'Oakvale' via Williamsdale in the State of
New South Wales.
 
C2. In December, 1992, the Defendants represented, and agreed with the
Plaintiffs, that they would grant to the Plaintiffs, or their nominee, a licence to develop and operate a quarry on 'Oakvale', on the terms and conditions agreed between the parties.
 
PARTICULARS 
The terms and conditions were partly written and partly oral. Insofar as they are written or recorded in writing, they are contained in the draft Deed handed to the first-named Plaintiff by the Defendants' solicitor (Mr Morris
Owen) at Goulburn on or about 14 October, 1992, and the letter from the
Plaintiffs dated 22 October, 1993, which letter was handed to the Defendants at 'Oakvale' on 25 October, 1993.
 
C3. It was a term of the agreement, and the Defendants represented to the
Plaintiffs, that the parties would thereafter execute a formal written contract in which the terms of their agreement would be stated more fully and precisely but no different in effect.
 
C4. It was a further term of the agreement, and the Defendants represented to the Plaintiffs, that they would transfer to the Plaintiffs the right to prospect and mine blue metal on the site of the proposed quarry.
 
C5. It was a further term of the agreement that, in consideration of the
Defendants transferring and assigning to the Plaintiffs the right to prospect and mine blue metal on the site of the proposed quarry: the Plaintiffs would take all property (sic) and necessary steps to obtain development consent for the quarry, including the preparation and submission of an Environmental Impact Statement; the Plaintiffs would meet all costs and expenses associated with the application for development consent for the quarry, complying with all conditions of such development consent, and construction of the quarry site; the Plaintiffs would pay the Defendants costs of and incidental to the agreement, and joining in the Plaintiffs' application for development consent, including costs already incurred by the Defendants with their accountant (Horwath & Horwath) not exceeding $5,000.00.
 
C6. It was a further express (or alternatively, implied) term of the agreement, and the Defendants represented to the Plaintiffs, that the
Defendants would do all co-operative acts required of them to achieve the contractual result intended by the parties, namely the development and operation of the quarry on 'Oakvale'.
 
C7. On 25 October, 1993 at 'Oakvale', the Plaintiffs handed to the
Defendants a signed copy of their letter dated 22 October, 1993, recording the terms of the agreement between the Plaintiffs and the Defendants, and requested that, in view of the significant expenditure then being incurred by the Plaintiffs in performance of the agreement, the Defendants sign a copy of the letter as the formal written contract contemplated by the parties as aforesaid in paragraph C3 above. The Defendants then represented to the
Plaintiffs that there was no need for a written contract to record the terms of the agreement between the parties, and that the Defendants would honour their agreement with the Plaintiffs in respect of the quarry. The Defendants further represented, by their conduct, that the agreement between the parties was as recorded in the Plaintiffs' letter dated 22 October, 1993.
 
C8. Acting in reliance on the Defendants' representations as aforesaid, and induced thereby, and in performance of the terms of the agreement, the
Plaintiffs have: at the request and direction of the Defendants, paid the Horwath &
Horwath, Queanbeyan, fee memorandum to the Defendants dated 5 June, 1992, in the sum of $5,000.00; as requested by letter from the Defendants' solicitors (Johnson &
Sendall) dated 19 April, 1994, paid those solicitors' memorandum of costs and disbursements dated 28 March, 1994, in the amount of $800.00; transported to the site various plant, equipment and materials required for the construction of the quarry: expended considerable time and expense in and about: negotiations with various statutory authorities having jurisdiction in respect of the proposed quarry; preparation of a draft Environmental Impact Statement, which was submitted for the approval of the Defendants on 5 May, 1994; preparation of a Development Application for submission to Yarrowlumla
Shire Council; preparation of the Environmental Impact Statement, in the form to be submitted with the Development Application, as the Defendants well knew or ought to have known.
 
C9. On 3 August, 1994, following receipt of a letter from the Defendants' solicitor dated 21 July, 1994 indicating that the Defendants had decided not to proceed with the matter any further, a meeting was held at 'Oakvale' between the Plaintiffs and the Defendants, during which the Defendants represented to the Plaintiffs that they were in fact proceeding with their agreement with the Plaintiffs, and that the Plaintiffs should proceed to finalising the Environmental Impact Study and submission of the Development
Application to the Council. The Defendants further represented that, if required by the Council, they would sign the Development Application.
 
C10. Acting in reliance on the further representations as aforesaid in paragraph C9, and induced thereby, the Plaintiffs have expended further time and cost in and about finalising the Environmental Impact Statement and submission of the Development Application, as the Defendants well knew or ought to have known.
 
C13. The representations made by the Defendants, as aforesaid in paragraph
C2, C3, C4, C6, C7 and C9, were intended to induce the Plaintiffs to rely on them, and the Plaintiffs did in fact rely on them.
 
C14. By reason of the matters aforesaid, the Defendants are estopped from denying that there is in existence an enforceable agreement between the
Plaintiffs and the Defendants in respect of the development and operation of a quarry on 'Oakvale'.
 
C16. The representations made by the Defendants, as aforesaid in paragraphs
C2, C3, C4, C6, C7 and C9, were made in trade or commerce.
 
C17. The representations made by the Defendants, as aforesaid in paragraphs
C2, C3, C4, C6, C7 and C9, were made by the Defendants in respect of future matters.
 
C18. The Defendants did not have reasonable grounds for making the representations in respect of future matters, as aforesaid in paragraphs C2,
C3, C4, C6, C7 and C9, and those representations must therefore be taken to be misleading by reason of the provisions of [s.41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s41.html) [Fair Trading Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) (N.S.W.) and/or s.51A [Trade Practices Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (C'th) or [s.11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s11.html)
Fair Trading Act, 1992 (A.C.T.).
 
C19. The representations by the Defendants, as aforesaid in paragraphs C2,
C3, C4, C6, C7 and C9, constituted conduct which was misleading or deceptive, in contravention of the provisions of s.42 [Fair Trading Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) (N.S.W.) [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s52.html) [Trade Practices Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (C'th), and [s.12](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s12.html)
Fair Trading Act, 1992 (A.C.T.)." 
There followed particulars of the costs and expenses incurred. Those costs and expenses fall into four groups: the first is payments to third parties, namely $5,000 to Horwath & Horwath and $800.00 to Johnson & Sendall in discharge of the McDonalds' indebtedness to them; the second is $30,570 paid to Connell Wagner Rankine & Hill for the preparation of the Environmental
Impact Study; the third is legal fees $3,568.61 and consulting fees $4,800 paid by the plaintiffs to their solicitors and to a consultant; the fourth is "time expended and disbursements" for Keogh ($31,085.36) and for Fisher ($15,750.00). In addition the plaintiffs have claimed to recover twenty years lost profits (discounted back to present value) which they calculate to be $10,982,400.00.

I add that an Amended Summons was filed on 27 November 1995. The only relevant difference is that the claim in respect of Connell Wagner Rankine & Hill has increased to $32,510.33.

I will deal first with the claim for breach of contract. It must fail, simply because the evidence which I have accepted does not evidence the formation of a contract. It is at most an agreement in principle to enter in the future into a legally binding and therefore enforceable contract. Thus, in October , according to Fisher's evidence (which I have set out earlier in these reasons) Brett McDonald was asserting "we are not prepared to sign anything until the final agreement is prepared". And their solicitor was advising them that an agreement (similar to the previous agreement signed by Leightons) should be signed "if the matter is to proceed". And Manion & McCosker were plainly of the same view and expressed it in their letter to Johnson &
Sendall dated 13 December 1993.

The history which I have recounted reveals, apart from all the other matters still "up in the air", that by the time the McDonalds refused to proceed, there was not even agreement as to the identity of the proposed licensee. All that is clear is that Keogh & Fisher were not intending that it would be them, or either of them. Yet they claim damages for breach of a contract with them! At its highest their claim is that the McDonalds agreed (on several occasions) with them to enter into a contract for the development of a quarry by their nominee on the terms of a license agreement to be documented when its terms had been agreed in principle) and I would add approved by each party's legal advisers.

The High Court stated the relevant Australian law in this situation in the joint judgment of Dixon CJ and McTiernan and Kitto JJ in Masters versus Cameron <case>; [(1984) 91 CLR 353] at 360. They said:- "Where parties who have been in negotiation reach agreement upon terms of a contractual nature and also agree that the matter of their negotiation shall be dealt with by a formal contract, the case may belong to any of three classes. It may be one in which the parties have reached finality in arranging all the terms of their bargain and intend to be immediately bound to the performance of those terms, but at the same time propose to have the terms restated in a form which will be fuller or more precise but not different in effect. Or, secondly, it may be a case in which the parties have completely agreed upon all the terms of their bargain and intend no departure from or addition to that which their agreed terms express or imply, but nevertheless have made performance of one or more of the terms conditional upon the execution of a formal document. Or, thirdly, the case may be one in which the intention of the parties is not to make a concluded bargain at all, unless and until they execute a formal contract.
 
In each of the first two cases there is a binding contract: in the first case a contract binding the parties at once to perform the agreed terms whether the contemplated formal document comes into existence or not, and to join (if they have so agreed) in settling and executing the formal document; and in the second case a contract binding the parties to join in bringing the formal contract into existence and then to carry it into execution." 
In Coal Cliff Collieries Pty Ltd versus Sijehama Pty Ltd [(1991) 24 NSWLR ] at pp.38-43 Handley JA dealt in greater detail with this question and the authorities upon it. His conclusion, stated at pp.41-2 was succinct. He said "Negotiations are conducted at the discretion of the parties. They may withdraw or continue; accept, counter offer or reject, compromise or refuse, trade-off concessions on one matter for gains on another, and be as unwilling, willing or anxious and as fast or as slow as they think fit. To my mind these considerations demonstrate that a promise to negotiate in good faith is illusory and therefore cannot be binding".

The plaintiffs alternatively relied on an estoppel based on their asserted assumption that an agreement in respect of the development's existence of the quarry was in existence and that they relied upon it in making the payments to which I have referred. I have no doubt that each of the plaintiffs did assume there was an agreement of that general nature: but for the reasons I have just given, it did not amount to a legally binding contract. No estoppel, even if what had happened could amount to an estoppel, could elevate the agreement which a party is estopped from denying into a legal enforceable contract, when the agreement which the estoppel prevents that party from denying is not as a matter of law a legally enforceable contract.

I can best illustrate why that is so by referring in a little more detail to the relief sought and reliance on the estoppel submission. It was "In the exercise of its discretion the Court should order specific performance of the agreement between the Plaintiffs and the Defendants in respect of the development and operation of a quarry on the Defendants' land known as 'Oakvale' ... in the terms contained in Exhibit P19 ... and including a term that the Defendants as Licensors execute a formal written instrument with the
Plaintiffs or the Plaintiffs' nominee as Licensee".

Exhibit P19 begins as follows:- "THIS DEED made the day of One thousand nine hundred and ninety BETWEEN 
MICHAEL VIVIAN COLL McDONALD AND BRETT IAN GERARD McDONALD both of 'Oakvale' Williamsdale in the State of New South Wales, Graziers (hereinafter called the Licensors) of the first part 
AND (hereinafter called 'the Licensee') of the second part and (hereinafter called 'the Guarantors') of the third part WHEREAS the
Licensors are the Executors by way of representation in the Estate of the late
Vivian Vincent McDonald and are entitled to be registered proprietors of grazing lands known as 'Oakvale' Williamsdale in the said State by virtue of the terms of the Wills of the said Vivian Vincent McDonald and their late father Ian Melbourne Vincent McDonald AND WHEREAS the Licensee desires to open a quarry on the said property known as 'Oakvale' AND WHEREAS the
Licensors have agreed to allow the Licensee to carry out such quarrying upon the terms and conditions now hereinafter appearing AND in consideration of the Licensee agreeing to prospect the parcel of land situated at 'Oakvale'
Williamsdale in the said State owned by the Licensors" 
As I have already recorded the identity of the Licensee had not been agreed upon, so that there was no legally enforceable contract. The proposed form of the relief seeks to overcome that defect by offering a term which the
McDonalds had not prior to termination of the negotiations, agreed upon. The perceived need to offer it at this stage highlights the failure to reach any contractually binding agreement for the development of the quarry on "Oakdale".

The plaintiffs' alternative case relied on [ss.41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s41.html) and [42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) and [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (C'th).
Counsel for the plaintiffs in his submissions relied principally on [s.41](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s41.html) of the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). [Sections ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s41.html) and [42](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of that Act are in the following terms:- "41. (1) For the purposes of this Part, where a person makes a representation with respect to any future matter (including the doing of, or the refusing to do, any act) and the person does not have reasonable grounds for making the representation, the representation shall be taken to be misleading.
 
The onus of establishing that a person had reasonable grounds for making a representation referred to in subsection (1) is on the person.
 
Subsection (1) shall not be taken to limit by implication the meaning of a reference in this Part to a misleading representation, a representation that is misleading in a material particular or conduct that is misleading or is likely or liable to mislead.
A person shall not, in trade or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely to mislead or deceive.
 
Nothing in this Part shall be taken as limiting by implication the generality of subsection (1)." 
The misrepresentations relied on were: 
In October 1992, that Fisher and Keogh "had a deal" and should therefore as part of it get Horwath & Horwath "off their backs" by paying over their overdue account of $5,000.00.

On 28 January 1993, after the Yarrowlumla Shire Council meeting that
Fisher and Keogh should "get stuck into it and get the quarry opened", i.e.
that there was an agreement granting to them the appropriate rights and that they should set about exercising them.

On 1 June 1993 that the McDonalds would sign an agreement for the development of the quarry when it had been prepared.

On 25 October 1993 that "there has to be mutual trust between the parties.
We have given you our word that you can develop the quarry. We will not go back on our word".

On 3 August 1994. This was the occasion of the angry meeting in the kitchen of the homestead on "Oakvale". What is relied on was the statement that the McDonalds would sign the Development Application (for the quarry) if they could see that their father had signed the Development Application when
Leightons were proposing to develop the quarry, a course consistent only with an intention to go ahead with development by Keogh and Fisher.

I have found that all these representations were in fact made. I find also that neither of the McDonalds had any such intention. Their purpose in entertaining the discussions with Fisher and Keogh was first to get them to pay some outstanding obligations of the McDonalds that they either could not, or were not willing to pay themselves out of their own resources and secondly to have Fisher and Keogh carry out steps at their expense designed to establish whether or not establishment of a quarry on the McDonalds' property would be likely to be permitted, and would or might probably be a profitable venture. Favourable answers to these questions would improve the value of "Oakvale", either on sale, or more significantly in their minds I think, for mortgage purposes.

Those findings make it unnecessary for me to consider whether the representations were "with respect to any future matter", within the meaning of s.41 rather than being representation of their intentions at the time of making the representations. They were untrue statements of the McDonalds' intentions when they were made and the making of them contravened s.41 if they were made "in trade or commerce". If any of them is properly to be described as being "with respect to any future matter", for example to execute an agreement, then such of them as are in that category were on my findings then untrue so that neither of the McDonalds had reasonable grounds for making any such representation.

There are many cases dealing with the meaning of the expression "in trade or commerce". It is obviously taken from s.52(1) of the of the [Trade Practices
Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (C'th) simply substituting "A person", for "A Corporation" in the Commonwealth Act.
It is accordingly reasonable to construe "in trade or commerce" as having the same meaning in the New South Wales Act as it has in the Commonwealth Act.

The expression "trade or commerce" is to be found in The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
[Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s51.html) empowers the Parliament of the Commonwealth to make laws with respect to "Trade and Commerce with other countries, and among the States,": [s.92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s92.html) requires that "on the imposition of uniform duties of customs, trade, commerce and intercourse among the States ... shall be absolutely free". Power to enact
The [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) must, it seems to me, be that conferred by [s.51(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s51.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/).
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s4.html) in defining "trade or commerce" to mean "trade or commerce within Australia or between Australia and places outside Australia" echoes [s.51(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s51.html) 
In W & A McArthur Limited versus State of Queensland <case>; [(1920) 28 CLR 530], at pp.546-7 Knox CJ, Isaacs and Starke JJ said, of [s.51(1):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s51.html)- "The terms 'trade, commerce, and intercourse' are not terms of art. They are expressions of fact, they are terms of common knowledge, as well known to laymen as to lawyers, and better understood in detail by traders and commercial men than by Judges. But as Judges we are taken to know and do in fact in this instance know the general import of the words. The particular instances that may fall within the ambit of the expression depend upon the varying phases and development of trade, commerce and intercourse itself.
Aviation and wireless telephony have lately added to the list of instances, but the essential character of the class remains the same. 'Trade and commerce' between different countries - we leave out for the present the word 'intercourse' - has never been confined to the mere act of transportation of merchandise over the frontier. That the words include that act is, of course, a truism. But that they go far beyond it is a fact quite as undoubted. All the commercial arrangements of which transportation is the direct and necessary result form part of 'trade and commerce'. The mutual communings, the negotiations, verbal and by correspondence, the bargain, the transport and the delivery are all, but not exclusively, parts of that class of relations between mankind which the world calls 'trade and commerce'." 
Later, in Bank of New South Wales versus The Commonwealth <case>; [(1948) 76 CLR 1] Dixon J, as he then was, said of [ss.92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s92.html) and [51](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s51.html)(1):- "Those who introduced [s.92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s92.html) into the Australian [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) did so in the full light of American experience. In [s.51(i)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s51.html) they coupled the word 'trade' with the word 'commerce', which stood alone in the United States [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) to define the subject matter of the power of Congress to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the several States. Not content with the expression 'trade and commerce' for the purposes of [s.92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s92.html), they there added the word 'intercourse'. 
It has been said that 'trade' strictly means the buying and selling of goods. That, however, is a specialized meaning of the word. The present primary meaning is much wider, covering as it does the pursuit of a calling or handicraft, and its history emphasizes rather use, regularity and course of conduct, than concern with commodities. 'Intercourse' was doubtless added because of the view, now no longer open in the United States, that commerce might not extend to intercourse that was not concerned with business profit or pecuniary gain and because of the degree to which the right of the citizen to access to every constituent part of the Union had been rested on implication.
I cannot think that the essential content of the expression 'trade commerce and intercourse' in [s.92](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s92.html) is any less than is included in the conception of commerce in the modern American view of the commerce power. I am not speaking of the spread of that power over an immense field of activities that are incident to commerce. It is the central conception expressed in the word to which I refer. It covers intangibles as well as the movement of goods and persons. The supply of gas and the transmission of electric current may be considered only an obvious extension of the movement of physical goods. But it covers communication. The telegraph, the telephone, the wireless may be the means employed. It includes broadcasting and, no doubt, it will take in television. In principle there is no reason to exclude visual signals. The conception covers, in the United
States, the business of press agencies and the transmission of all intelligence, whether for gain or not. Transportation, traffic, movement, transfer, interchange, communication, are words which perhaps together embrace an idea which is dominant in the conception of what the commerce clause requires. But to confine the subject matter to physical things and persons would be quite out of keeping with all modern developments. The essential attributes which belong to the conception should determine the field of human activities to which it applies. To place among the essential attributes the requirement that there should be goods for sale or delivery or a man upon a journey, is to mistake the particular for the general, the concrete example for the abstract definition, and to yield to habits of thought inherited from a more primitive organization of society." 
The expression "trade or commerce" in s.52 of the Commonwealth Act has been described as of "wide import"; (Hornsby Building Information Centre Pty Ltd v Sydney Building Information Centre Ltd (1978) 140 CLR at 234) (Murphy J) as "intended to cover the whole field in which the nation's trade or commerce is carried on" (Larmer versus Power Machinery Pty Ltd (1977) 29 FLR 490 at 493) (Nimmo J), as not confined to things done in the course of carrying on a business (Smolonozov versus O'Brien <case>; [(1982) 67 FLR 311) (Ellicott] J), or for the purpose of profit making (Re Ku-ring-gai Co-operative Building Society (No 12) Ltd <case>; [(1978) 22 ALR 621] at 648) Deane J with whom Brennan J concurred, as extending communications between a corporation and its shareholders relating to a proposed resolution to acquire an asset (the whole of the issued capital of another company) (Orison Pty Ltd versus Strategic Minerals Corporation NL [(1987) 77 ALR 141) (French] J) and as extending to a sale by a corporation of its capital asset (Bevanere Pty Ltd versus Lubidinense [(1985) 7 FCR 324) (Morling](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281985%29%207%20FCR%20324 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Neaves and Spender JJ).

If a corporation owning a grazing property negotiated for the opening of a quarry on its land and for the receipt of a royalty on product produced at that quarry and sold, its so doing would on the above authorities be an activity in trade or commerce within the meaning of s.52 of the Commonwealth
Act. It follows in my view that such activities engaged in by the McDonalds were in trade or commerce within the meaning of that expression in [s.42(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/s42.html) of the [Fair Trading Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) .

For the reasons earlier given several of their representations were deliberately false and misleading and Fisher and Keogh were misled by them.

Damages recoverable for breach of s.42(1) of the New South Wales Act are reliance damages, i.e. compensation for things done relying on the assumed truth of the representation, and not expectation damages, i.e. damages for loss of a bargain: Gould versus Vaggelas [(1985) 157 CLR 215], Sutton v A.J. Thompson Pty Ltd [(1987) 73 ALR 233], Gates v
City Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd (1986) 160 CLR 1, Futuretronics
International Pty Ltd versus Gadzhis <case>; [(1992) 2 VR 217.] 
The plaintiffs' claim in this action for the present value of the profits they expected to gain from the quarry operation is a claim for "expectation" damages. Had they succeeded in establishing a contractual entitlement, those damages would have been recoverable, but they did not.

The plaintiffs' claim for reliance damages entitles them to recover the moneys expended in reliance on the McDonalds' representations.

The expenses incurred by the plaintiffs which they are entitled to recover consistently with the above reasons are:-
The $5,000 paid to Horwath & Horwath by four instalments between 16
December 1992 and 4 March 1994.
The $800 paid to Johnson & Sendall on 4 May 1994.
The $32,510 paid to Connell Wagner Rankine & Hall (by six instalments between 5 August 1993 and 23 December 1994).
Their legal costs paid to Manion & McCosker $3,568.
Consultancy fees paid to Weltone Pty Ltd $4,800 in relation to advice on the development of the quarry, at some date after May 1995.
Fisher's travelling expenses. The evidence relating to those expenses is somewhat sparse. It asserts twenty seven journeys of various distances all in
Fisher's car totalling approximately 5,000 km. There was no evidence that had
Fisher not made these journeys he would have gainfully otherwise used the time so spent. I propose therefore only to allow travel costs, which I determine at $2,500.

There was no evidence that Keogh actually incurred any out-of-pocket expenses, or that his time spent in relation to quarry proposal would have been otherwise remunerated. Nor does the evidence establish with precision the date of some of the above payments.

I propose to quantify those claims on the basis that the total of those six items ($54,978) was all paid by 31 December 1994 (recognising of course that some were paid earlier and some possibly later) and to add interest to 20
September 1996. That totals $65,988.

There will accordingly be judgment for the plaintiffs in the sum of $65,988.

The effect of Pt 52A r 33(2) of the Supreme Court Rules is that the plaintiffs are not entitled to their costs of these proceedings unless it appears to me that they had sufficient reasons for commencing or continuing these proceedings in this Court. I am not of that opinion. I could only form it if I thought that the claim for breach of contract had any prospect of success. If it did the expectation damages claim would have been substantial. But for the reasons earlier given it should have been apparent to the plaintiffs, properly advised, that their claim for damages for breach of contract had no prospect of success.
 * * * 
