

Robert Leslie Martin versus Oatlands Golf Club Ltd [1996] NSWSC 335 (6 August )

ROBERT LESLIE MARTIN v. OATLANDS GOLF CLUB LTD /94 
TUESDAY 6 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
BRYSON J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The Club: golf buggies.
 
These proceedings relate to the plaintiff's wish to use his private motorised golf buggy for transport on Oatlands course while playing golf.

Oatlands Golf Club Ltd is a company limited by guarantee. It owns and operates the Oatlands Golf Course, with club premises and principal access on
Bettington Road. The Club was incorporated on 6 July 1933 and members incur guarantee liability limited to $2 in the event of winding-up. The present
Articles of Association were adopted by a special resolution of a General
Meeting of members on 17 September 1986. The Club is a Registered Club under the Registered Clubs Act and it is organised on familiar lines for registered clubs with social or sporting activities. Under Article 43 it has a Board of
Directors of 10 members, including a President, a Vice President, a Captain, a
Vice Captain, an Honorary Treasurer and five other Board members; these are elected annually at the Annual General Meeting. By Art.16 the Board has power to determine the rights of members to use the golfing facilities and by
Article 46: "The Board shall be responsible for the management of the business and affairs of the Club." Further powers are stated more particularly and at length in Article 47, and these include power to delegate powers to committees, to make By-Laws and enforce observance and many other matters.
There are a number of functioning committees but the decisions significant to this case were made by the Greens Committee, which meets once in most months and usually consists of five office-holders and board members; meetings are often attended by the Secretary/Manager and by the Course Superintendent. The
General Committee is a Committee of the Whole and usually meets each month and receives the minutes of other committees; the resolutions of the Greens
Committee have been adopted in most cases in evidence, but this does not always happen.

This case is concerned with motorised golf buggies which can transport players. The case does not involve hand-drawn buggies or trolleys used by players on foot to transport clubs and equipment. The evidence shows that some players use motor bikes for transport on the golf course; but these had little attention. The use of motorised buggies to transport players has had the attention and concern of the Board and the Greens Committee for many years; the minutes show this. The use of buggies brings with it practical concerns for those managing a golf course. Buggies cause wear and tear to grass and marks and indentations on fairways and paths. Obviously enough, impact and intensity of usage can vary greatly with the numbers of players and buggies, characteristics of soil, rainfall and vegetation and the facilities constructed on particular courses. I was told that some modern courses are laid out with buggy pathways as part of the design and construction of the course, and that on some courses it is compulsory to use a motorised buggy. In the perception of the directors, voiced by Mr Foster, there is a need for the directors to control and manage buggy usage on Oatlands.

Rule 13 
Each year for many years the Club has issued a booklet entitled "Members and Associates Programme" for the year, and these booklets have included some pages headed "Rules of the Club (to be read in conjunction with the By-Laws) regarding hours, conditions of play, etc." These Rules do not purport to be By-Laws and so far as evidence shows, they were not made according to the procedure prescribed by the Articles for By-Laws. Under Article 48 these procedures include a provision requiring posting of By-Laws on the club notice board, in terms which probably make posting on the notice-board essential for the By-Law to come into force. Evidence of Mr Foster, who has been a Board member and office-holder for some years and is now President, shows that so far as Mr Foster's knowledge extends r.13(f) of the Rules has never been posted on the Notice Board as a By-Law. This is not a strict proof of lack of validity as it is possible that r.13(f) came into effect under some earlier version of the Articles. 
Article 16 provides: "The rights of members to use the golfing and other facilities of the Club shall be as the Board may determine from time to time by By-law or otherwise." The words "or otherwise" appears to enable the Board to adopt the rules in the booklets; I would think however that if a subject were dealt with by a By-Law, the Committee could not vary it by a determination under Art.16.

There have been generally similar rules to r.13, with some differences in language, in the Programs since 1976-1977 (if not earlier); see Exhibit 3. The numbers vary, and in one recent booklet the same rule was given number 12.
Rule 13 deals with power buggies and motor bikes. In the booklet for 1993-1994 (Exhibit L) there are eleven paragraphs in r.13 and the ones now important are these: "(d) Any Motorised Buggy or Bike used within the boundaries of the Club must comply with specifications as laid down by the Committee. Details of these specifications are available from the Office.

Any Buggy or bike which deteriorates in appearance or departs from any other specification may be refused access to the Course until it is again restored to an acceptable condition as judged by the Committee.

Members contemplating the purchase or building of a Motorised Buggy or
Bike must consult the Committee for preliminary approval.

Only 2 Sets of Clubs are permitted for each Motorised Buggy.
. .

Any member wishing to use a private Motorised Buggy or Bike on a regular basis must seek written approval from the Committee." 
There are several other subrules relating to practicalities of where and how buggies and bikes may be used.

The plaintiff and his golf buggy.

The plaintiff Mr Robert Martin (known in the Club as Bob Martin) has been a member since 1959. He has been a very active member, in participation in sport and as a Board member and Honorary Treasurer, but at the times now most significant he was no longer a Board member. He plays golf about 40 times per year. He has played at many other courses. He has health problems in that he is a diabetic and has severe circulation problems in his leg. He needs to use a motorised buggy to play golf, and if he did not have the use of one he would be unable to get around the course, so he would be unable actually to obtain the principal benefits of membership. His house property at 3 York Street, Oatlands is contiguous with the course. He owns a motorised buggy with a petrol motor. The plaintiff did not acquire his motorised golf buggy by planning of his own; it was given to him, as a complete surprise, as a Christmas gift by his adult children a few days before Christmas 1993. It cost them $11,000. One of his sons who was a donor has himself been a member of the Club for 20 years or so and should have known of r.13 and the Club's requirements for permission to use a golf buggy. The buggy is illustrated by the photograph Exhibit C. It can transport two golfers and equipment; this is well related to r.13(g). The Club's requirements seem to involve that only two persons should be transported by a buggy and that no more than two sets of equipment should be on the buggy. This requirement is enforced. This reflects concern with the overall weight of the buggy and its impact on the course. When the plaintiff uses a buggy on the golf course he is usually accompanied by his son, one of the donors, who drives. The plaintiff has not been able to make a practice of using his own golf buggy to play at Oatlands. He usually plays golf on Wednesdays, and as he has never received permission to bring his buggy onto the course and use it, except possibly as a short-term exception his application was being considered, he must hire a buggy owned by the Club to play, and pay $22 as the hire charge. As the Club only owns eight buggies for hire, there is the possibility that a buggy might not be available. This has not been a practical problem so as to prevent him from playing on Wednesdays so far, but if he were to seek to play on Saturdays, it is likely that he would often encounter problems from a shortage of hire buggies. 
Committee Minutes.

Over many years the Club's Minutes show signs of concern with practical matters affecting the use of golf buggies. Until 1989 it does not seem that practical limits were imposed by Committee decisions on the number of buggies which could be used. The first sign in the evidence of motorised buggies as a concern in managing the course is in a minute of the Greens Committee of 24 March 1975, which recommended a sub-committee to investigate desirable manufacturing standards, the concerns being power, tyres, appearance and noise factor. In July 1975 the Greens Committee resolved that a permanent rule be made that passenger buggies must not be driven on fairways in wet or soft conditions, and there was to be a notice to that effect in buggies.

The Club has a storage shed for buggies and motor bikes, and at one time the
Club had building work done to extend the shed, which can accommodate 50 buggies, more than are now in use. It is not essential to have the use of storage space in the shed to be able to use a buggy, as a member might be able to bring his buggy onto the course each time he used it. That is the plaintiff's situation; he could easily and conveniently do this because he lives close to hand, has garaging at his house for the buggy, and could bring it directly onto the course by a connecting lane. A minute of 23 March 1985 says that the buggy shed had then been erected and space in it was allocated to seven members. In the minutes of the Greens Committee meeting of 10 April the problem reflected was the allocation of the additional spaces for storing buggies. In the minutes of 12 June 1985 there is a decision and an instruction to the Club professional to tell persons wishing to purchase motorised golf carts that there was no guarantee of a parking space and "a written request must be made to the Buggy Committee for their name to be entered on the waiting list in accordance with r.13(f)." Directional signs and other traffic controls for carts became a recurring subject for decisions of the Greens Committee. Insurance became a concern after a member was hit by a run-away buggy.

On 13 July 1987 the Greens Committee recommended that the directors look at increasing the storage facilities by up to 10 spaces and "to advise current applicants that at present no storage facilities are available but pending deliberation of (the increase) ... they may use a buggy on a daily basis." On August 1987 the Greens Committee was concerned with making buggy use and storage self-funding by fees. In 1988 a decision was taken for the construction of additional storage; the additional storage was erected in , and there was then space to store 50 buggies. There were approvals for storage of members' buggies which, together with others hired out by the
Professional, filled the available space.

On 13 November 1989 the Greens Committee Minutes show that "A request from Dr
B. Lee for a buggy space was noted and his name placed on the waiting list."
Dr Bian Lee, a long-standing member, is still on the waiting list, and his name is the first on it. Messrs M.Ruter and D. Lawton made requests in 1990 to store a motorised buggy on course and after consideration, Mr D. Lawton's request was approved on 9 April 1990 and Mr Ruter was placed on the waiting list. On 15 October 1990 the Greens Committee approved buggy storage for Mr K.
Hicks and approved transfer of buggy storage from Mr K. Coles to Mr N.
Stringer.

A significant turn in the directors' management of motorised buggies was taken with the Greens Committee resolution of 22 April 1991 which is in these terms: "Following receipt of a request from Mr P. Coleman to regularly use a motorised buggy at Oatlands but not to store it on course, Committee resolved to set a ceiling of 50 units of motorised use. Carts and bikes including the professional's hire units at any one time.

Secondly, it was resolved that for any future request, including the present one, that should permission be granted it be on the basis of payment of the course upkeep fee currently $165 p.a.".

This was a significant turn of events because until this time there had been a practical limitation arising from the limit to the number of buggy storage spaces which caused the need to maintain a waiting list, but it was possible for a member to obtain permission to use a buggy if it was not stored on the
Club's premises, and it seems that there were instances where this happened.
But from 22 April 1991 there was a ceiling of 50 units of motorised use. This was not a decision to impose a ceiling on storage space; it was a ceiling on the number of motorised units, and this included the units hired out by the
Professional.

On 17 June 1991 the Greens Committee resolved "Buggy Management. It was generally agreed that Committee should look closely at controlling and improving buggy management on the course to reduce wear and tear particularly around tees and greens." On 19 August 1991 the Greens Committee approved what was in effect a transfer of a relinquished storage space from Mr A. Williams to Mr A.E. Brown. On 21 October 1991 the Greens Committee noted a request from
Mr N. Chipis and Mr I. Lee to store and use a motorised buggy and resolved to advise that no vacancies existed at that time and that their names be placed on the waiting list. From time to time other applicants were placed on the waiting list.

On 2 December 1991 the Greens Committee gave approval for Mrs W. Shields to store on course a buggy previously approved for course usage, and decided to allocate buggy storage for Mr E. Edwards to Mr N. Chipis. The Greens Committee went on to resolve "Further it was resolved to adopt a policy of not necessarily replacing vacancies as they occur, with a view of reserving space for urgent medical situations. Secondly, it was resolved that a prohibition be placed on visitors bringing motorised units on course ... The Professional has eight (8) units for hire." The minutes contain several more resolutions dealing with Mr N. Chipis, who did not ever pay his buggy fees and hence was never able to take up the approval granted to him. Mr Chipis' approval was revoked on 19 October 1992.

The minutes for 20 January 1992 show that Mr W. Shields, who had approval to store a motorised buggy, would not store it on course.

Another significant turn of events occurred with a resolution of 18 January in these terms.
 "Buggies. Following request for a Messrs R.O. and R. Willington to store and use a motorised buggy a full report on present numbers was tabled. It was resolved to advise the applicants that their names be placed on the waiting list. It was further agreed to pursue the present policy of trying to reduce the number of motorised carts on the course." 
The plaintiff's application.

The next significant event was the application by the plaintiff to use a motorised buggy. The plaintiff wrote the Secretary/Manager on 17 January 1994 and asked for permission to use a Motorised Buggy on the course. He said that he intended to build a garage on his property to house it, and that the Professional had offered to house his buggy temporarily until the garage had been built. He enclosed a brief medical certificate. On 17 January 1994 the Greens Committee resolved "Request for a motorised buggy. A request for a Mr R.L. Martin to use a motorised buggy was noted. Consistent with policy, Mr Martin was to be advised and his name would be put on the waiting list and there be ten (10) names already on the list.

The Secretary/Manager wrote to the plaintiff on 18 January acknowledging his letter and telling him that the Committee, consistent with its policy over the last two years, had noted his request, placed his name on the waiting list, and that there were 11 members awaiting for buggy vacancy.

On 24 January 1994 the Secretary/Manager wrote to each of the persons whose names were already on the list referring to Mr Martin's request (but not naming him) and asking whether the member had any objections to the request which was supported by a medical statement being given priority. There were ten replies; one made no objection and others replied in various senses, often referring to medical difficulties of their own or of others. These replies came before the Greens Committee.

In a Newsletter circulated in March 1994, the President said: "Whilst on the subject of Motorised Buggies and Bikes, Committee recently reviewed its policy on the issue.

For some two years now Committee has followed a policy of gradual reduction in numbers, so much so that no approval has been granted for a private buggy or bike since early in 1992 and a waiting list of some eleven (11) members now exists.

Committee's policy continues to be one of gradual reduction with a view to reducing present numbers by three units per year to a maximum reduction of 15 units in 5 years.

This policy will reduce the detrimental effect of compaction on fairways and accelerate the benefits of continuing Fairway Improvement Programmes.

All applicants for membership will be advised prior to joining of this policy." 
The Secretary/Manager wrote to the plaintiff on 3 March 1994 in similar terms and offering on behalf of the Committee to endeavour to arrange priority booking if the plaintiff experienced a problem in hiring a buggy from the
Professional. It appears that in sending this letter the Secretary/Manager acted on a decision taken by the Greens Committee on 14 February 1994.

On 21 March 1994 the Greens Committee resolved as follows: (Ex 1, p100, item ) "Motorised Buggies. It was noted that all private buggy owners will be given until 28 March 1994 to indicate to the pro shop of any authorised use of their buggy. After that date in the absence of any authorisation, the buggy will only be given to the owner." 
Messrs Calvin Nelson & Co. Solicitors representing the plaintiff wrote to the Secretary/Manager on 15 April 1994 making a number of inquiries for information, making representations in favour of reconsideration of his request, and saying that if the request was rejected or not dealt with at the next appropriate Committee meeting they were to take action in the Supreme
Court. This letter was tabled and discussed at the Greens Committee Meeting on April 1994 and there was a decision to consult solicitors and report to the
General Committee.

On 27 April 1994 the General Committee agreed on the terms of a draft reply which was sent to the plaintiff's solicitors on 3 May 1994. The reply referred to the Committee's concern for the preservation of the golf course and the enhancement of the Fairway Improvement Programme, said that the
Committee believed that it was not in the best interest of the Club and the golf course to treat Mr Martin's situation as a special case, and advised that the Committee had decided not to grant the permission sought. This led to a further letter from the plaintiff's solicitors on 23 June 1994, setting out the conclusions of an Opinion obtained from counsel and requesting review of the decision and grant of approval. Restricted access to counsel's advice was given.

On 18 July 1994 the Greens Committee received and noted advice from the Club's counsel and recommended no change to the earlier decision on 19 July 1994.
Messrs Coleman & Greig Solicitors representing the Club informed the plaintiff's solicitors of adherence to the previous decision. There was more correspondence, and on 27 July 1994 the General Committee considered the manner, adopted the Greens Committee proposal to affirm earlier decisions and decided that the Club's solicitors should advise Mr Martin of this decision.
The Club's solicitors carried out this decision in a full letter of 28 July concluding with an offer to accept service of process. The plaintiff commenced the proceedings by Summons on 7 September 1994.

The claim under Rule 13.

The terms of the Summons and the relief claimed in it show that the claim was based first on s.260 of the Corporations Law and secondly on contentions that the powers given by r.12(f) or 13(f) had not been exercised bona fide, had been exercised taking irrelevant considerations into account and failing to take relevant considerations into account, had been exercised as an inflexible or rigid application of policy without regard to the plaintiff's circumstances and was not a fair and honest exercise of powers. 
The claim based on r.12(f) or 13(f) can be put out of consideration forthwith.
The plaintiff complied with subr.(i) by making a written application for the
Committee's approval; it could not be said that the plaintiff has failed to comply with r.13 and the defendant has not suggested that he has so failed.
The powers of the defendant and of the Committee to give or withhold permission to anybody, member or not, to bring a motorised buggy onto its course could not be affected by the validity or invalidity of r.13. The relevant powers of the directors are their general powers of management conferred by Articles 46 and their power to determine the rights of members to use the golfing facilities conferred by Article 16. Directors do not exercise powers purporting to be conferred by the rules in the booklet. Subrule 12(f) or 13(f) is directed at what members are to do and does not confer a power on directors; they have their powers from another and higher source in the
Articles. The same is true of subrule 13(i). The rules deal with a wide variety of subjects, and many of them are directed to calling members' and players' attention to well-mannered and sportsman-like behaviour on the course and in the Club premises rather than to things which need to have By-Laws made about them. I am really only concerned with r.13 and the provisions in subr.(f) requiring members contemplating the purchase or building of a motorised buggy to consult the Committee for preliminary approval and with subr.(i) requiring a member wishing to use a private buggy to seek written approval from the Committee. Mr Martin did not have to comply with (f) because he did not ever contemplate purchase and the gift of the buggy came as a complete surprise. He did comply with (i) and seek written approval. If he had not complied but had completely ignored subrule (i), or if there had been no rules or they were completely invalid, it would still have been within the directors' powers to grant or withhold to him permission to bring his buggy onto the course.

The exercise by the directors of their powers of management, however well or badly they exercise them, is not open to review by the Supreme Court. (I give the authorities for this view later.) The directors have to answer to the members, especially at the Annual General Meeting at which directors are elected or re-elected, for the quality of their management decisions; they do not have to answer to me. It can be clearly seen that their decision on the plaintiff's application was a decision relating to the business and affairs of the Club (Art.46) and to the rights of members to use the golfing facilities (Art.16), and that is all that needs to be seen for it to be a completely effective decision authorised by law and within their powers.

The claim under s.260.

The practical inability of courts to review management decisions of company directors according to the general law no doubt explains the enactment of what is now s.260 of the Corporations Law.

Section 260(1)(a) provides: "An application to the Court for an order under this section in relation to a company may be made: by a member who believes: that affairs of the company are being conducted in a manner that is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, a member or members, or in a manner that is contrary to the interests of the members as a whole; or that an act or ommission, or a proposed act or omission, by or on behalf of the company, or a resolution, or a proposed resolution, of a class of members, was or would be oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discirminatory against, a member or members or was or would be contrary to the interests of the members as a whole; or ..." 
The Australian Securities Commission may also make such an application. By later subsections the Court is empowered to make orders of a number of specified kinds, including an order for regulating the conduct of affairs of the company in the future. For these powers to exist the Court must be of opinion as indicated in the opening paragraphs (a) and (b) of subs.260(2) which follow.
 "If the Court is of the opinion: that affairs of a company are being conducted in a manner that is oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, a member or members (in this section called the `oppressed member or members') or in a manner that is contrary to the interests of the members as a whole; or that an act or omission, or a proposed act or omission, by or on behalf of a company, or a resolution, or a proposed resolution, of a class of members of a company, was or would be oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, a member or members (in this section also called the `oppressed member or members') or was or would be contrary to the interests of the members as a whole; ..." 
There are a number of supplementary provisions in subs.(3) to (9) of s.260.

The High Court decision in Wayde's case.

The predecessor provision to s.260 was s.320 of the Companies (New South Wales) Code. Section 320 was considered and applied by the High Court of Australia in Wayde & Anor v. New South Wales Rugby League Ltd <case>; [(1982) 180 CLR 459.] The facts of that case were unlike the present case in significant respects, including the nature of the power of the Board of the New South Wales Rugby League which was exercised and challenged. The Memorandum of Association of the Rugby League in cl.3(j) made it an object for which the League was established to determine which club should be entitled to enter teams in the Premiership and other competitions, and Article 76 expressly enabled the Board of Directors to determine which clubs would participate in competitions. By Article 32(a) the Board had general powers of management. The leading judgment (Mason ACJ, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ) emphasised at p466 the importance of the express conferral on the Board of the power which was exercised to determine the nature and extent of the competition which was to take place.
 "It is conceded that the Board made the decisions which are under attack in good faith. There is no suggestion that, in exercising the power conferred by
Art. 76, it failed to have regard to relevant considerations or that it took irrelevant considerations into account. It is a point of great importance that the decisions were made in the exercise of a power that is expressly conferred on the Board, a power to determine the nature and extent of the competition that was to take place in 1985 and the clubs that were to be permitted to participate in it. It is not a case where the directors of a company, in the exercise of the general powers of management of the company, might bona fide adopt a policy or decide upon a course of action which is alleged to be unfairly prejudicial to a minority of the members of the company. In that kind of case it may well be appropriate for the court, on an application for relief under s.320, to examine the policy which has been pursued or the proposed course of action in order to determine the fairness or unfairness of the course which has been taken by those in control of the company. The court may be required in such circumstances to undertake a balancing exercise between the competing considerations disclosed by the evidence. cf Thomas v. H.W.
Thomas Ltd., [[1984] 1 N.Z.L.R. 686], at pp.695, ." 
Further observations at 467 and 468 emphasise the need to show not only that the decision challenged was prejudicial but that it was unfairly prejudicial, and also emphasised the caution which a court must exercise in determining an application under s.320 in order to avoid an unwarranted assumption of the responsibility for management of the company. The Court (at 468) also observed: "It has not been shown that those decisions of the Board were such that no Board acting reasonably could have made them." 
The present case is one of the kind which the majority, in the longer passage which I have cited, put on one side; a case where the directors, in exercise of the general powers of management, might bona fide adopt the policy or decide upon the course of action which is alleged to be unfairly prejudicial.
This is a case where it is appropriate for the court to examine the policy which has been pursued and the proposed course of action in order to determine its fairness or unfairness, and this does in the present case require me to undertake a balancing exercise between competing considerations.

Brennan J reached the same conclusion in a separate judgment. This judgment is presently significant for, among other things, citations by Brennan J from courts of high authority on the absence of any general power of appeal to courts from the merits of management decisions. At p469 Brennan J cited this passage from the judgment of Lord Wilberforce in Howard Smith Ltd v. Ampol
Petroleum Ltd <case>; [[1974]
AC 821] at : "There is no appeal on merits from management decisions to courts of law: nor will courts of law assume to act as a kind of supervisory board over decisions within the powers of management honestly arrived at." At 470 Brennan
J cited this passage from the judgment of Barwick CJ, McTiernan and Kitto JJ in Harlowe's Nominees Pty Ltd v. Woodside (Lakes Entrance) Oil Co. NL <case>; [(1968) 121 CLR 483] at 493: "Directors in whom are vested the right and the duty of deciding where the company's interests lie and how they are to be served may be concerned with a wide range of practical considerations, and their judgment, if exercised in good faith and not for irrelevant purposes, is not open to review in the courts." Of course, Brennan J went on to point out that s.320 provides authorisation for courts to give remedies for which the law did not provide before its enactment.

It is I think of significance to set out the following passage at pp471 to 473 from the judgment of Brennan J: "In the present case, the relevant expressions are `oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, a member'. Where the directors of the company are empowered to discriminate among its members and to prejudice the interests of one of them, the adoption of a resolution which has that effect and which is made in good faith and for a purpose within the power is not, without more, `oppressive or unfairly prejudicial to, or unfairly discriminatory against, a member'. Section 320 requires proof of oppression or proof of unfairness: proof of mere prejudice to or discrimination against a member is insufficient to attract the court's jurisdiction to intervene. In the case of some discretionary powers, any prejudice to a member or any discrimination against him may be a badge of unfairness in the exercise of the power, but not when the discretionary power contemplates the effecting of prejudice or discrimination. It is not necessary now to decide whether `oppressive' carries in the context of s.320 the meaning which it carried in the context of the statutory precursors of s.320. At a minimum, oppression imports unfairness and that is the critical question in the present case.

It is not necessarily unfair for directors in good faith to advance one of the objects of the company to the prejudice of a member where the advancement of the object necessarily entails prejudice to that member or discrimination against him. Prima facie, it is for the directors and not for the court to decide whether the furthering of a corporate object which is inimical to a member's interests should prevail over those interests or whether some balance should be struck between them. The directors' view is not conclusive, but an element in assessing unfairness to a member is the agreement of all members to repose the power to affect their interests in the directors. Nevertheless, if the directors exercise a power - albeit in good faith and for a purpose within the power - so as to impose a disadvantage, disability or burden on a member that, according to ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing is unfair, the court may intervene under s.320. The question of unfairness is one of fact and degree which s.320 requires the court to determine, but not without regard to the view which the directors themselves have formed and not without allowing for any special skill, knowledge and acumen possessed by the directors. The operation of s.320 may be attracted to a decision made by directors which is made in good faith for a purpose within the directors' power but which reasonable directors would think to be unfair. The test of unfairness is objective and it is necessary, though difficult, to postulate a standard of reasonableness directors possessed of any special skill, knowledge or acumen possessed by the directors. The test assumes (whether it be the fact or not) that reasonable directors weigh the furthering of the corporate object against the disadvantage, disability or burden which their decision will impose, and address their minds to the question whether a proposed decision is unfair. The court must determine whether reasonable directors, possessing any special skill, knowledge or acumen possessed by the directors and having in mind the importance of furthering the corporate object on the one hand and the disadvantage, disability or burden which their decision will impose on a member on the other, would have decided that it was unfair to make that decision." 
Phases of controls.

Stated broadly, there were four phases in the controls exercised over the numbers of buggies. The first phase was that members were required to get approval to use a buggy on the course, the Committee was not concerned with the total numbers of buggies, but was concerned with allocating available storage space. The second phase began on 22 April 1991. The ceiling of 50 buggies was adopted and approvals were regulated, at least in part, by availability of an allocation within that number. The third phase was signalled by the decision of 2 December 1991 that when vacancies occurred they would not necessarily be replaced and the decision of 18 January 1993 which recorded that the present policy was to try to reduce the number of buggies. The fourth phase, which at least so far as matters recorded in the minutes show, began soon after the plaintiff made his application, was the definition of the reduction as 15, that is a reduction to 35 buggies by 3 units per year over 5 years. A waiting list began to be kept in the first phase, but the function of the waiting list has changed somewhat. Even in the first phase, the limits on the availability of storage space provided a practical restraint on approvals. However a member like the plaintiff would not have been affected by this as he did not need to store his buggy on the club premises. Spaces on the waiting list and storage space would become available through attrition of the numbers of members who were actually able to take advantage of existing approvals; members might die or become too ill or infirm to play, or they might give up club membership. In the phases in which there was an upper limit and later a reduction, movement in the waiting list would necessarily be slower, and the reduction policy had a particularly acute impact in that there would have to be an attrition of 15 users before there could be any movement.

What was complained of at the hearing.

In the advocacy in support of the plaintiff's case a remarkable number of matters and circumstances were alluded to as subjects of grievance. A grievance seemed to be expressed about every circumstance of every user which is not represented in the plaintiff's own circumstances. At the core however several anomalies do call for examination.
The plaintiff genuinely has circumstances arising from his medical condition and state of health which mean that he needs to have and use a buggy if he is to play golf. There are other strong points in his favour: long membership, past services in office, and no need for storage space. In varying degrees most members on the waiting list also claim to have relevant medical and health circumstances. The plaintiff's circumstances were addressed and considered, and the views of other persons on the waiting list were canvassed before the Committee finally parted with his application. The outcome was that these circumstances had no effect on what was decided; the decision was simply an application of the waiting list. This in my opinion was quite reasonable in weighing the position between the plaintiff and persons who were on the waiting list earlier than he was, but there is an anomalous contrast between the situations of persons who are on the waiting list and have a medical need (to whom may be added members who have not yet made an application, but may in the future have a medical need and make an application) and members who already have approvals, perhaps dating from years ago, which they obtained without consideration by the Board of whether they had any need.
There are apparent anomalies presented by cases where the Board has allowed transfers of permission to use buggies from deceased members, or members who have ceased to play, to their widows or wives.
There are apparent anomalies in cases where the Board has allowed transfers between members in other situations.
The Board has allowed persons to use particular buggies additional to the owners who have permission to use those buggies, with the approval of the owners. For some buggies several persons are so authorised.

The principal claim of unfairness was directed to what was said to be the rigid application of a rule that the time an applicant had been on the waiting list was the sole or dominant criterion.

The submission was that ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing require that in addition to time spent on the waiting list, the following matters should be considered:- 
The reason why the applicant needs to use a motorised ride-on buggy including medical need; whether the granting of the application will increase the amount of buggy use on the course; the age of the member, category of membership (e.g. playing member, non- playing member etc.), years of membership and service to the Club either on the Committee or in some other honorary or other capacity; any policy of restricting or minimising use of motorised ride-on buggies on the golf course or parts thereof so as to protect or minimise damage to fairways, greens etc., whether the applicant wishes to store the motorised ride-on buggy on or off course; other persons on the waiting list with regard to when they were placed on the waiting list and relative merits inter se; 
The number of motorised ride-on buggies for hire by the Club and the ease or difficulty with which the applicant can secure a regular hiring arrangement.

The contention was that the Court should act under s.260 by adopting this or some other list of considerations and requiring the Club to make a decision by reference to them; then the proceedings were, it was submitted, to come back for further consideration and a final decision and order.
 
Holding the ceiling.

It will be seen that in the list of matters which I was asked to adopt the ceiling of 50 or the reduction to 35 in the number of buggies is not necessarily complied with; the matters in item (d) are to be considered but they could be outweighed by other matters. The plaintiff's position involves a position that the Committee have put too high a value on the ceiling and the reduction in the number of buggies. (This position was not stated explicitly in the plaintiff's case, but it is necessarily involved in what was stated.) The evidence does not justify a view that the Committee have not assessed correctly the relationship between the number of buggies which are approved and the impact on the course. Consideration must be given to the relative importance of limiting wear and tear on the course on the one hand and enabling members who need to use buggies to get around the course on the other hand. A very wide range of views on what is the appropriate balance would all be reasonable; the Court is in no position to make a better appraisal than the Committee about what is the correct balance or trade-off between buggy impact on the course and access to the course by members who need to use buggies. As the satisfaction of their need rises, dissatisfaction with the state of the course also rises, and another interest of members will start to claim the attention of the Committee. If the ceiling were 50, or there were no ceiling, the Committee would have another set of problems, or more intense forms of other problems. The Committee could decide to hold any of a wide range of positions without acting unreasonably, or unfairly. This is management. I am quite unable, on the evidence, to say that the Committee was wrong to decide that 35 was the reduction target, or to make other considerations fit within that target.
 
A clean slate.

Unless the confines imposed by the decisions to impose a limit on the number of buggies which may be used and to reduce that number to 35 were abandoned, at the heart of the principles put forward by the plaintiff's counsel would be a departure from allowing existing approvals to continue or to be transferred or extended to additional users, to an altogether different principle for approval in which present medical need would be predominant. The Board would be involved in assessing and comparing needs, ending the approvals of some people who now have them, and perhaps have had them for years, and granting approvals on a new principle. 
In my opinion it would be a fair procedure, according to ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing, to decide that the leading consideration was to be medical need, but it is also a fair procedure, according to the same ordinary standard of reasonableness and fair dealing, to decide to respect and continue existing approvals, and to allow them to be transferred between members in the kinds of circumstances which have actually occurred. Where resources of some kind are in demand and are in short supply and access to them is regulated, it is usual, in my experience, to allocate the resources which become available on a basis of assessments of needs, but it is very unusual to disturb the status quo existing when the need for allocation arose by cancelling a pre-existing entitlement. Maintaining the status quo or minimising disturbance of it is a very strong factor in ordinary standards of fair dealing. Adding force to its natural appeal is the rudimentary wisdom, for any authority engaged in allocating resources, of not increasing the intensity of the controversy by dispossessing or disturbing the security of existing holders for the benefit of a relatively smaller number who present further applications for the same resources. It would, I think have been truly remarkable, and very disturbing to peace and harmony in the Club, if the directors had embarked on their reduction programme by making some decision which ended every existing approval or made its continuation depend on the holder making an application to continue it and showing a good case in comparison to all other applicants. A case could be made for a decision like that according to ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing, but it would not be the only approach which would be defensible in those terms. In the practical world it would be extremely rare that any reasonable person with responsibility for allocation of resources would decide not to wait until the resource became available through attrition of the present users, and then allocate it among those who had applied.

The existence of policies for limiting and later reducing the number of buggies which may be used meant that when the plaintiff's application was made there was no buggy usage to allocate. A view that the plaintiff's application ought on proper consideration to have been granted seems to involve the view either that there should not have been a policy to limit the numbers of buggies, or that the plaintiff's application should have been granted by withdrawing someone else's approval, or that some action should have been taken in the past which would have prevented someone else from gaining an approval.

The likely result of adopting a list of matters for consideration would be to introduce complexity, difficulty and controversy without any corresponding advantage in terms of clarity or otherwise. The Committee of a Golf Club is not a very good tribunal to weigh up and compare competing claims based on medical conditions and degrees of disability. There would with fair certainty be room for different interpretations on practically every application and on most aspects of every application; the possible causes of grievance would be multiplied. It is very unlikely that ordinary standards of reasonableness and fair dealing would be better served, or would be perceived to be better served than by allocating approvals in the order of application as the opportunity becomes available through attrition.

How the policies have functioned.

In most cases in evidence where members have been granted the right to use motorised ride-on buggies to play golf since Dr Bian Lee, who is now the first in the list, went on the waiting list on 13 November 1989, permission to use a buggy previously existed and a transfer of permission to another person was allowed. Obviously enough, position on the waiting list was not the dominant element in decisions to allow transfers. If these transfers had not been allowed, it is likely that several, perhaps most of the allocations to which these transfers related would have come to an end, and there would have been corresponding opportunities for the waiting list to move. As it is, there do seem to have been some instances where the waiting list has moved, notwithstanding the policies of ceiling and reduction, and presumably this indicates that there have been cases where allocations have simply come to an end with death or retirement or have been surrendered.

Mr Foster conceded (t234, l.40) that the time on the waiting list and the date of the application had become an absolute consideration since the waiting list began. The waiting list was the only matter which operated on his mind when he decided how to vote on Mr Martin's application (t45, l.30); or it was his dominant consideration (t46). At the conclusion in July 1994 of the considerations raised by the plaintiff's solicitor's letters, it was the only factor. The Committee has specifically avoided weighing up personal factors such as would apply when a long-standing member became incapacitated and made an application only when so advised by the member's doctor; the health condition would not be a relevant consideration. Mr Foster said however that the Committee's policy is to allow any member who has an approval to use a buggy to nominate any other member as a user; the consideration is that buggy owners may nominate any users they give permission to. (t38). Obviously enough where such permission is given there is an increase in the usage of the particular buggy which would otherwise take place. The advantage of this policy has been that the Board does know who is using buggies (t40). There has been no determination by the Board of what would be regarded as excessive use and no control over intensity of use. In other words, the control is a somewhat crude one by reference to buggy numbers. One person who obtained permission to use another member's buggy is Mr Willington, whose name stood higher than the plaintiff's in the waiting list, but who has never been granted permission for the use of a buggy of his own.

Mr Holmes Q.C., counsel for the plaintiff, pointed to the anomaly that Mr
Charles Robinson, who has had approval to use a buggy for some years, it would seem before there was any limit on the number of buggies, is now a non-playing member but continues to have authorisation to use a buggy, and further his wife who is also a member has permission to use his buggy and does so; and the
Board has also allowed his buggy to be used by three other members whom he has nominated.

There have also been several instances where widows of members have been authorised to continue to use a deceased member's buggy. If a member has been able to accompany her husband on his buggy while they played a round of golf, few people would care to tell her that she could no longer use the buggy after his death.

The Committee has adopted very broad measures, not subtle and complex tests.
Simply to limit and then reduce the number of buggies which may used on the course is a very broad measure indeed because there would be great variations in the intensity of use of particular buggies, particularly if several people are authorised to use some of them. Still, in a broad way, perhaps in a crude way, a ceiling and reduction in the number of buggies must have cut down usage and the impact of buggies on the course.

The Committee has also adopted a broad approach to the grant of permissions to use buggies, and permissions at the start date of a policy have been left in existence without any review of the needs or merits of the holders of the position. Before there was a limit on the number of buggies, there was no occasion for any review of needs or merits; the real considerations were whether to approve of the buggy itself having regard to its characteristics such as its weight and capacity, and whether there was storage room in the shed, if the applicant needed it. There is I suppose a fundamental choice between allowing existing permissions to continue and cancelling all permissions and starting again with a review of needs and merits. If there is to be a policy of limiting or reducing numbers, one or other of these broad positions must be chosen. It would I think be very natural for the holders of existing permissions to feel that there had been an injustice to them in the defeat of their expectations of going on holding their permissions; that is to say, there is no refuge from claims of injustice in committing the entitlement of all who hold permissions to reconsideration. The same kind of claims and expectations, in a weaker form, support the transfers and extensions of permission to use buggies which have taken place. It would seem to many minds, and is highly likely to seem to the minds of those who have permissions, only natural and reasonable that they should be allowed to hand on their permissions to their widows, and that they should be allowed to permit other members to use their buggies. The right to lend a useful article to a friend is a basic aspect of ownership of the article in the concept of practically everybody. In making those broad choices the Committee has, in my opinion made choices among several choices which could reasonably be made, each of which could be the subject of reasonably arguable adverse observations to the effect that it was unfair. The case that refusal of all transfers, and all permissions to use buggies would be unfair could be advocated at least as vigorously as the plaintiff's case has been advocated. The Committee has chosen from a range of policies which could be defended as fair, and in my judgment the policies which it has applied have not fallen outside the range of what it was reasonable for them to decide to do, or outside the range of what it was fair for them to decide to do.

Anomalies.

However not all decisions of the Committee of which the evidence speaks fit well within any of these policies. A striking exception was made in the case of Mr Hicks in October 1990. Mr Hicks had a medical need to use a buggy, and his application attracted the strongly sympathetic consideration of the Club Captain at the time. The documents in Exhibit K show that in effect the Club Captain directed the Secretary/Manager to give a permission to Mr Hicks very soon after Mr Hicks made his application; the language used is not literally a direction but obviously it had that effect. This occurred notwithstanding the priority of other persons whose names are on the waiting list. This decision was soon ratified by the Committee.

The way in which Mr Hicks' application was dealt with makes a striking exception to the course taken in all other cases of original applications since 1989, including the plaintiff's. (The decision makes it difficult to maintain the often-repeated criticism that the policies adopted by the
Committee have been excessively rigid; but this is not really a mitigation.)
The plaintiff's counsel said that Mr Hicks jumped the queue because of his condition of health and this is plainly correct. The decision was not fair to other persons with medical needs who were then on the waiting list; indeed one of them Dr Bian Lee is still on the waiting list; so far as appears he was not consulted in relation to Mr Hicks' application, nor was anyone else who was on the list. It is plainly the case that Mr Hicks was dealt with on an exceptional basis, and not in accordance with the usual treatment of members whose names went onto a waiting list regardless of their medical needs. This occurred before the Committee adopted the ceiling of 50 buggies, when the practical limit was the number of available storage spaces.

Another exception was made in the case of Mr Brown; this was explained by Mr
Foster the President in evidence (t55) in these terms: "Mr Brown had an application for a buggy approved sometimes prior to that and then, due to his ill health, had not taken it up and following his by-pass operation he sought the buggy. Q. When that subsequent application was made was it considered not on the basis of when that application was first made, but on the basis of his prior application and his health? A. Yes, his prior application." 
It was also contended that an approval granted to Mr Chipis was an exception to the policy. Mr Chipis' transfer is an instance, I would think according to the evidence the only instance since 1989, where there has been approval for a simple transfer other than in circumstances where a member's widow was allowed to take over his allocation. Mr Foster gave this explanation (t31) "At that stage Mr Chipis had been using Mr Edward's buggies and others for a number of years and at that meeting we went on a bit further to resolve to reduce members.

Q. He was given preference because he had been using a buggy which it had been approved for somebody else? 
A. Yes." 
The decision to approve was followed at the same meeting by the decision to reduce numbers. It may have been justified, more or less, as a transfer, but it had no effect on events as Mr Chipis did not pay the fees required and take advantage of the permission granted.

The end result then is that there has been one full and clear exception made to adhering to the waiting list, that made in the case of Mr Hicks; this exception was made in an earlier phase before adoption of the ceiling and reduction policies which apply to the plaintiff's application. It makes an unfortunate contrast with the plaintiff's application, which has attributes also presented by Mr Hicks' application; a real medical need and past meritorious services to the Club as an office-holder. However a single exception does not make the Committee's proceedings unfair, or justify taking a significant aspect of the Club's affairs under the control of the Court under s.260. It shows that the Club works like a human institution; its policies are not laws of nature and when management decisions are examined closely there are anomalies.

Conclusion.

In my opinion there was no unfair prejudice or discrimination against the plaintiff or against any group of members in deciding to adopt policies limiting and reducing the number of buggies which might be used on the course. The conduct complained of does not fall within s.260 as it is not oppressive, not prejudicial to the plaintiff and not discriminatory against the plaintiff and members like him who have reasonable medical needs but are left on the waiting list. There was a practical need to make a policy choice and it is inevitable that some members would see disadvantages for them in any choice which was made. This is not discrimination, and it is not unfair, in my judgment.

I order that the proceedings be dismissed.Costs are reserved.
 * * * 
