

Council of the City of Bathurst versus State of New South Wales Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 331 (3 August 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BATHURST versus STATE OF NEW SOUTH WALES /97 August 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff Council of the City of Bathurst (the Council) is seeking to recover expenditure associated with remediation of land at the corner of William and Durham Streets Bathurst (the site) undertaken pursuant to a notice dated 27 May 1993 served on it by the Environment Protection Authority (the EPA) under <case> of the [Environmentally Hazardous Chemicals Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ehca1985373/) (the Act) which provides so far as is presently relevant: "36. (1) Where the Authority has reasonable grounds to believe that any premises are becoming or have become contaminated by reason of the carrying on of any prescribed activity in relation to a chemical or any chemical waste, the Authority may, by its servants or agents, enter into or upon the premises and take such prescribed remedial action as is reasonable in the circumstances.

A public authority, other than the Authority: where the public authority has reasonable grounds to believe that any premises are becoming or have become contaminated as referred to in subsection , may, with the consent of the Authority, exercise the powers of the
Authority under that subsection; and shall, if directed to do so by the Authority, exercise the like powers in relation to any specified premises, in any case in which the Authority might lawfully do so.

Costs and expenses incurred by the Authority or any other public authority in taking any action under subsection (1) or (2) in respect of any contaminated premises may, subject to subsection (4), be recovered as a debt, in any court of competent jurisdiction, from an appropriate defendant.

For the purposes of subsection (3), a person is an appropriate defendant, in relation to the recovery of costs and expenses, if the costs and expenses were incurred: in taking action in respect of premises contaminated by reason of the carrying on of any prescribed activity by or on behalf of the person; in taking action which the person was required, by a condition imposed under section 34(1) or (2) in relation to the premises, to take, but which the person, without reasonable excuse, neglected or refused to take; or in taking action which the person was directed, in a notice served on the person under section 35(1), to take, but which the person, without reasonable excuse, neglected or refused to take." 
The site had been the location of a police station since about 1900. In the preceding century there was, among other uses, a watch house on the site. Two underground fuel tanks were installed. In 1981, one of these was detected to be leaking. This was the source of soil contamination upon which this action is focussed. A replacement tank of 12,000 litre capacity was installed.

A site assessment dated April 1993 by PPK Consultants Pty Limited (PPK) referred to two 4,500 litre tanks having been installed about 1960. I notice that correspondence in 1980 authored by a police sergeant and a petrol pump mechanic referred to tanks of 1000 gallon and 500 gallon (4546 litres and 2273 litres) capacity. Sgt Hallett's enquiries suggested that, as at 1980, the smaller tank had been in situ for thirty years and the larger one for ten years. The mechanic concluded from his testing (by pumping out the tanks and filling them with water) that there was a hole in the smaller tank and holes in the line from the larger one to the bowser. Nothing directly turns upon these differences in historical detail other than the observation that sources of contamination would include the line along the service route, that is the pipe track which passed between the tank and the bowser.

The terms of the EPA notice directed: "Bathurst City Council, in relation to the former Police Station site at the corner of William and Durham Streets Bathurst, take such prescribed action as is reasonable in the circumstances to have the site remediated to a standard suitable for any designated future use and recover any costs and expenses incurred in taking such action." 
The documentary material in evidence suggests that the council procured the issue of notice conscious, I would infer, that associated costs would be able to be recovered from the defendant. That procurement, if it occurred, is not of significance. It is conceded that the council was bound to take some action in response to the notice. There is no issue between the parties that the defendant is an appropriate defendant within the meaning of that expression in s 36(4). Nor is there an issue that the costs incurred by the council amounted to $265,167.88 as detailed in Exhibit S. The sole issue of primary contest is whether the action taken as represented by those costs and charges was "as is reasonable in the circumstances to have the site remediated to a standard suitable for any designated future use".

After closure of the police station the site was eventually developed in connection with a fast food sales outlet.

In the event that I conclude that the amount specified in Exhibit S is unreasonable in the relevant consequential sense and context, it is sought that judgment be entered for the plaintiff for such lesser amount as I find represents the reasonable cost of compliance with the EPA notice. It was the submission of counsel for the defendant that I should find for the plaintiff but for a lesser amount than claimed.

The remediation was carried out by PPK as contractors to the council although of course various activities such as excavation, treatment of the stockpile of excavated soil and supply of electric power were subcontracted. Some items were undertaken by council employees. In essence however, the issue for determination turns upon the defendant's contention that PPK executed the task in a manner which was extravagant beyond the point of being reasonable. PPK is not a party to this litigation and ordinarily one would be reluctant to make a finding that an entity such as it has engaged in overservicing (which is the real nub of dispute) without hearing from it. The structure of the exercise of power and recovery of costs facilitated by the Act makes it inevitable that I must investigate the action of PPK which was not directly represented in the litigation but whose professional officers provided the principal evidence for the plaintiff's case.

A considerable proportion of hearing time was spent in the examination in exquisite detail of the scientific, or less than scientific procedures, adopted or suggested. I consider that the central issue in the case can be determined without retracing all of that detail. The plaintiff's case was essentially dependent upon the proposition that, as at 1993, guidance for undertaking a task such as required by the EPA notice was available as a matter of practicality from the Australian and New Zealand Environment and
Conservation Council (ANZECC) publication in January 1992 of guidelines for the assessment and management of contaminated sites (Exhibit P). In his final address, senior counsel for the plaintiff traversed the content of those guidelines to demonstrate that PPK had acted in accordance with them and therefore, it was submitted, it should not be concluded that what was done was unreasonable. The argument is plausible and superficially attractive. It is appropriate however to examine how PPK implemented the guidelines. I have not overlooked the assertions and counter assertions which appear in the documentation following the disclosure of experts' opinions in the course of the dispute. Such disclosure was made both before and after the commencement of the action but I do not consider that the determination of the issue in the case requires analysis of the experts' contradictions of each other.

The fundamental objection of the defendant to payment of the sum charged arises from the circumstance that over 4,000 cubic metres of fill were extracted from the site and treated. This impresses as an extraordinary volume given the size of the site and the source of the contamination, even allowing that it was not known in 1993 exactly how much fuel might have escaped in
The question is, how did this immense extraction come about? In the planning stages for site clean-up PPK had "floated" figures in the vicinity of half that volume. Those figures had inherent ambit considerations and I do not think they were intended by the would-be contractor to be aimed at erring on the low side.

The on-site decisions and specifically the decisions to identify soil for removal and remediation were made by Ms Morrell an engineering geologist born in England and educated there. She arrived in Australia in 1993 and was employed by PPK at Bathurst virtually immediately upon arrival. Her employment was between May and August 1993. She was at the time aged 25 years and had some but necessarily limited experience doing field work with a company in the
United Kingdom called Soil Mechanics Limited. For the task she was given the job of soil testing which she commenced about 7 June having previously done some atmosphere sampling. She was provided with a device called a photo ionization detector (PID). She had not used such a device previously. A PID monitors organic vapour and offers head space values in relation to samples taken. She was given some instruction by a Mr Covets and familiarized herself with an instruction manual. When she received it it was calibrated to detect benzine at 50 parts per 1,000,000. The actual procedure of placing the samples in a portable cooler for half an hour and then measuring and observing is described in the evidence. The manual recommended calibration daily and Ms
Morrell did so. Late in the exercise, upon instructions the calibration was changed to increase to 100 parts per 1,000,000 but nothing of significance turns directly upon this, although it strongly suggests that someone decided that 50 was too low a threshold. The question remains whether the PID readings should have been relied upon to the extent that they were.

The PID is a screening tool and I am satisfied, particularly from the evidence of Mr Mulvey who impressed as the most knowledgeable, experienced and therefore reliable witness, that it would be quite imprudent to rely upon PID reading alone as a determinant for excavating soil and treating it to remove presumed contaminants.

Ms Morrell testified that she did not rely upon PID readings alone. The other two criteria which she applied were odour and soil discolouration. In regard to these she stated that she knew what petrol smelt like, she "had a car". She had no particular knowledge of the soils (including clays, granular deposits etc) in the Bathurst area and was dependent upon her own background knowledge of natural soils.

I found this passage of cross examination in relation to these matters to be significant in showing how the task was undertaken: "Q. Did you think that every time you found a reading of 50 particles per million or more on your PID machine that that necessarily revealed the presence of petroleum as a contaminant in the soil? 
A. Yes.

Q. And did you have any belief that the petroleum that was then being revealed as contamination in the soil, once you had this reading of more than 50 particles per million on your PID machine, was present at some hazardous or potentially dangerous level? 
A. Did I believe it was present at a hazardous level? 
Q. Yes? 
A. If that was what the machine said, then yes.

Q. Did you think the machine, once it provided the reading of more than 50 particles per million, was thereby providing information as to the presence of petroleum as a dangerous contaminant of that soil? 
A. Yes.

Q. And was that something that you came across in the manufacturer's manual?
That is to say, the manufacturer of the PID machine? 
A. No.

Q. Was that something that was provided to you by way of instruction from your superiors at PPK? 
A. Yes.

Q. So the PPK instruction to you with respect to the use of this PID machine was to order excavation whenever there was a PID reading of more than 50 particles per million, because that meant the soil was contaminated by petroleum or hydrocarbons to such an extent that remediation was desirable? 
A. No it wasn't solely on the PID. The three criteria were followed, as I mentioned earlier. At least two out of those three would have failed the test, if you like, for us to remove the soil.

Q. Well, if you had a PID reading of more than 50 with no olfactory detection of petroleum, what did you do? 
A. I identified the soil for removal.

Q. So the odour was not regarded by you as having any impact at all with respect to your decision to order excavation if the PID reading was above 50? 
A. It was because if I tested samples that were representative of the conditions where a reading of more than 50 was observed. I observed the odours and the colours and the nature of the soil where those conditions carried on with odours. I didn't necessarily always test with the PID because I had set up the correlation for myself. I then knew that the soils were representative of the last test I took, so it wasn't solely reliant on the PID, no.

Q. Are you saying sometimes you were solely reliant upon the olfactory detection of petroleum? 
A. If the soil remained in exactly the same condition or near enough as the last test that I took, then I would carry on taking the soil out because it was representative." 
It is self evident that smell and colour are not wholly objective elements. I accept the evidence of Mr Mulvey concerning the unsuitability of relying upon odour as a criterion for detecting hydrocarbon contamination at any particular level. His evidence accords with common experience that human beings have a range of sensitivities to smell. His evidence was unequivocal: "Q. Can we deal firstly with this odour question I know you have already touched on it but is that an indicator of some significance with respect to the detection of hydrocarbon contamination at some particular level? 
A. No, it is not and even in the hands of experienced operator, who has attuned their nose, even attuned it for that site or that particular type of soil.

Q. Is there an approach that it does that, calibrates noses as it were? 
A. As ridiculous as it seems, we do do it. Where you take a series of clods, if you like, of sample that have different strengths of odour or different types of odour and you create a fresh face or open the jar - if it is pungent of course you waft it to you - cradle it, fresh face, you smell it and you put down what you describe it as and then you send it to the lab and they see how close your correlation is with the lab results and invariably it is very different from operator to operator. But also an example we had recently at
Moree with creosote contamination the sample - the three of us described as earthy with no contamination, had the highest levels of PRH's and the sample we described as in the same material contaminated with a medium to strong odour which we expect to be the highest sample which in fact was the lowest.
There are a whole variety of issues that affect odour from soil. The degree of organic matter for instance. Organic matter is an odour capturer, the type of odour capacity to absorb in the clay the length of time it takes to reach equilibrium so that the odour can saturate the pore space and achieve what is known as pastoral pressure equilibrium which is what is on the soil and that was as high it can go. It can't get higher. It goes to a certain point and the volatilisation process stops. So the issue of odour without laboratory results on that particular nose is close to meaningless. The issue of odour with a trained nose without lab results is also meaningless, except to say that there is a possibility of contamination. Occasionally you can be lucky enough and if the site is big enough with consistency of terms that you can train a nose with an operator and have the nose calibrated and that is a pretty good guide and we have only one or two sites where we have been able to do that and I have only had one operator that I would trust that way in which she has been able to calibrate her nose.

Q. Quite apart from the difficulties that you mentioned that is - I mean neighbouring land uses like for example the service station you would expect to have some impact on the odours? 
A. Yes that is quite an interesting issue because the that I - that would have an intermittent impact. You might be there and there is no odour and the wind changes or somebody operates a pump and you get an odour, but fresh petrol smells very different to aged petrol. However in the general atmosphere of exhaust fumes and fresh petrol nearby and so on it would make it very difficult to be convincing about odour as a useful tool." 
He was asked to summarize: "Q. In the upshot, what comment do you have to make with respect to relying upon odour in any attempt to identify hydrocarbon contamination in a site like the Bathurst site? 
A. It is an extremely dangerous thing to do on the basis that it would tend to result in you having excessive excavation that was unnecessary." 
I interpolate because the matter was raised by counsel in argument that I confirm my understanding of the word "dangerous" in that testimony to mean imprudent or tending to induce error rather than perilous.

Similarly I accept Mr Mulvey's evidence that colour would not be a useful criterion unless a colour pattern had been validated for the particular site.
As mentioned, Ms Morrell relied upon general experience with natural soils.
The evidence which I accept is exemplified in this extract from Mr Mulvey's evidence: "........... So colour at this particular site is a difficult tool for interpretation and it is difficult at most sites, but at this site it is very, very difficult and should not be used unless you have done a lot of work calibrating it with laboratory data and have a firm handle on what colour is associated with hydrocarbon contamination.

Q. Does hydrocarbon contamination typically leave some sort of colour residues which can be identified as likely to be the result of hydrocarbon contamination? 
A. Yes, diesel particularly and petrol less so. It imparts initially a stain like a wetting effect on the clay but with time it, that colour changes a little and you will have a change in colour from the unaffected clay. But it is very hard to pick up and the degree of change is confused by other factors and it is not something that I have ever seen used in isolation or with other subjective description techniques. It is always supported by hard data." 
I should not be taken to be suggesting that Ms Morrell was doing other than conscientiously applying herself to her task in accordance with her employer's instructions and her skills. Despite her "two out of three" criteria approach, it is evident that PID readings played a critical part in any decision to remove and treat most, if not all, of the soil. The rashness of over-reliance upon data provided by a PID received confirmation in the cross examination of
Mr Avalle who was at the time Ms Morrell's superior, being the manager for environmental services of PPK: "Q. Yesterday when you gave your evidence you said that - 49, `We used a PID for screening which was a common tool in use for hydrocarbon screening at that time and we took soil samples for laboratory analysis' do you remember that evidence? 
A. Yes.

Q. The use of the word `screening' is in differentiation, isn't it, to detecting? 
A. Yes.

Q. You don't suggest for a moment that the PID meter was ever detecting hydrocarbon contamination, do you? 
A. Yes, the PID measures total volatile organics, so it will detect the petroleum hydrocarbon vapours, amongst others.

Q. It is an indicator of the possible presence of hydrocarbons? 
A. Yes.

Q. And absolutely invariably, so far as concerns work in this field, the PID meter readings are considered against laboratory analysis of the soils? 
A. Do you mean specifically or in general? 
Q. I mean with respect to detecting possible hydrocarbon contamination it would be absolutely impermissible to rely upon PID meter testing without consideration of laboratory analysis at the same time? 
A. Yes." 
Excavation took place without awaiting laboratory results. In passing it might be mentioned that the material was placed into two stockpiles each approximating 2,000 cubic metres volume. The later-reported laboratory testing of samples taken from one entire pile showed no readings which would have justified extraction and remediation activity.

As I have noted, during the hearing attention was paid to the detail of borehole drills and the testing of cores. It is not surprising that results varied from place to place but for the purpose of determination of the issue between the parties there is available confirmation for my conclusion that PPK was using ill advised method in the circumstance that, when it was decided to cease further removal of an already huge volume of soil, there were still PID readings which were within the range that was used as an indicator for extraction.

It is not necessary to make a definitive finding as to why, in any event, the
PID readings may have been suspect. I am satisfied that they ought not to have been relied upon. The methodology devised and implemented by Ms Morrell in accordance with instructions received directly led to greater activity than was reasonable. I note the preference expressed by Mr Mulvey for using an FID (flame ionization detector). There was no evidence establishing how long the lamp within the PID supplied to Ms Morrell had been in previous use. It requires replacement at intervals when the device is used. Neither is the evidence that the lamp was changed. The arbitrary cessation by PPK when readings were still being given by the device adds conviction to the perception that the operational technique was flawed.

In the light of the statutory framework in which the litigation is brought, an interesting question of onus might arise but it is of no consequence in this case as I am affirmatively satisfied that the defendant has established the probability that the extent of action undertaken by PPK was beyond what was reasonable in terms of the notice given by the EPA to the council.

An alternative approach was postulated in the Unisearch report (Exhibit 1) prepared by Professor Winder and Mr Mulvey in September 1993. The report included: "Based on the data in the investigation report and our previous experience,
Environmental & Earth Sciences estimated that no more than 350 m³ of hydrocarbon contaminated material would have required remediation to more than satisfy the Section 36 Notice. This also includes the areas most likely to contain contamination that were not investigated by PPK. These areas include the backfill around the leaking tank and services across the site. These areas are likely to report greater concentrations than those recorded by PPK
Consultants." 
To that report is attached a costing based upon carrying out remediation by a technique called air sparging. I am conscious that this method of bioremediation was subjected to critical comment specifically by Mr Avalle in his letter to the council dated 10 June 1994. I am unpersuaded that that criticism should be sustained. The suggested undertaking has been costed at $75,000 which I understand to be put forward as a "generous" estimate when that meaning is attributed to the description "conservative" which appears in the printed report. On premises then put to him, Mr Mulvey was invited to expand the area (of approximately 350 cubic metres) which he hypothesized but he did not, nor do I, accept the premises. There is no need to recapitulate what can be read in the transcript.

In summary I conclude that the task was considerably and even grossly over performed. Whether the inadequacies in estimate, technique and assessment were inspired by appreciation that the council could claim reimbursement for whatever PPK's bill became, I cannot and need not determine but I should observe that the impression I gained was that activity was simply allowed to progress without brake until the extravagance of what had been done in terms of volume removed for treatment, provoked at least a glimmer of appreciation.
The contractual relationship between the council and PPK in terms of the amount specified in Exhibit S is not in issue in this litigation. I assess the cost of reasonable remediation at $75,000.

In accordance with the concession by counsel for the defendant, there should be judgment for the plaintiff together with interest since 1993. The rates of interest in Schedule J to the Supreme Court Rules have fluctuated during the period between low and high of 10% and 12%, with extended periods of 10½% and a brief applicable period of 11¼%. Interest will be added to the judgment amount for 5 years at 11% making an increment of $41,250.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $116,250. Liberty to apply in respect of orders for costs.
 * * * 
