

Regina versus Ware Matter No 60115/97 [1997] NSWSC 254 (9 July 1997) 
Regina versus Darren John Ware /97 July 1997 
Gleeson CJ, James J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Darren John WARE 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence imposed by Judge Court QC in the District Court on 25 February 1997. 
For reasons that will appear I am of the view that the learned sentencing judge was confronted with both an unusual and extremely difficult task of sentencing. The facts of the case raised for consideration a number of important questions of principle which, so far as appears from his Honour's remarks on sentence, do not seem to have been given consideration. This perhaps is because they were not raised in argument in the sentencing proceedings.

I propose that leave to appeal should be granted and that this court should allow the appeal and quash the sentences imposed and proceed to re-sentence the applicant. My reasons are as follows.

The applicant pleaded guilty to four charges of sexual misconduct towards his niece. One charge was of sexual intercourse without consent, the niece at the relevant time being under the age of sixteen years. The other charges were of offences of indecent assault upon the same girl. It has been pointed out by counsel for the applicant that on the Statement of Facts tendered to the sentencing judge it is not entirely easy to identify the precise factual basis of the first of the charges, but the charge was one to which the applicant was willing and, indeed, anxious, to plead guilty.

The offences all occurred in 1983 over a period of six months. It is not now possible to identify with any precision the dates of the offences. The offences charged appear to be representative of a wider course of conduct engaged in by the applicant.

At the time in question, the applicant was aged seventeen and the niece aged either nine or ten, depending upon precisely when the offences occurred. All of the offences, including the first offence to which reference has been made, involved acts of inappropriate sexual physical contact between the applicant and his niece. The nature of the intercourse the subject of the first offence appears to have involved digital penetration.

The background of the offences, and the unusual history of the case, is as follows.

The applicant, having lost his parents, when he was about seventeen, went to live with his brother, who is the father of the complainant, and the brother's wife and family. He remained living with his brother and his brother's family over the period of six months during which the offences occurred. He became very friendly with the complainant. He induced the complainant to engage in inappropriate sexual activity with him.

Ultimately, a day came when the complainant's mother observed the applicant engaged in conduct of this kind towards the complainant. She naturally protested strongly and ordered the applicant out of the house. That left the applicant with nowhere to go, and for some time thereafter he lived in a caravan park.

The uncontradicted evidence of the applicant was that his immediate response was to go to the police at Maitland and confess to the conduct towards his niece in which he had engaged and which had led to his removal from his brother's home. The applicant was at the time - although that was unremarked by the sentencing judge - a juvenile. If the police had decided to lay charges against him as a result of his confession he would have been dealt with pursuant to the Community Welfare Act 1982 .

The legislation that governs the manner in which the law deals with juvenile offenders is substantially influenced by considerations of welfare in addition to considerations of punishment. There are discretionary powers in the courts to determine whether a juvenile offender should be dealt with according to law or in accordance with provisions of the legislation which give wide discretionary powers in relation to the treatment of juvenile offenders.

It should be mentioned that the applicant had no previous encounters with the law and for that matter, apart from the present proceedings, has never had any subsequent encounters with the law.

The police took no proceedings against the applicant. They evidently regarded the problem as primarily a welfare matter. They referred the applicant to a clinic and advised him to undertake a course of counselling for his sexual problem. He complied with that advice.

Some time later he returned to live with his brother and his brother's family.
The matter of his conduct towards his niece during 1983 was kept to the family. In due course, the applicant married and had a family of his own.
Prior to asking his wife to marry him he confessed to the conduct in which he had engaged towards his niece when he was aged seventeen.

The evidence shows that the applicant's conduct towards his niece had serious adverse effects upon her. In 1996 she informed the applicant that she had found it necessary to undergo counselling and treatment as a consequence of his previous abuse of her. He offered to accompany her when she went to seek treatment.

Almost immediately following the receipt of this further information the applicant once again went to the police at Maitland. He again confessed to them that when he had been seventeen years' old he had sexually abused his niece. The police informed him that there was nothing that they could do about the matter in the absence of a complaint from the niece. The evidence indicates that the niece had not previously intended raising the matter with the police, but she then did. She gave information to the police. That resulted in the laying of the charges to which the applicant pleaded guilty.

The written submissions filed on behalf of the Crown contain the following paragraph: "The material available indicates that the applicant has at all relevant times since his actions were discovered by the complainant's mother in 1983 attempted to bring his actions to the notice of the authorities and was the person who finally caused the matter to be dealt with at court." 
The facts as I have outlined them indicate that the case raised for consideration by the sentencing judge the following amongst other matters.

In R versus Ellis [(1986) 6 NSWLR 603] this court held that as it is the policy of the criminal law to encourage a guilty person to come forward and disclose that an offence had been committed and to confess to having committed it, a plea of guilty entitles a convicted person to an element of leniency which is magnified, if but for the disclosure by the offender, it is unlikely that the offence would have come to the notice of the authorities. No reference was made to that principle in the remarks on sentence of Judge Court.

In R versus Todd <case>; [(1996) 2 Qd R 63] at 66.

Delay does not of itself warrant leniency towards an offender. Many cases, particularly cases of sexual abuse, only come to the notice of the authorities many years after the offences have occurred. On the other hand, depending upon the circumstances of the individual case, the fact that there has been delay may require close consideration to be given to rehabilitation that may have occurred over the period between the date of the offences and the date when the proceedings are brought before the court.

In the present case there was an unusual combination of the matters of principle to which I have referred. The applicant was a juvenile at the time of the commission of the offences. Whilst still a juvenile he brought the offences himself to the attention of the authorities. It was only after he brought the offences to the attention of the authorities a further time, some thirteen years later, that proceedings were taken against him. He pleaded guilty. In the meantime he had established himself with a family of his own, and with an occupation, and had apparently undergone substantial rehabilitation. The only reference that Court DCJ made to any of those matters in his remarks on sentence was a passing observation that the offences were "of some antiquity." Court DCJ sentenced the applicant in respect of each of the offences to concurrent sentences involving a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months, the sentence to date from 21
February 1997.

The objective circumstances of the offences were serious. The evidence showed that they had a substantial adverse impact on the female child with whom the applicant sexually interfered.

At the same time the considerations which I have expressed in summary form entitled the applicant, in the particular and unusual circumstances of this case, to a measure of leniency which he was not extended by the sentencing judge.

For the reasons I have given I consider that the sentencing proceedings were affected by error of principle. I think that in the circumstances of the case an appropriate sentence for this court to substitute for the sentence imposed by Court DCJ is a sentence of imprisonment for a fixed term of six months to commence on the same day as the commencing day of the sentences imposed by
Court DCJ.

The reason that it is unnecessary and inappropriate to fix a minimum and additional term relates to the rehabilitation that the applicant has undergone since the commission of his offences, the fact that he was a juvenile at the time the offences were committed and the fact that the evidence does not suggest that he requires any supervision upon his release from imprisonment.

Accordingly I propose that the following orders should be made. Leave to appeal should be granted. The appeal should be allowed. The sentences imposed by Court DCJ should be quashed. In lieu thereof the applicant should be sentenced on each offence to penal servitude for a fixed term of six months commencing on 21 February 1997 and expiring on 20 August 1997.
 
JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice and the orders proposed by his Honour.
 
SPERLING J: I also agree.
 
GLEESON CJ: The orders of the court will be as I have proposed.

REGINA versus Darren John WARE 
SENTENCING - Offender a juvenile at the time when offences were committed and were first brought (by the offender) to the notice of the authorities - long delay in taking proceedings - offender undergoes rehabilitation in meantime - Crown concedes that offender was responsible for bringing offences to police attention - None of these matters taken into account by sentencing judge - HELD - The sentencing proceedings were affected by error of principle. 
R versus Ellis [(1986) 6 NSWLR 603], R v
Todd [(1982) 2 NSWLR 517], Sell versus The Queen [(1995) 15 WAR 240], R versus Law ex parte the Attorney-General <case>; [(1996) 2 Qd R 63] applied.

O R D E R S Leave to appeal granted.  Appeal allowed.
 Sentences imposed by Court DCJ quashed.
 In lieu thereof appellant sentenced to fixed term of six months.
 * * * 
