

Ramskogler versus The Director of Public Prosecutions of New South Wales and
Anor Nos. Ca 40745/94; Dc 93/11/1285 Criminal Law and Procedure - Prerogative
Writs [1995] NSWSC 110 (30 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), HANDLEY(2) AND SHELLER(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 25 May 1995 #DATE 22:8:1995 #ADD 30:10:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant:      J C Papayanni 
Solicitor for the Claimant:     Garry
Penhall 
Counsel for the Opponent (DPP):   P A Johnson 
Solicitor for the Opponent (DPP):  S E O'Connor, Solicitor for 
Public Prosecutions 
Counsel for the District Court:   Submitting appearance 
Solicitor for the District Court:  I V Knight, State Crown
Solicitor
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY
P The claimant challenges an order of Johnston DCJ by which his Honour refused an application for a certificate under the [Costs in Criminal Cases Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/) (the Act). The claimant caused a summons to be issued out of this Court, directed to the District Court of New South Wales, claiming a declaration that the order made by Johnston DCJ was not made in accordance with law, an order quashing his Honour's refusal to grant the certificate, and an order that the proceedings be remitted to the District Court.
The District Court has submitted to this Court's orders. The Director of
Public Prosecutions of New South Wales (DPP) contests the claimant's entitlement to relief.
 
An accused is acquitted of a number of criminal charges
Mr Peter Ramskogler, the claimant, was charged with eight offences.
Each of these offences related to alleged acts of homosexual intercourse between the claimant, and two other persons. The identity of these persons has not been disclosed in the record. I shall refer to them simply as the first complainant and the second complainant.
Both complainants were under 18 years of age at the time of the alleged offences. Consent to sexual intercourse cannot be given by a male person in this State before the age of 18 years. See [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), <case>. The trial of the claimant took place before Johnston
DCJ sitting alone, without a jury.
The first count in the indictment related to an alleged act of homosexual intercourse between the claimant, and the first complainant, who was then 16 years old. The first complainant alleged that this took place on 12 January
Counts two to five inclusive related to alleged further sexual assaults by the claimant against the first complainant. Counts six and seven concerned an incident involving the claimant and both complainants, in which, it was alleged, the second complainant was drugged using chloroform, and then sexually assaulted by the claimant.
The final offence charged (count eight) related to an alleged attempt by the claimant to suborn the first complainant.
Johnston
DCJ, after a hearing which lasted no less than five weeks, returned verdicts of acquittal on each of the counts in the indictment.
The first count had alleged that the sexual assault charged took place on 12
January 1992 in North Curl Curl. However, under cross-examination, the first complainant admitted that he was at the Jenolan Caves on 12 January 1992, and that he stayed there overnight with the claimant and Ms Sue Wyman. Although the first complainant still alleged that he was sexually assaulted at some time around that date, Johnston
DCJ held that, since there was now no specific or certain date relied upon by the prosecution, there was no case to answer on this count. He therefore entered a verdict of acquittal on the first count.
The evidence relied upon by the prosecution in relation to the eighth count the charge of suborning, included three audio cassette tapes of conversation between Mr Ramskogler and the first complainant. However, in the exercise of his discretion, Johnston DCJ decided to exclude this evidence, on the basis that the tapes had been procured as a result of unfair conduct on the part of the police and the first complainant. The tapes were recorded when the first complainant, with the encouragement of the police, telephoned the claimant in September 1994. By his bail conditions, the claimant was forbidden to have contact with the first complainant. Both the police and the first complainant were aware of these bail conditions. Johnston DCJ found that it was "abundantly clear" that the first complainant, "with a degree of confidence that was never displayed in the witness box, was endeavouring to trap the accused into making some admission". In light of these matters,
Johnston DCJ excluded the tapes from the evidence at the trial.
The remaining evidence in relation to the eighth count of the indictment consisted of the records of interview of each of the complainants, and certain annotations on these documents which the first complainant alleged were made by him and by the claimant when the claimant travelled to Junee in early
December 1993. However, under cross-examination, the first complainant admitted that the annotations were actually made in September 1993 at North
Curl Curl when he visited the claimant. Johnston DCJ, after noting that the material allegations in an indictment must be positive and free from doubt, found that it was clear from the evidence that there was an allegation that the offence took place in September in North
Curl Curl. This was an offence separate and distinct from that alleged in the indictment which referred to an alleged incident in
December in Junee. Therefore, his Honour held that there was no case to answer on count eight in the indictment.
Johnston DCJ then examined, in some detail, the evidence surrounding the allegations which constituted counts two to five in the indictment. His
Honour noted that the first complainant's evidence on these alleged assaults was central to the Crown case. He concluded: "In my objective assessment of the evidence I have found (the first complainant) to be a most unimpressive witness. I have taken into account his immaturity and other subjective matters early referred to, and I have come to the conclusion that he is not capable of giving a true or reliable account to a tribunal of fact."
His Honour then examined the evidence of the second complainant. This evidence related to counts six and seven. His Honour noted that the second complainant had consumed a large quantity of whisky on the night of the alleged offence. Moreover, until he was informed by the police, he had no knowledge at all of any alleged assault. This led Johnston DCJ to conclude that the second complainant may have been subject to memory contamination.
In light of the preceding conclusions as to the respective strength and veracity of the prosecution evidence in support of the charges against
Mr
Ramskogler, his Honour concluded: "I have grave suspicions concerning the accused's conduct in this night (ie. the night on which the assault of the second complainant was alleged to have taken place) plying a young boy with alcohol and taking him back to his flat to watch pornographic videos. I also suspect there was an unhealthy relationship between the accused and (the first complainant) but not in the manner suggested by (the first complainant).
If one accepts what was put to Detective
Yeomans as to his approach to the investigation then this suspicion may not be unfounded However, suspicion even the gravest suspicion is no substitute for proof beyond reasonable doubt and having considered the totality of the evidence I do not wish to hear any more and I propose to stop the trial and return verdicts of acquittal on counts two, three, four, five, six and seven in the indictment. If I had found a case to answer on count one I would have, following the Prassard direction returned a verdict of acquittal.

The claimant was consequently discharged of all charges brought against him.
 
The primary judge refuses a certificate for costs
After Johnston DCJ had read out his judgment, Mr Littlemore SC, counsel appearing at the trial for Mr Ramskogler, applied for a certificate for costs under the Act. Judge Johnston replied, "Do you really make that application in view of what I have just said in the last paragraph of my judgment?", or words to that effect. Mr Littlemore replied that he did.
There then followed some discussion between Johnston DCJ and Mr Littlemore. At the conclusion of this discussion, Mr Littlemore said "I formally apply for a certificate for costs".
Johnston DCJ then refused to grant a certificate.
It is against that refusal that Mr Ramskogler has sought relief in this
Court.
 
The nature of this Court's jurisdiction
Before this Court, the claimant sought judicial review of Johnston DCJ's decision. Specifically, he claimed relief in the nature of the prerogative writ of certiorari.
He contended that the trial judge had made an error on the face of the record. He requested that this Court quash the order purportedly made, and remit to the proceedings to the District Court for a determination according to law.
The power of this Court to order relief in the nature of the former prerogative writ of certiorari is founded in the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), [s 69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s69.html) and the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/), [Pt 54.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/index.html#p54) I have discussed the nature of this statutory power at some length elsewhere. See e.g. Commissioner of Police v District Court of
New South Wales and Anor (1993) 31 NSWLR 606 (CA) at 614 -
I will not repeat what I said there. It is clear that <case> was not designed to introduce a general reform of the remedies of judicial review.
However, Parliament has, by <case>, given this Court the opportunity to reform the beneficial remedies of judicial review, especially where they were subject to out-dated complexities and technicalities.
One aspect of the remedies of judicial review which has been reformed since the abolition of the prerogative writs, is the scope and meaning of the expression "the record", when it is used in the context of an error on the face of the record of an inferior court. Under the former prerogative writ of certiorari the concept of "the record" was a very limited one. Historically, it was confined to the documentation initiating the proceedings, the pleadings, and the actual order of the inferior court. As I explained in
Commissioner of Police, (above), at 615, this limitation was largely the result of historical conditions, such as widespread community illiteracy and the absence of reliable recording mechanisms when the writ was first devised.
These limitations have now been abandoned in this State and in other jurisdictions of the common law. In England this process was accelerated by the decision of the English Court of Appeal in R versus Knightsbridge Crown Court;
Ex parte International Sporting Club (London) Ltd [(1982) 1 QB 304 (CA)] at 314.
The process was confirmed by the House of Lords in R versus Lord President of the
Privy Council; Ex parte Page [(1992) 3 WLR 11] at , Hope JA and I said: "Just as in (Knightsbridge) it was said that the court could scrutinise the judgment and reasons given below to see if error appears, so in this case the Court can examine for present purposes not only the award and the judgment which preceded it but the transcript and record of the proceedings of the Tribunal. These are plainly part of the modern record of this Tribunal."
In Commissioner of Police the second opponent, Mr Perrin, argued that "the record", for the purposes of judicial review in that case, was confined to the court's originating process and its orders. It did not so it was argued, include the reasons for the decision or the transcript. At 617, I made clear my position on this argument: "Consistent with the authority of this Court and with the whole trend of local and overseas developments of the common law the argument put for Mr Perrin should be rejected.
Consistent also with the abolition of the old writs and the provision of new remedies for judicial review, it should be rejected We are not here concerned with the issue of one of those old writs. It is true that this Court has been asked to provide a judgment or order, derived from the history of the writ of certiorari. But its process is now freed of one of its formalistic, historical requirements. The historically minded may prefer the language of "intermingling" of orders and reasons. For myself, I prefer the candid escape from such formalism which in my view, the Act permits. But by whatever course, the law has now reached a point that it should be made plain that in judicial review for error of law on the face of the record in this State the "record" certainly includes any reasons given by the court or tribunal under review for its decision Let us have no further arguments of this kind on this point."
In the present case, the DPP sought to limit the "record" of the District
Court. He argued that the "record" should be limited to the available transcript of the original application for a certificate for costs, and those parts of the affidavits of the solicitor for the claimant and the Crown prosecutor which record what passed between Johnston DCJ and counsel, but which were not transcribed in the transcript.
It was submitted that the "record" did not include Johnston DCJ's judgment acquitting Mr Ramskogler of the charges against him, his
Honour's interlocutory judgment on the admissibility of the audio tapes, the trial transcript, or the transcript summary which had been prepared by Mr Littlemore.
It is clear from my preceding remarks that the "record" does include the reasons given for rejecting the application for a certificate for costs.
However, the DPP argued that this did not mean that the reasons given in the substantive criminal trial were therefore admissible. I cannot agree with this submission. In rejecting the application for a costs certificate, Johnston DCJ explicitly referred to the final paragraph in his judgment on the criminal charges. In fact, this paragraph appears to have constituted the judge's understanding of his reasons for rejecting the application peremptorily. Once it is accepted that this final paragraph is part of the record, it would be pointless to attempt to exclude the remainder of his Honour's reasons.
The final paragraph can only be understood in the light of the entire judgment of which it forms a part. Therefore, the reasons given by Johnston DCJ for acquitting the claimant in their entirety, as well as those contained in the earlier interlocutory judgment, should be considered to be part of the "record" of the proceedings before his Honour for the present application for this judicial review.
The authorities are less certain as to whether the transcript of evidence (and argument) should be considered part of the "record" of the proceedings in the court below. In Commissioner of Police, at 618 I stated that: "My own preference is for the view that the other materials which were before the District Court are also part of the record as being necessary (or at least relevant) to understand the reasons and the orders which those reasons sustained This is clearly the approach taken in England in R versus Lord President of the Privy Council: Ex parte Page and I agree in it."
However in the same case,
Mahoney JA found, at 634, that "the transcript of evidence has not, I think, been held to be part of (the) record". Clarke JA did not express a final opinion on this issue.
I am still inclined to include the transcript as part of the record of the proceedings before Johnston DCJ. This does not mean that the "record" will include all of the transcript of evidence in every case of judicial review.
However, given the paucity of the reasons (if any) eventually given by
Johnston DCJ in rejecting the application for a costs certificate under the
Act this Court must have regard to the transcript of evidence in this case if it is to be in a position to understand those reasons and the orders which they supported.
In fact, although he submitted that the whole transcript of evidence should be admitted before this Court as part of the "record", the claimant eventually relied only on one small passage in the transcript. This was the cross-examination of Detective Yeomans by Mr Littlemore. This passage was only relied upon in relation to the comment by Johnston DCJ in the final paragraph of his judgment that he suspected that: "...there was an unhealthy relationship between the accused and (the first complainant) but not in the manner suggested by (the first complainant). If one accepts what was put to
Detective Yeomans as to his approach to the investigation then this suspicion may not be unfounded." .
The claimant argued that, in formulating this view, his Honour had misunderstood the evidence from the cross-examination of Detective
Yeomans. Mr
Littlemore had put to Detective Yeomans that: "you put to him that you believed that whatever happened between him and (the first complainant) was consensual, didn't you?" 
The claimant submitted that Johnston DCJ had incorrectly inferred that this was the case being put on his behalf. Rather, it was suggested, his counsel was merely putting what the police officer had allegedly said to the claimant.
Counsel was, in fact, suggesting that Detective Yeomans had been badgering the claimant, and tying to extract an admission from him as later he did by way of the excluded telephone call which was recorded.
Leaving aside the merits of the claimant's argument on this point, it is clear that this particular passage in the transcript must be considered part of the record of the proceedings if this Court is to try to understand the meaning of the very brief passage in Johnston DCJ's reasoning. Even if the whole of the transcript should not be admitted as part of the record, clearly this brief passage should be.
I would therefore treat it as part of the record of the District Court for the purposes of this summons.
 
There are errors on the face of the record
The [Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/) was introduced to remedy the situation which occurs when a person is forced to expend what is often a great deal of money, in defending himself or herself against a prosecution which has been brought without reasonable grounds as provided in the Act. By the prerogative and, at common law, the Crown neither sought nor gave costs.
Therefore, in the absence of legislative intervention, accused persons could be faced with very large financial burdens, regardless of the outcome of the proceedings against them.
The Act authorises the court in any criminal proceedings to issue a certificate to enable accused persons to recover their costs. However, this power is not an unfettered discretion. It is by no means at large. The Act provides specific criteria which must be observed before the grant of a certificate is considered: "s. 3 (1) A certificate granted under this Act shall specify that, in the opinion of the Court or Judge or Justice or
Justices granting the certificate - if the prosecution had, before the proceedings were instituted, been in possession of evidence of all the relevant facts, it would not have been reasonable to institute the proceedings; and that any act or omission of the defendant that contributed, or might have contributed, to the institution or continuation of the proceedings was reasonable in the circumstances.
..."
The claimant complains that
Johnston DCJ did not have regard to these stated criteria in refusing the application for a costs certificate. It does appear that his Honour approached this matter as though he enjoyed an unfettered discretion. Before reaching a conclusion on the application for the costs certificate, Johnston DCJ was required by the Act to consider whether, if the prosecution had known of all the relevant facts before the proceedings were instituted, it would have been reasonable to institute the proceedings.
The judgment of Mahoney
JA in The Treasurer in and for the State of New South
Wales versus Wade and Anor, Court of Appeal, unreported, 16 June 1994; (1994) NSWJB , at p.2 makes it clear that, in deciding whether to issue a certificate under the Act, a judge must make two findings with respect to <case> (a). First, the judge must determine what Mahoney JA describes as the "facts issue". That is, the judge must determine what were, within the Act were "au the relevant facts". Secondly, the judge must decide the "reasonableness issue". He or she must determine whether, if it had known all of these facts, the prosecution would have been acting "reasonably" in bringing the proceedings. These considerations require that some care be taken in considering the two steps mandated by Parliament. Cf Gwozdecky versus Director of Public
Prosecutions [(1992) A Crim R 160 (NSWCA)], 164. With respect, it seems that Johnston DCJ failed to take into account the requirements of the Act as this Court has explained them. Perhaps it could be said that his Honour impliedly determined what were the relevant facts in his substantive judgment. However, he certainly failed to examine with the care required, or indeed at all, the reasonableness of the conduct of the prosecution in light of these relevant facts. Thus, his Honour failed to address the considerations which, by law, he must take into account in determining the issue that was before him. He simply telescoped the process and appeared to assume that he had a broad and general discretion according to the justice of the case. But that was not the discretion which Parliament had given him.
It was suggested that Johnston DCJ may have been making reference to s (b) of the Act when he mentioned his suspicions surrounding the relationship between Mr Ramskogler and the first complainant. in this regard, the claimant suggested that <case>(b) should be read down, so as to only apply to the acts or omissions of the defendant which occured outside the events connected with the crime or crimes. This construction is supported by the decision of Maguire J in R versus Osborne (1969) 90 WN (Pt 1) (SC) 625 at 630. I do not feel that it is necessary to determine the correct construction of the section in present proceedings. Even if Johnston DCJ were referring to <case> (b) of the
Act, he still failed to consider <case> (a). The court from which an order is sought is required to consider both subsections when determining an application under the Act.
The error of Johnston DCJ in failing to exercise his discretion in accordance with the Act was, with further respect, compounded by his Honour's failure to give proper and adequate reasons for refusing the application. It is true that the evidence on this issue is somewhat unclear. The transcript is silent on the point. Certain evidence was given by affidavit.
The Court suggested that an affidavit should be procured from Mr Littlemore, who did not appear on the summons. This was done. It was read without objection by either side. Mr Littlemore was not required for cross-examination. Neither of the counsel who appeared before Johnston DCJ was able to provide a completely detailed account of the discussion that took place between his Honour and Mr
Littlemore on the issue of costs. This is unsurprising. However the relevant evidence contained in Mr Littlemore's affidavit can be stated as follows: 
Mr Littlemore: "It would not be appropriate to do it today, but we would wish to make an application for costs in this matter." 
His Honour: "In view of what I said in the last paragraph of my judgment, do you really want to argue that?" 
Mr Littlemore. "Yes, your Honour. For a start, there were the two counts on which you found no prima facie case."
There was then some further discussion which Mr Littlemore could not recall. However, Mr Littlemore stated that the trial judge made it clear that he would not "entertain" the application. Mr Littlemore then asked that it formally be noted that the application was made. Mr Littlemore also made clear in his affidavit that he never meant to argue the costs application on that day. He intended to seek a later date for argument permitting the preparation of evidence and detailed written submissions. He only abandoned the application when Johnston DCJ made it plain arguendo that he would not entertain a costs application.
An affidavit of Penelope Hock, the Crown Prosecutor who appeared before
Johnston DCJ, adds little to the evidence given by Mr Littlemore. Nor does it appear to dispute the matters referred to by Mr Littlemore. As Mr Littlemore was not questioned on his affidavit, the Court can safely proceed on the basis that his statements may be taken to elaborate the record accurately in the respects in which the official record was silent.
The DPP submitted that, if the claimant were dissatisfied with the reasons given by the trial judge for rejecting the application, then he was obliged to ask the judge for satisfactory reasons then and there. In general, it is true, where a trial judge has failed to give, or has given insufficient reasons for a decision, the dissatisfied party should immediately point this out to the judge. If I thought that Mr Littlemore had acquiesced in failure of
Johnston DCJ to give reasons for his decision on the costs application, the claimant would be bound by Mr Littlemore's election, however hard that might be on him personally. However, far from acquiescing, it appears abundantly clear that Mr Littlemore attempted to have the issue of costs argued at a later date. When the judge made plain his refusal to "entertain" the application and in fact proceeded peremptorily to dismiss it, Mr Littlemore insisted that the application be formally noted to protect his client. Without lapsing into arrant discourtesy, it is difficult to see what more Mr
Littlemore could have done for the claimant. In such circumstances, it cannot be said that the claimant must be denied in this Court the opportunity to challenge the failure of his Honour to provide reasons and to consider the application in a lawful way.
Mr Littlemore stated in his affidavit that his Honour made it plain arguendo that he would not "entertain" an application for costs. The DPP submitted that Mr Littlemore meant to say "grant" rather than "entertain".
This submission cannot be accepted. The DPP was afforded an opportunity to cross-examine Mr Littlemore as to the contents of his affidavit. He did not take this opportunity. This Court must therefore read the words in the affidavit, including the word "entertain", by reference to their natural and ordinary meaning. The use of the word "entertain", in this context; signifies that Mr Littlemore meant that
Johnston DCJ indicated that he would not listen further to an application for a certificate for costs and that it would be useless to advance argument on the point as the judge's mind was made up. With respect, this point further supports the proposition that
Johnston DCJ failed to approach the application for costs in the correct manner. He approached it as if there were a broad, unstructured discretion to act as he thought just and meritorious. This is in fact what he proceeded to do. However, as the Act makes plain, and
Mahoney JA has explained in Wade, the discretion is a structured one, requiring some care in its consideration and application.
In many ways this case is similar to Quach and Anor versus Mustafa, Court of
Appeal , unreported, 15 June 1995; (1995) NSWJB
Although that case was a summons for leave to appeal, it concerned a complaint that Karpin DCJ had rejected an application for costs under Pt 19A r 9(6) of the District
Court Rules upon general discretionary grounds rather than by reference to the precise terms of the structured discretion provided by the Rule. This Court unanimously (Sheller JA and Powell JA agreeing with my reasons) held that her
Honour's exercise of discretion miscarried and warranted the grant of leave.
For other reasons special to the case the Court dismissed the appeal. But it emphasised the importance of conforming to the subordinate legislation in the discretion it provided and in giving proper reasons addressed to those provisions. The errors here are the same. There is no extraneous reason which would justify dismissal of the application to this Court.
It is said that the claimant should be disentitled because
Mr Littlemore did not press the point immediately. I do not agree. I would repeat what I said in Morawski versus Stale Rail Authority of New South Wales [(1988) 14 NSWLR 374 ], at 376: "Litigation is not a game between legal representatives. It is the just resolution of disputes by the courts, according to the law. Litigants are entitled to look to a judge to apply the law. In a trial by jury, they are entitled to have the judge charge the jury according to law. Where a point has been adequately referred to, even if not specifically formulated, it is not, in my opinion, just to penalise a litigant because his or her counsel did not exactly refine the point and insist upon it being noted in a particular form.
Where a matter is completely overlooked or where the law, in the interim, changes it might be different. But where, as here, the point was specifically called to the judge's attention, enough has been done to enliven the judge's duty. The law casts a duty on the judge to consider the law, if necessary to research it further and to give a correct instruction.

For more than a century our legal system, like that of England, has marched resolutely and consistently away from the defeat of meritorious claims by technical lapses on the part of the legal representatives of the litigants. As long ago as 1878,
Thesiger LJ reminded the sometimes inflexible judges and lawyers of that time, brought up in the legal traditions of the nineteenth century before the Judicature Acts, that enforcement of the rules of court could be insisted upon at "too high a price". see Tildesley versus Harper [(1878) 10 Ch D .] The same is true of a rule of practice requiring a point to be noted for appeal purposes. It is important never to lose sight of the function of the courts of justice. In 1884,
Bowen LJ in Cropper versus Smith [26 Ch D 700] at 710 emphasised that: "It is a well established principle that the objects of the
Court is to decide the rights of the parties, and not to punish them for mistakes they make in the conduct of their cases ... Courts do not exist for the sake of discipline, but for the sake of deciding matters in controversy. " 
This statement was approved by the High Court of Australia in
Shannon versus Lee Chun <case>; [(1912) 15 CLR 257] at 261. The same approach is reflected in the statement of the modern practice in relation to pleading amendments contained in the joint judgment of
Stephen, Mason and Jacobs JJ in Leotta versus Public Trannsport
Commission of New South Wales [(1976) 50 ALJR 666] at 446."
I adhere to those views. They apply to facts of this case.
In summary, two errors appear on the face of the record of the District
Court in these proceedings. Johnston DCJ failed to take into account the relevant considerations of the Act in determining the proper exercise of his discretion under the Act. Furthermore, his Honour did not supply adequate reasons, explaining why he took the course that he did.
It is not for this Court to determine whether Mr Ramskogler was entitled to a certificate for costs. This is, properly, a matter for the trial judge.
However, the trial judge must examine an application in accordance with the law. The judge must take into account all of the relevant considerations, and only those considerations. For that reason, the proper course for this Court to take is to quash the decision of Johnston DCJ in which he refused the application for a certificate for costs, and to remit the proceedings back to the District Court for Johnston DCJ to reconsider the application.
It is true that Johnston DCJ may reach exactly the same conclusion.
However, at least by adopting this course, the Court will ensure that his
Honour applies the proper, lawful principles and considers the claimant's application by reference to the legally specified criteria.
The claimant expressed confidence that he could persuade Johnston DCJ, upon a full consideration of the relevant facts and by detailed argument, to grant a certificate, at least for part of the costs of the trial. In issue for the claimant (as the Court was told) is no insubstantial sum ($120,000). Given the care with which decisions on much smaller amounts are decided and explained in judicial reasons, it is no special burden that such a decision, so important to the claimant who was not legally aided, should take place in a lawful and more careful way than the evidence suggests occured here. I say this with a full understanding of the great pressures which are upon judges of the
District Court and with high respect for the careful and painstaking way in which Johnston DCJ disposed of the substantive criminal charges against the claimant.
 
Conclusions and orders
The orders which I favour are: 
Call up the record of the District Court in the motion for a certificate under the [Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/) in the matter of DC 93/11/1285; 
Quash the order made by Johnston DCJ on that motion; 
Order that the proceedings be remitted to the District Court to be determined according to law; and 4. Order that the first opponent, the
Director of Public Prosecutions of New South Wales, pay the claimant's costs before this Court.
JUDGE2
HANDLEY JA In this matter I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Kirby P. His Honour sets out the relevant facts, the legislation, and the history of the proceedings and there is no need for me to cover the same ground.
The claimant seeks an order, in the nature of certiorari, to quash the decision of Johnston DCJ for error of law on the face of the record. This
Court has not taken a narrow view of what constitutes the record for this purpose but there are limits. The record is not yet equivalent to an appeal book. Material, such as the transcript of evidence, may be looked at to identify the matters submitted to the judge for his determination, to help the
Court understand the judge's reasons, and for similar purposes. Affidavit evidence is also admissible to prove reasons given orally which have not been reduced to writing. See R versus Chertsey JJ Ex parte Franks [(1961) 2 QB 152.]
On this basis evidence of legal argument is also admissible where this discloses the judge's reasons for making the order under challenge.
The essential question is whether the judge made an error of law which can be discerned on the face of the record.
In the present case this means on the face of his Honour's reasons for refusing a certificate under the [Costs in
Criminal Cases Act 1967](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/) (the Act). These can only be discerned from the discussion between himself and Mr Littlemore SC. The official transcript records:- "(Mr Littlemore made an application for a certificate of costs under the Criminal Cases Act).

HIS HONOUR I decline to grant the certificate."
The claimant relied upon the affidavit of his solicitor Mr Penhall who said:- "4. My recollection of the application for costs is that when senior counsel applied for a certificate for costs the trial judge said: 'Do you really make that application in view of what I have just said in the last paragraph of my judgment?
Senior counsel replied with words to the effect: 'Yes. Also there are two charges where there was no prima facie cases'.
The trial judge shook his head and said words to the effect: 'I refuse the application for a certificate for costs'".
The opponent filed an affidavit by Miss Hock, the Crown Prosecutor, who said:- "4. To the best of my recollection following his Honour's order acquitting the claimant, Mr Littlemore QC, senior counsel for the claimant, rose and words to the following effect were said: 'Littlemore
QC: I seek a certificate pursuant to the [Costs in
Criminal Cases Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/) for my client's costs.

His Honour: I would have thought that somewhat optimistic given the ultimate paragraph of my judgment but I will certainly hear you.

Littlemore QC: There were two counts where your Honour found no case to answer.
 
His Honour: I would have thought that was not enough given the technicality of those findings.' 
There was some further discussion between his Honour and Mr
Littlemore QC which I am not now able to recall and at the end of which senior counsel for the claimant said words to the following effect: 'Littlemore QC: Alright. I formally make an application for a certificate under the [Costs in Criminal Cases Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/)'.

As I recall Mr Littlemore QC then sat down without saying anything further and his Honour then said words to the following effect: 
His Honour: I don't need to hear from you Madam Crown. I decline the application."'
At the conclusion of the argument in this Court on 25 May the claimant was given leave to file an affidavit by Mr Littlemore. This leave was availed of.
His affidavit said:- "3. I then rose and said to His Honour words the following effect:- 'It would not be appropriate to do it today, but we would wish to make an application for costs in this matter'.

His Honour responded to the following effect: 'In view of what I said in the last paragraph of my judgment do you really want to argue that?' 
I said words to this effect: 'Yes, your Honour. For a start there were the two counts on which you found no prima facie case.'
There was further discussion which I do not now recall save that it did not include any remark of his Honour's to the effect that any of the acquittals was on a 'technicality'.
I have read the affidavit of Ms Hock sworn 30 March, 1995 and agree that after his Honour made it plain in arguendo that he would not entertain an application for costs, I asked that it formally be noted that the application was made.
It was never my intention to argue the costs application on November, 1994.
My intention was to seek a later date for argument, permitting the preparation of evidence and detailed written submissions.
Only after his Honour made it plain in arguendo that he would not entertain a costs application - for the reason he stated -
DID I ABANDON MY APPLICATION for an opportunity to call evidence and argue the matter at a later date.
I then sought to have it recorded that costs were sought." (emphasis supplied)
None of the deponents, were required for cross-examination but it is the claimant who has the onus of proof. See R versus Alley Ex parte NSW Plumbers' and
Gasfitters' Union <case>; [(1981) 153 CLR 376] at 382, 392-3, 397.
The claimant pressed three alleged errors of law said to be apparent on the face of the record, namely failures to take into account relevant matters and to give adequate reasons, and the refusal to entertain the application.
 .
The power to grant a certificate is conferred by [s 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s2.html) but is circumscribed by the conditions in [s 3(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s3.html) See Allerton versus DPP [(1991) 24 NSWLR 550] at :- "... before it can exercise its discretion to grant a certificate under [s 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s2.html) the Court must have formed the opinion described in [s 3(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s3.html) and (b)."
If the statutory conditions are satisfied the Court "may ... grant a certificate" [(s 2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s2.html) It thus has a discretion which may be exercised by granting or refusing a certificate. See [Interpretation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/) [s 9(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s9.html) (effect of "may") and Ward versus Williams <case>; [(1955) 92 CLR 496.] An applicant who establishes the matters in [s 3(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s3.html) is not entitled as of course to a certificate.
His Honour, sitting without a jury, had just delivered his reserved judgment acquitting the claimant on all charges. In his judgment he expressed "grave suspicions" about the conduct of the accused on the occasion which gave rise to counts 2-7 and said he suspected "there was an unhealthy relationship" between him and the first complainant.
Count 1 alleged a sexual assault on 12
January, 1992 at Curl Curl but the complainant and the accused were at Jenolan
Caves on that date with a third party and no offence occurred there. There was evidence that an offence occurred about that time but no specific date was established, the count was not amended, and there was no case to answer. There was no case to answer on Count 8 for similar reasons.
It is no wonder in these circumstances that the Judge thought the claimant should not receive a certificate. As an experienced criminal trial judge he may be taken to have a working knowledge of the Act. He was correct in thinking that he had a general discretion to refuse the application and in my opinion he made no error of law in exercising that discretion adversely to the claimant.
An application for a certificate would ordinarily enliven the obligation to give adequate reasons. However, following the discussion with the Judge senior counsel for the claimant said, according to the Crown Prosecutor:- "Alright I formally make an application for a certificate under the [Costs in Criminal Cases Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/)."
According to his own affidavit he said he abandoned his application for an opportunity to call evidence and argue the matter at a later date, and sought to have it recorded that costs were sought. It seems to me that senior counsel indicated to the Judge by asking for a certificate formally or abandoning his application for the matter to be heard at a later date that no further reasons were required. He thereby waived any entitlement on the part of the claimant to further reasons. There could hardly have been a clearer case of waiver.
If senior counsel considered that the reasons disclosed in argument were not sufficient, it was his duty either to press his application for an adjournment or to ask his Honour to give fuller reasons.
The Court does not know what other judicial commitments the Judge had that day but it is well aware of the heavy workloads carried by the judges of the District Court.
His Honour would not want to waste time giving fuller reasons if it was made clear that this was not required. As was said in a related context in Vakauta versus Kelly <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 568] at 572:- "... a party who has legal representation is not entitled to stand by ... By standing by, such a party has waived the right subsequently to object. The reason why that is so is obvious.
In such a case if clear objection had been taken ... the judge may have been able to correct (the matter) ... It would be unfair and wrong if failure to object ... were to give the party in default the advantage ..." 
I would therefore reject this ground of challenge.
Certiorari is a discretionary remedy. See Meagher versus Stephenson (1993) 30
NSWLR 726 at 738. Even if this ground had been made out, in my opinion in the present case it is a technicality and I would have refused relief in the exercise of the Court's discretion.
The final ground was that the Judge refused to "entertain" the application. Mr Littlemore said so in his affidavit. The Judge made it clear that he thought the application had no merit and he declined, in that sense, to "entertain" it or take it seriously. However he listened to everything
Mr
Littlemore wanted to say and in that sense did entertain the application.
There is no basis, in my view, for concluding that he declined, actually or constructively, to exercise his jurisdiction. On the contrary he exercised jurisdiction by dismissing the application.
The summons should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
SHELLER JA: I have had the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by
Kirby
P and Handley JA. [Section 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s2.html) of the [Costs in Criminal Cases Act 1967](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/) empowered
Johnston DCJ on the acquittal of the claimant, Peter Ramskogler, to grant to him a certificate under the Act, "specifying the matters referred to in [s3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s3.html) and relating to those proceedings." [Section 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s3.html) (1) requires that a certificate granted specify that, "in the opinion of the ... Judge granting the certificate" "(a) if the prosecution had, before the proceedings were instituted, been in possession of evidence of all the relevant facts, it would not have been reasonable to institute the proceedings; and that any act or omission of the defendant that contributed, or might have contributed, to the institution or continuation of the proceedings was reasonable in the circumstances."
I accept that before a judge grants a certificate the judge must have formed an opinion which would enable the certificate to be granted, specifying the matters in (a) and (b), and must also exercise a residual discretion, contemplated by [s2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cicca1967226/s2.html), to grant a certificate. In short the judge is not bound to grant a certificate because he or she has formed the opinion of the matters specified in (a) and (b). Of course if the judge does not have the opinion required to be specified the certificate will not be granted.
However paras, and (b) indicate specific matters about which the judge must form an opinion in the course of exercising the discretion to grant or refuse a certificate. It would obviously be material to the exercise of the ultimate discretion that the judge had formed the opinion required to be specified. As the President has put it his Honour approached the matter as though he enjoyed an unfettered discretion. According to Mr Littlemore, his Honour made it plain that he would not "entertain" an application for costs. Like the
President I do not regard Mr Littlemore's "abandonment" of the application against this indication from his Honour and Mr Littlemore's request that the Court formally note the application was made, as doing other than respond courteously to his
Honour's decision that he proposed to refuse the application. Substantially for the reasons he has given I agree with the orders the President proposes.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/110.html  
