

Needham versus McSweeney Matter No Ca 40591/98 [1998] NSWSC 403 (24 August )

Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
JOHN CHARLES NEEDHAM versus ANGELA BELLE-MCSWEENEY 
CA 40591/98 August 1998 
Meagher JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter I am asked to deal with two notices of motion arising ultimately out of matrimonial proceedings between husband and wife. The husband's notice of motion is a notice of motion seeking a stay of a judgment of Hodgson Chief Judge in Equity in proceedings number 3760 of 1996, pending the determination of an appeal from his Honour's orders. 
The wife's application is an application that the husband's appeal be dismissed as incompetent or alternatively struck out.

The litigation out of which these two notices of motion arise is hardly a matter that reflects credit on anybody. There was initially matrimonial proceedings between husband and wife in the Family Court. That seemed to be disposed of except for the questions of property settlement. The judges of that jurisdiction were of the view that they could hardly make sensible orders about the property of the parties until they discovered what the property of the parties was. They could not discover what the property of the husband was because at that moment, proceedings were afoot in the Equity jurisdiction of this Court for the determination of that precise problem. In those circumstances, Mr Justice Ellis of the Family Court ordered that the proceedings be transferred. By the proceedings, I mean the proceedings in the
Family Court or such of them as remained, be transferred to the Equity
Division of this Court presumably with a view that the remaining matters in the Family Court and the litigation concerning the husband's properties already on foot in this Court be determined simultaneously.

The litigation in which the husband was involved concerning his property was eventually heard by Windeyer J, who made orders which seemed finally to have disposed of that matter. It would seem to me that once Mr Justice Windeyer had made those orders the dilemma which necessitated the transfer in the first place then dissolved. Once the equity proceedings had been thought to have closed there was no rational reason left for maintaining the transfer from the family court to the Supreme Court.

The wife then, presumably taking the same view, applied for the re-transfer of the matter from the Supreme Court to the Family Court and that application was granted by the Chief Judge in Equity, Hodgson J. It is from that order that the present two motions arise.

In my view, the husband's notice of motion should be dismissed with costs and order 1 in the wife's notice of motion should be made in the terms in which it is couched and that the husband should pay the costs of the wife's notice of motion. In the first place, there is strictly speaking no proper appeal before this Court. There should be some summons for leave to appeal instead of which there are documents which purport to be a Notice of Appeal. In the second place, I am unable to see, despite argument to the contrary that there is anything wrong in the learned Chief Judge's judgment.

In particular, I can see no constitutional reason which would prevent the learned chief judge from transferring the matter to the family law court where the litigation originally commenced.

For these reasons, I will make the orders which I have suggested dismissing the husband's notice of motion and making order 1 as sought in the wife's notice of motion.
 * * * 
