

Colquhoun versus Australian Iron and Steel P/L [1996] NSWSC 544 (15 November )

Colquhoun v. Australian Iron and Steel Pty. Limited /93; CLD 90143/91; CLD 90144/91 November 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Handley JA, Powell JA 
Catchwords: Negligence - Master and servant - Duty of care - Safe system of work - Employer's duty to provide - Final year apprentice underground electrician - Whether direction as to manner of performing, and supervision of performance of, task required.

Negligence - Res Ipsa loquitur - Inference from fact of recurrence -
Circumstances in which accident occurred - Derailment of diesel man car in underground coal mine, owned and operated by respondent - Whether evidence of negligence.

Practice - Trial - Verdict by direction - Application for - Test to be applied.

Ex Tempore/Reserved: Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: I agree with the orders proposed by Powell JA and generally with the reasons which his Honour has given. The fact that risks were involved in what the plaintiff was doing is, I think, reasonably plain. In the end, I do not think that it was seriously in contest that such risks existed. The real question has, in my opinion, been whether, in the circumstances in question, the duty of the defendant extended to taking precautions against those risks. The necessity for an employer to take precautions against the risk of injury to employees has in recent times received emphasis. The principles involved have not changed: they remain generally as stated in Glass & McHugh The Liability of Employers (2nd ed, 1979). But what those principles require an employer to do in a particular case now requires to be considered in the light of the views expressed in Bankstown Foundry Pty Ltd versus Braistina <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 301.] 
I am conscious of the particular problems associated with underground mining.
The relationship between employer and employee in such work-place has been developed over many years and the law does not require that there be sudden and dramatic changes in what is required to be done, at least in the absence of evidence of means by which recognised risks can now, by new developments, be dealt with in new ways.

In the present case, the risks that were involved were, in a sense, ordinarily inherent in the processes involved in underground mining. But in my opinion that does not mean that the duty of the employer to deal with them is any the less. In all the circumstances I respectfully differ from the conclusion arrived at by Levine J. I agree with the views of Powell JA.

HANDLEY JA: In this appeal I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment of Powell JA in draft form.

I agree with Powell JA that there was sufficient evidence of negligence in both actions to entitle the plaintiff to have that issue considered by the jury, and the appeal must therefore be allowed.

The first accident was caused by the fall of a beam which was not adequately supported when the plaintiff attempted to wedge back a fallen prop under it.
The plaintiff was a senior electrical apprentice, not fully experienced in this work, and had been sent to do it on his own, without proper instructions.
There was evidence which entitled the jury to find that the system followed in this instance was unsafe and that injury to the plaintiff was reasonably foreseeable.

The second accident occurred when a man car on which the plaintiff was a passenger was derailed. There was evidence which the jury could accept that a derailment had occurred shortly before at the same spot. Independently of that evidence there was the unexplained derailment of the man car. The track, the man car, and the mine were all under the respondent's control. The case was one where, in my opinion, an inference of negligence arose from the accident itself. The jury were not bound to find negligence, but in the absence of any explanation were entitled to do so.

I agree with the orders proposed by Powell JA.
 
POWELL JA: In the two proceedings which have given rise to this appeal, the Appellant sued the Respondent to recover damages in respect of injuries which he claimed to have sustained in two separate accidents which occurred at a time when he (the Appellant) was employed by the Respondent in a colliery - operated by it, the cause of action relied upon in each proceeding being what was alleged to be the negligence of the Respondent in failing to provide a safe system of work, a safe place of work, safe and proper equipment with which the Appellant might carry out his work and the efficient supervision of such work.

The accident which was the subject of the first proceeding occurred on 12
December 1982 at a time when a beam - that is, a wooden roof support - which the Appellant was attempting to prop up, fell on him, while the accident the subject of the second proceeding occurred on 19 March 1987 when a diesel man car on which the Appellant was then riding as a passenger was derailed and the
Appellant was thrown out and struck the wall of the drive along which the man car was travelling.

Although the two proceedings appear originally to have commenced in the
District Court, the first in January 1987 and the second in February 1988, they appear thereafter to have been removed into the Supreme Court.

The two proceedings came on for hearing before Levine J and jury at Wollongong on 17 February 1993, the hearing occupying some eleven days.

At the conclusion of the evidence tendered on behalf of both the Appellant and the Respondent, counsel for the Respondent applied to Levine J for a verdict by direction in each of the two proceedings, to which application his Honour acceded and, on the eleventh hearing day the jury, at his Honour's direction, returned a verdict for the Respondent in each of the two proceedings.

The questions which arise for determination on the appeal are: - in relation to the first of the proceedings, whether Levine J erred when he held: a. that there was no evidence, in the circumstances, of a foreseeable risk of injury; and b. that, even if there were evidence of a foreseeable risk of injury, there was no evidence of any practicable means of obviating any such foreseeable risk; in the second of the proceedings, whether Levine J erred in holding that, the Appellant having tendered no evidence as to the actual cause of the man car derailing, and, as he was of the view that neither a judge nor a jury has of common knowledge any information which would warrant the inference that the derailing of the man car was more likely than not to have occurred as the result of want of care on the part of the Respondent, the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur was not available to be relied upon by the Appellant.

Given the nature of the application made to Levine J, and the questions which arise for determination on this appeal, it is unnecessary to record, in any extensive detail, the history of the Appellant's employment by the Respondent, or to examine, in any extensive detail, the evidence which was tendered on the hearing at first instance.

The Appellant, who was born on 23 September 1962, completed his secondary education at the end of Year 10, when he was 16 years of age. Although it would appear that he had earlier had thoughts of training as a motor mechanic, he had, by the end of his secondary education, decided to train as an electrician. It would appear that, at some time in 1979, the Appellant obtained a position with the Respondent as an apprentice electrician. The evidence would tend to indicate that for about nine months after he commenced his employment with the Respondent, the Appellant worked in some form of training centre, following which - in about November 1979 - he commenced work at the Corrimal Colliery as an apprentice underground electrician. At the time of the happening, on 12 December 1982, of the accident which gave rise to the first proceeding, the Appellant was thus in the fourth year of his apprenticeship and had just completed three years work as an apprentice underground electrician.

It would seem that, following the completion of his apprenticeship and his qualifying as an electrician the Appellant undertook a further trades course - this time in the field of electronics - which, when completed, would have enabled him to obtain a position as a technician and that, at some time which is not clear, the Appellant commenced studies to qualify for an electrical engineering certificate. Whether or not the Appellant completed either of those additional courses is not clear, but this is not a matter of any great consequence since, at the time of the happening on 19 March 1987 of the accident which gave rise to the second of the proceedings, the Appellant was employed at the Respondent's Cordeaux Colliery as an underground electrician.

The evidence which the Appellant gave in chief in relation to the accident which gave rise to the first proceeding was as follows: - (Appeal Book pp. 31-35) "O'LOUGHLIN: Q. In 1982 what were you doing by way of your duties at work? 
A. I was a fourth year electrical apprentice and at that stage they put you in a panel to give you full responsibility so that you get your experience as an electrician and hopefully if you did really well in the last couple of months you would then be taken on as a tradesperson rather than sort of getting the sack.
 
Q. So when, to the best of your recollection, were you due to complete your apprenticeship? 
A. I would have completed it in January, January the 15th, just after the accident.
 
Q. That is 15 January 1983 you were due to finish your apprenticeship.

A. Yes.
 
Q. On 12 December 1982 you were an apprentice, fourth year electrician and what sort of duties generally speaking were you performing then? 
A. I was performing the duty of an underground electrician. Basically, I was supervised by assistant engineer (sic) who would give you what to do on the shift. Beforehand he would give a list and away you go and do it but basically, I was a full electrician in underground mines but of course, you were learning.
 
Q. Very briefly, what sorts of things did that involve underground? 
A. If we had a breakdown of a miner or a shuttle car - it didn't matter where it was in the mud or where it was, you had to get that machinery going. So, it was mainly just underground electrician, just maintenance and keeping the machinery going. So, it was basically just the general duties of an underground electrician.
 
Q. On 12 September 1982 were you give some specific duty which led you to go somewhere? 
A. My assistant engineer asked me to, said that the radio cable going in the panel, which is strung through, was to go back. He said `There's some timber on some parts and other parts just sticking down. Can you go and fix that cable and get the timber off the road?' I said, `Not a problem' and away I went.
 
Q. Where did you have to go to do that? 
A. I went into the panel with my normal crew. I proceeded to walk outby with a hammer and some cables and if the cable was sticking down I would fix it up, where it was sticking outby I would fix the cable. There were a couple of places it was going to get caught on the man car coming in - - 
Q. Just passing there. There was a cable running along the roof of the tunnel which was sticking out at a couple of points and you had to fix it up at a couple of points so it wouldn't hit the man car? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. Tell us what happened? 
A. Well, I had proceeded quite well, I suppose. I walked some two kilometres, one and a half kilometres outby and I was probably only 50 yards from completing the task and things were going pretty well and I came up to where the bar was falling down on the cable and it was sort of leaning on the cable.
 
Q. What do you mean by `bar'? 
A. A bar about as big as telephone post and it's held up on each end - - 
Q. I said a skinny telegraph post when I was opening to the jury? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. That was not correct, it is quite long? 
A. Yes. You actually use an hydraulic hoist to put it on the roof.
 
Q. How would such a bar, or another work for it would be a beam, how would such a beam be secured to the roof? 
A. Secured by each end. It has a wedge and you put your prop in and hammer your wedge in to get a pressure on it and it remains there.
 
Q. And the prop remains in position permanently? 
A. As different times change when we have to go underground, they have an outby gang which from time to time goes by and their job is to check the props intermittently. They have crews which are supposed to check the condition of those props but they don't always do that.
 
Q. That tunnel which had this particular beam that fell, is that tunnel used on a regular basis? 
A. Yes, the man car uses it.
 
Q. You said outby gangs, I think, amongst other things, were responsible for checking the beams, is that right? 
A. That is right. The deputy on that incoming man car would normally check the beam and he is also supposed to walk down the tunnel every now and then and check on them. It is also the job of the outby crew to check on it, which also has a deputy.
 
Q. Which deputy is the senior one? 
A. They are the same. There is the deputy on the incoming man car and the deputy on the outby crew.
 
Q. How often do you say it should be checked? 
A. It is supposed to be checked every shift but this one - - 
OBJECTION: 
Q. Every shift is your answer.

A. Yes.
 
Q. When you got to this particular site where the accident happened, tell us what happened there? 
A. Well, I saw the beam was down on the cable which is like the last cable - 
Q. How far down? 
A. Not very far, it had fallen down about that far (Indicating) because the prop had come down the bar had dropped that much and it was pushing on the cable and causing it to bow (Indicating).
 (Mr. Gleeson requested an estimate of the distances that the plaintiff was indicating.) 
Q. You'd say the bar or the beam had dropped down at one end about 15 inches, is that right? 
A. Yes. Very approximate, yes.
 
Q. And was causing the wire underneath it to sag by that much, is that right? 
A. That is right, different pressure on it.
 
Q. And you said something then about the prop being - what did you say about the prop? 
A. The prop was just lying against the ribs where it had fallen out. So I then proceeded to put the prop against the bar which was quite easy because all you have to do is push the wedge in. As I was pushing the wedge in the other side dislodged, both sides were loose, the bar fell - - 
Q. We will get on to that in a minute. Had you been trained in any training course about the way in which to secure a bar or beam? 
A. The only training course - I don't think anyone gets a training course.
 
OBJECTION: 
HIS HONOUR: Just listen to the question and answer the question.
 
WITNESS: All right. Had I been trained? I would think I was - I was apprenticed. I was with the panel electrician and helped with it every day. It wasn't my job but I helped and assisted with it daily. It was quite common that you might have to put a prop in each day, to raise it, to winch machinery in and out of the place because you didn't have cranes in those places. But training really wasn't there. It wasn't a job where you get trained, you assisted with the jobs that you could do. It's like every job, you just pick it up while ever you are in a panel for 12 months.
 
Q. You say you were hammering a wedge into place when the whole beam fell out, is that right? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. What was securing the beam at the time that it fell out along its length? 
A. Nothing securing it. It just sort of fell down and the prop sort of holds it from going the whole of the way down.
 
Q. Is it the case with a beam such as that one that you have a prop at both ends? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And the props are kept in place by wedges, is that right? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And if the prop at the other end had been secure and its wedges secure, in your opinion would the beam have fallen out? 
A. No.
 
Q. Then tell us, please, what happened. It fell out and how did that happen? 
A. It actually fell out. I saw it fall. I ducked. I didn't have time to run away, I just ducked. It hit me on the top - 
Q. Top of what? 
A. Top of the neck and then just flattened me but as I fell to the ground, when it hit there, as I fell it slid and when it hit the ground the full force was taken across my lower back (Demonstrating).
 
Q. I think from your demonstration the beam fell across your body? 
A. (Demonstrating) It fell across like that and it actually slid to there. It actually slid and rolled, it was more or less a glancing blow. It sort of hit my back but once it got to the floor it fell the full two metres and I got the full force across my lower back.
 
Q. It fell the two metres to where you were located on the ground? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Just for the record, the demonstration you just made with your hands, when you were in a virtual standing position it hit you on the back of the neck? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And it forced you down to a point where you became horizontal and it was in contact with your back above ground level and fell on you as it basically hit the ground? 
A. It pinned me.
 ...........
 (Appeal Book pp. 42-43) 
O'LOUGHLIN: Q. Before we adjourned I was about to move on to the collision. I am now going to go back just for the moment and cover a couple of more features of the first one before I move ono to the second accident.
 
Sir, you said when you had this first accident concerning the falling beam you were an apprentice, is that right? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You were a fourth year apprentice? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Were you often or at all supervised at the work site in the work that you were doing? 
A. Very rarely. We would normally see our assistant engineer, though, once a shift, normally at the start and occasionally he'd come in sometimes through the day to see how you were going.
 
Q. You would come in or the assistant engineer? 
A. The assistant engineer would drive in the panel in the car.
 
Q. And the shift was seven hours? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And the engineer might come out to spend, what, some minutes with you? 
A. Normal enough (sic) for him to have a cup of tea.
 
Q. But in terms of being with you and directing and supervising you in the work that you were doing, what do you say about your engineer? 
A. Yes, he just told you the jobs you had to do. It was up to my own discretion how I did the jobs or how I approached them.
 
Q. In respect to the beam which fell on you, did anyone warn you in respect of that beam that it was possible or even moreover likely that it might fall on you? 
A. No.
 
Q. Other than hearing that the beam had slightly dislodged to the point where it was stretching the wire underneath, did anyone tell you anything about that beam before you went to the work site? 
A. No.
 
Q. In your experience as at the date of that accident in December 1982 was there some other method used within the mines to reposition a beam which had slightly dislodged? 
A. No.
 
Q. When I say other method, I mean other than the one that you described before? 
A. Normally if the beam - - 
OBJECTION: NOT PRESSED.
 
Q. You probably do not need to go on. And do you remember about what time was it that the beam fell - do you remember when through the shift that it happened? 
A. I'd only be guessing but I think probably half way through the shift.
 
Q. Well, is that an absolute guess, I mean can we rely on that at all or not? 
A. I don't really recall. I don't recall too much after the accident.
 
Q. The engineer who sent you to do that job, the job wasn't specifically related to that particular beam, was it, it was a job right along the end of the tunnel? 
A. That's right.
 
Q If I understood you before it was a job concerned with the sagging wires at various points along the tunnel? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Beyond telling you that in a long section of tunnel there were some sagging wires, were you told anything else? 
A. No." 
In the course of his cross-examination, the Appellant gave the following evidence in relation to the accident which gave rise to the first proceeding: -
 (Appeal Book pp. 98-99) "Q. You went along this day, having got your instructions and you said you were fixing, by means of using staples, a cable sagging as you saw it along the heading that you were walking on, is that right? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. You had been walking along the heading or a tunnel and where sagging (sic) you had a hammer in one hand and you had some staples and you would fix it up? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. You said that after you proceeded about one and a half kilometres and you were fifty yards from finishing your job you came across the sagging cable and the overhead bar was sagging as well because one of the props had been knocked into the rib or was in the rib? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. Now, you mentioned that this could happen because of the roof moving or the floor heaving or the ribs sporing, is that right? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. You had no knowledge of how that particular bar with the prop in the rib had been in that condition - you had no knowledge of how long it had been like that, did you? 
A. No. I would have guessed for some time if my engineer had seen it but I don't know.
 
Q. In fact, you don't know whether it happened two days before you came across it or half an hour before you came across it? 
A. I figured it must have been within the last couple of days.
 
Q. You don't know? 
A. The engineer must have seen it the day before.
 
HIS HONOUR: Q. Do you know or don't you? 
A. No, I don't know.
 
GLEESON: When you came across it you formed a view that you were going to do something about it, is that right? 
A. Yes, I had just done previous ones.
 
Q. You had, but it was not part of your duty, of course, as an electrician to do the work of the outby gang, was it? 
OBJECTION: QUESTION ALLOWED 
Q. Was it? 
A. Well, I was asked to fix the cable. Get the timber off the cable is what I was told to do.
 
Q. It was not part of your duty to do the work of the outby gang was it? 
A. But I was not doing their work. I was just fixing a barred off cable, like I had been instructed.
 
Q. You were there to fix the cable, weren't you? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. And you decided not only to fix the cable but to support the bar? 
A. To fix the cable what I did was put the prop under the bar. I had just done three or four previous to that without a problem.
 
Q. You did not have to fix the cable to put the prop under the bar, did you? 
A. Well, how else could I have done it.
 
Q. The cable was sagging, wasn't it? 
A. The cable was tight. The cable was not holding the bar up. The cable was tight underneath. With the bar pressing on it and kept pressing on it, it would have snapped the cable and that is what my job was, to go back and stop that.
 ..........
 (Appeal Book pp. 111-115) 
Q. I suppose when you proceeded to put the prop back in and hammer the wedges you had to make an assessment whether or not it was safe to do so, would you agree with that? 
A. I suppose I would, yes.
 
Q. And in order to ensure it was safe to do that you'd have had to look at the other side to see if it was ably supported? 
A. Being it was the only thing that was holding the bar up you would take it was supported properly, otherwise the bar wouldn't have been up there, it would have fallen long before.
 
Q. You took it the bar was supported properly? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you didn't check it? 
A. I wouldn't have known to check things like that. I was only a fourth year apprentice, as I said. As an apprentice you don't really get to make - if you get a job you do the job to the best of your ability; make the job look good so you can be put back on the job. You do the job to the best of your ability.
 
Q. Didn't you take the opportunity to see if it was secured? 
A. I would have checked it visually.
 
Q. You checked it, and did you see if it had wedges in it? 
A. I would have checked it. I don't remember, no.
 
Q. It would have had wedges in it? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You, of course, checked to see it had a wedge in it and then you went to fix the prop on the other side, is that right? 
A. I just visually looked at it. I don't recall exactly.
 
Q. You would have, indeed, visually looked at it to make sure it was safe before you went under it, is that right? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. And you say that it was kept in place by wedges, is that right? 
A. Yes, could have been one wedge, many wedges, I can't remember. You just have a look at it to see if it is all right.
 
Q. If there hadn't been any wedges there you wouldn't have fooled around with the other side? 
A. But it was tight.
 
Q. It was tight, was it? 
A. Well, it was the only thing that was holding a six metre bar up. A six metre beam, if it only sags at the other end you would assume it was tight.
 
Q. From the other side you formed the opinion it was tight? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you formed the opinion it was wedged? 
A. I can't remember. I really can't remember.
 
Q. Well, you formed the opinion that the prop or the beam at the other side was secured, right? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. And you formed the view that it had been wedged securely, that's right, isn't it? 
A. I took it as it was being fixed, yes.
 
Q. Because otherwise it would have been ridiculous for you to get under it and fiddle around with the other side if it wasn't secure on the side that was supporting it.
 
OBJECTION: ALLOWED 
Q. It would be ridiculous for you to fiddle around and try to put a prop under a beam on one side if the other side wasn't secure? 
A. It would have been a better idea to fix the other side first. It would have been better if, as I said, what I know now and what I knew then is two different things.
 
Q. You are saying you are more experienced now? 
A. I was a fourth year, I would have only been in the mine for maybe six to twelve months, I don't really remember.
 
Q. You were performing the duties of an underground electrician, weren't you? 
A. That's right.
 
Q. And basically you were a full electrician in underground mines? 
A. I was an apprentice.
 
Q. Basically you were a full electrician in underground mines? 
A. No, I wasn't a full electrician.
 
Q. Why did you say yesterday basically you were a full electrician in underground mines if that wasn't the fact, because that is what you said yesterday? 
A. I was an apprentice electrician fourth year.
 
Q. Is it wrong to say that basically you were a full electrician in underground mines? 
A. It was right, I wasn't a full electrician obviously, I am not out of my time.
 
Q. Why did you try and lead his Honour and the jury to accepting you basically as a full electrician in underground mines? 
A. I didn't try to lead anything.
 
Q. Was it the truth or not? 
A. I have just said I was a fourth year apprentice electrician.
 
Q. You were a full electrician in underground mines still learning, that's right, isn't it.

A. No, well I can't be a full electrician, you aren't qualified until after you finish the fourth year.
 
Q. These are your words - 
A. I was four weeks off being qualified.
 
Q. `I was performing the duty of an underground electrician. Basically, I was supervised by assistant engineer who would give you what to do on the shift. Before hand he would give a list and away you go and do it but basically, I was a full electrician in underground mines but of course, you were learning'? 
A. Basically I was a full electrician, four weeks off.
 
Q. Are you saying having come across this bar that was down you knew then that you didn't have the experience to deal with the problem? 
A. We put in props quite regular.
 
Q. Are you saying you didn't have the experience to deal with the problem? 
A. I wouldn't think I was fully experienced, no.
 
Q. Why did you try and move the prop and support the bar, why didn't you call the gang? 
A. Number one I suppose because I was asked. Two, is because you try not to make too many problems, if you are asked to do a job you do it to the best of your ability and as an apprentice you don't really ask too many questions, cause any waves and I suppose the third thing is often on overtime shifts you have got to put props in to move machinery using blocks and tackles and throughout the shift as an electrician, because you don't always have a break down you go and assist at the face, part of assisting at the face is timber and whatever else you need to come in with.
 
Q. You were experienced in fixing props and supporting bars? 
A. I wouldn't think I was experienced, no.
 
Q. Why did you try to do it? 
A. I have done it many times before.
 
Q. Then you were experienced? 
A. No, experience in a mine takes years.
 
Q. I thought you said you had done it many times before. I thought you were telling his Honour and the jury that you were experienced in underground work at that time? 
A. Experience in a mine takes many years, you don't learn it in twelve months.
 
Q. Although you have done this supporting of bars with props before you say you weren't experienced, is that what you are saying? 
A. I wouldn't class myself as experienced, it takes years to be experienced in a mine normally, it takes four years to get a deputy's ticket normally.
 
HIS HONOUR: Q. You are free to give your evidence, your evidence is either Mr. O'Loughlin asks a question or Mr. Gleeson asks a question and the evidence is made up of your question and your answer to that question, whoever asks you a question you just answer the question. One side or the other can object if you go off the track or if you keep saying these things. You might say something that might be absolutely disastrous.

A. I said I was inexperienced but he asked me several times.
 
Q. And you don't argue with me, you just listen to the question and answer the question.
 
GLEESON: Q. Do you think you are an argumentative person? 
A. No, no really.
 
Q. You don't think you have been in trouble at the colliery because you tend to argue with the boss a bit too much? 
A. No, I always put my ideas across though.
 
Q. Are you saying that what you did when you assessed the job was you assessed firstly whether or not it was safe for you to do it or that you didn't care whether it was safe for you to do it or not? 
A. I'm saying I assessed the job to the best of my ability.
 
Q. To the best of your ability you are saying it was safe? 
A. I would have thought so.
 
Q. And in order to reach that conclusion you checked the other side to see if it was secure? 
A. Just visually.
 
Q. There was no other way to check it, was there? 
A. There is now that I have learnt.
 
Q. There was no other way to check it, was there, bearing in mind that you were there by yourself? 
A. There is another way to check it.
 
Q. How could you have checked it? 
A. It is a bit dodgy but what you can do, if you have a big hammer is go and hit the prop, at the time I didn't know that but they hit the prop and see if it still stays there but obviously if it has got the weight of a six metre beam on it it probably would have still stayed there anyway, maybe, I don't know.
 
Q. If it was secure on the other side and you say it obviously was secure because it was supporting the six metre beam and yes I think you saw the wedges in it you have said, then by you putting the beam on the other side and hammering in the wedges that would not have brought it down, would it? 
A. I wouldn't have thought so but it did." 
In the course of his evidence in chief, the Appellant gave the following evidence as to the accident which was the subject of the second proceeding: - (Appeal Book pp. 45-47) "Q. On or about 17 March 1987 was there a new section of track opened up - this is two days before you accident? 
A. Yes, there was.
 
Q. Where was that section of track running? 
A. Mostly we had to get from a point to a point. (Indicating). We used to go down that way and then they opened a new section to go that way.
They opened a new section because they were going to re-route the way the wind came into the tunnel.
 
Q. They were going to improve the ventilation? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And did they open a new section of tunnel and lay some track? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. On or about 17 March, two days before your accident, were you driving a car on that section of track within a couple of hours of it being opened up? 
A. I would imagine within a shift of it being opened up. I couldn't be exact on that but I'd be pretty certain of it.
 
Q. It was virtually brand new.

A. That is right.
 
Q. Did you drive the car for the purpose of transporting the miners or for some other reason, or don't you remember? 
A. Can I have that again? 
Q. For what reason were you driving the car that day? 
A. It was a Saturday maintenance shift and were in there doing just maintenance on a Saturday and I was actually driving into the mine - - 
Q. By yourself? 
A. By myself when the car derailed.
 
Q. How fast were you going? 
A. I was going about half speed and we came off with a jar. I have been in other car derailments but not going as slow as this and not derailed with the specific jerk that we went off, it frightened me.
 
Q. Would you tell the jury what happened? 
OBJECTION: ALLOWED.
 
HIS HONOUR: I will allow this general area, Mr. O'Loughlin. Perhaps you should elicit from the witness if it was the same track.
 
O'LOUGHLIN: Q. It was the same track, wasn't it? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. It was the same track as the track upon which you were travelling at the time of your accident a couple of days later? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. In fact, a derailment of the car which you were driving on or about 17
March occurred at exactly the same place on the same track - 
A. That is right.
 
Q. - as was the car that you were in which crashed on 19 March 1987, is that right? 
A. That is right.
 
HIS HONOUR: Q. Was it the same car? 
A. I don't recall. We have probably 14 different cars, to be the same car would be highly unlikely.
 
Q. They have 14 cars. Are the 14 cars the same? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. When you said a moment ago you were travelling at half speed when it was derailed, that does really mean very much to me anyway. Are you able to way in terms of kilometres per hour? 
A. All right. With a diesel man car - - 
Q. How fast were you going, ten, 15, 20, 25? 
A. They don't have a speedo. You can't know.
 
O'LOUGHLIN: Q. But you have been a driver of motor cars for a while, haven't you? 
A. Yes, but a motor car is different to when you have a wall that far away , if you know what I mean.
 
Q. Just a bit like Luna Park, in relation to the confined spaces? 
OBJECTION: NOT PRESSED.
 
WITNESS: I would estimate 25 kilometres, 20 kilometres.
 
O'LOUGHLIN: Q. So half speed is about 20 to 25? 
A. At a very rough guess.
 
Q. So to make this clear, you were travelling at half speed. That is half of the normal speed, is that right? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Cars normally travelling at full speed, it is a bit like trains, they normally travel at a fast speed? 
A. It depends on the driver. Normally going out they usually travel fast going out. Going in, they usually take their time.
 
Q. We are getting to the point where I want you, please, to detail to the jury what happened when that car which you were driving at half speed derailed? 
A. Well, I was going down - it's a very straight road and down the end of it - it is down hill, is a straight road which would be a couple of kilometres straight - and you actually have to turn right at the bottom of the hill.
There's a shunt, a shunt half way down. So that if - - 
Q. It is to allow two vehicles to pass, one of them gets off the track? 
A. Yes. Normally they have lights. If they don't have lights, you can use the shunt to pass, to put anything in there, or if something breaks down you can go in there. I was coming down to the shunt. In was only half speed. I hadn't been there before. Before I hit the catch points, it just threw the car off the tracks very fast, not actually derailed me.
 
Q. In what direction: 
A. It threw it to the right very fast and actually where I actually came off was across the tracks of the shunt and I actually hit the wall. But it happened very quickly. I hadn't been in one - this is nine or eight years in the mine, I had never been thrown off like this before and it scared me.
 
The deputy was coming outside the mine and the crew was coming outside, it was near the end of the shift, they abused me very abruptly because, naturally, I delayed them in going home. The car had to go back on the track which takes a couple of hours. They were quite - - 
Q. Just pausing there, was mine deputy Danny Begley, the mine deputy who was one of the people coming out and who was delayed because you had derailed the car? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. Do you say he was very cranky with you? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Did he say something to you about the speed you had been travelling at? 
A. He did. He said I was speeding or he said, `You must have been going too fast' and I said to him, `I wasn't, there is something wrong with it.' because where he came off is across the catch point, so it looked like I had hit the catch points maybe going too quick but I wasn't. I was going quite slowly when it happened, I said and suggested that he should report it.
 
Q. What did you say to him, to the best of your recollection, about that? 
A. I just said there was something wrong with it, `Maybe you should report it to the next shift.'" ...........
 (Appeal Book pp. 51-53) 
O'LOUGHLIN: Q. Did you have a conversation with someone about whether you would drive the vehicle on 19 March, that is in terms of whether you were prepared to drive or not? 
A. I spoke to people when I came in.
 
Q. No, pause there; did you speak to either Hank Pinkster or the panel deputy? 
A. That is correct, I refused to drive the diesel.
 
Q. You refused to drive the vehicle which then - - 
A. Because of - - 
Q. Just pause there and just listen to what I am asking you. You refused to drive the vehicle which then shortly later crashed, is that right? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. Did a man called Geoff Meehan to the best of your recollection volunteer to drive the vehicle on that journey? 
A. He did.
 
Q. And did he actually drive the vehicle and was he driving it at the time of the crash? 
A. He did.
 
Q. You, in the course of your duty, needed to travel on that vehicle, didn't you? 
A. I did, yes.
 
Q. Whether as the driver or as a passenger you needed to be on the vehicle to get to where it was going? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. You had been directed to perform duty which required you to travel on that vehicle? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. You had just told either one or the other of Pinkster or the other deputy that you did not want to drive it. Did you give them a reason - yes or not - as to why you didn't want to drive it? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Did you mention to them the derailment that you had happen to you - yes or no? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Did you then sit in the vehicle - did you sit in the vehicle at some stage before it took off? 
A. I did.
 
Q. Where did you sit? 
A. Only after a driver - - 
Q. Just pause there? 
A. All right, the rear of the vehicle because it was the safest place to be.
 
Q. Just correct me if I am wrong, is the rear of the vehicle a driving compartment? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. Which you could use to drive it in the other direction: 
A. The vehicle is identical front to back.
 
HIS HONOUR: Q. How long is it, could I just ask you? 
A. The end of that, its probably about there (indicating).
 
Q. What about the length of the jury box, is it longer or shorter than that? 
A. Probably a fraction longer but pretty close to it. Yes, definitely longer than that but not much.
 
O'LOUGHLIN: Q. Is it a vehicle that sits for very far off the ground? 
A. About there (indicating).
 
Q. About four feet off the ground. You are measuring from the top of the step, are you? 
A. No, the top of the ground.
 
Q. That is what I am asking you. How high is the roof of the vehicle off the ground? 
A. About that high (indicating), which is probably about five feet.
 
Q. Is it made of steel? 
A. It is made of fibreglass and steel.
 
Q. Fibreglass padding around a steel frame, is it? 
A. Why I am thinking is because in different mines - I think that is how you do it. At Corrimal I think we just had steel ones. I think there was a fibreglass and steel one, doing the best of my memory.
 
Q. Sitting in the driver's compartment at the back, were you enclosed in a smaller compartment than the bulk of the passengers would be sitting in the main area? 
A. Oh, probably gives quite a little bit more room - - 
Q. No, no. Just answer yes or no. Is it a little driver's compartment? 
A. No, it is in the same area.
 
Q. I may have interrupted you, you were going to say it gives you, what, more protection in some respect? 
A. It just gives the driver a wall between him and the other passengers so that they can't hit him if something happens.
 
Q. Did the driver take off with you and other people aboard is that right - were there other people as well as you? 
A. I believe, I would think about 12 to 14.
 
Q. At what speed did he travel? 
A. Flat out.
 
Q. We have used the terms so far half speed and full speed. Did he travel at full speed? 
A. Full speed.
 
Q. Did you know Geoff Meehan at the time? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Had you known him for some time? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Was he someone who frequently or occasionally drove mining cars in the course of his duties? 
A. Yes, he did drive frequently.
 
Q. Was he travelling at full speed with you in the very back seat when the car derailed? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. And at what point along the track did it derail? 
A. At the same spot it did two days previous.
 
Q. What happened this time, would you describe to the jury what happened in the derailment? 
A. As you can imagine, our tunnel is not very wide, in fact, six metres at the most, sometimes five. There is not a lot of room between the car and the sides. This time when it derailed it derailed with such force that the car derailed. The car spun around, there would be very minimal room from the sides of the car to do this but it managed to. It did a complete 180 degree turn and was actually starting to turn again, spinning, when it ploughed into the wall. I was then in the driving seat. I was looking out the window, looking out what I call from the rear of the car, once it spun to the front of the car. We were going very fast and we just slammed into the side of the wall.
 
Q. Was the point at which it turned somewhere near that shunting area? 
A. That is right. We collected the side of the shunt, that might have been why there was enough room for it to turn and when we hit the wall, I had a driver's window in front of me, or the rear driver's window came in on me and so did coal and I really can't remember too much after that." 
In the course of the Defendant's case at the hearing, Mr. Meehan who had been the driver of the man car on 19 March 1987, gave the following evidence in chief: - (Appeal Book pp. 378-382) "Q. Do your recollect getting to the stage where you were at the bottom of the shaft on the swing shift on 19 March 1987 - - 
HIS HONOUR: A moment ago you mentioned 17 March, 1987.
 
GLEESON. Q. I am sorry, your Honour. I misled you. If I mentioned 17 March, the accident was on 19 March? 
A. I recollect the night of the accident, yes.
 
Q. In fact, just going ahead a bit, you were the driver of the man car? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. How many man cars were there positioned to take the men to the work area? 
A. We used four to five, may be seven were there.
 
Q. On this morning can you recollect in which man car you were when the accident happened, in terms of were you the first, second, third or what? 
A. Third.
 
Q. Does it follow from that that prior to the man car in which you were proceeding two others had preceded? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Now on that shift in evenings prior to 19 March 1987 - you can take that as being the night of this accident - who normally drove the care in which you were travelling? 
A. I did.
 
Q. Was it variable? 
A. Rarely.
 
Q. What do you mean by rarely? 
A. 99 percent of the time I drove.
 
Q. But occasionally someone else would drive? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Prior to you commencing to drive on the swing shift of 19 March 1987 did you have any conversation with Mr. Colquhoun? 
A. No.
 
Q. Was anything said in your presence about who should drive the diesel man car? 
A. No., 
Q. It is suggested by Mr. Colquhoun that you volunteered to drive the man car that evening. What do you say about that? 
A. No.
 
Q. Is that true or not true? 
A. This is not true. I drove every night.
 
Q. By the way, who is Mr. Hank Pinkster? 
A. He is the undermanager of that shift.
 
Q. Does the undermanager of the shift come down with you when you go to get in to the man cars to go to the face? 
A. Rarely.
 
Q. Was he there this night? 
A. No.
 
Q. Mr. Meehan, it is suggested in your presence the plaintiff Mr. Colquhoun spoke to the deputy and said words to the effect that he refused to drive the diesel man car because it was dangerous to drive it. What do you say about that? 
A. Not in my presence.
 
Q. Did you have any reason that evening not to drive that man car? 
A. No.
 
Q. And you adopted your usual procedure in driving it? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And prior to you moving off how many other cars had left? 
A. Two.
 
Q. And is there a procedure about distances you should keep from the other cars? 
A. Roughly 100 metres.
 
Q. Well, did you see the other cars leave? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And did you follow? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Did you maintain the 100 yards distance? 
A. Yes, thereabouts.
 
Q. Can you recollect seeing the other ones? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And were they then travelling at the same speed as you? 
A. They should have had to have been, yes.
 
Q. Why do you say that? 
A. Well, I can't pass them and I was staying with them so we were travelling at a similar speed.
 
Q. Do you know in terms of slow, moderate or fast, or normal, how would you describe your speed? 
A. Quick.
 
Q. And were they as quick? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And was that the way the man cars were normally driven? 
A. It is the way I normally drove, yes.
 
Q. You cannot catch up on the other man cars? 
A. No.
 
Q. At some stage along the track you had an accident? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Had the other man cars passed that point? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And do you say they were travelling at the same speed as you? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Because you were not catching up on them? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. Now the area of track which you were (sic) when you got into the man car to start driving it, that was at the bottom of the shaft? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. How far had you travelled before the accident happened, roughly? 
A. A kilometre; maybe 1.2 kilometres.
 
Q. Was that track a new track or old track or what? 
A. No, that is original Cordeaux track so it has been there for some years.
 
Q. It is suggested that the section of the track in which this accident happened was virtually brand new. What do you say about that? 
A. No.
 
Q. Speak up, please.

A. No.
 
Q. Was there any brand new track at all that you were aware of? 
A. A bit further down from where the accident was.
 
Q. When you say a bit further, how far? 
A. Maybe 200 metres. They had installed a new turn to swing on to, some old existing track.
 
Q. Did the accident happen there? 
A. No.
 
Q. There was nothing suggested to you on that morning to suggest to you (a) that you shouldn't drive? 
A. No.
 
Q. Or (b) that it was dangerous to drive? 
A. No.
 
Q. The accident occurred you say on the old track? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And at that point of time the other two cars had gone further on? 
A. Yep.
 
Q. And they hadn't come off the track? 
A. No.
 
Q. After the manned (sic) car derailed it came to a stop? 
A. Yes." while, in the course of his cross-examination, Mr. Meehan gave the following evidence: - (Appeal Book pp. 394-398) "Q. If you don't have people rostered on to maintain the tracks in what circumstances do they ever maintain the tracks? 
A. Can I explain the system? 
Q. Yes? 
A. We have a crew that lays tracks, one crew lays tracks.
 
Q. New tracks? 
A. New tracks. It is part of a deputy's inspection, every twenty four hours a deputy, his job is to travel all the track rails in the colliery and make a report. Anything he finds unusual he reports and then men are set to that task to repair it.
 
Q. Have you ever gone with a deputy - you are a deputy? 
A. I have done that job myself.
 
Q. You are a deputy now? 
A. Now.
 
Q. You do that job every twenty four hours, do you? 
A. No, I don't, but a deputy does.
 
Q. When you do it do you fill out a report certifying that the track is in good condition? 
A. That is right.
 
Q. That report is kept on some file at the mines? 
A. It would be.
 
Q. What is it, ticking a box? 
A. No. You had to just fill out the space, the tracks and other things to do with the track.
 
Q. When you as deputy conduct that type of round are you also looking for other aspects of maintenance within the tunnels, within the mines? 
A. Not maintenance, no.
 
Q. Other aspects of things needing to be fixed? 
A. You are to look for track condition and just condition of the heading the track is in.
 
Q. The heading? 
A. The tunnel the track is in.
 
Q. Look for track condition and the tunnel condition? 
A. Yes, if you like.
 
Q. It is what you like? 
A. OK.
 
Q. I just want to understand what you are saying. The tunnel, you mean by that all of the facets that keep the tunnel from collapsing in? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And you do this, one deputy does it each twenty four hours? 
A. Correct.
 
Q. Does that mean every three shifts? 
A. Correct - every four shifts.
 
Q. Every four shifts? 
A. Yes. There's four shifts in twenty four hours.
 
Q. And does the deputy who does that travel in a vehicle? 
A. yes.
 
Q. Does he normally travel on that inspection round by himself? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Mr. Meeham, do you understand when am asking you questions I mean to put them back in the March 1987 era. I am interested in what happened then. In March 1987 were the tunnels in darkness other than for the illumination provided by people or by mining cars? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. The illumination provided by people came from the little torch on the miners hats, is that right? 
A. Correct, yes.
 
Q. Run by rechargeable battery? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And giving what kind of beam - I am not asking for a technical term but in your opinion how far away would they illuminate something? 
A. Well, they can illuminate to 100 metres. They can be quite bright if they are shone in your eyes.
 
Q. They are a very narrow beam, therefore? 
A. At 100 metres they open up pretty well.
 
Q. Therefore, at a much closer distance are they a narrow beam, in other words, do you squat in on a small area? 
A. No, they give a good light.
 
Q. For the duration of a shift? 
A. Oh, longer.
 
Q. Another means of seeing within a tunnel, is there some illumination on a mining car? 
A. There is.
 
Q. Is that a headlight? 
A. It is.
 
Q. Again March 1987, was it a single head light on cars then? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Was that head light run by electricity, batteries, generator? 
A. Generator.
 
Q. Like one car head light? 
A. Possibly better.
 
Q. How many kilometres of tunnels would the deputy in March 1987 have had to inspect on a particular round? 
A. I couldn't give you a figure at that time.
 
Q. Well, try. You work there. How many kilometres of tunnels in March 1987 would a single deputy have to inspect? 
A. Maybe ten kilometres.
 
Q. How long in time would a deputy then have spent inspecting the ten kilometres of tunnels? 
A. A whole shift.
 
Q. And doing a whole range of other duties as well? 
A. No. He has plenty of time to inspect the track.
 
Q. And so you say a deputy in March 1987 performed no other duties during his shift other than inspecting tunnels - - 
A. Track.
 
Q. Didn't you say he inspected tunnels? 
A. Track and the tunnel the track is in. He doesn't leave the track.
 
Q. I am sorry, I don't mean to trick you. I meant by `tunnels' the tunnel and whatever is in it including the track? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. So you say he has no other duties to perform during the shift other than to inspect that? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Does he have any other duties relevant to the work that is being performed by the various workers in the tunnels during the shift? 
A. No, he doesn't.
 
Q. That is done by the panel deputies, is it? 
A. That is right, or outby deputies.
 
Q. And the section of track that one would have found in these tunnels in March 1987, did they vary in length? 
A. Only in the panels, not on main track rails where this incident happened.
 
Q. But in the panels do they come down to very short pieces of track? 
A. Well, a panel can be three kilometres long back to 100 metres long.
 
Q. Is it fair to summarise it this way and by all means disagree if you want to, but within that shift which, I gather, is, what, six hours? 
A. Seven hours.
 
Q. Seven hours. The deputy using only the illumination of the light on his head? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And the head light on his car would have to travel ten kilometres? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. All the time moving the car with him otherwise he'd end up leaving it behind? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Are you agreeing so far with the course of his inspection? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. And to seek to look at every section of track? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Every connection? 
A. Yes, if - - 
Q. Every beam in the roof, every chock, every prop? 
A. No, it's not like that.
 
Q. What's it like? 
A. A deputy, from my experience of the pit, if there is something out of place he can put it together straight away. The same with the track, if you are travelling on the track you can pick straight away if there is something amiss, a loose joint you can hear it.
 
Q. If it is loose tighten it, if it is broken fix it? 
A. Exactly. That is his job.
 
Q. If there is a crash of a mining car have a look, find out what was loose or what track and tighten it or fix it? 
A. If there is a crash. There's not always a crash to find a fault. Very rarely.
 
Q. Because of the system - - 
A. That is right, the system is there to maintain the track.
 ..........
 (Appeal Book pp. 408-409) 
Q. Might I put it to you that the section of track upon which the crash happened was a section which was virtually brand new? 
A. No.
 
Q. You disagree with that? 
A. yes, I disagree with that.
 
Q. You remained there with Danny Begley? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. After the others were taken away and by which time if I understand some of the other investigators were turning up to the scene? 
A. Turning up outside, all the investigators come to the scene together.
 
Q. Were you on the scene when the post crash investigation took place? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Did you see the section of the track which caused the derailment? 
OBJECTION: WITHDRAWN.
 
Q. Did you see anything which in your opinion apparently caused the car to derail? 
A. No.
 
Q. Were you in a position to see? 
OBJECTION.
 
Q. Physically? 
A. Yes, for sure.
 
Q. The car mysteriously derailed? 
OBJECTION, DISALLOWED.
 
Q. Did you conduct an examination of the car itself? 
A. I am not qualified to do that.
 
Q. Did you conduct an examination of the rail upon which it was travelling at the time it derailed? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Were there sections around that point which were connections? 
A. There were no connections.
 
Q. From what you said you were driving completely normally? 
A. As I would drive every night.
 
Q. Everything within the car was completely normal? 
A. Correct.
 
Q. The car was full as it normally was? 
A. No, the car was not always full.
 
Q. It was full as it often was? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. You were travelling at the speed at which you normally travel? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. There were no other unusual conditions which you could discern yourself? 
A. No.
 
Q. And the car came off the rails? 
A. That is correct.
 
Q. This is a straight section of rail? 
A. It is.
 
Q. Is the rail laid on timber? 
A. It is.
 
Q. Is the rail bolted to timber? 
A. It is." 
When he came to consider the application for a directed verdict in relation to the first of these proceedings, Levine J, having first referred to portions of the Appellant's evidence which he considered relevant, continued (Appeal Book pp. 627-629): - "... any allegation of an unsafe system of work is considered unfit for submission to a jury unless the evidence establishes four separate issues of fact as outlined in The Liability of Employers in Damages for Personal Injury by Messrs. Glass, McHugh and Douglas, p.26 of the second edition: - `(1) That the defendant's operations involved a risk of injury which was reasonably foreseeable. (The foreseeability issue.) 
That there were reasonably practicable means of obviating such risk. (The preventability issue).
 
That the plaintiff's injury was caused by the risk in question. (The causation issue.) 
That the failure of the defendant to eliminate the risk showed a want of reasonable care for the plaintiff's safety. (The issue of reasonableness.)' 
It will be seen, therefore, that the resolution as to the non-existence or otherwise of evidence related to the issue of foreseeability is critical to both legs on which the plaintiff's case purports to rest.
 
The plaintiff must have adduced evidence to be left to the jury's consideration as to whether, as a matter of fact, a foreseeable risk of injury was real, not merely fanciful, remote, trivial or inconsiderable. This, I am satisfied, this plaintiff, as a matter of law, has failed to do.
 
The evidence, of course, must point to the defendant itself, or other employees or agents of the defendant. It does to this extent, in summary: 
In relation to training.
 
In relation to the supervising electrician clearly knowing of the job in general and the task in particular.
 
Of the direction of the plaintiff, in terms to which I have referred, to do his allocated job.
 
The plaintiff knew what do - it was a simple task to be carried out by him as a senior apprentice - two weeks or so from attaining the de jure status in which, on his own evidence, he had de facto been working.
 
The hydraulic lift is irrelevant. Its use was for the installation of the beam to the roof. This occasion was not for the installation of the beam to the roof but, as the plaintiff described, a simple task in hammering the wedges into place on the upright.
 
As to the sledgehammer, the plaintiff, as he said, learned this later, i.e., he later learned of something which existed at the time of the incident, namely, the use of the sledgehammer to test the props was not, in any event, associated with part of the task in hand as the plaintiff described it.
 
The outby crew and deputy had their functions but no evidence points to the actual performance of them or failure to do so as to be related to the particular task in hand for the plaintiff.
 
The plaintiff's evidence was, further, there was no need for supervision and no factual basis from which it could be found or inferred that in that task was there such need reasonably to be foreseen by the defendant.
 
Given the status of the plaintiff, the nature of the task, his evidence as to its simplicity, his evidence as to his experience, his evidence as to the defendant treating him as a trained workman and electrician, all of that material rather than pointing to there being a foreseeable risk of injury in the circumstances, points to there being none.
 
I add, in respect to the claim based on an unsafe work system, in any event, even if the position was otherwise, namely, there was foreseeability evidenced, there is no evidence of the second component, that is, no evidence of any practicable means of obviating any such assumed foreseen risk. Accordingly, I will direct the jury to return a verdict for the defendant in respect of the first accident." 
When he came to consider the application for a directed verdict in relation to the second proceedings, Levine J dealt first with the question whether, apart from the application of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur, the evidence tendered on behalf of the Appellant would support a finding of negligence on the part of the Respondent, a question which he answered in the negative, and which answer the Appellant has not sought to challenge on the hearing of the appeal. Next, his Honour turned to the question of res ipsa loquitur, in the course of doing so referring to the following passage in the Judgment of
Barwick CJ in Piening v. Wanless 1: - "I would repeat in relation to the failure of a steering mechanism the substance of what I said in a case recently heard by this Court. Speaking of a commercial washing machine, a part of which for some unexplained reason began unexpectedly to move so that the machine's operator was injured, I said, with the concurrence of my brothers McTiernan and Owen: `An accident will itself provide evidence of negligence where in the ordinary affairs of mankind such an incident is unlikely to occur without the want of care on the part of the person sued. What happens in the ordinary course of mankind is either the subject of evidence or of common knowledge. Here there was no evidence whatever beyond the fact that in four years' operations nothing of the kind had manifested itself in the operation of this machine. It seems to me that neither a jury nor a judge has of common knowledge any information which would warrant the inference that, when an accident of the present kind occurs in the use of a complicated piece of machinery energised partly by electricity and party by compressed air, having various components for the merest understanding of which some mechanical knowledge or expert explanation is necessary, the accident is more likely than not to have occurred due to the want of care on the part of the respondent.' 
If the occurrence is to provide evidence, it can only be that, within the common knowledge and experience of mankind, that occurrence is unlikely to occur without negligence on the part of the party sued. By that very statement, the occurrence is unlikely to provide evidence except in connection with machines or machinery of whose working and use the ordinary man has knowledge and experience. I do not think that the mechanical make-up of, and the forces operating on or with, the steering mechanism of a car are within such knowledge or experience." 
Having done so, his Honour continued: - "However, it seems to me that while the first part of what the Chief Justice said makes it difficult for the proposition advanced by Mr. Gleeson to be accepted, namely, that the first derailment is irrelevant, it is the second part that is decisive, which is particularly apposite. More so when, as was submitted for the plaintiff on the res ipsa loquitur point, that all the circumstances of the plant in use in the mine must be taken into account in determining the question of the availability of the doctrine. Taking into account that which the plaintiff asserts is of particular significance and relevance, it is more clear to me that neither a judge nor jury has, of common knowledge, any information which would warrant the inference that the accident was more likely than not to have occurred due to the want of care on the part of the defendant, irrespective of the fact of which there is evidence that within thirty six hours of the event sued upon there had been a previous derailment. I propose, therefore, to direct a verdict for the defendant on the second accident." 
In the Notice of Appeal which was filed on behalf of the Appellant on 26 March 1993 the only ground of appeal taken was: - "His Honour erred in directing a verdict for the defendant in both actions in that his Honour erred in finding insufficient or no evidence of foreseeable negligence (sic) in the defendant in both actions." 
However, in the Written Submission which were filed on behalf of the
Appellant for the purposes of the appeal, Mr. M.J. Joseph SC identified as the questions to be determined on the appeal those questions which I have set out at the commencements of these reasons.
 
Although it has not been submitted that Levine J misdirected himself as to the approach to be taken by a judge when dealing with an application for a directed verdict, it is, perhaps, as well, to remind oneself of that approach. In Glass and McHugh: The Liability of Employers [2]; (see also Glass McHugh and Douglas; The Liability of Employers [3]) it is said: - "The application, whether for a non suit or a verdict, requires a ruling from the trial judge. The ruling can only be given after the relevant evidence has been fully investigated and considered. By relevant evidence is meant that part of it which favours the plaintiff's case." 
Among the authorities referred to in order to support that statement is the judgment of Latham CJ in Hocking v. Bell 4. In the course of his Judgment,
Latham CJ said [5]: - "There is sometimes great difficulty in distinguishing between a case of no evidence upon which a jury could reasonably find for a plaintiff (so as to justify entry of a verdict for the defendant) and a case of some evidence for the plaintiff but greatly preponderating evidence for the defendant (where a verdict for the plaintiff can be set aside and a new trial ordered but it would be wrong to direct a verdict for the defendant). Davidson J and Halse Rogers J refer to this difficulty in this case. But this distinction, though difficult to apply in particular cases, is very real and important. The relevant principle was expressed in Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford Railway Co. v. Slattery (1878) 3 App. Cas., at p.1168 by Lord Hatherley who said that he concurred with Mr. Justice Barry's opinion in the court below, viz: `When once a plaintiff has adduced such evidence as, if uncontradicted, would justify and sustain a verdict, no amount of contradictory evidence will justify the withdrawal of the case from the jury.' The question for the court is not a question whether the evidence for the plaintiff should be believed or not. In the last-cited case their Lordships all agreed in this view and they emphasised the importance of maintaining that principle under a system of trial by jury. The headnote fairly states the decision: `Where there is conflicting evidence on a question of fact, whatever may be the opinion of the judge who tries the cause as to the value of that evidence, he must leave the consideration of it for the decision of the jury.' 
The judge must leave the case to the jury, because, however preponderating the evidence against the plaintiff may be in his opinion, it is a matter for the jury to determine what evidence they believe.
 ..........
 
It may be, however, that, even though the plaintiff makes out a prima facie case, uncontested and indisputable evidence called by the defendant may be such as to provide an explanation which deprives the plaintiff's case of its prima-facie effect, as in De Gioia v. Darling Island Stevedoring &
Lighterage Co. Ltd. <case>; [(1941) 42 SR 1] In such a case the position is that upon all the evidence a jury acting reasonably can only come to one conclusion, so that as a matter of law the party on whom the onus of proof does not lie is entitled to a verdict. But this exceptional case arises only where there is no conflict of evidence, so that the case falls within the general principle which s.7 embodies, viz., that where there is really no question of fact for the jury to decide the Full Court may determine that, as a matter of law, one party is entitled to a verdict.
 
I have not referred in detail to the authorities which establish the proposition which I have stated, because they are very fully set out in the judgment of Davidson J in this case. I particularly mention, however, Ryder v.
Wombwell (1868)LR <case>; [4
Ex. 32] and
Mechanical and General Inventions Co. Ltd. v. Austin [(1935) AC 346."] 
As this statement of principle makes clear, other than in the exceptional type of case to which Latham CJ refers, relevant evidence excludes the whole of the evidence called by the defendant except to extent to which it supports the plaintiff's case (see, for example, Commissioner for Railways v.
Corben 6).
 
The case which the Appellant sought in each proceeding to establish against the Respondent being one of negligence in the sense that the Respondent was alleged to have been guilty of a breach of its duty as an employer to take reasonable care for the safety of his employees in all the circumstances of the case, it is as well to begin by reminding oneself of what is the nature and the extent of that duty. Although the language in which that duty has been formulated in a variety of ways over the years, I am content, for the reason which I will shortly state, to adopt the formulation of it laid down by the High Court in O'Connor v. Commissioner for Government Transport 7 (see also Commissioner for Railways v. O'Brien 8), that formulation being: - "The defendant as employer was of course under a duty, by his servants and agents, to take reasonable care for the safety of the deceased by providing proper and adequate means of carrying out his duty without unnecessary risk, by warning him of unusual or unexpected risks, and by instructing him in the performance of his work where instructions might reasonably be thought to be required to secure him from danger of injury." 
Formulating the duty of care in this way, in my view, has the advantage of reminding oneself that the duty is multi-faceted - to provide a safe place of work, to provide and maintain adequate plant and appliances, to establish and maintain a safe system of work and to provide adequate supervision.

So far as the workplace is concerned, the employer owes to his employees not merely a duty to warn against unusual dangers known to him, but also to make the place of employment as safe as the exercise of reasonable skill and care would permit.

So far as plant and appliances are concerned, the employer's duty to his employee is to take reasonable care to provide proper plant and appliances and to maintain them in a proper condition.

Although the phrase "system of work" might suggest that the obligation to provide a safe system of work exists only in relation to an operation of a permanent and continuous nature, the obligation is not so limited, but extends to an operation which may be carried out from time to time under varying conditions which might call for modification of the system, and to an operation being undertaken for the first time and which may or may not be intended to be repeated. Whether or not, in any particular case, an employer will be required to lay down the manner in which an operation is to be organised and carried out and, if so, whether what the employer has done in the circumstances is to provide a safe system of work, is a question of fact depending on all the circumstances of the case.

Because this is so, an employer is not absolved from the duty to provide a safe system of work because his men are experienced and should be capable themselves of devising a system which does not expose them to risk, for if there be any real risk, the employer cannot escape the duty of care imposed on him by the relationship of employer and employee. However, where what is in issue is a simple operation, such as the use by a tradesman of his tools of trade (Commissioner for Railways v. O'Brien 9), or the carrying out of an occasional task of a simple character which does not involve any real risk if ordinary care is exercised (see, for example, Electric Power
Transmission Pty. Limited v. Cuiuli 10), there is likely to be little need for the establishment of a system of work.

In determining whether, in the particular circumstances of the case, he is obliged to lay down a system of work, and, if so, what that system should be, an employer is required to take into account the possibility of inadvertent and negligent conduct on the part of others including, in particular, his employees (see, for example, McLean v. Tedman [11]; see also, Sungravure
Pty. Limited v. Meani 12, Ferraloro v. Preston Timber Pty. Limited 13).

Finally, it is to be observed, that, where an employer's obligation requires him to establish a safe system of work, his duty is not discharged by his so doing; rather, his duty extends to maintaining and enforcing that system (McLean v. Tedman 14; Bankstown Foundry Pty. Limited v. Braistina 15).

An employee who sues his employer for damages for negligence causing injury at work is not entitled to have the verdict of the jury upon his claim unless there is evidence that the employee's injury was caused by the failure on the part of the employer, or of those for whom the employer was responsible, to take reasonable care for the safety of the employee (Australian Iron &
Steel Limited v. Krstevski 16). Except in cases in which the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur may be invoked, it is necessary that there should be evidence which directly establishes negligence or from which negligence may be inferred.

Although there may be cases in which no more than common knowledge, or, perhaps, common sense, is necessary to enable one to perceive the existence of a real risk of injury and to permit one to say what reasonable and appropriate precautions might appropriately be taken to avoid it (see, for example,
Hamilton v. Nuroof (WA) Pty. Limited 17; Nelson v. John Lysaght
Limited 18), in the normal course, where the negligence asserted against the employer is a failure to provide a safe system of work, the employee is required to provide evidence that the employer unreasonably failed to take measures, or to adopt means, reasonably open to him in all the circumstances, which would have protected the plaintiff from the dangers of his task without unduly impeding its accomplishment (see, for example, Neill v. NSW Fresh Food & Ice Pty. Limited 19; Vozza v. Tooth & Co.
Limited 20; Australian Iron & Steel Limited v. Krstevski 21).

In Commissioner for Railways v. Corben 22 Jordan CJ said: - "The doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is a rule of common sense. It is to the effect that if something occurs which causes physical injury to a person or his property, and is of such a kind that it would not ordinarily be likely to happen unless someone had been negligent, and if it is proved that all the relevant surrounding conditions were under the control of the defendant, this supplies evidence from which, if unexplained, it may be inferred that the occurrence was caused by negligence for which the defendant is responsible, notwithstanding that the plaintiff is unable to point to any specific act of negligence. The doctrine does not shift the onus of proof. It serves only to indicate what may be treated as sufficient to discharge it." (see also, Fitzpatrick v. Walter E. Cooper Pty. Limited 23; Davis v. Bunn 24; Mummery v. Irvings Pty. Limited 25; Franklin v. Victorian Railways Commissioners 26; Anchor Products Limited v. Hedges 27; The Nominal Defendant v. Haslbauer 28; Piening v. Wanless 29; The Government Insurance Office of New South Wales v. Fredrichberg 30).

Although the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur has been applied in cases not dissimilar to the present, as, for example, where a railway carriage has been derailed (see Dawson v. Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway 31;
Flannery v. The Waterford and Limerick Railway Company 32) or where a train has run into stationary buffers (Burke v. The Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway Company 33), it is not the case that the mere fact of an accident affecting a passenger on a railway line (see Metropolitan
Railway Company v. Jackson 34; Corben v. Commissioner for Railways 35;
Franklin v. Victorian Railways Commissioners 36;) or a tramway (Newberry v. Bristol Tramways and Carriage Company Limited 37) will enable a plaintiff to rely on the doctrine - the test of whether or not, in a particular case, a plaintiff may rely upon the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur would seem to be that laid down by Jordan CJ in Corben v. Commissioner for Railways in the passage which I have set out above, which passage does not differ in any substance from the following passage in the Judgment of Erle CJ in Scott v.
The London and St. Catherine Docks Company 38which was adopted and applied in Burke v. The Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway Company 39 which passage was: - "There must be reasonable evidence of negligence; but, where the thing is shown to be under the management of the defendant, or his servants, and the accident is such as, in the ordinary course of things, does not happen if those who have the management of the machinery use proper care, it affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of explanation by the defendant, that the accident arose from want of care." 
It is against the background of the principles which I have discussed above that I turn to consider the questions which arise for determination on the appeal.
The first proceedings 
Foreseeability 
As Glass JA said in Wyong Shire Council v. Shirt 40, the test of foreseeability is an "undemanding" one, a view which was confirmed by the High
Court on appeal (Wyong Shire Council v. Shirt 41). In his Judgment - in which Judgment Stephen and Aickin JJ concurred - Mason J (as he then was) said [42] : - "The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of injury which is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely to occur may nevertheless constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not farfetched or fanciful is real and therefore foreseeable. But, as we have seen, the existence of a foreseeable risk of injury does not in itself dispose of the question of breach of duty. The magnitude of the risk and its degree of probability remain to be considered with other relevant factors." 
With respect to Levine J, it seems to me that there was evidence upon which a reasonable jury might find that the risk that the Appellant might sustain injury when undertaking the tasks which he had been given was anything but fanciful. 
The description of the problem - that there was some timber on the wire - which the Appellant says he was given might have led a jury to find that his supervisor had not himself seen what the problem was and that he was relying on what he had been told by someone else, as, for example, one of the mine deputies, it following that the Appellant's supervisor had no real understanding of what would be required of the Appellant when sent out to remedy the problem. If this be so, then, it would be open to a jury to find that it was at least likely, if not highly so, that remedying the problem would be beyond the Appellant's capacity and that, in the course of attempting to remedy the problem, the Appellant might suffer injury.

If, however, the jury were to find that the Appellant's supervisor was aware of the true nature of the problem, it would have been open to the jury to find that he would, or should, have appreciated that one of the props under the beam had been dislodged and had fallen against the rib of the drive, and that the beam, although apparently secured on the prop at the other side of the drive, had dropped some 15 inches, or thereabouts, leaving the beam in a state of unstable equilibrium. The fact that, in the ordinary course of events, a beam is lifted into place with a hydraulic lift, could have led the jury to find that it ought to have been clear to the Appellant's supervisor that, even if - which was not the case - the beam was firmly secured on the prop on the other side of the drive, an attempt by one man to manoeuvre a prop under the loose end of the beam, and to lift the beam so that the wedges might be fixed, was likely to go wrong, in which event it was likely that the Appellant would suffer injury.

The fact that the Appellant was still an apprentice, that his trade was that of an electrician and that the task of maintaining the props and beams was of the outby gang, could have led the jury to conclude that it ought, in either case, to have made the risk of injury to the Appellant, if he were sent out on his own to rectify the problem, more apparent to the Appellant's supervisor.

Obviating the risk 
With great respect to Levine J, I am quite unable to accept that there was no evidence of any practicable means of obviating any foreseeable risks. On the contrary, it seems to me that this was one of those cases in which common sense would have provided the answer.

If the jury were to conclude that the Appellant's supervisor did not know the true nature and extent of the problem,they could well have concluded that no one should have been sent to rectify the problem, unless, and until, that information had been obtained and a proper assessment of the number of men, and the plant and equipment, required to rectify the problem made.

If, however, the jury were to conclude that the Appellant's supervisor did understand the true nature and extent of the problem, then they could also reasonably have concluded that he ought to have appreciated that rectifying the problem might be beyond the Appellant's capacity, but that, this notwithstanding, the Appellant might impulsively, or because his opinion of his abilities was greater than the fact, attempt to rectify the problem nonetheless. This being so, the jury could also reasonably have concluded that, in the circumstances, the Appellant's supervisor, when giving the
Appellant instructions to rectify the problem, ought to have given him proper instructions as to the manner in which the task should be undertaken and, in particular, should have warned him not to attempt to lift a beam on his own (see, for example, Da Costa v. Cockburn Salvage and Trading Pty. Limited ; Turner v. State of South Australia 44) and that, as he did not, the
Respondent was to be regarded as having failed, in the circumstances, to take reasonable care for the Appellant's safety.

This being so, it seems to me that Levine J should not have directed a verdict in the first proceedings.
Res ipsa loquitur 
The resolution of this question is, in my view, less easy than was the resolution of the former questions. I say this since, although, as I have earlier recorded, in the normal course, on an application for a directed verdict, the only evidence which is relevant for the trial judge to consider, and which evidence must be considered at its highest in the plaintiff's favour, is that tendered on behalf of the plaintiff, or such of the evidence tendered on behalf of the defendant which favours the plaintiff, which evidence is to be read at its highest in favour of the plaintiff, the fact that, during his cross-examination of Mr. Meehan, the Appellant's counsel elicited from Mr. Meehan evidence as to the system of inspection which existed at the relevant time, which evidence was not challenged thereafter, may have made this case - at least to the extent of any suggestion that the system of inspection was inadequate - one of those exceptional cases, such as De Gioia v. Darling Island Stevedoring & Lighterage Co. Limited 45 to which Latham CJ referred in Hocking v. Bell in which event that issue might have been withdrawn from the jury.

Whether that be so or not, the question that remains is whether Levine J erred when he held that, the Appellant having tendered no evidence as to the actual cause of the man car derailing, and as he was of the view that neither a judge nor a jury has of common knowledge any information which would warrant the inference that the derailing of the man car was more likely than not to have occurred as the result of want of care on the part of the Respondent, the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur was not available to be relied upon by the
Appellant.

With respect to Levine J I have concluded that, in directing a verdict in the second proceeding, his Honour erred.

As the employer of those who worked in the mine, it was the Respondent's duty, in the circumstances, to have the man car, the permanent way and any other equipment associated with the permanent way as safe for the conveyance of such of its employees as were required, or permitted, to use them as the exercise of reasonable care and skill on its part and on the part of its servants could make them, and to have those for whom it might be vicariously liable employ all necessary skill to drive the man car in a proper manner. Even if one leaves to one side the earlier derailment of the man car at what the Appellant claimed - but Mr. Meehan denied -was the site of the derailment which caused his injury - which evidence might lead a jury to infer that there was some defect in the catch points at that site - it seems to me - as, so the authorities to which I have earlier referred would indicate, it has, in the past, seemed to others - that rail cars and the like ordinarily are not likely to be derailed unless someone has been negligent, it following that, as the mine, the man car, the permanent way and any associated equipment were at all times under the control of the Respondent, there was evidence from which, unless satisfactorily explained, a jury might infer that the derailment was caused by negligence for which the Respondent was responsible, notwithstanding that the Appellant was unable to point to any specific act of negligence. This being so, it seems to me, with respect, that Levine J ought not to have directed a verdict in the second proceeding.

For these reasons, I would propose the following Orders: -
ORDER that the appeal be upheld.
ORDER that the verdict and judgment in each proceeding be set aside and that each proceeding be remitted to the Common Law Division for rehearing.
ORDER that the Respondent pay the Appellant's costs of the appeal, the Respondent, if qualified, to have a Certificate under the [Suitors Fund
Act 1951](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/).
ORDER that the costs of the first trial abide the result of the second trial.
 <case>; [(1967-1968) 117 CLR 498], [2] (1966) 228; <case>; [(1945) 71 CLR 430] [5] supra at 442-444 (1938) 39 SR 55, 61 per Jordan CJ  <case>; [(1954) 100 CLR 225], 229  <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 306], 312  <case>; [(1964) 110 CLR 24],36 [(1982) 16 ALJR 872], 873 supra at 313  <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 301], 309  <case>; [(1973) 128 CLR 666], 667 per
Barwick CJ and Menzies J  <case>; <case>; [(1974-1975) 132 CLR 201]  <case>; [(1962-1963) 108 CLR 362]  <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1968) 118 CLR 403] [(1862) 5 LT (NS) 682] (1877) IR 11 CL 30 [(1870) 22 LT (NS) 442] [(1877) LR 3 App Cas 193] supra supra [(1912) 107 LT (NS) 801] [(1865) 13 LT (NS) 148] supra [[1978] 1 NSWLR 631], 641  <case>; [(1979-1980) 146 CLR 40] <case>; [(1970) 124 CLR 192] [(1982) 56 ALJR 839] (1941) 42 SR 1 * * * 
