

R versus Jones and Ors (No4) [2007] NSWSC 1154 (4 April 2007) 
Last Updated: 22 October 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: R versus Jones & Ors (No4) <case>  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 2006/2009  
HEARING DATE{S):  
JUDGMENT DATE: 4 April 2007  
PARTIES: 
Regina 
Adam Jones  
JUDGMENT OF: Buddin J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
J Pickering (Crown) 
D Price (Adam Jones) (Accused)  
SOLICITORS: 
S Kavanagh (Solicitor for Director of Public Prosecutions) 
Conaghan Hunter P/L (Adam Jones)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Objection to parts of lawfully intercepted telephone conversations  
LEGISLATION CITED:  
CASES CITED: 
R versus Blick <case>; [(2000) 111 A Crim R 326]  
DECISION: 
Objection upheld.  
JUDGMENT:  
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
BUDDIN J  April 2007  /2009 - Regina versus Adam JONES  /2010 - Regina versus Samuel JONES  /2011 - Regina versus Elizabeth Jean JONES  /2012 - Regina versus Lydia JONES  /2007 - Regina versus Adam Samuel JONES  
JUDGMENT - (No 4) Objection to parts of recorded conversations between Ellen Smith and Adam Jones on 20 October 2005   His Honour: I have previously overruled an objection made on behalf of the accused Adam Jones Jnr concerning the admissibility of two phone conversations (between him and his wife, Ellen Smith) which were recorded by way of a listening device. I have been informed that in consequence of that ruling, counsel for Adam Jones Jnr and the Crown have agreed to edit out two separate portions of those conversations. They cannot however agree about one other aspect of the conversation which accordingly falls to me to determine.  The part of the conversation which is in dispute is in the following terms:  "Ellen Smith: You'll have a hard job to do anything because if the gavvers get hold of you, you're going down for a very long time.  
Adam Jones: Yeah, I know, I believe about 12 years.  
Ellen Smith: Yeah, probably, no, I think 12 years would be too light for you,...........you know."  The Crown submits that the material to which I have just referred is relevant and thus admissible because it is capable of being treated by the tribunal of fact as constituting an admission.  It is submitted on behalf of the accused that the material should be excluded pursuant to <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) which is in the following terms:  
Section 137 
In a criminal proceeding, the court must refuse to admit evidence adduced by the prosecutor if its probative value is outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant.  The test to be applied is uncontroversial: R versus Blick <case>; [(2000) 111 A Crim R 326] (at pars 19-20).  In my view Ms Smith's remark that "12 years would be too light for you" is of no probative value whatsoever. Her opinion about the length of any sentence which the accused should receive is entirely irrelevant to the proceedings. In any event, it is far from clear what could have informed such a view, given that she was not a direct eyewitness to the fatal incident and could not therefore have known precisely what the accused had done.  It is true that in some circumstances an accused person's view as to the penalty that he or she is likely to receive may be capable of amounting to an admission because it may indicate an awareness of the nature and seriousness of their conduct. In the present context however, I am of the view that the balance of the conversation is also of little, if any, probative value. The views which are expressed by the participants in the conversation are entirely speculative because it is unlikely in the extreme that either of them would have any real appreciation of current sentencing patterns for offences of homicide in this State. The reference to 12 years is itself ambiguous because it is entirely unclear as to whether it is a reference to the likely head sentence or the non-parole period. In considering this aspect of the conversation, I have had regard to evidence given on the voir dire in the course of which Ms Smith admitted that she was endeavouring to provoke the accused during the conversation.  On the other hand, a discussion about the appropriate sentencing outcome, and particularly one which is as specific as the present discussion is, is capable of giving rise to the danger of unfair prejudice. That consideration assumes particular significance in the present case because the applicant has pleaded guilty to manslaughter, a fact which in itself constitutes an admission of significant wrongdoing. There are also, it may be noted, other admissions by the accused to similar effect. A discussion about the length of any sentence is capable of distracting the jury from its proper task in considering whether the appropriate verdict for this accused is murder or manslaughter. If this material was to be introduced into evidence, it is entirely conceivable that the the jury would embark upon an exercise of endeavouring to decide whether a sentence of 12 years was more appropriate for the offence of murder or for manslaughter. At the very least they are likely to engage in speculation about the matter. That would be an entirely inappropriate exercise given that the question of sentence is simply not a matter which is of any concern to them.  Accordingly I uphold the objection.  
LAST UPDATED: 19 October 2007 * * * 
