

McElwaine versus Bulmer Matter No 11265/98 [1998] NSWSC 490 (26 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
McELWAINE versus BULMER /98 June 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 21 May 1998. The plaintiff is seeking leave to appeal pursuant to section 208M of the [Legal Profession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the Act). 
In proceedings No. 600004 of 1995, the plaintiff had made a claim against the defendant for damages arising out of injuries suffered in a motor vehicle accident. The claim was heard by Studdert J. There was a four day hearing during which the question of liability was keenly contested. His Honour found in favour of the plaintiff. In his judgment, he said, "I have not found the issue of liability easy to resolve." He made an order for costs against the defendant. The order required the defendant to pay part of the costs on a party/party basis and part of the costs on an indemnity basis.

The plaintiff prepared a Bill of Costs. The total of the costs was $202,058.20. It comprised profit costs of $76,737.93 and disbursements of $125,320.36. A substantial part of the disbursements was taken up by Counsel's fees (including fees charged by Mr Branson QC in the sum of $72,507).

The plaintiff brought proceedings to have the costs assessed pursuant to the
Act. The Court referred the application for assessment to a costs assessor (Mr O'Neill who is a barrister practising in chambers at Parramatta). He purported to perform the assessment process required by the Act. On 7 May , he issued his Certificate As To Determination Of Costs. The Certificate had attached to it a three page document headed "Summary Of Adjustments To
Costs Bill". This documentation showed that the Costs Assessor had reduced the profit costs to a sum of $56,934.50 and disbursements to a sum of $81,137.78.

A reduction in amounts allowed in respect of Counsel's fees significantly accounts for the reduction in disbursements. The fees allowed for Mr Branson
QC were reduced by $37,152 and reductions were also made to fees charged by Mr
Wheelahan QC, Mr Radburn and Mr Weinstein. The reductions included the disallowance of the contingency fees charged by Counsel. Certain of the
Counsel had charged a 25% contingency fee.

Although these proceedings were commenced within time for bringing an appeal as of right pursuant to section 208L, the plaintiff has chosen to pursue the avenue of appeal provided by section 208N. The plaintiff accepts that an error of law cannot be demonstrated. It is said that this is because the Costs
Assessor failed to give reasons for his determination.

The application for leave was heard on 9 June 1998. The supporting evidence is to be found in an affidavit sworn by Mr Loveband (the solicitor for the plaintiff) on 20 May 1998.

Counsel for the plaintiff has prepared a written Outline of Submissions. The thrust of the case advanced by the plaintiff principally turns on the disallowance of Counsel's fees (including the contingency fees). However, it is accepted that the fees charged by Mr Branson QC could not be justified. The amount disallowed in respect of his fees represents a significant part of the reduction made in respect of disbursements. The written Outline of Submissions also contains the following:- "16. Sperling J in Kennedy Miller canvasses (at the bottom of page 13ff) what has to be established for leave to appeal under s208M. He says `It may be that an arguable case is sufficient.' 
However whether it be an arguable case or the stricter test of substantial injustice or obvious error on the face of the record, in this case, where a plaintiff awarded indemnity costs has his actual costs reduced by a substantial amount and where no reasons are given for so reducing those costs, leave ought to be given.
Leave also ought to be given for the reasons set out in the Summons namely:
If the assessor's determination stands the plaintiff will be deprived of a significant part of his verdict
The assessor has given no reasons for reducing the plaintiff's costs by over 30% when the greater part of those costs were awarded on an indemnity basis
The assessor's determination has effectively undercut the Court's ruling that the plaintiff's costs be paid on an indemnity basis
Studdart J's ruling was based on the fact that the plaintiff had made an offer of settlement that was significantly exceeded at the hearing. If cost assessors can significantly reduce actual costs even when awarded on an indemnity basis then the incentive for parties to make offers of settlement in accordance with the Rules is diminished
The question of the status of no win/no fee contingency agreements ought to be resolved
The assessor's failure to give reasons means that an appeal on a question of law, a matter of right pursuant to [section
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s208l.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), is effectively removed." 
It is settled law that leave may be granted in those cases where the interests of justice require that relief be given. Each case will turn on its own particular facts. The plaintiff bears the onus of satisfying the Court that leave should be granted.

The Act establishes a new regime of cost assessment. The Act prescribes the role to be played by the Costs Assessor. In making the assessment, he must, inter alia, assess what is a fair and reasonable amount of costs.

I have taken into account both the material contained in the written Outline of Submissions and the material advanced during oral argument.

In my view, the plaintiff has failed to discharge the onus of satisfying the
Court of an entitlement to relief. I am not persuaded that the Costs Assessor has done other than perform the assessment process as required by the Act.
It was common ground that his function was to assess what was fair and reasonable in respect to both party/party costs and indemnity costs. It seems to me, that the assessment was consistent with that task having been performed.

This is not a case in which it has been said that there has been a failure to give reasons which amounts to an error of law. The need for a costs assessor to give reasons for a determination is a matter of some present controversy.
The matter is the subject of appeals presently pending in the Court of Appeal.
As the authorities presently stand, I am of the view that a costs assessor is not required to deliver reasons.

It must be borne in mind that this is a case in which a considerable part of the Costs Assessor's reasoning process has been disclosed in the document headed "Summary Of Adjustments To Costs Bill". I do not accept the submission that the conduct of the Costs Assessor effectively removed the right to appeal under section 208L. It seems to me to be simply a case where the plaintiff was unable to demonstrate any error as to a matter of law.

For completeness, perhaps I should add some further remarks. Little has been said about the reduction made in respect of profit costs and I am not satisfied that it would justify any grant of leave. It seems to me that it was open to the Costs Assessor, in the circumstances of this case, to make the reduction in Counsel's fees (including the disallowance of the amounts charged for contingency fees). Whilst the matter was not fully argued (and it seems to be the subject of little authority), I am presently inclined to the view that the matter of allowing contingency fees may largely be a matter which has to be considered in the context of the circumstances of each particular case. The written Outline of Submissions recites other grounds upon which leave was sought. These were not argued with any enthusiasm. In my view, they are lacking in substance. I consider that the plaintiff has failed to demonstrate any error which would justify the granting of leave.

I order that the Summons be dismissed. I order that the plaintiff pay the costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
