

Regina versus Bell Matter No 72721/98 [1998] NSWSC 430 (17 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 October 1998 
REGINA versus STEPHEN CHARLES BELL /98 September 1998 
Handley JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: This is an application on behalf of Stephen Charles Bell that he be admitted to bail until he is due to appear for sentence before her Honour Judge Morgan on 23 September. He was convicted by a jury on 21 August this year of an offence of break, enter and steal from a dwelling house on 28 January. He was remanded on bail until 26 August when he was to appear for sentence and he duly appeared. The sentence proceedings were then adjourned until 23 September but bail was refused. 
An application for bail was made on 3 September but did not come before Hulme
J until 17 September this being the normal period between application and hearing date. The application has been referred to this Court pursuant to SCR
Pt 12 r 2 (1)(b). His Honour took evidence by video link from the applicant and made findings of fact for the assistance of this Court.

The first ground of the application for bail before Hulme J was that the applicant needed to make arrangements concerning property subject to credit contracts on which some $3,000.00 was owed, and if he was unable to attend to these matters personally there was a risk that the credit contracts would be enforced and the property lost. The other ground was that he needed to make arrangements for the care of an elderly uncle and had had insufficient time between conviction on 21 August and custody on 26 August to do so.

His Honour did not consider that these were particularly strong grounds for an order for bail. He was not persuaded to make affirmative findings that these needs existed and he was not satisfied that the applicant personally had to make those arrangements.

Mr Murphy, who appeared for the applicant, called his client to give evidence of matters which have occurred since he gave evidence before Hulme J by video link. It appears that his mother-in-law, who was admitted to Port Macquarie
Hospital earlier this week, died overnight and arrangements are in hand for her funeral to take place at Port Macquarie Cemetery sometime over the weekend or perhaps on Monday. The applicant is not aware of the precise details of those arrangements.

There is no presumption of bail in this case and the application falls to be considered in the light of the criteria in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/s32.html) of the [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/).
Hulme J found that there was a probability that the applicant, if granted bail, would appear on the 23 September and answer his bail. He did not make any finding as to other matters referred to in [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/s32.html) 
Hulme J found that it was likely that the applicant would receive a full time custodial sentence. With his record, I think this finding was inevitable.

In Regina versus Rowe (CA unreported 24 December 1991) Hunt J emphasised the importance of the fact that a full time custodial sentence for the applicant was not inevitable. Since such a sentence in this case is likely, it seems to me that a proper exercise of the Court's discretion requires the application for bail to be refused.

One cannot but be impressed, in an unfavourable way, by the remarkable criminal record of the applicant which extends over nineteen pages in the material before us, commencing with offences when he was aged eleven and continuing until the offences of 28 January this year.

In the light of that remarkable record, and the likelihood that the applicant will receive a full time custodial sentence, I am not persuaded that we should differ from the decision of the trial Judge, her Honour Judge Morgan, who refused bail on 26 August, when remanding the applicant in custody for sentence until 23 September.

This is an original application which does not invoke the appellate jurisdiction of this Court, but her Honour was far more familiar with the circumstances of the case and the position of the applicant than this Court could be, and her exercise of discretion is an important consideration in deciding the present application. For those reasons I would refuse the application.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree. 
STEIN JA: I am unable to agree. For my [part I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/index.html#p1) would grant bail subject to strict conditions notwithstanding that there is no presumption of bail for this applicant since he has been found guilty by a jury. There are three principal reasons which lead me to this conclusion. 
Hulme J was clearly of the opinion that the applicant, if admitted to bail, would attend his sentence hearing on 23 September 1998. Indeed, his
Honour said that there is a substantial probability that he will attend.
There is no likelihood that, if admitted to bail, the applicant will commit offences during the bail period. The Crown did not argue before Hulme
J, or this Court, to the contrary.
There is a need to attend his mother-in-law's funeral. In this regard, he only became aware of her death after he gave evidence before Hulme J. For these reasons, I would uphold the application and grant conditional bail.

HANDLEY JA: The order of the Court by majority is bail refused. * * * 
