

In The Matter of St. George Builders Hardware Pty Limited and In The
Matter of The Corporations Law Ronald John Dean-Willcocks (Plaintiff)
Corporations Law [1995] NSWSC 170 (18 December 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SANTOW J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 13 November 1995 #DATE 13:11:1995 #ADD 18:12:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff     Mr D Fordyce 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff    P A Somerset and Co
ORDER
Leave granted
JUDGE1
SANTOW J This matter is an application for leave pursuant to s448C(1) of the
Corporations Law that Ronald John Dean-Willcocks as the administrator of a
Deed of Company Arrangement executed by Driftpush ("Driftpush") which has a fixed and floating charge over the assets of St. George Builders Hardware Pty
Limited ("St. George") seek or consent to be appointed as, or act as,
Administrator of St. George and, if the creditors think fit, a Deed of Company
Arrangement for St. George.
The matter arises because the effect of s82A(1)(ea) of the Corporations
Law includes in the definition of "officer" an administrator of a deed of company arrangement executed by a body corporate. Thus, s448C(1)(d) applies because Mr Dean-Willcocks is an officer of a body corporate namely Driftpush, that is a mortgagee of property of the company, namely St. George. Such an officer may not be appointed administrator without leave of the Court to the company subject of the relevant mortgage, namely St. George.
In giving leave in applications of this kind, the Court should have regard to analogous principles to the removal of a liquidator on the ground of actual or perceived conflict of interest. In Advance Housing Pty Limited (in liq) v
Newcastle Classic Developments Pty Limited [1994 14 ACSR 230], the relevant principles are set out and may be summarised as follows: 
The cases show that there must be a real and not merely theoretical possibility of conflict and that the guiding principle in the appointment by the court of a liquidator is that he must be independent and must be seen to be independent. 
Those who assert that a liquidator should be removed are under a duty to establish at least a prima facie case that this is for the general advantage of the persons interested in the winding up and the onus of proof will not be easy to discharge if the liquidator has become well acquainted with the business and affairs of the company.
A liquidator may act as a liquidator of a company even if there is a prior involvement with the company in liquidation provided that involvement is not likely to impede or inhibit the liquidator from acting impartially in the interests of all creditors or give rise to a reasonable apprehension that the liquidator might be so inhibited or impeded.
There are several factors present here which in the end allow me to conclude that there is not a real possibility of conflict at the present time.
This is as distinct from the theoretical or inherent in the fact that if I accede to the application for leave, Mr Dean-Willcocks will represent both the interests of creditors of St. George as a class and, the interests of one particular creditor, namely Driftpush, under a fixed and floating charge. If the test were the mere possibility of conflict, then not only would this force the courts to disregard advantages of cost saving often in circumstances where money is short. It would also require the Court to act with prophylactic zeal to anticipate what may never happen where, as here, there is no objection from any party.
There is in fact no one here to assert that the
Administrator should be removed. In contrast to a liquidator, here the application is made with the onus upon the party seeking the court's leave. Nonetheless I am satisfied that that onus is discharged, having regard also to the following matters:- 
As is clear from the ancillary deed to the Deed of Company Arrangement, in clause 3 thereof, the secured debt to Driftpush is not in dispute.
Not only is there no opposition but apart from the inherent potential conflict of representing one creditor and then representing the whole group of creditors of which that one creditor is a member, there are no areas of potential conflict presently known. That the Corporations Law permits that degree of potential conflict is clear enough from s448C(1)(b) and (c). There it is contemplated by the exception for common administrators and liquidators that the same person may act as the administrator of more than one company or indeed liquidator of more than one company, even though that the creditors may differ.
I have however in the framing of my orders made sure that this matter will be drawn to the attention of creditors at the creditors' meeting required by s436E. There within the statutory time period for the calling of a meeting of creditors, creditors have opportunity by resolution to remove the administrator from office and appoint somebody else. I have also made sure that in any voting upon that matter Driftpush will not vote.
In all the circumstances I believe that this provides a sufficient basis for leave to be given.
Though it will also be on the undertaking that in the event that any conflict arises that may impede or inhibit the administrator from acting impartially in the interest of all creditors or give rise to a reasonable apprehension that the administer may be so impeded or inhibited, the administrator will approach the Court forthwith with a view to submitting to the administrator's removal and substitution by another administrator.
I make the following orders: 
I give leave pursuant to s448C(1) of the Corporations Law that Ronald
John
Dean-Willcocks may seek or consent to be appointed as, or act as, administrator of St. George Builders Hardware Pty Limited ACN 001 847 ("St. George") notwithstanding that the said Mr Dean- Willcocks is deemed by s82A(1)(ea) of the Corporations Law to be an officer of Driftpush Pty Limited that is a mortgagee of property of St. George. 
I direct that for the purpose of the statutory meeting under s436E of the
Corporations Law that the administrator so appointed give notice to creditors that Mr Dean-Willcocks required leave in the circumstances above described, and
Driftpush will not vote on any resolution pursuant to s436E(4) for the removal of Mr Dean-Willcocks as administrator from office or the appointment of someone else as administrator of
St. George
The foregoing leave is given on the basis of the undertaking previously referred to in my earlier observations.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/170.html  
