

Durovic trading as Shell Tornik Roadhouse versus Judge and Anor [1997] NSWSC 52 (25 February 1997) 
DUROVIC trading as SHELL TORNIK ROADHOUSE versus JUDGE & ANOR /95 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Appeal from decision of Equal Opportunity Tribunal 
Appeal on a question of law only: s.118 of the [Anti-Discrimination Act 1977](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/) 
Nature of appeal to a single Judge of the Court: 
Allders International Pty Limited versus Anstee [(1986) 5 NSWLR 47] followed.
 
Difficulties when appeal only on a question of law: 
Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Limited [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] and Natoli & Anor versus Walker (Court of Appeal - 26 May 1994 - unreported) referred to.
 
Sufficiency of Reasons in the light of the requirement that the Tribunal was required to determine disputed issues of fact: 
Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247] 
If no reasons given necessity to apply to the Tribunal for reasons pursuant to s.117 before an appeal is brought.
 
Basis on which case fought considered: Dare versus Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658] applied.
 "Constructive dismissal": Western Excavating (ECC) Limited versus Sharp <case>; [[1978] 1 QB 761] applied.
 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
Introduction 
By letters dated 14 August 1991 the President of the Anti-Discrimination Board of New South Wales referred, pursuant to [s.94(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s94.html) of the [Anti-Discrimination Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/), ("the
Act"), to the Registrar of the Equal Opportunity Tribunal, ("the Tribunal"), constituted by the Act, complaints under the Act received from Paula Marie
Judge and Christine Anne Saville (formerly Duncan), which alleged discrimination "on the ground of sex (sexual harassment)". The allegations were made against Mr Milan Durovic and were said to arise out of incidents which happened at the Shell Tornik Roadhouse on the Pacific Highway at
Grafton, which was operated by Mr Durovic and at which, at all relevant times,
Ms Judge and Ms Saville were employed as casual workers.

The Tribunal was satisfied that it was appropriate to hold a single enquiry into these allegations pursuant to [s.97](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s97.html) of the Act, and the matters were heard on seven days between 5 April 1995 and July 1995 and, on 30 November 1995, the Tribunal delivered its reasons for decision and judgment. Mr Durovic has made no complaint before me about a single enquiry being ordered. To some extent the evidence of Ms Judge corroborated that of Ms Saville and vice versa.

The Tribunal made the following orders:- "1. That the claims of Ms Christine Saville and Ms Paula Judge have been substantiated and that the respondent has been guilty of sexual discrimination and discrimination in work pursuant to [ss.24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s24.html) and [25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s25.html) of the Act.
 . The respondent is ordered to pay general and aggravated damages to Ms Saville in the sum of Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) within twenty eight (28) days from the date hereof and the sum of Twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) to Ms Paula Judge within twenty eight (28) days from the date hereof.
 . That the Respondent pay on account of legal costs incurred by the Complainants Christine Saville and Paula Judge the sum of Twenty five thousand ($25,000) as assessed by the Tribunal.
 . That the Respondent pay to the Complainant Paula Judge within twenty eight (28) days from the date hereof the sum of Nine hundred dollars ($900) representing loss of wages for three weeks from the date her employment was terminated, and to the Complainant Christine Saville within twenty eight (28) days from the date hereof the sum of Six hundred and forty eight dollars ($648) for loss of wages, representing twenty seven hours a fortnight for one month at Twelve dollars ($12) per hour." 
By a Summons filed on 21 December 1995 Mr Durovic, as plaintiff in this Court, for whom Mr I.McC. Barker of Queen's Counsel and Mr A.R. Moses of Counsel appeared, sought an order allowing an appeal against these findings and orders; an order setting aside the findings and orders; an order that the proceedings be remitted to the Tribunal "to be determined according to law"; and for ancillary relief. Ms Judge and Ms Saville, for whom Ms S. Winters of Counsel appeared, were named as the first and second defendants respectively and the Tribunal, which filed a submitting appearance save as to costs, was named as the third defendant. It is convenient to refer to the parties by their names, although when referring to both of Ms Judge and Ms Saville I shall call them the complainants.

The grounds of appeal set forth in the Summons were:- "(i) The third defendant erred in law in the construction of [ss.24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s24.html), [25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s25.html) and [114](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s114.html)(2) of the Act; 
The third defendant erred in law in finding that the conduct of the plaintiff in relation to the first defendant and second defendant amounted to circumstances that were within the meaning of [ss.24](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s24.html) and [25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/s25.html) of the Act; 
The third defendant erred in law in that there was no evidence before the Tribunal upon which the order for costs was made and accordingly the third defendant must have considered material not disclosed in the proceedings; 
The third defendant erred in law in its application of the 'egg shell skull rule' in the circumstances of this case; 
The third defendant erred in law in failing to acknowledge in its findings of fact the higher standard of civil proof required as per Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] in dealing with matters of the gravity of those Matters No. 20 and 21 of 1991.
 
The third defendant erred in law in that it gave no reasons or sufficient reasons as to why the First and Second Defendants were entitled to aggravated damages." 
On the appeal being called on for hearing I granted leave to Mr Durovic to add the following additional grounds of appeal, it not being suggested by Ms Winters that she was prejudiced thereby:- "(i) In failing to take account of significant evidence (clinical notes of Ms Parker and Dr Harding) and the oral evidence about them; 
In failing to give adequate reasons for its findings, the award of damages and the order for costs; 
In failing to take account of the plaintiff's counsel's submissions and in failing to accord procedural fairness to the plaintiff; 
In finding that the second defendant's reduction in working hours was a consequence of sexual harassment; 
In finding that each defendant was, in effect, dismissed from her employment." 
During the hearing Mr Barker stated that his client would not be relying on grounds (iii) and (iv) in the Summons and the words "and the order for costs" in additional ground (ii).

A Question Of Law 
Section 118 of the Act deals with appeals from the Tribunal and provides:- "(1) A party aggrieved by a decision or an order of the Tribunal may appeal to the Court on a question of law: except as provided in paragraph (b), within twenty one days after the date of that decision or order; or where a notice has been served on the Tribunal under s.117(1), within twenty one days after the date on which the Tribunal states its reasons for that decision or order under s.117(2).
 
An appeal shall be made in accordance with the rules of Court.
 
The Court shall hear and determine the question of law arising on the appeal and shall: remit the decision of the Court thereon to the Tribunal; or make such other order in relation to the appeal as to it seems fit.
 ..." 
The appeal apparently comes before a single Judge as the Tribunal is not a "specified tribunal" within the meaning of [s.48(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s48.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), at least in circumstances where the judicial member of the Tribunal is not "a Judge or member" unless that status is itself relevant to the powers of the Tribunal: Allders International Pty Limited versus Anstee [(1986) 5 NSWLR 47.] 
Mr Durovic faced all the problems which arise when an appeal is restricted to a question of law: Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Limited [(1985) 4
NSWLR 139 (Workers] Compensation Act); Haines versus Leves & Anor [(1987) 8
NSWLR 442] (the Act); Natoli & Anor versus Walker (Court of Appeal - May 1994 - unreported) (The Commercial Arbitration (Amendment) Act 1990) to cite but several examples. The first such problem is that the appellate Court cannot consider questions of fact or mixed fact and law unless, of course, the submission is that there was no evidence to support a factual finding or the evidence does not meet the test specified by the legislation. The second, which may be relevant to the present appeal, is that the extent to which reasons must be given is somewhat circumscribed.

Mr Barker readily acknowledged these difficulties and pointed out that adverse findings of fact by the Tribunal, particularly in cases where sexual harassment is alleged, can be expected to have a number of devastating effects on the person against whom they are made. This can readily be understood and presumably the legislature appreciates it, but it has directed that an appeal should only run on a question of law. Hence this Court cannot intervene even if a finding of fact is said to be perverse, contrary to the overwhelming weight of evidence or against the evidence and its weight. As Kirby P said in
Leves, at p.459:- "The purpose of establishing a specialist tribunal, with a judicial president, and of confining appeals to this Court to questions of law, is to provide a high measure of immunity from review to determinations of the Tribunal the difficult and sometimes controversial decisions which arise in characterising conduct as discriminatory. The jurisdiction of this Court is limited. It must not, under the guise of designating a question of law, intrude into the domain which has been reserved by Parliament to the Tribunal." 
At p.469 his Honour returned to this point stating:- "It is not for us to substitute our views on the interpretation of the facts. That is a function reposed by Parliament in the Tribunal. Law operating on fact, there is no gulf between them. They interact in the process of decision making. But the stringency of the limitation in the entitlement of this Court to examine factual determinations was recently stressed by the Court in an appeal from another specialist tribunal, the Compensation Court of New South Wales. Appeals from that Court are, relevantly, also limited to questions of law. In Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Limited [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] the majority (Glass JA, with whom Samuels JA agreed) stressed that in appeals such as the present, the legislation does not allow the Court to correct errors of fact. It does not permit the Court to review even a finding of fact which is said to be perverse or contrary to the overwhelming weight of evidence or even against the evidence and the weight of evidence. Nor may the Court review findings on the facts which are alleged to ignore the probative force of the evidence which is all one way, even if no reasonable person could have reached the decision made and even if the reasoning by which the Court arrives at its conclusion is demonstrably unsound. In all such circumstances, the Court concluded, no error of law would be shown to attract the jurisdiction of this Court. The findings and interpretation of the facts are matters reserved to the Tribunal below. Only if there is no evidence to support a finding, or if the ultimate finding of fact necessarily demonstrates a misdirection on the applicable statute may this Court offer relief, within its remit on questions of law. In Azzopardi I suggested that perversity and illogical reasoning could attract the jurisdiction of the Court. But this was a minority view. The majority opinion is the binding rule. It must be observed in this case. It provides the basis for the consideration of the appeal by this Court." 
At p.476 Samuels JA said:- "However, although the appeal lies only upon a question of law and, although in Azzopardi .. the majority emphasised the breadth of decision which in such a case must be accorded to the tribunal of fact, that case clearly recognised an exception which applies in the present proceedings. What must be decided here is whether the facts satisfy a statutory description, that is to say, whether it had been established that the appellant had treated Melinda Leves 'less favourably' than in the same circumstances he had treated a person of the opposite sex. I leave out of this formulation the element 'on the ground of her sex' which seems to me to raise only a simple question of causative fact." 
Subsequently his Honour said:- "It follows that in the present case this Court does have a regulatory function to perform notwithstanding that the appeal lies only on a question of law; because it is a question of law whether the conclusion to which the Tribunal came concerning the application of a statutory description was, or was not, one which could reasonably be entertained." 
One can readily understand that a person against whom serious findings, with all their consequences, have been made would harbour a real feeling of injustice at not being allowed to re-agitate findings of fact, particularly of the doubtful nature to which the authorities refer. But the legislature has decided that there should only be limited appellate rights and the authorities stress the extent of these rights beyond which this Court cannot go. It also seems to me, although no complaint was made by Mr Durovic about this, that the ordering of a single enquiry has the potential to prejudice the position of the person against whom complaint is made. The remarks I have made in this paragraph are quite general and not necessarily relevant to a consideration of the present appeal. They have been stimulated by Mr Barker's opening comments about the harmful effect which adverse findings have on so many parts of the life of the person against whom they are made.

The Proceedings Before The Tribunal 
At page 3 of its reasons the Tribunal identified the case made by the complainants as being that Mr Durovic had unlawfully discriminated against them on the ground of their sex pursuant to s.25(2)(a) and (c) of the Act in the conditions of employment afforded to them and by subjecting them to a detriment. Mr Barker accepted that if an employer so treats a woman employee that her conditions of employment become less favourable than the conditions of employment, which would be extended to men, then the woman employee is suffering a detriment because she is being treated differently.

He also conceded that on the findings of fact made by the Tribunal in relation to Ms Judge there could be sexual harassment, but he submitted that there was no evidence that the reasons for her ceasing to be employed were as a consequence of Mr Durovic's conduct. He made no such concession in respect of
Ms Saville, it being his submission that, as a matter of law, her case did not fall within the provisions of s.25. He submitted further that even if it did there was no evidence to support the finding that her employment was constructively terminated by dint of the conduct of Mr Durovic.

Because of the limited appeal rights it is appropriate, at the outset, to identify the factual issues which were before the Tribunal. In doing so I note immediately that a primary submission made by Mr Barker was that there was a failure by the Tribunal to give reasons or adequate reasons for the decisions to which it came and the orders it made, such that one could not, by reading the forty one pages of reasons, discern the reasoning which led to their being made.

Ms Judge asserted, in her Points of Claim before the Tribunal, that she was employed as a waitress/cook by Mr Durovic from December 1988 until approximately 18 November 1990 and that he discriminated against her "on the grounds of sex (sexual harassment)". She provided six particulars of conduct, which alleged that between February 1990 and August 1990, or perhaps a little later, Mr Durovic made unsolicited and unwanted advances to her both by word and action of a sexual nature, which she found unacceptable. In consequence she alleged a contravention of the Act and sought damages not exceeding $20,000 alleging she had suffered loss of income, loss of career prospects, injury to feelings, and distress, insult and mental suffering. She also sought an order for costs.

Ms Saville, in her Points of Claim, alleged that she was employed by Mr
Durovic from 28 November 1989 until approximately 13 October 1990 and that she was unlawfully discriminated against "on the grounds of sex (sexual harassment)". She provided four particulars of this, the first two of which relate to incidents in February and March 1990, which Mr Barker conceded could amount to unsolicited and unwanted sexual advances. Particulars (iii) and (iv) stated:- "(iii) In the beginning of September 1990, the Complainant took the till to the petrol station. At approximately 12.20 am Mr Durovic was the only person in the petrol station shop. Mr Durovic said - 'I want to talk to you. Come upstairs to my apartment'. The Complainant declined to go upstairs and left the petrol station shop as quickly as possible.
 
Following this incident in September the Complainant had her shifts reduced two (2) days a week, and in effect lost twenty-seven (27) hours work per fortnight. The Complainant's work was reduced because of her rejection of Mr Durovic's attentions." 
Mr Barker submitted that the third particular could not amount to such a sexual advance, and that it was not open to the Tribunal to infer it did. He submitted there was no evidence to support the fourth particular.

In the course of evidence Ms Saville also relied upon two incidents on 13
October 1990. The first was when there was a dispute between herself and Mr
Durovic concerning his breakfast during which, as Mr Barker conceded on the findings made by the Tribunal, Mr Durovic was rude, boorish, bad tempered and failed to display the qualities of a gentleman. He said that the incident could not be said to be "of a sexual nature" and it was "not the sort of the conduct on which the claim was based". The second was that Mr Durovic forced
Ms Saville to inspect the urinal in the men's toilet to impress upon her the standard of cleanliness he required. This incident was accompanied, as was the first, by the use by him of bad language. Mr Barker agreed that the evidence of these incidents was given before the Tribunal without objection by Mr
Moses, who appeared on behalf of Mr Durovic before the Tribunal.

In the result the Tribunal considered all these allegations, and it is clear from the first finding it made that it had regard to both sexual discrimination and discrimination in work.

The Tribunal's Reasons 
In its reasons, which ran to forty one pages, the Tribunal referred to certain preliminary matters, quoted from ss.24 and 25, and, at pages 2 and 3, said:- "Although the Act does not specifically make sexual harassment unlawful, it is widely accepted that such conduct can constitute unlawful discrimination on the ground of sex within the meaning of s.25 of the Act: O'Callaghan versus Loder & Anor [[1984] EOC 92-023] In the case O'Callaghan versus Loder & Anor, Matthews J adopted the following definition of sexual harassment:- 'A person is sexually harassed if he or she is subjected to unsolicited and unwelcome sexual conduct by a person who stands in a position of power in relation to him or her.' " 
Mr Barker did not seek to argue to the contrary. Hence, as I would understand it, his concession in relation to Ms Judge. However, he submitted that so far as Ms Saville was concerned there was no sufficient continuity of activities amounting to sexual harassment and the Tribunal was not, in the way in which the case was pleaded and particularised, entitled to have regard to the incidents of 13 October 1990.

The reasons then set out the cases of Ms Judge and Ms Saville and the background in relation to each of them. In doing so they dealt with the various allegations and set forth the evidence in chief and in cross- examination at some length. Essentially the basic issue which confronted the
Tribunal was whether it accepted, as a matter of fact, that Mr Durovic had conducted himself in the manner alleged by the complainants, which he denied.
In the light of the very substantial submission made by Mr Barker that the
Tribunal failed to give proper reasons for its decision such as to amount to an error of law, it is necessary to bear constantly in mind that at the forefront of this case before the Tribunal was the question as to whether the allegations, as matters of fact, were established. This required, essentially, the Tribunal to decide whether it accepted the evidence of the complainants, or either of them, or the evidence of Mr Durovic. The Tribunal, having traversed the evidence in some detail and made some observations along the way, came to its findings on those factual issues at page 26. It said, and I think it necessary to quote in extenso:- "The Tribunal found the Complainants and their witnesses to be honest, responsible and credible witnesses and the Tribunal is of the opinion that their evidence was truthful and their testimony was in no way contradicted under cross-examination. On the other hand, it was the view of the Tribunal that the evidence given by the Respondent was inconsistent and unreliable and that many parts of his evidence were not truthful. In particular, the Tribunal refers to conflicting evidence given by the Respondent, inter alia, as to the possession of a video in his flat, the events which took place at the Charity Night, the question as to whether food and drink was supplied to members of the Police Service without cost when attending the Roadhouse and the Respondent's recollection of the night relating to Ms Saville's presence or otherwise in a truck in the parking lot. Having regard to all the evidence given by the Respondent, the Tribunal was of the opinion that his evidence could not be accepted and that on the other hand the evidence of the Complainants was truthful and unshaken in cross-examination and accepted by the Tribunal.
 
The Tribunal is satisfied that the conduct complained of by both Complainants was substantiated and constituted both a discriminatory condition of employment within the meaning of s.25(2)(a) of the Act and a detriment within the meaning of s.25(2)(c) of the Act. The Tribunal was also satisfied that the Respondent discriminated against each Complainant in contravention of s.24(1) of the Act.
 
Apart from Christopher David Orton, a senior constable called by the Respondent whose evidence was totally inadmissible, the other witnesses called by the Respondent did not assist the Tribunal in its deliberations as to the specific complaints made in these proceedings." 
It appears from this statement, read in the context of what preceded it in the reasons, that the Tribunal was making findings of fact, which were completely adverse to Mr Durovic. It was submitted by Mr Barker that the reasons furnished by the Tribunal were inadequate in relation to substantial issues and substantial submissions. Mr Barker submitted that from a reading of the reasons one could not discern how the Tribunal reached the conclusion it did. I think this submission must fail. As I have said the primary issues involved questions of fact and the determination of those questions depended upon, essentially, whether the Tribunal accepted the evidence of Ms Judge and/or Ms Saville or the evidence of Mr Durovic. The Tribunal made it completely clear that it accepted the evidence of the complainants, which, as I have said, was self corroborating in certain respects, and, equally, that it totally rejected the evidence of Mr Durovic. It formed the judgment that the complainants were reliable witnesses and that Mr Durovic was not. Of course these factual findings do not give rise to a question of law. It is only if Mr Barker's submission be correct that the reasons are inadequate to the point where that constitutes an error of law that there is such an error.

A number of Mr Barker's submissions also related to the way in which the
Tribunal failed to consider what he submitted was a discrepancy between the reports, which constituted the evidence in chief of Ms Parker and Dr Harding, who were psychologists called on behalf of Ms Judge and Ms Saville respectively, and the contemporaneous notes they made. It is possible to deal with the submission shortly. Ms Parker and Dr Harding each furnished a report, and both reports were tendered before the Tribunal. Their contemporaneous clinical notes were also tendered. Each was cross-examined in great detail about the fact that her report contained material which was not in the contemporaneous notes. Each gave an explanation for this, and it was conceded that it was never suggested to either that the report was fabricated, or that the information contained in it was not information available, or that the explanation for the absence of the material from the contemporaneous notes was incorrect. To make good the present submission the witnesses should have been challenged on their explanations. The Tribunal noted the evidence of each, although it did not make reference to the cross-examination on this point. Mr
Barker submitted that the cross-examination gave rise to a serious matter with which the Tribunal should have dealt expressly. In view of the failure to explore beyond the prima facie plausible reasons advanced for the absence of that material from the contemporaneous notes, or to put to the witnesses matters of the type to which I have referred, it does not seem to me that the matter, in itself, had the significance before the Tribunal, for which Mr
Barker now contends. However, in my opinion, the answer is to be found in the acceptance by the Tribunal of the honesty, responsibility and credibility of witnesses called on behalf of the complainants and the failure to contradict their evidence "under cross-examination". This included an acceptance of the evidence of Ms Parker and Dr Harding.

After making the findings of fact to which I have referred the Tribunal went on to deal with the "egg shell skull" assertions, which no longer require consideration as the ground of appeal was withdrawn, although it is instructive to read them to show the extent of detail into which the Tribunal went.

At page 34 the Tribunal commenced to consider general and aggravated damages under the headings "General and Aggravated Damages". It referred to evidence given by each of the complainants. This consideration by the Tribunal takes on importance in view of the submission made by Mr Barker that the Tribunal had failed to give any reasons as to how it assessed the sum of $20,000 damages and, additionally, how it apportioned this amount between compensatory and aggravated damages. In the end Mr Barker did not pursue the second point. It seems to me that there are two answers to this complaint. The first is that the findings commencing at page 34 set forth a number of facts, which are relevant to the question of damages and the reasons make clear the Tribunal was considering that issue. I do not accept that the Tribunal failed to give reasons, which would show how the damages were assessed. It set forth a number of problems from which each of the complainants was suffering and about which each was complaining. It had made clear that it accepted their evidence. The only inference is that it was upon this basis that the damages were awarded.
It would, perhaps, have been desirable for the sake of completeness to state what damages were compensatory and what were aggravated but, as I have said,
Mr Barker took no point about this in the end. As was made plain in
Australian Iron & Steel Pty Limited versus Najdovska & Ors [(1988) 12
NSWLR 587] an award of damages under the Act involves essentially a matter of fact for the Tribunal and the method adopted must relate to the particular circumstances before it, rather than to any principles of awarding damages in tort cases. Further such an award is discretionary in nature.

Even if this analysis of the reasons is incorrect and no reasons had been given by the Tribunal, as Mr Barker basically, or perhaps initially, submitted, the Act provides its own remedy. Section 117 states:- "(1) Where the Tribunal does not state its reasons for any decision or order made in relation to an inquiry, a party to the inquiry may, by notice in writing served on the Tribunal within 7 days after the date of that decision or order, require the Tribunal to state its reasons.
 
The Tribunal shall, within 14 days after the service of a notice under sub-s.(1), state its reasons for the decision or order referred to in the notice." 
It was submitted on behalf of the complainants that if there was a failure to give reasons Mr Durovic had a remedy under s.117, which he had not exercised. It is to be noted that in s.118(1)(b) the time within which an appeal is to be brought is regulated by the giving of reasons pursuant to s.117(2).

Mr Barker's response was that it is inappropriate for a party to interrogate the Tribunal, which had already given reasons of an extensive nature, although the primary submission was that the reasons are so inadequate as to constitute an error of law, and that if in respect of part of the case reasons were not given this rendered it inappropriate for Mr Durovic to request reasons for that part. I do not agree. In my view s.117(1), upon its proper construction, gives the right to a party to request reasons, not only where none have been given, but where some have been given but, in respect of "any" decision or order reasons are not given. If a party does not avail itself of that statutory right then, in my opinion, it is not open to it to complain on the appeal that no reasons have been given and to submit, accordingly, that the appeal should be upheld and the matter remitted to the Tribunal to give reasons. The inconvenience of this course to all concerned is obvious, and I have no doubt that s.117 was intended to ensure that the Tribunal was given the opportunity to give reasons when the matter was still fresh to its mind, and to avoid appeals on this narrow point when, if reasons had been sought from the Tribunal, they may have been found to be completely satisfactory. In my opinion, if no reasons have been furnished, as Mr Barker submitted was the case in relation to the orders for damages, the correct remedy for Mr Durovic was to apply for them pursuant to s.117(1). As he failed to do so then, in my opinion, he cannot complain on the hearing of an appeal that no reasons were given.

I tend to agree with Mr Barker that where a document purporting to give reasons is furnished the party aggrieved is not obliged to seek further reasons by way of explanation of the reasons given. But that is a very different situation to one where the submission is that no reasons were given at all in respect of any decision or order. It is also different from a situation where reasons were given for part, but not for another part of the decision or for one but not for another order.

My view is that there are two answers to the submissions made by Mr Barker in relation to the orders for damages. Firstly, the Tribunal gave reasons.
Secondly, if the Tribunal did not give reasons, the remedy was pursuant to s.117(1) and, it not having been availed of, complaint cannot now be made in this Court.

Failure To Give Adequate Reasons 
The assertion of a failure to give adequate reasons is to be found in grounds (v) and (vi) in the Summons and grounds (i), (ii) (as amended) and, I think, (iii) in the additional grounds of appeal. The basic submission was that there had been a failure by the Tribunal to give adequate reasons in respect of substantial matters in relation to which substantial submissions were made. It was further submitted that as there was no reference to the detailed written submissions of counsel for Mr Durovic, I should assume that no account was taken of them. There is no material before me, which, in my opinion, justifies any such assumption. 
Mr Barker accepted that it is not necessary for every matter of fact and every submission to be considered in the reasons, but submitted that the Tribunal should give sufficient reasons to expose the reasoning process and should, in its reasons, acknowledge and deal with evidence and submissions of significance proffered by both sides as the parties are entitled to know how the Tribunal evaluated such evidence and submissions. He submitted that although the Tribunal published reasons it did not expose its reasoning process and, in large measure, the reasons "are a mere recitation of the evidence with some findings unsupported by the intellectual processes which led to them". He submitted the Tribunal failed to take account of important evidence, or, if it did, it is not clear how it did so, and that it took no account of lengthy written submissions as to law and fact. The submission continued that the only real attempt to give reasons was in respect of the costs' order.

I was referred to many cases in relation to the obligation to give reasons. I think, without any disrespect to the detailed reference to earlier decisions,
I can go immediately to Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) NSWLR 247], which was an appeal from the Workers Compensation Court where the appeal was restricted to a point of law. It was also concerned with the extent of the duty to give reasons for findings of fact. Its relevance to the submissions I am now considering is thus obvious. Kirby P, who was in the minority, was of the view that there was a failure to give "proper reasons", which constituted "an error of law": p.259. He noted, at p.257:- "An unsatisfactory situation is therefore brought about by his Honour's assertion of satisfaction on the evidence of fitness for work after 17 January 1984. Absolutely no reason is given for this finding. It is a finding crucial to the determination of the case and vital for the respective rights of the appellant and the respondent.
 
The duty of judicial officers to record the reasons for their decisions has been developed in recent decades in this, as in other jurisdictions of the common law, as an attribute of the judicial process and an incident to the necessities of appellate review." 
His Honour referred to the judgment of Jordan CJ in Carlson versus King [(1947) 64 WN 65] 
Mahoney JA disagreed that sufficient reasons were not given and, after considering the evidence, he said at p.265:- "... In this case the learned Judge did not arrive at his conclusion of fact by finding and articulating every fact relevant to his decision. And where he has not done so, the argument that he has made a finding of fact that was not open to him is, at least, difficult to sustain." 
He continued, at p.268:- "But, the complaint was, he did not spell out how he reasoned from the scan to the termination of the incapacity. It is this which, apparently, is urged to be an error of law. I do not think that it can be so. But it is argued that principle leads to that conclusion. So it is necessary to consider whether it does.
 
It will be convenient to do this by examining two questions: to what extent is a judge obliged to give reasons for findings of fact; and whether in this case the reasons he gave were sufficient." 
In considering the obligation to give reasons his Honour quoted from the decision of Gibbs CJ in Public Service Board of New South Wales versus Osmond [(1986) 159 CLR 656] at pp.666-667 and, at p.269, he said:- "Three things may be taken from what was there said by Gibbs CJ. First, the reasons given must be sufficient, where there is a right of appeal, to allow that right to be exercised. Secondly, the giving of reasons is not limited to cases where there is a right of appeal: there are reasons in the nature of the judicial process which may require that reasons be given as an incident of the decision in question. And, thirdly, the giving of reasons is a normal but not a universal incident of the judicial process: there are some cases, or kinds of cases, where they need not be given. In so far as it may be relevant for me to do so, I would agree with each of these and see them as applicable in determining what reasoning of fact a judge is under pain of error of law, required to set forth in his judgment." (My emphasis.) 
After considering Housing Commission of New South Wales versus Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Limited [[1983] 3 NSWLR 378] his Honour said, at p.271:- "In my opinion, the law does not require that a judge make an express finding in respect of every fact leading to, or relevant to, his final conclusion of fact; nor is it necessary that he reason, and be seen to reason, from one fact to the next along the chain of reasoning to that conclusion." 
At p.272 his Honour said:- "Their Lordships did not, I think, suggest as a model of a judgment one in which, having the evidence in mind, the judge does no more than state his final conclusion of fact. Professional skill would suggest that something more be done. But their Lordships did make clear that there is no ground for reversal in the fact that, having made clear the steps on which he based himself, the learned Judge did not detail the steps by which he proceeded from those facts to his final conclusion.
 
In my experience, it has not been the practice in New South Wales for judges, in cases where reasons are given, to detail their reasoning processes in the manner suggested in the present case." 
His Honour then pointed out that it was necessary, in determining what must be said in a judgment, to distinguish between "the essentials and the peripherals".

He continued, at p.273:- "There is, I think, no formula the application of which to the instant case will indicate what, in that case, the judge must do. Where, in the decision of an ordinary dispute, reasons are necessary, they are necessary because of the expectation that, being a judicial decision, a sufficient explanation will be given of why the order was made. And, in my opinion, it will ordinarily be sufficient if - to adapt the formula used in a different part of the law: see R versus Associated Northern Collieries .. - by his reasons the judge apprises the parties of the broad outline and constituent facts of the reasoning on which he has acted.
 
To require that a judge detail the way in which he has reasoned step by step to his conclusion is, in my opinion, to mistake the nature of the reasoning process." 
At p.281 McHugh JA considered the position in the light of the fact that there was only an appeal on a point of law and he said:- "Accordingly, the present case is concerned with a finding of fact which involves no legal standard and is not subject to appeal. The issue, therefore, is whether the failure to explain the basis of the crucial finding of fact involves a breach of the principle that justice must not only be done but must be seen to be done. If it was, that is itself an error of law because, as Asprey JA pointed out in Pettit versus Dunkley (at 382), the learned judge 'has not properly fulfilled the function which the law calls upon a judicial person to exercise'. However, in determining the issue which this appeal raises, great care needs to be taken that dissatisfaction with the finding of fact does not mislead the Court into holding that the learned judge has failed to give his reasons for his finding." 
At p.282 his Honour concluded:- "While it is true that his Honour did not expressly give any reasons for the finding, his reasons for judgment show quite clearly in my opinion that he held that the applicant was fit for work because the CAT scan did not reveal any abnormality. It is not to the point that his Honour's finding was erroneous or, as counsel for the applicant claimed, perverse. An erroneous or perverse finding of fact raises no question of law and cannot be challenged by way of appeal. What is decisive is that his Honour's judgment reveals the ground for, although not the detailed reasoning in support of, his finding of fact. But that is enough in a case where no appeal lies against the finding of fact. Accordingly there was no failure to give reasons sufficient to constitute an error of law." (My emphasis.) 
It is not necessary, in my respectful opinion, to deal with each of the cases to which I was referred. I shall come forward to the most recent decision on this question in the Court of Appeal of which I am aware.

In Kiama Constructions Pty Limited versus Davey (Court of Appeal - 29 November 1996 - unreported) Mahoney P said that the general principles which determine the form of a judgment are well settled and referred to Soulemezis, Mifsud versus Campbell [(1990) 21 NSWLR 725] and Rajski versus Bainton (Court of Appeal - 6 September 1991 - unreported). His Honour said, at p.2, that whilst the general principles are clear what will be sufficient reasons "will depend, of course, upon the reason why it is necessary to detail them and the circumstances of the particular case". For present purposes this picks up the passages I have emphasised in the judgments of Mahoney and McHugh JJA.

His Honour then set forth the matters in issue, which were essentially matters of fact, and observed that there was a clear and direct conflict of evidence between the plaintiff and the defendant's two witnesses. He set forth the short reasons the trial Judge gave for accepting certain evidence to which reasons exception was taken by the appellant and continued:- "In my respectful opinion, the reasons why the judge accepted the plaintiff's evidence in preference to that of the two witnesses for the defendant is plain. At least, it is plain to one who reads the evidence recorded in the transcript and reads the judge's judgment." 
His Honour referred to the submission made, which is very similar to the submission made to me, that the judge "must spell out why", and to the fact that submissions of that kind "are not infrequently made to this Court". He said:- "I shall therefore, for future guidance, deal with what is here suggested at greater length than would ordinarily be appropriate." 
At the foot of p.4 his Honour observed that the process of fact finding "is not a mechanical thing" and that in the end a judge must be satisfied in the Briginshaw sense that the case has been made out.

At p.5 his Honour said:- "In some cases, the finding as to the credibility of a witness will be made upon, or influenced substantially by, what the trial judge has seen of the witnesses. The judge, by the use of the unfortunate term 'demeanour', indicated that this was so in the present case. There is no reason to doubt that he tested what he saw against the facts, as he was required to do. But, if he found nothing in the facts which made it wrong for him to do so, he is entitled to give proper effect to the impression which in this way he had had of the witnesses.
 
It is, special cases apart, not necessary for a trial judge to try to spell out why the one witness impressed him as credible and the other did not. Often this cannot be done. It would be to attempt to give a greater degree of definition than the subject matter may properly bear to attempt to explain why the choice was made. If the matter be one of impression, the law does not require that a trial judge rationalise his impression.
 
Given the preference for one witness over the other, it may be plain why that witness's account of the facts is accepted and the other's not. If that be so, it is not necessary that the judge detail how A follows from B and B from C. There may, of course, be special cases. The credibility finding may not decide the crucial issue. It may leave a crucial finding of fact to be made. In some cases, the principles to which I have referred may require or warrant that the judge set forth how he has made that finding. In other cases, they may not: ordinarily, I think they will not." 
His Honour concluded, at p.6, thus:- "In the end, it is to be borne in mind that the judgment of a court - more accurately, the document in which it sets out the reasons for its orders - is essentially a professional working document. In the ordinary case, it is not written to record the history of the proceeding or of what happened between the parties. It will be seldom, I think, that those who have been concerned in the case will be in real doubt as to why the judge decided as he did. In days when courts may be required to deal with several cases each day - this Court has been required to deal with three or more appeals in a single day - I do not think that more is required." 
I was referred to the decision of the High Court in QBE Insurance Limited versus Switzerland Insurance Workers Compensation Limited & Ors <case>; [(1996) 134 ALR 433.] 
That case, so it seems it to me, is an exceptional case and must be considered having regard to its own particular facts and circumstances. I do not understand it to be changing the long established principles relating to the giving of reasons based on the authorities to which I have referred.

The findings of the Tribunal must also be measured against the views expressed by the High Court in Jones versus Hyde <case>; [(1989) 63 ALJR 349]; Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167] and Devries & Anor versus Australian National Railways
Commission & Anor <case>; [(1992-1993) 177 CLR 472] in relation to the circumstances in which an appellate Court may interfere with findings of fact.

Against the background of these authorities I can now consider the basal submissions of Mr Barker that the reasons are so devoid of an expression of the reasoning process by which the Tribunal reached its conclusions that there has been an error of law. As McHugh JA pointed out expressly in Soulemezis the decisive consideration where there is no appeal on a question of fact is the revealing of the ground for the finding without the detailed reasoning.
The passage from the judgment of Mahoney JA, which I have emphasised, is wholly consistent with this approach.

In the present case the Tribunal made clear the reasoning process which led to its acceptance of the evidence of the complainants and the witnesses called by them and to its rejection of the evidence of Mr Durovic. On issues which turned essentially on what evidence was believed the Tribunal considered that the evidence in the complainants' cases should be accepted and the evidence of
Mr Durovic rejected. There was no need for the interposition of detailed reasoning, although certain reasons were given. Similarly the Tribunal made clear the factual matters to which it had regard in awarding damages.

I am also satisfied that the Tribunal must have been satisfied to the highest extent required within the civil onus. This flows from the complete acceptance of one body of evidence and the complete rejection of the rest.

I have dealt, although perhaps on a prima facie basis, with the attack made on the failure to deal with the evidence of Ms Parker and Dr Harding. I merely confirm as my final views what I there stated.

I am satisfied that adequate reasons for the Tribunal's findings, including the award of damages, were given, essentially for the reasons to which I have already referred. If I be wrong in relation to damages and no reasons were given I am of the view that the proper approach by Mr Durovic was to seek reasons.

There is nothing before me to indicate that the Tribunal failed to take account of Mr Durovic's counsel's submissions and, in so far as that and the failure to give reasons is the basis for the allegation that there was a failure to accord procedural fairness to Mr Durovic I reject it. No further submission was placed before me in relation to procedural fairness.

It is, sometimes, convenient to have a summary of submissions set forth in the reasons, but I know of no authority which compels that to be done, the obligation being upon the Tribunal to determine the matter and to state its reasons for so doing. Of course, if the Tribunal determined the matter on some basis which was not properly before it either by way of evidence or through submissions that may lead to a different consequence. But there is no material before me which would form any basis for such a conclusion in this case.

The Nature Of The Conduct  
It was submitted on behalf of Mr Durovic that the Tribunal erred in law in finding that his conduct in relation to Ms Judge amounted to circumstances that were within the meaning of ss.24 and 25 of the Act. I do not think that this ground of appeal can succeed in view of the finding I have made that the Tribunal did not err in law in failing to give reasons. As I have said Mr Barker made a concession in relation to Ms Judge and once the reasoning supporting the findings of fact is accepted it seems to me, subject to the question as to whether there was evidence upon which the Tribunal could find that she was "in effect" dismissed from her employment, that that issue must be answered in her favour.

It is convenient, as I am dealing with the position of Ms Judge, to consider the termination of her employment. At p.35 the Tribunal said:- "As far as loss of wages is concerned, Paula Judge was out of work for three weeks after her employment was effectively terminated by the Respondent. The Tribunal is of the opinion that she should be compensated for that period for loss of wages." 
Mr Barker submitted there was no evidence that would enable this finding to be made.

In paragraph 4 of her affidavit of 2 August 1994 Ms Judge said:- "As a result of the harassment I left my employment with the respondent and lost income of approximately $300 per week for seven weeks." 
Accordingly, it seems to me that there was clear evidence upon which the Tribunal could find that the termination of employment was brought about by the conduct of Mr Durovic. The Tribunal obviously considered the matter because it allowed Ms Judge three rather than seven weeks.

The position so far as Ms Saville is concerned requires some further consideration. At p.36 the Tribunal said:- "On 13 October 1990, Ms Saville resigned from the Roadhouse and the Tribunal considers that she was constructively dismissed on that day." 
The starting point for an examination of this matter is whether the conduct, which occurred on that date, was conduct to which the Tribunal should have had regard in concluding that it was satisfied that so far as Ms Saville was concerned there was a discriminatory condition of employment and a detriment. If it was not then, conformably with authority, the factual findings arguably did not meet the statutory test and there was an error of law. The point arises because of the submission of Mr Barker that the case proceeded as one in which there was only an allegation of sexual harassment, by which I mean unsolicited and unwanted advances on the part of Mr Durovic. However, the matter, so it seems to me, went further than that because evidence of the incidents of 13 October 1990 was led, without objection, and tested. The question is, therefore, whether the Tribunal was entitled to have regard to it. Mr Barker complained that it was not particularised, but it seems to me that as the evidence was led in the circumstances to which I have referred the parties agreed, at least, that the case should be fought on that basis: Dare versus Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658.] 
Before coming to those incidents I shall deal with the incident in September
Mr Barker submitted that the inference could not be drawn that the request by Mr Durovic to Ms Saville to go to his apartment at 12.20 am had any sexual connotation. I do not agree. In the light of the specific complaints made by her of earlier events, which it was agreed did have a sexual connotation, I think it was open to the Tribunal, notwithstanding the time lapse, to conclude that there was a sexual connotation. It must also be borne in mind that to a not insubstantial extent the evidence of sexual conduct in relation to Ms Judge was corroborated by Ms Saville, which would further assist the inference that Ms Saville saw this request as amounting to an unwanted and unsolicited sexual advance.

In her submissions Ms Winters made the point that the conduct of Mr Durovic on October 1990 and, in particular, his reference to Ms Saville and his taking her into the men's toilets and forcing her to look at the urinal to indicate it was not sufficiently polished was "sex-based harassment and there was unlawful discrimination". For this proposition she cited Hill versus Water
Resources Commission [[1985] EOC 92-127.] It was further submitted that the evidence did not indicate that Mr Durovic behaved in this manner to a male employee, nor that he ever swore at that employee or threw food at him.

In my opinion the question of fact as to how Mr Durovic behaved towards Ms
Saville on 13 October 1990 was left for the determination of the Tribunal in the context that it amounted to sexual discrimination in the work place. It is clear, I think, that it was not based upon any sexual advances and did not constitute conduct, which was conduct mainly of the type about which the complainants complained. On the other hand there was evidence from which the
Tribunal could conclude that in acting in the way in which he did towards Ms
Saville on this occasion he was acting in a discriminatory way based on her sex and that is sufficient to fall within the relevant proscription provided by the Act. The fact that it is of a different character from other complaints does not matter having regard to the way in which the case was conducted and the issues to which the Tribunal could have regard.

Ms Saville gave evidence, in paragraph 5 of her affidavit of 21 July 1994, that following her refusal to go to Mr Durovic's apartment in September 1990 she had her shifts reduced to two days a week "and in effect lost twenty seven hours work per fortnight. My work was reduced because of my rejection of
Mr Durovic's attentions".

In paragraph 6 of that affidavit, after referring to one of the incidents on October 1990, she deposed:- "I lost my employment immediately." 
In my opinion the issue propounded as to the termination of employment and the incidents of 13 October 1990 were matters of fact for the Tribunal and related to matters which the Tribunal was required to determine. The Tribunal referred to the termination of Ms Saville's employment as being "constructive" dismissal. In Western Excavating (ECC) Limited versus Sharp <case>; [[1978] 1 QB 761] at 772 Lawton LJ said:- "For the purposes of this judgment, I do not find it either necessary or advisable to express any opinion as to what principles of law operate to bring a contract of employment to an end by reason of an employer's conduct. Sensible persons have no difficulty in recognising such conduct when they hear about it. Persistent and unwanted amorous advances by an employer to a female member of his staff would, for example, clearly be such conduct; ..." 
In the present case there was evidence from which the Tribunal was entitled to find that the culmination of the totality of the conduct of Mr Durovic, about which there was complaint, amounted, as a matter of fact, to discrimination leading to the constructive termination of employment.

In my opinion additional grounds (iv) and (v) have not been established in the sense that it has not been shown that there was no evidence before the
Tribunal upon which it could have come to the conclusions it did.

Further Consideration Of The Grounds Of Appeal 
In the light of what I have written it is convenient to consider the grounds of appeal briefly.

It is unnecessary to consider whether the Tribunal erred in its construction of s.114(2) as this ground is not pressed. In relation to the assertion that the Tribunal erred in its construction of ss.24 and 25 and that the conduct of the complainants amounted to circumstances within the meaning of those sections one has to consider the position of Ms Judge and Ms Saville separately.

In relation to Ms Judge Mr Barker conceded that it was open to the Tribunal on the evidence to find that Mr Durovic conducted himself towards her in a way that amounted to discrimination. The error identified was the alleged failure by the Tribunal in not disclosing its reasons and apparently failing to take account of significant evidence, which was identified as that of Dr Harding, and of the submissions on behalf of Mr Durovic.

Once it is accepted, as I have, that the Tribunal gave adequate reasons and that there is no basis for suggesting that it failed to take account of or deal satisfactorily with the evidence and the submission, the submission that there was a failure to construe ss.24 and 25 properly qua Ms Judge fails.

In relation to Ms Saville it was not in issue that the first two incidents had a sexual connotation. In my opinion it was open to the Tribunal to infer from all the evidence that the September incident was of a similar character. It was not suggested that the incidents on 13 October 1990 fell into the same category, but they were susceptible of amounting to discrimination based on sex (i.e. gender) and, in my opinion, that was an issue of fact to be decided by the Tribunal. As I have said the factual issue as to the 13 October incidents was fought out before the Tribunal and it was not submitted, provided the issue was properly before the Tribunal, that one could not have different types of discrimination in one complaint.

It was submitted that there should have been found to be a continuum of the offending conduct. I was referred to the definition of "harass" and "harassment" in various dictionaries. A number of incidents over a relatively short period were proved. Whether they constituted such conduct was a matter of assessment by the Tribunal. That amounted to an assessment of a matter of fact.

The fifth ground of appeal in the Summons raises the issue whether the
Briginshaw test was met. For the reasons I have given there can be no doubt that it was.

The sixth ground of appeal in the Summons and the first three additional grounds are concerned in various ways with the failure to give reasons, the failure to take account of significant evidence and of submissions and to accord procedural fairness. I have considered all these grounds.

The fourth and fifth additional grounds are concerned with the findings that
Ms Saville's reduction in working hours was a consequence of sexual harassment and that each complainant was in effect dismissed from her employment. There was evidence from which the Tribunal could conclude that each of these findings was justified.

A submission on behalf of Mr Durovic was that constructive dismissal only arose in circumstances where there was an intention on the part of the employer that the employee should leave. Ms Winters relied on the decision to which I have referred to show there was no need for any such intention, rather the test being whether the conduct was such that, irrespective of intention, the employee was left with no alternative. In my opinion this must be correct.

Mr Barker also submitted that the complainants were employed pursuant to a specified award and had no right to renewal of their employment contracts.
Granted that was so the Tribunal's finding of fact, which was open on the evidence, was that the reason for their ceasing to be employed was the conduct of Mr Durovic.

Conclusions 
In my opinion each of the grounds of appeal fails. Accordingly, the Summons must be dismissed with costs.

Orders 
I order that:- 
The Summons filed on 21 December 1995 be dismissed with the consequence that the appeal is dismissed.

The Plaintiff pay the Defendants' costs of the proceedings.

The exhibits be returned.

DUROVIC trading as SHELL TORNIK ROADHOUSE versus JUDGE & ANOR /95 February 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES ADMINISTRATIVE LAW DIVISION 
ROLFE J 
Appeal from decision of Equal Opportunity Tribunal 
Appeal on a question of law only: s.118 of the [Anti-Discrimination Act 1977](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/aa1977204/) 
Nature of appeal to a single Judge of the Court: 
Allders International Pty Limited versus Anstee [(1986) 5 NSWLR 47] followed.
 
Difficulties when appeal only on a question of law: 
Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Limited [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] and Natoli & Anor versus Walker (Court of Appeal - 26 May 1994 - unreported) referred to.
 
Sufficiency of Reasons in the light of the requirement that the Tribunal was required to determine disputed issues of fact: 
Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247] 
If no reasons given necessity to apply to the Tribunal for reasons pursuant to s.117 before an appeal is brought.
 
Basis on which case fought considered: Dare versus Pulham <case>; [(1982) 148 CLR 658] applied.
 "Constructive dismissal": Western Excavating (ECC) Limited versus Sharp <case>; [[1978] 1 QB 761] applied.
 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: 
The Proceedings 
By a Summons issued on 19 March 1996 the plaintiffs, for whom Mr P.R. Clay of Counsel appeared, appealed, purportedly pursuant to [s.146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s146.html) of the [Liquor Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/), ("the Act"), against a determination of the Full Bench of the Licensing Court made on 20 February 1996. The Summons also sought declarations that that Court erred in failing to determine that it had no jurisdiction to deal with certain applications before it, and in holding that there were Approved Plans in accordance with s.40 of the Act lodged with those applications; an order remitting the matter to the Licensing Court to be determined according to law; and orders for consequential relief. 
Upon the matter being called on for hearing I was informed that the first and second defendants, for whom Mr A.G. Whealy of Queen's Counsel and Mr J.F.
Kildea of Counsel appeared, proposed to challenge the competency of the appeal on the basis that the decision from which it was brought was not "an adjudication" from which an appeal lay pursuant to s.146(1): Hankey versus Du
Rieu & Ors (Yeldham J - 8 August 1984 - unreported). Against the possibility that this submission may be upheld the plaintiffs sought leave to file an Amended Summons seeking prerogative relief by way of a declaration that the Licensing Court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the applications; in the alternative an order quashing that decision; for an order restraining the defendants from further proceeding with their applications; and for ancillary relief. Mr Whealy said that he did not oppose the granting of leave to file the Amended Summons, although, in not opposing it, he did not concede that this is an appropriate case in which discretionary relief should be granted.

The third defendant, Sydney City Council, filed a submitting Appearance save as to costs.

The evidential material before me were certain agreed facts together with a bundle of documents.

The agreed facts are:- "1. On or about 29 April 1994, the first defendant made a conditional application to remove an hotelier's licence to premises on the Ground and Mezzanine Floor of 533 to 539 Kent Street, Sydney; on or about 10 June 1994, the second defendant (on behalf of the same interests as the Emery application) made a similar application for removal of an hotelier's licence to the same premises. Nothing turns on the fact that two applications were made.
 . The present plaintiffs are objectors to the removal applications. Mr Kennedy is the holder of an hotelier's licence at 580 George Street, Sydney known as 'The Pavilion Tavern'; Mr Harvey is the holder of the hotelier's licence for premises at 561 George Street, Sydney known as 'Cheers Bar & Grill'.
 . Each application was accompanied by a Development Consent dated 25 August 1992, which is at page 1 of the Agreed Bundle, and a Building Approval dated 22 September 1992 authorising, for the purposes of the [Local Government Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lga182/), the building work detailed on the same plan.
 . The application was also accompanied by the relevant plan detailing the additions and alterations sought to be carried out to the premises." (I interpolate that this was a drawing number 92/243A dated 7 July 1992 and is "the same plan" referred to in paragraph 3.) "5. On 15 November 1994, an application was made to the Council (the third defendant) 'to modify the Development Consent pursuant to [s.102](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s102.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/)', ('the EP&A Act'), so as to alter the description of the use approved under the Development Consent to 'a licensed bar with restaurant operating under an hotelier's licence'. On 3 April 1995 the Council resolved to refuse the modification application. An appeal to the Land and Environment Court failed on the ground that the proposed use was not a modification of the original consent within the meaning of s.102 of the EP&A Act. As a consequence, in the event that the Licensing Court grants the conditional application for removal, it will be necessary for the applicant to commence to trade that:- the premises be constructed; the licensing Authority grant a final order for the issue of the licence at the new premises; and a Development Consent for change of use issue." (I interpolate that Mr Clay did not concede that the consequences referred to in this paragraph was all that would be required to be done.) "6. The removal applications came before a Full Bench of the Licensing Court on 20 February 1996. The Court constituted the Chairman, Mr Armati, Mr Harvey and Mr Keating.
 . The Objectors submitted to the Licensing Court that the removal application should be dismissed for want of jurisdiction, alleging a failure to comply with the procedural requirements of s.40 of the Act. The Licensing Court rejected this submission. At page 3 of the Court's decision, Mr Harvey, Licensing Magistrate (with whom the other members of the Court agreed) said:- 'So in my view at this stage the Court should not find that there is no jurisdiction for the application to proceed. The real question then remaining is what is to be the further progress of the matter and perhaps that can be addressed separately.' . The proceedings were then adjourned. On 19 March 1996 the present Summons was filed in the Supreme Court of New South Wales. These proceedings are an appeal under s.146 of the Act and raise the issue as to whether the defendants had complied with the procedural requirements of s.40 of the Act." (I interpolate that the last agreed fact now has to be considered in the light of the decision by the defendants to challenge the competency of the appeal in so far as it may be thought that the agreement that the proceedings are an appeal "under s.146" amounts to a concession as to the competency of the appeal. However, in the way in which the matter was argued, the parties clearly agreed that it was open to the defendants to challenge the competency of the appeal and no submission was put to me to the contrary based upon the last mentioned agreed fact.) 
Finally, I was informed that the parties agreed that if the applications proceeded before the Licensing Court the hearing would take three to four days and involve considerable expense.

The Issues 
Three basic issues were raised. The first is one to which I have referred, namely whether the decision of the Licensing Court constituted an adjudication within the meaning of s.146(1). Mr Clay accepted that if I follow the decision in Hankey that question must be answered adversely to his clients. He submitted that I should not follow it. The second issue is whether, in the event that the appeal does not arise under s.146(1), prerogative relief sought should be granted. Mr Clay submitted that it would be a strange result if, on a question of jurisdiction, a party did not have a right of appeal under s.146 and, in addition, was precluded from receiving a favourable answer to the question by the granting of appropriate prerogative relief. Mr Whealy submitted that as a matter of discretion it was not appropriate to grant such relief at this stage because, when properly considered, the decision of the Licensing Court is not a final decision on the issue of jurisdiction. He submitted that in due course when there is a final decision and if the question of jurisdiction then remains a live issue the matter can be brought before the Court.

The third issue is the proper construction of s.40 of the Act and, in particular, sub-s.(6) thereof. It was, as I understood it, agreed between the parties that the lodgment of an "Approved Plan" with the application for a conditional grant was a condition precedent to the exercise by the Licensing
Court of its powers to grant a conditional application. The authorities clearly establish that this is so. Suffice it is to say at the moment that "Approved Plan" means a plan, relevantly for present purposes, "of the proposed addition or alteration", which plan is accompanied by each approval that by the Local Government Act 1919 or any other Act is required for the carrying out of any work represented by the plan, and by any consent required under the EP&A Act for the carrying out of that work.

Before turning to the detailed submissions of the parties in relation to these three matters I think it appropriate to consider the decision of the Licensing
Court against which the plaintiffs appeal.

The Decision Of The Licensing Court 
The reasons for the decision of the Licensing Court were given by Mr Harvey with whom the other two members of the Court agreed. He recorded that the two applications for conditional grant were before the Court on an application by the plaintiffs to have them struck out for want of jurisdiction and noted:- ".. As is often the case in this Court the question turns on [s.40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s40.html) of the [Liquor Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/)." 
He continued:- "I don't propose to give a comprehensive summation of everything that's been said in the Court to-day, nor to give what I would determine as a final and conclusive decision on this issue, but rather deal with it on a preliminary basis." 
This is the first indication that the Court was dealing with the matter "on a preliminary basis".

Mr Harvey referred to submissions as to the correct interpretation of [s.40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s40.html) and the reliance placed upon the decision of Smart J in Hill & Ors v
King & Anor (10 June 1993 - unreported). After considering the submission he expressed the view that the situation before the Court was "factually different from that in Hill versus King" and from what he described as "an extreme case" used by way of example in the submissions.

He said that as he understood the facts in the present applications, which he recorded had not been debated in any great detail, approval was given by the third defendant on an application for a restaurant/bar at the proposed premises. He continued:- "The plan, which was apparently a plan before the Council when determining that application, indicates hotel-like premises and initially, therefore, this is not a question of the Court considering an application in respect of premises which could not meet the requirements sought in the application, that is, for a hotelier's licence." 
He identified the issue, as it then appeared to him, to be whether or not the concept of the Approved Plan required that the use of the premises be specifically approved by the local Council rather than the mere building fabric being approved by it, and he noted a submission that Hill versus King supported the view that the question of use is an important element that must be considered by the Court in determining the jurisdictional question.

He nextly turned to the submissions of Mr Kildea, who appeared on behalf of the first and second defendants, that there should be a "literal interpretation of [s.40".](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s40.html)
He recorded Mr Kildea's submission that there was an Approved Plan, which allowed for work to be done and for an hotelier's licence to be granted, and:- ".. therefore it does not matter at this stage whether or not the Council, in approving that plan, also approves specifically the use of these premises as an hotel." 
Mr Harvey returned to the submissions on behalf of the plaintiffs to the effect that such an interpretation was not open and that the question of use must be considered, and said:- "However, I'm of the view and, again, as I say, on a preliminary basis, that the reading of Hill versus King does not support that interpretation, rather it is an interpretation that could be gleaned from the words of Mr Justice Smart but it's more likely, in my view, that his Honour simply didn't consider that issue in any real detail because it wasn't part of the case before him." 
Mr Harvey expressed the view that the first and second defendants were entitled to rely "on the literal interpretation of [s.40"](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s40.html) and:- ".. and I think that view is supported by the proposition that if the building was, in fact, added to or altered in accordance with the approved plan, an application could then be made pursuant to [s.37](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s37.html) for an hotelier's licence in respect of those premises and these issues relating to Approved Plans would not then arise." 
After another observation he concluded:- "So in my view, at this stage, the Court should not find that there is no jurisdiction for the application to proceed. The real question then remaining is what is to be the further progress of the matter and perhaps that can be addressed separately." 
I have referred specifically to the first occasion on which Mr Harvey stated he was dealing with the matter "on a preliminary basis". He repeated this in a later passage I have quoted, and the concluding paragraph of his reasons makes it clear that the Court was not disposed "at this stage" to find there was no jurisdiction.

The Competency Of The Appeal 
The first issue is whether the decision of the Licensing Court constituted "an adjudication" within the meaning of [s.146(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s146.html) I have been informed that the only decision of which the parties are aware in which the meaning of those words has been considered is Hankey and, in those circumstances, it is surprising that Hankey remains unreported. Hankey was a case in which an aggrieved party sought to appeal under [s.146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s146.html) on the basis of the refusal of the Licensing Court to allow further evidence to be called and the proceedings to be adjourned for that purpose. At p.3 of his reasons his Honour commenced a detailed examination of the appeal provisions under the Act, and at p.4 he said:- "It will at once be seen that if, as is submitted on behalf of the plaintiff, an 'adjudication' can be constituted by, for example, the grant or refusal of an application for adjournment, or a decision to admit or reject particular evidence, considerable problems are likely to arise and the proceedings before the Licensing Court would be prone to interruption as appeals are brought during the course of the hearing. But the question is one of construction and of the meaning of the word 'adjudication' in the context in which it is found." 
His Honour considered certain further provisions of the Act and, at p.5, he said:- "In Hope versus Bathurst City Council [(1980) 1 NSWLR 535], when dealing with the meaning of the word 'determination' in [s.101(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/s101.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/), I held that it was limited to a determination which results either in a conviction or order or in the dismissal of an information or complaint. In that case the appellant sought to appeal from a ruling upon a question of law by a magistrate in the course of proceedings, the action itself having been adjourned to enable his decision to be tested upon appeal. Although the present problem is concerned with a different statute and a different word, I have come to the conclusion that 'an adjudication' in [s.146(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s146.html) of the [Liquor Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) has the same meaning as a 'determination' in [s.101](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/s101.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/), and refers to a final decision or determination in granting or refusing the application which is before the Licensing Court." 
Thereafter his Honour considered a number of other somewhat similar legislative provisions to which he was referred, but adhered to the view he stated.

Hankey is a decision of a Judge of this Court with vast experience in deciding proceedings arising under both the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/) and the Act. It is a decision which has stood for almost thirteen years. Whilst, strictly speaking, I am not bound by precedent to follow it, judicial comity and the matters to which I have just referred, provide compelling reasons for my doing so unless I am satisfied it is clearly wrong. Even if I came to that view I would have to consider most carefully whether, in the circumstances I have recited, it would be appropriate for me not to follow it.

I would have to do so also in the light of the observations of Kirby P in
Harris & Ors versus McKenzie & Ors [(1986) 9 NSWLR 139.] It does not appear from the report that the Court of Appeal was referred to the decision in Hankey and, perhaps, it was not relevant for that to be done.
However the opening views expressed by his Honour indicate support for the approach taken by Yeldham J. His Honour said:- "This appeal (from Yeldham J) illustrates once again the need for urgent legislative attention to the appellate arrangements concerning decisions of the Licensing Court. Such a need was last referred to by McHugh JA in O'Sullivan versus Watson [(1986) 7 NSWLR 693.] In that case Hope and Mahoney JJA agreed with his Honour's comments in that regard. This is the third appeal and fourth proceedings involving the present parties on the narrow point of statutory construction which they tender for resolution. As amendments to the [Liquor Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (the Act) which followed the hearing at first instance demonstrate changes to the Act can be promptly secured where significant interest groups wish it. The public interest in finality of litigation and in conserving the scarce resources of the Court, suggest the need urgently to limit the hearings and appeals which arise 'without parallel' under the Act. It may be hoped that the same speed and resolution that secured the amendment to the Act in 1985, following the decision at first instance in this case, will be devoted to attention to the appellate arrangements, which this appeal once again demonstrates to be exceptional." 
I see no reference to Hankey in O'Sullivan versus Watson.

I appreciate that Harris versus McKenzie and O'Sullivan versus Watson do not support the decision, as such, in Hankey. However they do indicate a judicial view, which, in my respectful opinion, is totally consistent with that expressed in that decision.

I should also state, lest it be thought I have overlooked the point, that I appreciate that s.146 only allows an appeal "on a question of law".

Mr Clay submitted that the decision in Hankey is wrong and, accordingly, that I should not follow it. The basis for this submission was that the word "determination" in [s.101(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s101.html) of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) is dealing with a determination "of any information or complaint" which, as
Yeldham J observed, resulted "either in a conviction or order or in the dismissal of an information or complaint". Therefore, he submitted, the word "determination" was, in the statutory context in which it appears, dealing with a final decision, that finality being brought about by the relationship between the determination and the disposal of an information or complaint on a final basis. He submitted that when one looks to the word "adjudication" in [s.146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s146.html) there are no such indicia of finality. This led to the submission that to equate "adjudication" to "determination" is wrong in law.

In my opinion these submissions should not be accepted. The Licensing Court is a specialist tribunal to which the determination of many matters arising under the Act requiring a decision or an adjudication are referred. It would, in my view, be strange indeed if any adjudication, provided it constituted "a question of law", could become the subject of an appeal to this Court. Many adjudications, prior to a final adjudication, even though constituting questions of law, may not affect the final result, with the consequence that an appeal on them may be, in the context of a final decision, otiose. Thus the appeal would be time wasting without any guarantee that it would achieve a result which would reflect upon or affect the final determination. In these circumstances I consider that the decision to which Yeldham J came is correct and I propose to follow it.

This, so it seems to me, is ample justification, particularly when linked with the observations in O'Sullivan versus Watson and Harris versus McKenzie, to adopt the approach taken in Hankey.

Even if I had come to a contrary view, or if I held any real doubt about the matter, I would, none-the-less, as a matter of comity and having regard to the circumstances I have stated, have followed it.

It is clear the present decision of the Licensing Court was not a final decision or determination in granting or refusing an application before that
Court. Therefore, in my opinion, no appeal lies pursuant to s.146 and the
Summons should be dismissed, as should the Amended Summons in so far as it seeks relief in reliance upon that section.

The Grant Of Prerogative Relief 
The plaintiffs complain that if, as I have found, Hankey is binding they have no appeal from a determination that the Licensing Court has jurisdiction and, in consequence, they should be allowed to proceed with the claim for prerogative relief because it would be inappropriate for a court to act without jurisdiction. At the forefront of this submission is the assertion that the plaintiffs will be deprived of the right to assert an absence of jurisdiction. In my view this assumption is not correct. The plaintiffs will, if prerogative relief is not granted, no doubt renew the submission as to jurisdiction on the hearing of the substantive applications before the
Licensing Court and, in the light of all the facts before that Court, seek a ruling as to whether the conditions precedent have been fulfilled. Therefore, it is not correct to assert that the jurisdictional question will be foreclosed to them and, as I read the reasons of the Licensing Court, that
Court did not consider such a result would flow. The Licensing Court will make its decision and if it is unfavourable to the plaintiffs they will retain the right to appeal, subject to the decision being on a point of law.

The other matter of prejudice upon which the plaintiffs relied is that the parties were in agreement that the hearing of the substantive applications before the Licensing Court will take from three to four days and will involve considerable expense. It was submitted that the plaintiffs should not be put to that expense and trouble if the matter can be determined on what is referred to as a short point, namely the jurisdictional point. Whether it is a short point or not may be a matter of some conjecture. It was argued before the Licensing Court as long ago as 20 February 1996 and although it does not appear that the argument was lengthy and it does appear that an ex tempore judgment was given by that Court, the consequence was to stimulate an appeal to this Court, submissions as to which lasted for approximately three hours.
It is not beyond the realm of possibility, indeed one may think it distinctly probable, that there will be an appeal from this decision, thus furthering the appellate chain commented upon in O'Sullivan versus Watson and Harris v
McKenzie. All this would seem to indicate how much more sensible it would be, if I may say so with respect, to have all the facts determined in a final adjudication by the Licensing Court before granting any relief. As it is the plaintiffs have been held up for just over a year in pursuing their applications because of this appeal.

There is clear authority for the proposition that where this Court has both appellate and supervisory jurisdiction in respect of the same order, and the grounds for challenging that order would, if established, support the grant of either prerogative or appellate relief, it is for the Court to decide the proper form of relief, and a grant of prerogative relief is discretionary:
Hill & Ors versus King & Ors [(1993) 31 NSWLR 654.] This is so even where a jurisdictional error is asserted. At p.656 Clarke, Handley and
Sheller JJA said:- "This Court has recently had occasion, in Meagher versus Stephenson [(1993) 30 NSWLR 736], to comment on the unnecessary and undesirable proliferation of proceedings challenging decisions of the Licensing Court. In that case this involved joining a claim for certiorari for error of law on the face of the record in an appeal under s.146. The Court pointed out that such a claim could not secure any relief for an appellant which could not also be granted in the appeal and that the only reason for joining such a claim was to attempt to bypass the requirement for leave in s.101(2)(j). The Court noted that certiorari for non-jurisdictional error on the face of the record was discretionary and could be refused if it was not the 'appropriate' remedy and if some other remedy was 'the most convenient in the public interest'." 
In Meagher versus Stephenson [(1993) 30 NSWLR 736] at 254. A recent decision in relation to abuse of process so far as several court proceedings are concerned is that of Giles CJCommD in State Bank of New South Wales versus Alexander Stenhouse Limited in which judgment was delivered on 18 February 1997. If I may say so with respect, his Honour gathers together a number of relevant authorities on abuse of process and subjects them to detailed analysis.

In Hill versus King the prerogative relief was in the nature of prohibition and certiorari for jurisdictional error. Their Honours noted the traditional view that prohibition, when sought by a party directly affected did not constitute a discretionary remedy, and certain "well-established exceptions where the absence of jurisdiction was not clear on the face of proceedings and where a stranger applied for the writ" where, on discretionary grounds, prohibition was refused.

At p.657 their Honours continued:- "After some division of opinion the High Court has decided that its jurisdiction under [s.75(v)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/s75.html) of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) to grant prohibition is discretionary and that relief may be refused as premature if the prosecutor has a remedy by way of appeal to a superior Federal Court. ... The High Court has also held that its discretion to refuse prohibition may be exercised on wider grounds. In R versus Ross-Jones; ex parte Green (at 214), Wilson J and Dawson J said: '... that prerogative writs should not be used as an alternative to the exercise of a right of appeal and the discretion of this Court may be exercised so as to discourage them from being so used.' " 
Their Honours considered that these developments, "properly understood", did not involve any departure from the established common law principles and referred to the fact that the long line of cases in England and Australia, that had decided that prohibition and certiorari for clear jurisdictional error are not discretionary remedies, arose where either there was no other remedy or, if there was an appeal, it did not lie to the Court of King's Bench: pp.657-658.

At p.658 their Honours said:- "So far as the Licensing Court is concerned there is an 'enactment' namely [s.146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s146.html) of the [Liquor Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) and prohibition is not the only means given to the Supreme Court by law for enforcing public order in the administration of the State's licensing laws. The existence of a general right of appeal on a question of law from the Licensing Court makes it unnecessary in most, if not all, cases to resort to proceedings for prerogative relief and in such circumstances the Court is not bound to grant prohibition or certiorari for jurisdictional errors. The recent High Court decisions which establish the discretionary nature of prohibition when sought under [s.75(v)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s75.html) against a Federal Court Judge from whose decision an appeal ultimately lies by special leave to the High Court support this conclusion." 
At p.659 their Honours said:- "Where the same court has both appellate and supervisory jurisdiction in respect of the same order and the grounds for challenging that order, if established, would support the grant of either prerogative or appellate relief the Court must decide which form of relief will be granted. If the order was set aside on the appeal there would be nothing left for the Court to prohibit or quash and vice versa. The case would be one where the party aggrieved had alternative and inconsistent remedies. Accordingly, proceedings in the nature of prohibition and certiorari directed to the Licensing Court in circumstances where appellate relief is or was also available are necessarily discretionary.
 
In our opinion, therefore, a judge hearing an appeal under [s.146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s146.html) of the [Liquor Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) who is faced with claims for prerogative relief has a discretion to refuse that relief, even where jurisdictional error is alleged. Ordinarily, a second summons claiming prerogative relief should be struck out as an abuse of process." 
In the present case, even if I were satisfied that the Licensing Court was in error, I would not be prepared, in the exercise of my discretion, to grant prerogative relief. Firstly, the decision of the Licensing Court is a preliminary one and is not necessarily based on the totality of the evidence which will be before it at a final hearing. Secondly, and this follows essentially from the first reason, if the question of jurisdiction is relevant after a final adjudication by the Licensing Court the plaintiffs will have a right of appeal, subject to satisfying the Court that a question of law is involved, to this Court. I hasten to add that it was not suggested by Mr Whealy that the jurisdictional question did not raise a question of law on the present appeal. Thirdly, it seems to me that the proliferation of appeals and applications of this type should not be encouraged where there is no final determination or adjudication by the Licensing Court and, as I have held, there is no right of appeal until such time as that has occurred. Against these matters I have to weigh up the claim for prejudice made by the plaintiffs. In my opinion it almost sinks into insignificance when compared with the desirability of having the matter finally determined by the specialist tribunal to which the resolution of the dispute has been committed, so that the parties can determine whether there is any point in arguing the jurisdictional issue and, if there is, the appeal can come forward on the basis of a finding on all the facts.

I have referred on several occasions to the possibility of further facts being found. Mr Clay submitted that all facts had been found and it was not in issue that the Licensing Court had before it the letter from the third defendant to
Mr C.W. Crawley dated 25 August 1992, which commences at p.1 of the bundle, and the further letter between the same parties, which commences at p.8 of the bundle.

Mr Whealy submitted there may be further factual material before the Licensing
Court on the hearing of the substantive applications. [Section (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s40.html) contemplates this. It provides:- "Before granting a conditional application, the Court may require to be lodged with the Court a further approved plan that shows an amendment required by the Court to be made to the approved plan or plans previously lodged in relation to the application." 
It appears from this sub-section that the "approved plan" referred to in sub-s.(6) will not necessarily be the final "approved plan" applicable to the grant of a conditional application. This further reinforces the view to which I have come that it is wholly undesirable to try to resolve the jurisdictional issue in the absence of a final adjudication and, relevantly for present purposes, to demonstrate the inappropriateness of granting discretionary prerogative relief at this stage.

Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the application for prerogative relief should also be dismissed.

The Result So Far 
Strictly speaking the two conclusions to which I have come are sufficient to dispose of both the Summons and the Amended Summons. However, against the possibility that my views in relation to these matters are held to be wrong, I shall deal with the point of substance raised, namely the correct construction of s.40 of the Act. I do so in part because the parties requested it, and in part because if this matter goes to the Court of Appeal I would be hopeful that that Court, if it is otherwise minded to do so and considers it appropriate, will be in a position to determine as many contentious issues between these parties as possible on the one hearing.

Construction Of Section 40 
Mr Clay's written submissions define the issue, which basically divides the parties on the construction of s.40, namely whether the required approval referred to in s.40(6) is limited to "the mere building fabric", as the defendants submit, or whether the approval imports the need for the proposed use to be approved, as the plaintiffs submit. Section 40 was amended by the
Liquor (Amendment) Act 1990 and it provides, in so far as is relevant:- "(1) An application: ...
 for removal of a licence; ...
 may be made as a conditional application if the premises to which the licence will relate or to which the licence is to be removed, are premises proposed to be erected, premises proposed to be added to or altered, in accordance with an approved plan lodged with the application or are premises already erected in respect of which there is lodged with the application any consent required under another Act for the proposed use, or proposed change of use, of the premises.
 ...
 
In this section: 'approved plan', in relation to proposed licensed premises, or a proposed addition to or alteration of licensed premises, means a plan of the proposed premises, or of the proposed addition or alteration, that is accompanied by: each approval that, by the Local Government Act 1919 or any other Act, is required for the carrying out of any work represented by the plans; and any consent required under the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) for the carrying out of that work." 
I have been provided in the Agreed Bundle with the Second Reading Speech to the 1990 Bill, which identifies one of the main objectives of the Bill as the elimination of the existing duplication of the roles of the Licensing Court and local councils in relation to building standards of licensed premises. The Minister referred to the fact that in making an application for a liquor licence or making physical alterations to existing licensed premises, approval had to be obtained from local councils and the Licensing Court or the Liquor Administration Board. He continued:- "The existing legislation requires the Licensing Police to undertake an administrative workload by providing a written report on these applications. The amendments proposed by the Bills will overcome much of this duplication by requiring applicants for new licences to present development and building approvals from local councils to the Court. This will mean that approvals must be obtained from councils prior to lodging an application with the Court." 
The Minister noted that this would change the existing position and that:- "In effect, this will give local councils the primary responsibility for the standard of licensed premises - as is the case with other buildings." 
Subsequently the Minister said:- "The current building requirements of the liquor laws will be transferred to the appropriate local government building codes. This will be of assistance to architects, builders and licensees as all building requirements will be encompassed in the one standard." 
The submission on behalf of the plaintiffs is that the Development Consent at p.1 of the bundle refers to the purpose or use to which the premises are to be put, namely:- ".. to use the ground and mezzanine floors of Lot 1, No. 533-539 Kent Street for a licensed restaurant/bar, involving the construction of a mezzanine floor area, bar, cool room, kitchen and toilets, in accordance with the submitted Drawing No 92/243A dated 7 July, 1992 subject to the following conditions ..." 
The plaintiffs submit that having obtained that Development Consent it is necessary to obtain a Building Approval so that the work can be carried out. The Building Approval, it is submitted, does not direct itself to use. The approval appears at p.8 of the agreed bundle. It is headed:- "Premises: 533-539 Kent Street, Sydney 
Fitout licensed bar ground floor and mezzanine Lot 71." 
It states:- "Pursuant to the provisions of Part XI of the Local Government Act, you are hereby notified that the plans 92/243 submitted with your Building Application to execute the above work have been approved, subject to the conditions contained in the attached Schedule and in accordance with the details listed below, as unconditional consent would be contrary to the provisions of Ordinance No 70." 
It is submitted that the Building Approval is, relevantly for present purposes, deficient because it fails to direct itself to use of the premises.

The submission is that an Approved Plan must be considered in the context of s.40(1) before consideration is given to its definition in s.40(6) and that such a plan is "not just any approved plan" but one "in relation to proposed licensed premises". It is then submitted that the first approval required is one under the Local Government Act "for the carrying out of any work represented by the plan", and that if all that was required was approval of the mere building fabric, no further approval would be necessary. However, it is submitted by the plaintiffs that a consent under the EP&A Act "for the carrying out of that work" must also be lodged, because consent under that Act does not permit the actual work to be carried out, and the reference to "that work" means that the consent under that Act "is the consent which enabled the building approval to be granted".

It is submitted that the only reason consent under the EP&A Act is required is so that there is an approved use, otherwise that part of the sub- section "does no work". It is then submitted that each of the "approval" and "consent" is for the "proposed licensed premises", by which must be meant premises licensed in the manner sought in the application. In the present case it is submitted that the EP&A Act consent is for a "restaurant/bar" not an "hotel" and that there was not, at the time of the lodgment of the applications, a Development Consent which enabled the carrying out of the work for the proposed licensed premises.

In response to these submissions the defendants assert that the terms of sub-s.(6) are quite specific in relation to the consents, which are required to be lodged with the conditional application. It was submitted that the plaintiffs faced a Herculean task in satisfying the Court that sub-s.(6)(b) should be read as requiring that the consent to which reference is there being made is in relation to a change of user and not, as the words prima facie say, in relation to "any consent", which is required by that Act "for the carrying out of that work", which, on the submission made by the defendants, must mean the work "represented by the plan". In other words the submission is that one must hold that the consent required goes beyond one "for the carrying out of that work", i.e. the work referred to in s.40(6)(a), and relates to the use of the premises.

Whilst both sides sought to obtain assistance from the Second Reading Speech,
Mr Whealy submitted that it is clear the Minister was directing attention to "building standards" and that this is totally consistent with a consent, in so far as it may be required, under the EP&A Act "for the carrying out of that work".

In these circumstances the defendants submitted that the scheme of the Act is that if the proposed additions and alterations do not involve the making of structural alterations, then the only consent required to be lodged is the
Building Approval. If, however, they do involve the making of structural alterations, then, in addition to the building approval, the applicant must lodge a Development Consent "for the carrying out of that work". From that submission flows the submission that both a Development Consent and a Building
Approval were obtained for the carrying out of the work shown in the plans lodged with the application; it is proper to infer that both were required; and it is to be noted that the third defendant, the Council, did not seek to appear in the proceedings to put a contrary view. Each of the Development
Consent and the Building Approval was before the Licensing Court.

The defendants also point to the portion of the decision of the Licensing
Court, which notes that a plan had been lodged with the Court which "allows for the work to be done, that would allow a hotelier's licence to be granted".

In response to these submissions Mr Clay submitted that they were fatally flawed because there was a failure to understand the nature of the required consent. He submitted that the Court cannot ignore purpose and refer only to work, because there is a need for Development Consent to the change of use. He submitted that if the defendants' construction is correct one does not need consent under the EP&A Act for the use of the premises.

I shall deal with the matter first unaided by authority, it not being suggested that there is any authority binding on me in regard to this matter.
The defined "Approved Plan" has three components of which two must be provided and one may have to be provided, depending on the circumstances. There must be a plan of the proposed addition or alteration. There must be "each approval" required by the Local Government Act or any other Act "for the carrying out of any work represented by the plan". That, clearly enough, relates to approval to the building work. There may have to be an approval pursuant to sub-s.(6)(b).

The submissions focused, for obvious reason, upon the precise proposal in the present case, namely one whereby premises are proposed to be added to or altered in accordance with an Approved Plan lodged with the application. In those circumstances, in my opinion, there must be lodged not only the plan of the proposed addition or alteration, but each approval required for the carrying out of any work represented by the plan pursuant to the legislation referred to in sub-s.(6)(a) and, if any consent is required under the EP&A
Act "for the carrying out of that work", i.e. the work represented by the plan, such consent. In my view in the context of a plan of the proposed addition or alteration, and on a reading of the words in sub-s.(6), consent required under the EP&A Act does not extend to consent to user. This view is, in my opinion, fortified by the concluding words of sub-s.(1), which require that there be lodged with the application in respect of premises already erected "any consent required under another Act for the proposed use, or proposed change of use, of the premises". These words, in my opinion, only relate to "premises already erected". They do not relate to "premises proposed to be erected" or to "premises proposed to be added to or altered, in accordance with an Approved Plan".

If one adopts this interpretation of the Act then in respect of construction, whether by way of erection, addition or alteration there must be an Approved
Plan, which deals with consents to those functions. In respect of premises which do not require erection, addition or alteration there must be lodged consent for the proposed use or change of use. The legislature recognised this distinction in s.40(1) and, in my opinion, had it intended to incorporate consent to user into sub-s.(6)(b) it would have been easy to do so either by the omission of the words "for carrying out of that work", which necessarily confine the extent of the "consent required", or by stating, in terms, the requirement of consent to user. Unless the words "for carrying out of that work" do have a confining effect it is difficult to see what work they perform.

In my view this approach is consistent with the Second Reading Speech, but if it is thought for any reason that it is not, then, upon its proper construction, the legislation does not accord with the Second Reading Speech and, in my opinion, it is clear that the consent required is limited in the way to which I have referred.

Mr Whealy referred me to s.60 of the Act, which provides that the Registrar may, on application, make a final grant of an application conditionally granted under s.40 and, pursuant to sub-s.(2) thereof, he is not to make that grant in respect of erecting, adding to or altering premises unless the applicant for the final grant produces evidence by which he is satisfied:- ".. that the work of erection, addition or alteration has been completed substantially in accordance with the approved plan on the basis of which the conditional application was granted." 
There are several things to be noted about this provision, which, as I understand it, is a condition precedent to the right of the occupant to trade. Firstly, sub-s.(2) treats erection, addition or alteration as being referable to the Approved Plan and, therefore, draws the same distinction as I consider is drawn in s.40(1). Secondly, the Registrar must be satisfied that the work has been completed in accordance with the approved plan. That, in my view, picks up the words of s.40(6). The Registrar is not required to be satisfied about user consent but the carrying out of the work in accordance with the plan. This section, in my respectful opinion, reinforces the construction of s.40 I favour.

In Hill versus King it was submitted to the Court of Appeal that s.40(6)(b) was not complied with because the applicants had not lodged a Development Consent under the EP&A Act. After a consideration of certain provisions of the
Local Government Act 1919 their Honours said, at p.660:- "It is evident that the Council considered that development consent was not required for the proposed work because it fell within the earlier consent. It is also evident that the Council considered that the carrying out of the proposed work would not constitute development for the purposes of the" EP&A Act.
 
It seems to me that the issue as to the requirement of Development Consent was clearly raised in that case. The Court of Appeal was satisfied that if the Council did not consider that such consent was required, or that the carrying out of the proposed work would not constitute development for the purposes of the EP&A Act its consent was sufficient. From this one may infer, with respect, that no additional consent of the type submitted for in Hill versus King was thought by the Court of Appeal to be necessary.

I appreciate that at first instance Smart J (Hill & Ors versus King &
Anor - 10 June 1993 - unreported) said, at p.12, in the context of s.40(6) "It is necessary to look at the totality of what is proposed". From this Mr
Clay submitted that as part of the proposal was the user of the premises, I should infer that this is to what his Honour was making reference. I do not think, in the context of the judgment, that his Honour was expressing this view at all. He was looking at the extent of the work to be carried out in the context of having been asked to accept that relocating a few doorways in a small wing of a moderate shopping centre would amount to work necessitating
Development Consent. Earlier, in his reasons, he said, at p.10:- "S.40(6) complements s.40(1) by dealing further with premises proposed to be erected, added to or altered. It insists that there has to be both a building approval as required under the Local Government Act and development consent as required under the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/). S.40(6) is not directed to the case where there is no proposed erection of, addition to or alteration of premises. Proposed use and change of use without more are covered by S.40(1) alone." 
His Honour's views, as expressed in this paragraph, accord with mine as to the construction of the various presently relevant parts of s.40.

In Meagher versus Bott & Anor (Court of Appeal - 15 November 1996 - unreported) the Court of Appeal had reason to consider the construction of s.40. This was in the context of the Licensing Court having been persuaded, notwithstanding what Clarke JA perceived to be "the clear note of caution sounded by Smart J, and this Court in Hill versus King", "to embark upon an enquiry whether a development consent granted by Blacktown City Council ...
was still in force and effective at the date the relevant licence applications were lodged, and was still effective at the time of the hearing. In the result the Licensing Court held it had no jurisdiction to grant the application despite its satisfaction that there was no merit in the various objections taken and that, were it not for the jurisdictional ruling, the application would have been granted". His Honour continued:- "What makes the ruling even more surprising is that the Council was of the view that the development consent was effective at all relevant times and, acting on that view, the Council have issued building approvals on a number of occasions extending to 27 October 1994. As the Bench noted the applicant for the conditional grant could lawfully carry out the building works, at least as far as the Council was concerned, yet, because it took a different view, the applicant must fail before it." 
His Honour posed for consideration what led the Full Bench to that conclusion and, after referring the terms of s.40, he said:- "All that the section requires is that the applicant lodge its plans and the relevant approvals for the carrying out of the work shown in the plans. Once the applicant does that it satisfies its obligation under s.40. Further, there is nothing in s.40 which, expressly or impliedly, requires that the Licensing Court enquire into the validity or continued effectiveness of the approval.
 
That view is consistent with the relevant legislative purpose underlying the amendments to the [Liquor Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/) (of which [s.40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s40.html) was one) in 1990. That purpose was to reduce the duplication arising from the operation of the earlier Act resulting from the need to obtain approval for building works, whether they involved the erection of new premises or alterations to existing licensed premises, from both the Licensing Court and the Local Council. Henceforth the responsibility for granting those building approvals was placed squarely on the shoulders of councils who also had the responsibility of ensuring compliance with LGA and EPA." 
At p.4 his Honour observed that the Act did not direct the Court to superintend or double check the work of local councils. In the result his Honour was of the view that the Licensing Court had erred and that the appeal from Abadee J, who had so held, on the basis that it had no jurisdiction to determine for itself, contrary to the views of the Council, that relevant construction work had not been physically commenced before a certain date, should be dismissed. Handley JA dissented from the majority view. However, in the course of dissenting, his Honour said, at pp.5 and 6, in referring to the decision in Hill versus King, to which he was a party:- "In that case the objectors sought to challenge the validity of a building approval on the ground that development consent was also required but had not been granted. The Local Government Act 1919, as it then stood, required the Council to satisfy itself of the planning position before granting building approval." 
His Honour noted that the Building Approval in that case was valid on its face and that the challenge propounded by the appellant would have required the Licensing Court to decide whether the decision of the Council was either totally unreasonable or was vitiated by legal error. His Honour was of the view that the Land and Environment Court was the only court that could consider that particular matter but that the position in Meagher versus Bott was radically different from that in Hill versus King.

Cole JA, in upholding the view of Abadee J that s.40 did not require the applicant to establish an existing valid consent at the date of the hearing, said, at p.8:- "Ultimately, the obligations upon the applicants depend upon an interpretation of the requirements of the [Liquor Act 1982](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/). However, before addressing that matter, I wish to endorse and reinforce the expression of opinion in Hill versus King that it is not the function of the Licensing Court to entertain collateral challenges to the validity of building approvals and development consents." 
His Honour was of the view that such a challenge could only be made in the Land and Environment Court and that it followed that it was wrong for the Licensing Court to embark upon a determination as to whether the consent continued "in circumstances where the Council maintained there was an existing valid consent and where a building approval had been granted at a time after which the development consent would have lapsed had there not been commencement".

At p.12 his Honour said that it was to be implied that the Licensing Court is to accept the decision of the Council, as the responsible authority, regarding whether at the relevant date of application, a valid consent has been granted and continues to exist.

At p.13 his Honour said:- "The terms of [s.40(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/la1982107/s40.html) are in my opinion clear. An applicant for a licence in respect of premises to which the licence will relate or to which it will be removed, which are premises yet to be erected, added to or altered in accordance with approved plans lodged with the application, or in respect of premises already erected which require consent to the proposed use, must lodge with the application each approval or consent required under the Local Government Act or [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) relating to the approved erection, addition, alteration or change of use. Having done so the Court has jurisdiction subject to any other necessary statutory requirements." 
His Honour thus draws the distinction between premises the subject of erection, addition or alteration, on the one hand, and premises already erected where there is to be a change of user, on the other. In the former case the obligation is to lodge such consents as are specified in the section and, in relation to sub-s.(6)(b), only such consents as are required for the specified purpose.

Whilst this decision is not determinative of the issue before me, it offers, in my respectful opinion, strong support for the conclusion to which I have come.

Conclusions 
In the result I am of the view that the plaintiffs fail at all three levels. The appeal is not competent pursuant to [s.146](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s146.html); the case is not one in which it is appropriate, as a matter of discretion, to grant prerogative relief; and, even if both of those decisions be incorrect, there is no absence of jurisdiction by virtue of the defendants' having failed to comply with the provisions of s.40.

In the result the Summons and the Amended Summons must be dismissed with costs.

I order that:- 
The Summons and the Amended Summons be dismissed.

The plaintiffs pay the first and second defendants' costs of the proceedings before this Court.
 * * * 
