

Gorman versus Dunbier [1996] NSWSC 430 (16 September 1996) 
GORMAN V DUNBIER /95 
Monday 16 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff and the defendant are both solicitors of this court. They have been in conflict for some time and litigation is pending between them, not only in this current set of proceedings, but in others as well. By the end of 1995 there were three notices of motion for contempt and each of the parties was respondent to at least one motion. I set aside 1 April 1996 to dispose of these motions. 
On that day, Mr McInnes QC appeared for Mr Gorman, and Mr Dunbier appeared for himself. I had directed that written submissions be filed and this direction was complied with. Mr Dunbier previously had Mr Baird, solicitor, and Mr
Aldridge of counsel appearing for him. Mr Baird had filed written submissions and these Mr Dunbier adopted at the hearing.

When the case was called on, Mr McInnes QC indicated he did not propose to proceed with the notice of motion of 9 October, 1995 charging Mr Dunbier with contempt. I dismissed that notice of motion and reserved costs. Accordingly, I needed only to deal with the notices of motion charging Mr Gorman with contempt filed by Mr Dunbier on 1 September 1995 and 5 December 1995.

The court file is extremely voluminous. I accordingly directed that "appeal book" type papers be prepared, filed and served. Baird & Associates prepared and filed Contempt Books A to G which contain the relevant material and which are paginated consecutively. I will refer to these books. As material was read I marked the index of the relevant book with a purple highlighter for the material read by Mr Dunbier, an orange highlighter for the material read by Mr McInnes QC for Mr Gorman, and a blue highlighter for material read in reply.

The notice of motion of 1 September 1995 appears in Contempt Book A pages 1 to
It seeks an order that Mr Gorman be found guilty of contempt in the following respects:-
Failing to comply with the consent order made 16 June 1995 in that Mr
Gorman refused to or failed to produce to Mr Dunbier's solicitor letters to clients in the form annexed to the short minutes made that day with regards to all clients or former clients of Mr Dunbier to whom Mr Gorman has corresponded.
Failure to comply with the same consent order in that he failed to deliver a verified list of all clients or former clients of Mr Dunbier to whom Mr
Gorman had sent letters in relation to the cessation of the professional relationship between the parties.
Breach of the same order in that Mr Gorman refused to produce to Mr
Dunbier's solicitor letters to all clients or former clients of the practice of Gorman Dunbier in the form annexed to such orders.
Breach of an undertaking given to the court by Mr Gorman on 24 July 1995 in that Mr Gorman failed to pay to Mr Dunbier the undisputed component of any professional costs claimed by Mr Dunbier relative to files delivered by Mr
Dunbier to Mr Gorman.
Breach of the same undertaking in that Mr Gorman did not do all things necessary for the prompt assessment of the proper costs by the costs assessor appointed by the consent orders of 16 June 1995 in that Mr Gorman failed to deliver files to Mr Dunbier for billing.
Breach of the same undertaking in that Mr Gorman declined or refused access to the costs assessor to the files of former clients of Mr Dunbier such files being delivered to Mr Gorman by Mr Dunbier in accordance with the orders of this court.

The motion of 5 December 1995 is found in Contempt Book B page 331. It charges that Mr Gorman should be found guilty of contempt because (1) there was a breach of an undertaking to the court given to Simos, J by counsel on 24
November 1995 in that Mr Gorman failed to deliver to Mr Dunbier's solicitor details of the names and addresses of the solicitors acting for the defendants and respondents in files transferred to Mr Gorman; and (2) that there was a breach of an order of Simos, J made 24 December 1995 that Mr Gorman pay to Mr
Dunbier the amount of costs assessed in the various files transferred to Mr
Gorman upon the disposal of the matters favourably to the "plaintiff".

Mr Baird's submissions adopted by Mr Dunbier in respect to the first notice of motion were that the combined effect of what happened on 16 June and 24 July was that as regards the assessment and payment of fees due to Mr Dunbier: 
Mr Dunbier was obliged to deliver files with bills to Mr Gorman where Mr
Gorman had authority from the client. Files previously delivered to Mr Gorman were to be returned to Mr Dunbier for billing and after billing redelivered with the bills to Mr Gorman; 
Mr Gorman was to notify Mr Dunbier of objections to Mr Dunbier's bills within 7 days; 
The disputed components of the bills were to be assessed; 
Pending assessment, Mr Gorman was to pay to Mr Dunbier undisputed components of the bills; and 
All matters were to be referred for assessment at the one time.

Passing to the actual short minutes, order 3 provided that Mr Gorman was to prepare letters in the form annexed to the short minutes and deliver them to the clients of the practice. The document annexed to the short minutes was in a form which enabled the client to elect whether he or she would employ Mr
Gorman, Mr Dunbier, or any other solicitor as his or her solicitor.

The proceedings were heard by me on 1 April 1996. After hearing some evidence and noting Mr Dunbier's written submissions, I formally reserved judgment on the basis that both parties would file submissions in writing by 22 April .

I commenced work on the judgment. I then received from Mr Dunbier's associate a copy of a judgment of Bryson, J delivered in Dunbier t/as Gorman Dunbier & Co versus Misra Equity Division 3816/1995. (There was already in evidence a previous judgment of Bryson, J in that case). There did not appear to have been any consent by Mr Gorman's solicitors to me having this extra material.
Furthermore, I was confused when Mr McInnes QC's submissions were received as to whether he was really saying, as I thought he was saying at the oral hearing, that his client denied all the breaches or whether he was saying that they were trivial and did not go to the serious matter of contempt. As it did not appear that the matter could be solved by my Associate, I had the matter relisted on 5 June 1996. On that day, Mr J Wilson of counsel appeared for Mr
Gorman; Mr Dunbier again appeared for himself.

Mr Wilson made it clear that the only concession was in the matter of Sandra
Hams and that all other allegations of fact were denied. After some sparring, the position was reached that I could look at the judgments of Bryson, J in the Misra matter, but only as material to be considered on the charges and particulars that had already been supplied. I then again retired to consider the charges.

Before dealing with the facts, I should draw attention to the law as restated by the High Court in Witham versus Holloway [(1995) 131 ALR 4O1], that all charges of contempt must be proved beyond all reasonable doubt.

I will refer to the charges by numbers 1/1 to 1/6 in the first notice of motion, and 2/1 and 2/2 for the second notice of motion. I will deal with the matters seriatim and then deal with the result of the contempt motions in section 3. I then need to deal with a motion filed on 12 July, 1996 which I will consider as section 4 together with the costs of Mr Gorman's motion for contempt.
 . First Notice of Motion 
Charge 1/1 
The defence of Mr Gorman to this charge is that he did comply. Page 72 of
Contempt Book A is the requisition to Mr Gorman's law agents setting out 90 clients to whom letters were being sent in accordance with the short minutes.
It is conceded that Mrs Sandra Hams was missing from that list and she should have been on that list.

Apart from the matter of Hams, the only other problems appear to be that there were various standard form letters varying slightly from the one attached to the short minutes and that a different type of letter was written to one client, a Mr Proudlove. I do not think the first of these points matters overmuch. So far as Mr Proudlove is concerned, he received a letter that he should return an authority addressed to Mr Gorman for Mr Gorman to be his solicitor. On receipt of this letter, Mr Proudlove instead went and saw Mr
Dunbier and said that he did not want either Mr Gorman or Roxanne, meaning
Roxanne Smith, Mr Gorman's assistant, to deal with his matter.

Mr Gorman denies that the Proudlove matter is a breach of the orders saying that Mr Proudlove was not a client who was covered by the short minutes.

I have not sufficient material to be satisfied that this matter of Proudlove was a breach.

Mr Gorman says that he seeks to rely on his affidavit of 27 June 1995. That affidavit, however, was not read before me and indeed, it is missing from the file. I have accordingly not taken anything that was said in that affidavit into consideration. So far as Mrs Hams is concerned, it is conceded that this is a breach. The letter sent to Mrs Hams on 1 May 1995 told her that the partnership with Mr Dunbier had been dissolved and that Mr Gorman was now practising under his own name and that his litigation staff, Roxanne, Lu and
Adrienne were employed by him. He says that he and Roxanne had been looking after Mrs Hams' file and looked forward to continuing to act for her and enclosed an authority.

Mr Gorman was cross examined about the letter to Mrs Hams. His only explanation was "it may have been overlooked". It is difficult to accept this in the light of the terms of the letter and the general circumstances of the case.

Mr Dunbier puts that this is most unlikely and that the Proudlove matter and the Hams matter show that Mr Gorman was in breach of the order. I agree that the Hams matter is established.

Halsbury's Laws of England 4th ed Vol 9 para 53 summarizes the authorities by saying, "Although contempt may be committed in the absence of wilful disobedience on the part of the contemnor, committal or sequestration will not be ordered unless the contempt involves a degree of fault or misconduct. Thus accidental and unintentional disobedience is not sufficient to justify sequestration or committal, but the respondent may be ordered to pay the costs of the application." 
Accordingly, the only matter under this heading that I think is proved is that of Mrs Hams. Mr Gorman has apologised at p 61 of Contempt Book A for any contempt of court, and I do not consider there is much sense in pursuing this matter further.
 /2 and 1/3 
These really raise the same matters as 1/1 and I do not really consider that they need be discussed further.
 /4 
This raises order 5 of the short minutes of order of 24 July 1995 which provided that when costs claimed by Mr Dunbier had been paid to Mr Gorman, the latter would pay Mr Dunbier the undisputed component within 48 hours of clearance of the cheque and hold the disputed component pending assessment.

Mr Dunbier says that there were three matters involving Mr Misra. Three conveyancing matters were settled on respectively 19 June, 28 June and 17 July being sales by Mr Misra in which the solicitors' costs were paid out of the purchase moneys and transferred to Mr Gorman's general account on those days. Mr Dunbier says that Mr Gorman did not account to him for these until some three to four weeks after settlement of those conveyancing matters. The answer given by Mr Gorman is that the first matter was not one where Mr
Dunbier was ever involved; the other two were settled before the consent orders of 24 July 1995 and were not covered by them.

There was considerable dispute between the parties over the Misra matters, and indeed, those matters were the subject of the judgments of Bryson, J to which
I have earlier referred. Mr Gorman appears to have acted for Mr Misra against
Mr Dunbier in those proceedings. However, I do not really see how those proceedings are relevant to charge 1/4.

It seems to me that Mr Gorman's answer is technically correct, and one has to look at technicalities in contempt cases. The short minutes of 24 July 1995 use the word "receives" in the present tense. This would, to me, indicate that it only applies to moneys received on and after 24 July. The three Misra matters referred to in Mr Dunbier's affidavit occurred earlier. The same answer is given in respect of the matter of Jensen, where moneys were received on 7 July 1995 and the matter of Espinosa.

Mr Lapa was a client for whom criminal work was done. On 3 July 1995, Mr Lapa, then in Lithgow prison, was sent a bill for $4,500. Mr Dunbier claims that this was for work performed by the legal practice Gorman Dunbier; Mr Gorman denies this. The Lapa matter, so far as trust moneys are concerned, was excluded from the consent orders of 24 July 1995. The Lapa dispute seems to have come before the Registrar on 8 August 1995 and it would seem that moneys were paid by Mr Dunbier to Mr Gorman in respect of that matter before the
Registrar on that day. Again, it does not seem to me that this is a proved case of disobedience of the court's order of 24 July.

The matter of Banting was again one where the moneys were received in June before the consent orders. Mr Gorman paid Mr Dunbier $2,758.67 on 17 July
The balance claimed by Mr Dunbier is $4,445.33 and Mr Gorman says he retained $3,241.33 in his trust account pending assessment of Mr Dunbier's bill.

Mr Gorman says in his affidavit that he forwarded moneys to Mr Dunbier in respect of 16 completed matters subsequent to 24 July 1995. He says the only matter in which moneys were not forwarded within 48 hours of the funds being cleared was that concerning Roger Bosmans. Mr Gorman says that this was due to an oversight and was discovered upon the monthly reconciliation of trust balances on 1 August 1995 and the moneys were remitted to Mr Dunbier on that date.

I cannot see any contempt involved in 1/4. The matter of Bosmans was not detailed in Mr Dunbier's complaints and in any event that would have been a matter where I accept there was an oversight.
 /5 
This refers to order 6 of 24 July, namely, that Messrs Gorman and Dunbier would each do all things necessary for the prompt assessment of proper costs.
Mr Dunbier says that as at 11 August 1995, there were still 46 files which had not been returned to him for the purposes of billing. Mr Dunbier says that there was an informal agreement that two files would be returned each day for billing. Mr Gorman denies that there was an agreement, but says that in practice the parties worked out an arrangement whereby no more than two files per day were to be delivered. Mr Gorman says that whilst he has not been able to comply strictly with this arrangement, he has mainly done so and cannot see any prejudice in the assessment process through any non-compliance.

I could not be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there had been a contempt committed in this matter.
 /6 
Mr Dunbier says Mr Gorman has not given the costs assessor access to all the files; Mr Gorman says he has done so. The major dispute appears to be the files of Misra. However, Mr Dunbier also alleges that Mr Gorman hid files from the costs assessor, refused and failed to return files for billing and hence assessment, and generally has frustrated Mr Dunbier's attempt to recover costs from former clients. He gives as examples the cases of Aul, Coles, Harding,
Kourembes, Milla, Milosavljevic, Misra and Sproule.

The costs assessor, a Mr Lancken of Owen Hodge & Son, advised Mr Dunbier on 28 September 1995 that the files in relation to Misra had not been made available to him for assessment. In his affidavit of 9 November 1995 Mr
Dunbier complained that although the costs assessment generally was completed on 28 September 1995, his claim for costs in the matter of Misra was not assessed because Mr Gorman did not provide access to the files to Mr Lancken.

Mr Gorman's only answer to these allegations appears to be that he was the solicitor for Mr Misra and the matters involving Mr Misra were the subject of a dispute between Mr Misra and Mr Dunbier before Mr Justice Bryson.

I am unable to see how that is any excuse for not complying with the consent orders on 24 July with respect to providing Mr Misra's files to the costs assessor. Indeed, as things have turned out, Mr Justice Bryson was so critical of the way in which Mr Gorman and his counsel had approached the whole question in the Misra matters, that he not only rebuked counsel for being insolent and deliberately trying to obscure the questions which his Honour had to decide, but he also ordered that both Mr Misra and Mr Gorman pay Mr
Dunbier's costs on an indemnity basis.

In my view, the disobedience of the order in respect to the Misra matters is established beyond all reasonable doubt.

So far as the other persons named are concerned, the real complaint about them is that they were workers' compensation matters which were abandoned by non- action and so Mr Dunbier was deprived of any costs because the matters never proceeded to finality. Whether this be correct or not, it does not seem to me to come within charge 1/6.
 . Second Notice Motion /1 
On 24 November 1995, Simos, J accepted the undertaking of Mr Gorman to provide to Mr Dunbier's solicitors the names and addresses of solicitors acting for the defendants or respondents as the case may be in certain matters. There was no time set on compliance with the undertaking by Mr Gorman. On 6 December , Mr Gorman wrote to Mr Dunbier's then solicitors that he would endeavour to have his staff extract the names of the defendants' solicitors from the files by "Friday next" which presumably meant 8 December 1995. He then wrote again on 6 December asking for details of matters in which Mr Dunbier already held the information to reduce Mr Gorman's workload. Mr Gorman's affidavit of December 1995 annexes letters that he wrote to Mr Dunbier's solicitors suggesting that it would ease his load if Mr Dunbier would inform him as to what information he already held. This, of course, would have been no answer to the allegation that Mr Gorman had not complied with Mr Justice Simos' order. However, the list was provided on 14 December 1995. As no time had been set down in the undertaking given to Mr Justice Simos, I must assume that the information was to be given within a reasonable time. Although both parties expected that the information would be given earlier, I could not find that supply of the information on 14 December was otherwise than within a reasonable time. Accordingly this charge has not been made out.
 /2 
At the hearing before Simos, J on 24 October, Mr Dunbier's solicitor asked for an order that Mr Gorman pay $272,866.70. However, the order that Simos, J made was: "I order the plaintiff (that is Mr Gorman) to pay to the defendant (that is Mr Dunbier) the amount of costs assessed in the various files upon the disposal of the matters dealt with in those matters favourably to the plaintiff." 
The word "plaintiff" where his Honour used it secondly obviously refers to the plaintiff client in the litigious matter which was in dispute.

Mr Dunbier, however, considered that Simos, J had made an order that he be paid $272,866.70 (see his letter to Mr Gorman of 27 November 1995 on p 346 of
Contempt Book B).

Mr Gorman replied that there were only four matters which came within the order made by Simos, J and costs in respect of those four matters were paid over to Mr Dunbier by 14 December 1995.

Mr Dunbier's affidavit of 6 March 1996 in Contempt Book F p 534, suggests that the following matters fall within Simos, J's order and Mr Gorman is in breach of that order. I will use the numbers on pp 539 and following of Contempt Book
F.
Aul. This appears to have been a conveyancing matter settled in 1995.
 $622.20 costs is owing to Mr Dunbier but his allegation is that Mr Gorman "has refused to pay the full amount and now seeks to negotiate the costs down".
Milosavljevic. This is a personal injury matter where it is alleged that the matter has been settled favourably to the plaintiff but 
Mr Gorman is seeking to have costs compromised.
Potter. This suit was finalised on August 1995 but costs have not been paid.
Sparkes. It is alleged that the plaintiff has paid Mr Gorman costs but Mr Gorman has not accounted to 
Mr Dunbier.

I just do not find sufficient material to enable me to identify whether all or any of these matters come within the purview of Mr Justice Simos' order and am not able to identify any particular matter in which costs should not have been paid. I suspect that there are one or two, but that is not enough to establish a charge of contempt.
 . Conclusion on Contempt matters 
For the above reasons I do find that there were some contempts of the orders of 24 July 1995 committed by Mr Gorman. These, to a great degree were technical contempts, but for the reasons set out in the passage in Halsbury which I have adopted, were contempts nonetheless. They are not contempts which call for an imposition of a fine or imprisonment. However, in view of the general attitude of Mr Gorman, and the fact that the matters were contempts, he should pay Mr Dunbier's costs of the motion of 1 September 1995 on the indemnity basis. Even though Mr Gorman was successful in defending the motion of 5 December 1995, it seems to me that as the matters were heard together and he has been in contempt there should be no order for costs of that motion.
 . Notice of Motion of 12 July 1996 
I should note that I was appalled by the amount of paper that this case has generated and was also appalled by the frequency in which notices of motion were filed. Both parties being solicitors, they may have been protected to some extent from the massive costs of litigation but the system just cannot cope with such numerous applications supported by bulky material, especially when, as was the case, at least 50% of the material presented was of no value to the matters that were actually being litigated. This may be too harsh a criticism because the history of the matter shows that on many occasions it was only at the barrier after a fat affidavit had been served that consent orders were made.

Whilst I had reserved my decision various notices of motion came into my list.
I made no order on, I think, three of these, but one, a motion filed by Mr
Gorman on 12 July 1996 was heard and the decision reserved until I gave my decision in the matters I have just concluded. This motion concerned $3,175.62. I mention this because it was typical of the motions that turned up in the Supreme Court almost weekly, that they dealt with sums which would be ordinarily dealt with in the Small Claims Division of the Local Court.
 $3,175.62 is currently held in Mr Gorman's trust account. Mr Gorman acts for
Luigi Condo. Mr Condo had two accidents, a motor car accident and a work related accident. The claim arising out of the motor car accident has been settled and costs have been paid. Costs have been assessed as between Mr
Dunbier and Mr Gorman in respect of the work related accident in the sum of $3,175.62. Those moneys have been deducted from the damages paid in the motor car accident settlement and have been put into Mr Gorman's trust account to comply with an order I made in June this year. Mr Condo wants his money.

In my view Mr Condo is entitled to the money. The [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/) requires solicitors to hold money received on behalf of their clients for the clients or as they direct. Unless there is some special agreement, moneys received in respect of one claim are not held as part-payment of costs in another. The evidence in the matter generally has the flavour that the practice of both solicitors was not to charge clients in personal injury cases until their matter was finished. Accordingly, in my view the moneys should be paid to Mr
Condo.

Generally speaking, the dissolution of the solicitors' firm should not affect the clients' rights. I can well understand Mr Dunbier's position that, if he does not obtain security in a practical sense out of Mr Condo's moneys held by
Mr Gorman he may never get paid what he is owed in the work related accident matter. Indeed, in view of what has happened in other workers' accident matters being handled by Mr Gorman, that is more likely than not. However, the clients really must be the paramount consideration. To impound part of Mr
Condo's verdict because of the settlement of the partnership dispute between
Mr Gorman and Mr Dunbier would not be the right thing to do.

I should add that some time during the motion on contempt was spent on a note in Mr Gorman's handwriting on one of the files "Stuff the clients". Mr Dunbier put to me that that was typical of Mr Gorman's attitude. Mr Gorman, on the other hand, said that he was merely quoting Mr Dunbier. I am not able to determine who was right, but certainly it must be made abundantly clear that the "Stuff the clients" attitude must not be able to prevail in the legal profession generally.

Accordingly, Mr Gorman is entitled to order 1 in the notice of motion of 12
July 1996 and Mr Dunbier must pay the costs of that motion, but on the ordinary basis.

I reserved the costs of the motion filed by Mr Gorman on 9 October 1995 charging Mr Dunbier with contempt. This was dropped on the first day of the hearing. Its filing occasioned the generation of a great amount of paper. I consider that after reading all the contempt books that the costs should be on the indemnity basis.

I believe that I have now dealt with all the motions before me. If I have by oversight passed one by, then as I will be away from the court for the rest of this year the motion will have to be reheard before a Registrar, Master or another Judge.

Accordingly, the orders that I make on the motions are as follows: 
A. Notice of Motion filed by Mr Dunbier on 1 September 1995.

Declare that Mr Gorman is in contempt of court.

Accept Mr Gorman's apologies. Order Mr Gorman to pay the costs of the motion on the indemnity basis.

B. Notice of Motion filed by Mr Dunbier on 5 December 1995.

Dismiss the motion. Make no order as to costs.

C. Mr Gorman is to pay Mr Dunbier's costs on the indemnity basis of the notice of motion for contempt filed by Mr Gorman on 9 October 1995.

D. Notice of Motion filed by Mr Gorman on 12 July 1996.

Make order 1 in the notice of motion. Order that 
Mr Dunbier pay Mr Gorman's costs of the motion.

The exhibits should be retained as they are merely copies of documents.
 * * * 
