

Regina versus W Fong [1996] NSWSC 586 (29 November 1996) 
REGINA v. William Fong /95 
Friday, 29 November 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, SMART J, DUNFORD J 
CATCHWORDS: MEANING OF SUPPLY - TEMPORARY 
HOLDING - ISSUE FOR JURY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
HEADNOTE 
The appellant was convicted of supplying 82.59 grams of heroin. He appealed against that conviction and sought leave to appeal against the severity of his sentence.

Held: . The word "supply" where secondly appearing in [s.29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) does not include the mere transfer of physical control of the drugs from a person who had the drugs deposited with him to their owner or to the person reasonably believed to be the owner. The reservations which apply to this approach as outlined by Hunt J in R v. Carey [(1990) 20 NSWLR 292] do not apply in the present case.
Where there was evidence that the accused was temporarily holding the drugs for another the judge must leave to the jury the issue of whether there was "supply".
 
Orders: . Appeal allowed.
Conviction quashed.
Order that a new trial be had.
 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Smart J.
 
SMART J: William Fong has appealed against his conviction of supplying .59 grams of heroin on 16 December 1994 and has sought leave to appeal against the severity of his sentence.

Fong had pleaded guilty to 4 other charges arising out of events on that day, namely, supplying 3.96 grams of heroin (deemed supply) supplying 3.56 grams of heroin (deemed supply) and two counts of assaulting a police officer in the execution of his duty. Fong was acquitted of a further charge of offering a bribe to a police officer.

About 11.35 am on 16 December 1994 Constables Starr and Light were observing a car park at Waterloo. About 11.40 a.m. Fong drove a car into the car park and the Constables saw him hand something (suspected to have been a balloon containing a cap of heroin) to another male who had been waiting. The police ran to the car. Constable Starr opened the driver's side door and removed Fong from the car. Fong punched Constable Starr. Fong was restrained with the assistance of Constable Light and told by Constable Starr that he (Fong) was under arrest. Constable Starr forced the accused's left hand open, revealing two coloured balloons each containing a cap of heroin the total weight of which was 0.43 grams. Fong kicked Constable Light on his left leg at the knee.
The bag around Fong's waist was removed and opened. There was a plastic bag with 14 balloons each containing a cap of heroin, the total weight of the heroin being 3.13 grams. Fong was taken to Redfern Police Station and interviewed. A search warrant was obtained by the police in respect of the wrong home unit. A further search warrant was obtained as to Unit 77, 156-164
Chalmers Street, Redfern where Fong resided. On searching this unit Constable
Light found 2 "rocks" (of heroin) weighing in total 82.59 grams wrapped in foil and plastic in the space immediately above the bathroom ceiling and
Constable Starr found 18 balloons each containing a "cap" of heroin, weighing in total 3.96 grams, in a drawer in the bedroom. Fong claimed that the heroin in his clenched fist, in the waist bag and in the drawer was heroin which he sniffed.

The evidence established that the unit had 2 bedrooms and that Fong was the tenant under a written lease. He paid the rent and bond money and a receipt was issued in his name by the landlord. However, he asserted that his fellow worker and friend Kenny Lau provided that money and that all he had to do was to pay Kenny $100 per week. He and Kenny moved into the flat. Since his arrest on 16 December 1994 Fong has been in custody. He asked his brother and some of his friends to contact Kenny but they could not find him.

The Crown case was that because Fong was the lessee of the unit, had a key to it, occupied the unit, had drugs containing heroin in his unit, had drugs containing heroin on his person when arrested, and has admitted to police that he knew of the heroin's presence in the roof space of the unit he, at law, possessed the heroin in the roof space. The heroin in the 18 balloons in the drawer in Fong's bedroom had a heroin concentration of 17.5% while the two "rocks" found in the roof had concentrations of 59.00% and 72.5% respectively.

Constables Starr and Light stated that this conversation occurred: "Starr: These two blocks were found in a man hole in the bathroom, what can you tell me about them? 
Fong: I was asked to look after them.

Starr: Who by? 
Fong: I don't give names.

Starr: What is in the packages? 
Fong: Heroin 
Starr: How long have you had the blocks of heroin for? 
Fong: Three days." 
Fong said that he was left in the custody area for five to six hours after he was taken to the police station. The detective took him upstairs and according to Fong, said "Willy you're gone, we found this". He was shown two blocks and asked "What is it?" Fong stated that the police told him that they knew where he hid his "rock" and that they had found it in the bathroom/toilet. Fong said that the detectives asked him if the blocks were his. Fong said he had not seen those blocks previously nor did he have any knowledge of them. Fong denied that he had made the statements attributed to him by the police.
Indeed, he said that he told the police that he did not know anything about the blocks but they did not put that in the interview. Fong denied that the police asked him how long he had had the blocks for and he insisted that he did not say anything about keeping the blocks for three days or some other period. Fong denied that he told the police that he had been asked to look after the blocks. No substantial inroads were made in the cross examination of
Fong. The evidence suggested that Fong received a modest salary and was a man of modest means. For him to be seen as the owner of "the rocks" may have seemed improbable to some.

In the summing up the jury was told that the question for their determination was did Fong possess that heroin.

At summing up 21-22 the judge said: "The police evidence is, as you know, that he had it [the blocks] for three days having been given it by a friend. He had said when asked about it and this is the police evidence, `I was asked to look after them' `what's in them?' `heroin', `how long have you had them?' `three days'. So, on the
Crown's case, the blocks of heroin were not the Accused [sic-? accused's], because he had been asked to look after them, but it does not matter that they're not his, in the sense of being owned by him, because if he had them there looking after them for three days, then he possessed them. The Crown case goes a little further because the Crown Prosecutor in his submissions to you said that you could draw the inference that this heroin was in fact the
Accused's supply which he cut, to repeat the word, which means mixed, with other substances preparatory to selling the heroin in the capsules in the balloons to people who might buy it from him. In which case, the Crown's case would be not only did he possess it because he was looking after it for a friend, but it was his and it was his supply, that is the Crown's case. So, members of the jury, you have got to be satisfied on the evidentiary material, not only that the Accused knew of its existence, but knew where it was, knew what it was and acquiesced in it being there. If you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about those things, then you will find the Accused to be guilty, if you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about those things, then you cannot be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he possessed the heroin." 
We do not know what view the jury took nor which of the alternative approaches advocated by the Crown was taken. While possession was an important issue it was not the only issue.

The definition of "supply" in [s.3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s3.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) includes "having in possession for supply". [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) relevantly provides: "A person who has in his or her possession an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than the traffickable quantity of the prohibited drug shall, for the purposes of this Division, be deemed to have the prohibited drug in his or her possession for supply, unless - the person proves that he or she had the prohibited drug in his or her possession otherwise than for supply;..." 
It was thus a defence if Fong established, on the balance of probabilities that he had the blocks of heroin in his possession otherwise than for supply.
It is true that in his evidence Fong denied any knowledge of the heroin and that he had told the police what they attributed to him. The jury must have rejected his claim that he did not know anything about them and held that he did have them in his possession. I interpolate that it is unnecessary for me to determine whether the judge's directions on possession were correct. The jury may have had a reasonable doubt whether he owned the 2 blocks of heroin.

The evidence on which the Crown relied included Fong's statement that he was looking after the blocks for another and that he had done so for three days.
There was thus a real question whether his possession was for the purposes of supply or temporary custody and return to the owner. The summing up did not leave this issue to the jury. Indeed it foreclosed that issue against Fong by stating that if he had the blocks there looking after them for 3 days then he possessed them.

In R v. Carey [(1990) 20 NSWLR 292] Hunt J (with whom Wood & Finlay JJ agreed) undertook a review of meaning of the word "supply" in the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) and the local and English authorities. It was held that the word "supply" where secondly appearing in [s.29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) [that is, in paragraph (a)] did not include the mere transfer of physical control of the drugs from a person who had the drugs deposited with him to their owner or to the person reasonably believed to be the owner. Hunt J specified some important reservations in the application of that approach but they do not apply in the present case. Carey was analogous to a "bailment" situation. In Carey the Court held that the judge should have left to the jury the issue whether the appellant had established on the balance of probabilities that the accused's intention was merely to return the drug to its owner or the person she reasonably believed to be its owner. Failure to do so meant that the conviction had to be quashed.

In R v. Liberti [(1991) 55 A Crim R 120] the Court of Criminal Appeal applied its earlier decision in Carey on the basis that the Court should follow its own recent authority and because it was correct. Temporary possession where the accused person intended to return the drug to the person who was the true owner or who had given it to the accused to hold (or mind) did not amount to supply. In Liberti the accused claimed that he was just holding the prohibited drug given to him by his friend until that friend asked for its return. The accused had so held it for 31/2 months.
As the accused had not been charged on the basis that he was an accessory before the fact and the case had not been conducted on that basis the court declined to uphold the conviction on the ground of accessorial liability.

To satisfy the onus cast upon him by [s.29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) on the balance of probabilities reliance may be placed by an accused on the evidence adduced in the Crown case as well as that appearing in the accused's case. There was material in the Crown case from which it could be concluded that Fong was holding 2 blocks of heroin temporarily for return to its owner.
I have also borne in mind that the jury were not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the oral statements attributed by the police to Fong when they claimed he offered them a bribe. The alleged admissions are far from convincing. The usual equipment possessed by a relatively small-time drug dealer, such as scales, Glucodin, coffee grinder, supply of empty bags or balloons was not found in the flat.

The point as to supply and a direction under [s.29](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) was not taken at the trial. However, on the evidence the judge was bound to leave the issue to the jury. It was fundamental.

I have not found it necessary to deal with the other points raised by Fong.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal allowed.
Conviction quashed.
Order that a new trial be had.
 
DUNFORD, J: I agree with Smart, J.
 * * * 
