

Gsa Industries (Aust) Pty Limited versus Gulf Rubber (Aust) Pty Limited Matter
No 20378/97 [1998] NSWSC 494 (15 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 November 1998 
GSA INDUSTRIES (AUST) PTY LIMITED versus GULF RUBBER (AUST) PTY LIMITED /97 July 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: The claim arises out of a contract for the supply of silicone washers for use in temperature and pressure relief valves. It is alleged that it was a term of the contract that the washers were to comply with a certain specification. 
It is alleged that in breach of the condition, the washers did not comply with the specification. The Particulars of the alleged breach (which are to be found in paragraph 10 of the Statement of Claim) are as follows:- "The goods failed the testing criteria contained in the specification. The
Defendant failed to develop an inspection procedure that would ensure that washers conformed to the specification.

Washers: failed to retain any or any sufficient elasticity and when installed into temperature and pressure relief valves installed in water heaters after being compressed against the valve seat took on a permanent indentation and/or split resulting in leakage of water through the valve and/or stuck to the valve seat when compressed and as a consequence prevented the valve from opening freely or alternatively, stuck and tore when the valve was opening resulting in uneven wear and erosion and leakage through the valve.

These defects affected goods delivered by the Defendant during the period about late 1991 to early 1993." 
Further, it is alleged that there were implied conditions that the washers would be reasonably fit for the purpose for which the washers were required by the plaintiff and that the washers were of merchant quality.

It is alleged that there was a breach of both of these conditions. The
Particulars of the alleged breach (which are set forth in paragraph 16 of the pleading) are similar to those set forth in paragraph 10.

The defendant has filed a Defence. Largely, the plaintiff's allegations are traversed by way of non-admission.

The plaintiff seeks discovery of the defendant's documentation. There is dispute as to the extent of that discovery.

The plaintiff relies on an affidavit sworn by Sharon Maree O'Neill. The defendant relies on an affidavit sworn by Kevin Allan Gibbons.

The plaintiff has served a "Notice For Discovery". This Notice contains a definition of "document". It comprises two parts (Part A and Part B). Each
Part is divided into five segments. Discovery is sought of documents which relate to the matters identified in each of the segments. There is agreement as to number 1 of Part A. For present purposes, it can be put aside.

Numbers 2-5 of Part A are as follows:- "2. Any quality assurance and/or testing program or procedures developed and/or implemented by the Defendant in relation to the manufacturing of the washers and the implementation and/or results of such quality assurance and testing programs or procedures, including but not limited to; 
Any inspection procedures developed for the purposes of Engineering specification ES003A; 
Refinements, improvements and updates made to the Gulf Rubber Quality
Assurance Program as referred to in letter from Gulf Rubber to RMC dated 1
August 1991.
The raw materials and processes used in the manufacture of the washers and in particular, any changes in such raw materials or processes including, but not limited to; 
Any changes in the filler used in the manufacturing of the washers; 
Any changes in the way in which the washers were cured; 
Any problems in the operation or changes in the operation of the
Defendant's curing oven used in the manufacture of the washers; 
Any changes in the design or operation of the Defendant's moulds or dies used in the manufacture of the washers.
The cause or causes of the: 
Failure of the washers to retain any sufficient elasticity; or, 
Sticking of the washers as alleged in the particulars subjoined to paragraph 10 of the Plaintiff's
Statement of Claim and any investigation by or on behalf of the Defendant of such cause or causes, including but not limited to; testing undertaken to verify the state of cure of washers; testing undertaken to verify the degree of compression set; testing undertaken to assess the washer's adherence to gun metal.
Any similar problems with the curing of silicon washers, gaskets or other silicon products manufactured by the Defendant during the period January 1990 to December 1994, including, but not limited to the failure of silicon washers, `O' rings or gaskets supplied to Hardie Dux or Solarhart in 1990." 
Numbers 1-5 of Part B are as follows:- "1. Pleadings in the action between Gulf Rubber and Switzerland Insurance.
(Proceeding No 50300 of 1994 in the Supreme Court of NSW).
Reports, letters etc of Givens Emerson or any other loss assessor or investigator appointed by or on behalf of the Defendant in relation to the issues in dispute in this proceeding.
Correspondence or documents between the Defendant and its insurer in relation to the issues in dispute in this proceeding.
Memorandum or note from D. Molesworth to RMC dated 22 July 1993.
Minutes or other records of meetings between the Plaintiff and the
Defendant and/or loss assessors appointed by the parties." 
The application falls to be determined pursuant to the provisions for discovery and inspection of documents applicable to proceedings commenced on or after 1 October 1996 (Part 23).

The relevant rules purported to establish a new regime for discovery and inspection of documents. The principal purpose of this regime has been said to be to limit unnecessary discovery. There are six rules comprised in the present Part 23. Rule 1 is a definition provision. Rule 2 enables a party by notice to require production of documents for inspection. Rule 3, inter alia, empowers the Court to make an order for discovery. A party may be ordered to give discovery of:- documents within a class or classes specified in the order; one or more samples (selected in such manner as the Court may specify) of documents within such a class.

Rule 4 confers additional powers on the Court. Rule 5 deals with personal injury claims. Rule 6 preserves liability for contempt.

Subrules (2) and (3) of rule 3 are in the following terms:- 
A class of documents shall not be specified in more general terms than the
Court considers to be justified in the circumstances.

Subject to subrule (2), a class of documents may be specified: by relevance to one or more facts in issue; by description of the nature of the documents and the period within which they were brought into existence; in such other manner as the Court considers appropriate in the circumstances.

Rule 3 confers a discretionary power to be exercised in the context of the new regime established by the rules. Further, it is to be exercised having regard to the relevant circumstances of the particular case before the Court and so that justice is best served between the parties. The onus rests with the applicant to demonstrate an entitlement to the relief sought.

In my view, inter alia, the classes of documents sought to be described in numbers 2-5 of Part A and numbers 2, 3 and 5 of Part B are specified in terms that are far too general. As the reaching of this view is determinative of the disputes concerning these documents, it is unnecessary to further dwell on the questions raised for consideration.

It seems that the defendant does have documents (other than those described in number 1 of Part A) that may be the subject of an order for discovery.
However, it is a matter for the plaintiff to appropriately specify these documents. It must be borne in mind that discovery is governed by a new regime that narrows the range of discoverable documents. Also, like its predecessor, it does not permit a fishing expedition.

The material placed before the Court fails to demonstrate the relevance of the documents referred to in number 1 of Part B. In any event, it would not be necessary to use the remedy of discovery to enable an inspection to take place of these documents.

The material demonstrates that the plaintiff presently has a copy of the memorandum referred to in number 4 of Part B. Number 4 cannot be regarded as specifying a class of documentation. If there is a need to inspect the original memorandum, this result can be achieved by the use of the provisions contained in rule 2.

I make an order for discovery of the class of documents specified in number 1 of Part A. Save as to the granting of that relief, I make no other order for discovery. I have been asked to reserve the question of costs. Accordingly, I reserve that question.
 * * * 
