

S Khachikian versus P Michael [1996] NSWSC 181 (7 June 1996) 
Sylvia KHACHIKIAN versus Pavlos MICHAEL /95; DC2389/93 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
HANDLEY JA, SHELLER JA, COLE JA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE-no question of principle.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Ex tempore 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: The appellant was the driver of a motor vehicle which was travelling south in Avoca Street, Randwick on 9 December 1988 at approximately 7.00p.m. when it struck the respondent, a pedestrian. The respondent was seriously injured. He sued in negligence. Christie DCJ in a judgment delivered 9 February 1995, with obvious grave reservations and doubt, held that negligence had been established against the appellant. Having done so, his Honour found that the respondent had contributed to the accident to the extent of the 75%. The appellant has appealed against the finding of negligence.

The respondent was so seriously injured in the accident that he has no recall of the occurrence. Thus, apart from the police officer who attended at the scene of the accident, the evidence regarding negligence was that of Mr
Arriat, a person with whom the respondent was speaking shortly prior to the accident, Mr Rapaport, the driver of the vehicle immediately behind that of the appellant, and the appellant. There was no conflict of evidence between those witnesses in any relevant respect.

The evidence disclosed the following. The appellant was driving her vehicle south in Avoca Street, Randwick. As she approached the intersection of Avoca and Rainbow Streets she slowed down as the lights facing her were red. They changed to green as she approached and she accelerated passing through the intersection at approximately 40-50 kilometres per hour. Prior to reaching the intersection she had crossed into centre lane. To the south through that intersection the carriageway permitted one lane of parked cars adjacent to the kerb and two other lanes travelling south. She was thus travelling in the centre lane. As she approached the intersection, and as she emerged from it, she observed two men standing either on the footpath verge adjacent to the kerb or on the roadway between two parked cars. In fact they were on the verge. One was the respondent who was seeking directions from Mr Arriat. They were standing approximately 30 metres from the intersection of Rainbow Street and Avoca Street. The appellant continued in the lane adjacent to the parked cars still travelling at approximately 50 kilometres an hour. Having observed that the two men were talking to each other and giving no indication that either intended to go onto the roadway, the appellant took her eyes off them and looked straight ahead. The learned trial judge found: "There was absolutely no indication when she last observed them that this man would cease his conversation with the witness Arriat and embark upon the roadway with the speed with which he obviosuly did." 
When she was a few metres away from where the men had been standing, she noticed from the corner of her eye a man running out between two parked cars.
The person was the respondent who ran out directly in front of her vehicle from between the parked cars. Although the appellant braked and swerved, she could not avoid the respondent who ran out about two or three metres in front of her car. He was struck by the front right hand of her vehicle and injured.

Mr Rapaport who was travelling immediately behind the appellant, and also travelling at approximately 50 kilometres per hour, also had observed the two men talking on the verge when he was just through the intersection, saw the respondent run out from between the cars, braked as hard as he could but nonetheless ran into the back of the appellant's vehicle. Another vehicle behind Mr Rapaport ran into the back of him.

On those undisputed facts in my opinion it is clear that there was no evidence of negligence established against the appellant. She was keeping a proper look out and was travelling at an appropriate speed. She was taking all the care required of a careful driver. The accident was entirely due to the circumstance that the respondent ran out from between two parked cars in front of the appellant giving her no chance of avoiding him. The trial judge found: "I have absolutely no doubt, and if necessary on the standard of beyond reasonable doubt, that the plaintiff entered the roadway runing with compelte disregard for any traffic on it." 
Nonetheless Judge Christie found negligence. A reading of his Honour's judgment makes it clear that he had the gravest reservations in doing so for he said: "I find it very difficult to find that anything that the defendant did diverged from a standard of care of the reasonable man or the reasonable driver ...[1] and later: "I have managed to persuade myself that there is some substance in that submission, although I have an abiding suspicion that by finding the defendant negligent in that way, I may well be perpetrating an injustice upon her, and I may visiting upon her a standard of care which goes beyond that which could be described as the standard of care of the reasonable driver." and later: "I do not believe that Stirling Moss could have avoided this man in the circumstances in which the defendant found herself. There was absolutely no indication when she last observed them that this man would cease his conversation with the witness Ariatt and embark upon the roadway with the speed with which he obviously did.[2]" and later again: "There is no obligation, in my view, upon a driver in the situation in which the defendant found herself to take steps to avoid a collision with a person completely defiant of ordinary prudence in regard to their own safety, and if a pedestrian acts so much out of the ordinary as to put himself so quickly in front of the oncoming car so as to make it impossible to avoid him except by travelling at crawling speed, then I find it difficult to perceive that a driver in such a situation has breached a duty by reason of the defiance of the pedestrian in relation to ordinary prudence in regard to his own safety."[3] 
The only basis upon which his Honour found negligence was that: "It is just conceivable and I am persuaded on the balance, very marginally and with some disquiet, that the plaintiff has established that the defendant should have kept a closer eye on the two men having a conversation to her left."[4] 
That finding was not available to his Honour as he had found that the appellant had observed them when some 30 metres away but that they gave no indication of moving on to the roadway. In those circumstances it was entirely reasonable for the appellant to look ahead for any other danger. His Honour recognised that he may have been wrong in his finding for he said: "I may be in error in finding the defendant guilty of some negligence on that basis."[5] 
In my opinion he clearly was. The appeal must succeed.

The respondent has filed a notice of cross-appeal and a notice of contention.
Grounds 2 to 5 of the notice of appeal, in support of a challenge to the finding of 75% of contributory negligence, suggest that more weight in that respect, and presumably in determining negligence, should be attached to the appellant's failure to continuously observe the respondent from the time when she first saw him. I have addressed that matter. The notice of contention suggest factual findings regarding the movements of the respondent which are at variance with the evidence of the appellant, Mr Ariatt and Mr Rapaport and cannot be sustained.

In my opinion the appeal should be upheld, the judgment and verdict entered by
Christie DCJ on 22 February 1995 in favour of the respondent set aside, and in lieu thereof there be entered a verdict for the defendant. The cross appeal should also be dismissed with costs. The respondent is to pay the appellant's costs of the trial before Christie DCJ and of this appeal but is to have, in respect of this appeal, a certificate under the Suitors Fund Act if qualified.

HANDLEY JA: I agree.

SHELLER JA: I also agree.

HANDLEY JA: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Cole JA.
 [1] Appeal Book, p.225L.
 [2] Appeal Book, p.225R-226E.
 [3] Appeal Book, p.226L-T.
 [4] Appeal Book, p.226V-227B.
 [5] Appeal Book, p.227O.
 * * * 
