

Tsaoucis versus Gallipoli Memorial Club Limited Matter No 1694/98 [1998] NSWSC (27 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
TSAOUCIS versus GALLIPOLI MEMORIAL CLUB LIMITED /98 May 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between the tenant of a fish restaurant ("The Rock Fish Cafe") and the landlord in whose club premises the restaurant is being conducted. 
The parties entered into an agreement for lease on 3 November 1992. The plaintiffs, Menas Tsaoucis and Peter Kafkis, were named as the lessees. The agreement was to the effect that if and when certain necessary approvals were obtained, a lease would be granted in accordance with the schedule.

However, in due course a lease that differed in some significant respects from the schedule was entered into between the parties. This document took the form of a memorandum of lease, the annexure to which contained a series of terms and conditions. The form that was used did refer to a deposited memorandum with the Land Titles Office, but this clause was excised from the document by being ruled through. The lease said that the tenancy was for four years commencing on 19 September 1992 and terminating on 19 September 1996. It is common ground in the events which have happened, that (a) the parties intended a four year lease commencing at the time the fit-out was completed which was
April 1993 and (b) that the lease terminated on 25 April 1997. There was a claim for rectification made by the lessees but as this is common ground, it is unnecessary to pursue that claim. However, the lease was never registered so that at law there was never more than a tenancy at will terminable by a month's notice subject to such of the terms and conditions of the lease document as were apposite and subject to the right of either party to obtain an order for specific performance from this court during the pendency of the lease.

The schedule on the first page of the memorandum of lease document indicated that there was to be an option. The words used were simply - "4. With an 2X Options to Renew for X periods of 4 and 3 years set out in see Part 11 Annexure A.".

Ignoring the semantics, if one turns to Part 11 of annexure A one sees simply this: "Part 11: Option of Renewal 
Two (2) options of four (4) years and three (3) years respectively." 
There is nothing else in the option clause to show what were the terms and conditions of the renewed lease that would result if the option was exercised, how the option was to be exercised, or indeed, the latest time at which it could be exercised. There was nothing to indicate the terms and conditions of the lease. Whilst the general law would imply that the new lease was to be on the same terms as the old lease, things are not quite that simple because the original lease included a rent review clause for 30 June in each of the years and 1996. However, this complication has not played much part in the discussion before me.

There is no evidence of any attempt by the lessees to exercise the option before the institution of these proceedings except an alleged oral exercise by one of the tenants some time in 1995. The lessees say that this was an effective exercise of the option. They say, alternatively, that if it was not, then the issue of these proceedings was an effective exercise, or alternatively again, that a notice they issued on the day of hearing was an effective exercise.

As to this last point, Mr Ireland QC who appeared with Mr Larkin for the defendant, said that he was not ready to meet any case dealing with a written exercise of option made on 8 May 1998. However, he submitted that as any option had to be exercised no later than 25 April 1997, it could not in any event amount to an exercise of the option. It was also put that the exercise of the option which was said to be "without prejudice" to the lessees' existing rights was, in any event, not a proper exercise of the option because one cannot exercise an option on a without prejudice basis. These two points are in the ring for decision if need be, but the understanding is that should factual matters require decision, then Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin will have an opportunity to present evidence.

The alleged exercise of the option is set out in Mr Tsaoucis' affidavit of 9
March 1998 paras 9 to 12: "9. Towards the end of 1994 or early 1995 I met with Mr Stephen Ware, the treasurer of the Gallipoli Memorial Club Limited, at the club premises. To my knowledge there had been some proposal put to the Club by a developer about redeveloping the site. This redevelopment necessitated vacant possession of the entire premises. Mr Ware had initiated the meeting.
The "Rock Fish Cafe" was at that stage trading profitably and had traded profitably thereafter. During the course of our discussion I said to Mr Ware:- 
MT `You know that I have two by four and a two by three year options. I will be taking those options up.' 
SW `I don't think you have two by four and two by three year options'.

MT `I'll be staying even if we go to another place no matter how many options I've got.' 
At that meeting we also discussed moving the Club to another location and for the Rock Fish Cafe to trade wherever the Club moved. I was invited to attend with Club officers to inspect various proposed locations.
The following day Mr Ware and three other members of the 
Club, whose names I no longer recall, and I went to view possible premises for the Club. We visited sites at:- Elizabeth Street, Sydney; Pitt Street, Sydney; Bligh Street, Sydney.
During the course of that meeting which lasted about three to four hours we discussed the rent of any lease of the building and the suitability of the premises for the Club operations and also where I would conduct the Rock Fish Cafe." 
The questions which I have to determine are as follows:
Whether on the proper construction of the lease, the option in clause 11 of the annexure could be exercised orally or must be exercised in writing.
Assuming that an oral exercise of the option would be valid, was the option validly exercised by Mr Tsaoucis?
Where there are two lessees, is an exercise by one of the lessees sufficient?
Assuming that questions 1, 2 or 3 are answered unfavourably to the lessees, is it possible to exercise the option after the lease had expired?
If the answer to 4 is yes, was the option exercised - by issuing the summons in these proceedings; or by the notices of 8 May 1998?
What is the result of these proceedings? 
Before dealing with these questions, I should note that I would have thought that there was an argument available that the option was subject to a condition precedent that the lease must become effective in law. As the lease was never registered, and it was for more than three years, there was no effective lease for four years at law. It thus may well be that the condition precedent to the option never occurred so that there was never any option for the lessees to exercise. Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin did not argue this point.
Mr Warren, who appeared for the plaintiffs, merely submitted it was heresy when I put it to him in argument. The proposition is, of course, based on the reasoning that appealed to the Full Court in another connection in Davis v
McConochie <case>; [(1915) 15 SR 510],
However, as it was not argued, I will do no more than merely note it so that any appellate court may not think I have overlooked the point. I now pass to the six questions noted above.
The question as to how the option granted by a lease is to be exercised is one of construction of the lease itself taking into account <case> of the
Conveyancing Act.

All counsel accept that in the absence of a specific requirement for written notice and putting aside provisions such as <case> of the English Law of
Property Act 1925 (the English Act), there may be cases in which an oral notice of the exercise of an option may be given. An example is Gardner v
Blaxill  <case>; [(1921) 29 CLR 177]; Johnson versus Bones [[1970] 1 NSWR 28], 36 and
Commonwealth versus Newcrest Mining (WA) Ltd [(1995) 130 ALR 193], 242.
Indeed, there are some cases where an option can even be exercised by silence:
Nortel Australia Pty Ltd versus Portfolio Leasing Australia Ltd (Bruce, J - 20
March 1998, unreported, noted [(1998) 72 ALJ 355).] 
There is very little in the present lease to assist on this question of construction.

Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin say that there are two indications that a written notice of exercise of option was required. First, they say, that the exercise of an option to renew is a very serious matter and that it triggers a whole host of obligations. When one looks at the document generally important decisions are to be given by notices in writing and it would be bizarre if the most important decision of all, that is, whether the tenant was going to exercise the option, was not to be in writing.

This argument is fair enough, but it usually requires other indications in the document as well before it can be decisive. I do not consider that there are sufficient other indications for this to be so.

The second indication is clause 13 of the appendix which is as follows: "13.07 NOTICES 
All notices or communications required to be or which may be given or served by the Lessee to or upon the Lessor shall be sufficiently given or served if signed by ( ) or the person acting as such for the time being and if left at or sent by certified post or facsimile addressed to the Lessor at the place of abode of business of the Lessor last known to the Lessee." 
I have corrected two typographical errors in setting out the sentence, but have left the blank space, surrounded by my parentheses, which may very well eviscerate the whole provision so far as notices from the lessees are concerned.

This sort of provision is usually construed as being facultative rather than mandatory. In other words clauses such as 13.07 indicate a permitted method of giving notices but the permitted method is not exclusive of any other manner of communication: Wilson's Laundry Pty Ltd versus Patmoy [[1961] NSWR ]; [78
WN 636]; see also Ex parte Dally-Watkins; Re Wilson [(1955) 72
WN 454.] 
I do not consider that clause 13.07, even if it had any operation at all, requires that, or even points to, a common intention that notice of exercise of option to renew had to be in writing.

Section 196(1) of the English Act requires that notices exercising options "shall be in writing"; see eg New Hart Builders Ltd versus Brindley [[1975] Ch .] 
In Bressan versus Squires [[1974] 2 NSWLR 460], 463,
Bowen CJ in Eq held that <case>(2A) of the NSW Conveyancing Act applied to options in the same way as <case> of the English Act. It must follow that the local section has the same mandatory operation, subject to such operation being displaced by a contrary intention under <case>. The local section has no corresponding provision to <case> of the English Act which simply says that a notice under the section "shall be in writing". However if a notice has to be served under <case> and it has to be delivered personally or posted, it follows that it needs to be in written form. Thus, where no contrary intention is shown, an option affecting property must be exercised in writing. The New
South Wales legislation contains no contrary provision: thus a written notice was necessary.
In view of my answer to question 1, question 2 is otiose, but should the matter go elsewhere and I be in error on question 1, I will briefly consider it.

It was put by Mr Warren that the words used by Mr Tsaoucis bore an uncanny resemblance to those which were the subject of the High Court's decision in
Lamont versus Heron <case>; [(1970) 126 CLR 239.] In that case, the grantee of the option sent a telegram which stated "Advise taking up our option Wyoming Street ... letter following". The
High Court held that that was a valid exercise of the option.

As Mr Warren himself recognized, one cannot just move by analogy from one judicial decision to another; it is necessary to look at the words used and the circumstances in which they were used before coming to an answer to the present question.

When one looks at the words used by Mr Tsaoucis, one can see a very real difference to the words in Lamont's case, namely that Mr Tsaoucis said that he "will be taking those options up". It is necessary to set out the circumstances of this conversation in 1995 in which these words were said. The option did not have to be exercised until 1996/7. The purported oral exercise of the option was made in the context of the club moving to another location with the prospect that Mr Tsaoucis might transfer his restaurant to coincide with those new club premises. Also in this milieu were discussions about "two by four and a two by three" options. Whilst it is fairly obvious that Mr
Tsaoucis' statement regarding the options was a misreading of the addendum to the lease which must be understood as conferring one four year option and one three year option, the real significance is in his quip, "I'll be staying even if we go to another place no matter how many options I've got".

It seems to me that both the future tense of the word "will" and the circumstances in which the statement was made indicate that there was no present exercise of the options, but merely an indication that, at the appropriate time, the options would be taken up or that there would be an agreement for a new lease of the substituted premises.

Accordingly, I find that the option was not in fact exercised.
My decision on the validity of the exercise of the option means that a decision on this aspect is unnecessary. However, in case the matter should go further, I will briefly express a view on it. Ordinarily, where an option is granted to two people jointly, both must sign the exercise document. I analysed the cases on this point in Brennan versus Kinjella Pty Ltd (1993) 6
BPR 13,168. In that case an option was granted to Mr and Mrs Brennan. A purported notice of exercise was given commencing "I Timothy Francis Brennan hereby exercise the option". On the proper construction of the document I held that a notice signed by one grantee was insufficient because it did not purport to be an exercise of the option by both grantees.

Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin submitted that Brennan's case provided the same result in the instant situation. I doubt whether this is so because
Brennan's case was purely a matter of construction of the document there in question. The same can be said about another case cited to me, Sharp v
The Union Trustee Company of Australia Ltd <case>; [(1944) 69 CLR 539.] 
There may be cases where without special authorisation, a person may be able to exercise an option in his and another's name jointly. Ordinarily, because it involves the acquisition of an interest in land, one would expect that if one were to appoint the other as an agent to exercise an option over land, such appointment would be made by deed or registered power of attorney. I doubt whether in the case of husband and wife the mere relationship is sufficient to enable a spouse without prior authority to exercise a joint option. However, it may be in the case of partners, that there is such an authority. In the instant case, Mr Tsaoucis and the other grantee in the option were partners in the business that was being carried on in the demised premises.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/s5.html) of the [Partnership Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/) constitutes every partner as agent of the firm for the purpose of doing the business of the partnership. In the instant case, there may have been an argument that renewing the lease of the premises on which the partnership business was carried on may have been a purpose of the partnership. However, that was not argued by the plaintiffs. The plaintiffs' case was that as a general rule, Mr Kafkis left all these matters to Mr Tsaoucis. Whilst I accept that evidence, it does not seem to me that such a state of affairs is sufficient to show that as at the relevant date there was authority to exercise an option by Mr Tsaoucis on behalf of the partnership.

It is, of course, always possible to exercise an option by an agent; see for instance Farrands The Law of Options (LBC Melbourne 1992) p 101. However, the authorisation must exist at the date of the exercise of the option.
Sometimes there can be ratification later, but once proceedings have commenced, the time for ratification is usually over. In the present case I find no sufficient evidence to prove agency by Mr Kafkis to Mr Tsaoucis back in 1995.

It is also significant that when Mr Tsaoucis did purport to exercise the option he used the singular pronoun "I" rather than "we".

Unless agency can be shown, an option addressed to two people must be exercised by them both. An exception is a case where the construction of the document shows otherwise, but that is not this case. Even if a former partner who was a grantee of the option has equitably assigned all his interest in the relevant lease to the surviving partner, the surviving partner is not able to exercise the option in his own name alone: MacDonald versus Robins <case>; [(1954) 90 CLR 515], 524-5 and Churcher versus Danis Hotels Pty Ltd, Holland, J - February, 1980, as yet unreported.

Thus I would find, if it were necessary to do so, that the option was not properly exercised by the grantees.
This matter now needs to be considered because I have held that the option was not properly exercised.

The plaintiffs continue to hold over after the expiry of the lease until 26
April 1998, the date of the expiry of the notice to quit. They are still in possession, but pursuant to undertakings not to disturb them whilst these proceedings are being finalised. The present proceedings were commenced by summons filed 12 March 1998. Accordingly, if it were possible to exercise the option during the period of holding over, and the summons exercised the option (as to which see [s (a))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pa1892154/s5.html), then the plaintiffs would still succeed.

Farrands, op cit, at p 68, says that there is a divergence between English and Australian law on the point as to whether the option continues to be available for exercise during a holding over period. He says that in England it is considered that the parties intend that the option is available whilst the relationship of landlord and tenant continues whether or not this occurs during the original period: Rider versus Ford [[1923] 1 Ch 541.] 
Mr Warren in fact relied on Peters' case for quite the reverse proposition. Actually at pp 552 and 554, Menzies J indicated that it did not matter for the purposes of the case before the High Court on that occasion which alternative was correct as the same result would follow. However, he said that the rule was prima facie that the option must be exercised during the currency of the lease or at least whilst the relationship of landlord and tenant continued because it is "highly improbable that they would intend that after that relationship had ended the tenant could exercise an option to renew a lease that had already come to an end." Menzies, J distinguished Shearer's case on this point The Associated Minerals case is a more difficult case for Mr Warren to overcome, though it was dealing with a mining lease under a statute. In the Vincent Distributors' case King, J said, "It is clear that an option to purchase exercisable during the term of the lease cannot be exercised during a period of holding over in the absence of agreement to the contrary: In re Leeds and Batley Breweries' and Bradbury's Lease [[1920] Ch 548."] 
Bradbrook and Croft, Commercial Tenancy Law in Australia 2nd ed (Butterworths Sydney 1997) p 284, say, "If the lease does not fix any time for the exercise of the option, the option may be exercised so long as the relationship of landlord and tenant exists ... Accordingly, where a lease for three years was granted and it was agreed that the tenant might call for a further lease, no time being specified within which he was to call for it, and the tenant held over after the expiration of the original term as a tenant from year to year for four years and then required a lease, it was held that he was entitled to demand it ...". 
The learned authors refer as their authority for the last proposition the decision of Lord Romilly in Moss versus Barton <case>; [(1866) Beav 197]; [55 ER 870.] 
I believe the most convenient way of commenting on Moss versus Barton is to quote part of the judgment of Anglin, J in the Supreme Court of Canada in
Guardian Realty Co versus John Stark & Co [(1922) 70 DLR 333] at 344-5, "Much can be said for the opinion that convenience and certainty in regard to the position of landlord and tenant on the expiry of the original term would have been promoted by holding that the right of election for the renewal of a lease, under an option in which no time therefore [sic] is fixed, must be exercised before the expiry of the term to be renewed. The weight of American authority would appear to favour this view ... A similar opinion was expressed obiter by Bruce J in Lewis versus Stephenson [(1898) 67 LJQB 296.] But that opinion has been disregarded, if not overruled ... and, at least since
Romilly's decision in Moss versus Barton ... it must be taken as settled that in English law the exercise of such an option is not restricted to the duration of the original term, if nothing else has occurred to determine it, but endures so long as the lessee continues in possession with the sanction of the lessor. In Moss versus Barton, Lord Romilly may have unwittingly extended the effect of his own previous decision in Hersey versus Giblett <case>; [(1854) 18 Beav 174]; [52 ER 69] ... but Moss versus Barton was expressly approved in
Buckland versus Papillon [(1866) LR 1 Eq 477], and no dissent from it was suggested by Lord Chelmsford LC on the appeal in that case
LR 2 Ch App 67." 
The Guardian Realty case was followed in Newfoundland in Blomidon
Mercury Sales Ltd versus John Piercey's Auto Body Shop Ltd [(1981) 129 DLR (3d) .] The headnote sets out the principle, namely, "Where a lease gives the lessee an option to renew and does not specify when or in what manner the option must be exercised, it is validly exercised if the lessee remains in possession at the end of the term." 
The same was held in the New Zealand Court of Appeal in Bain versus Bartlett [[1922] NZLR 790], where following Moss versus Barton, it was held that the tenant may renew the option whilst he remains a tenant unless the landlord calls upon him either to exercise or decline to exercise the option at an earlier period.

As the Australian authority to the contrary can usually be distinguished on the basis that the point was not up for decision and as none of the Australian authority mentions Moss versus Barton, it seems to me that the rule set out in
England, Canada and New Zealand is also the rule in Australia. Accordingly, prima facie, where there is no time specified in the lease for exercising an option, it may be exercised during a holding over.

Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin say that clause 13.05 of the addendum is inconsistent with such a right. That clause says "In the event of the Lessee continuing to occupy the demised Premises after the expiration or sooner determination of the term with the consent of the Lessor without having exercised such option of renewal hereinbefore contained or having exercised such option continuing to occupy the demised Premises with such consent after the expiration or sooner determination of the renewed term than the Lessee shall become a monthly tenant of the Lessor at the rental payable for the last year of the immediately preceding term and otherwise on the same terms as herein contained or implied insofar as they are applicable excepting any option to renew which is expressly excluded and the tenancy shall be determinable at the expiration of one month's notice by either party to the other at any time." 
I have quoted this provision "warts and all". It obviously does not make complete sense as written in the document. Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin say, however, that the clause indicates that there are two alternatives to the lessees, (a) exercising the option; or (b) holding over, and if there is a holding over, it is on the same terms as the lease excepting an option to renew, "which is expressly excluded".

An argument, not as strong as Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin put, was considered and rejected by the Canadian courts in the Guardian Realty Co case. There, the argument appeared to have been that if a tenant has two rights, (a) a right to hold over; and (b) a right to exercise an option to renew merely by exercising right (a) does not prevent the tenant from exercising right (b).
That is not quite the argument of Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin in the present case. They say that the words "excepting any option to renew which is expressly excluded" plainly refer to the holding over period and make it clear that the option may only be exercised during the initial term.

I cannot see what semantic significance those words could have unless they are to the effect of the submission of Mr Ireland QC and Mr Larkin.

Accordingly, in my view, on the proper construction of the current lease the option was not available for exercise after the determination of the lease.
In view of my answer to question 4, this does not arise. In any event 5(b) would be too late because the occupation by permission of the landlord pending the giving of the decision in this case would be a licence not a lease so that the relationship of landlord and tenant ceased no later than 26 April 1998.
There is also the problem of the form of the latest attempt to exercise the option. The notices of 8 May, 1998 "without prejudice to our existing rights and without prejudice to any previous notice" purported to exercise the option. Although I had some initial hesitation about an attempt to assert a right "without prejudice" (see Haynes versus Hirst <case>; [(1927) 27 SR 480)],
I consider, on reflection, that the notices using that form of words are merely making it clear that previous notices are not waived.

As to 5(a), Mr Warren says that any clear intimation to the landlord that the tenant is exercising the option is sufficient to exercise that option and there can be no clearer indication than the issuing of proceedings.

It is certainly correct that where the lease does not set out any form of exercise of an option to renew, any communication couched in unqualified terms that the option is to be exercised is sufficient and no particular form is required, see Barnsley on Land Options (Oyez London 1978) p 205.

The present submission brings to mind the cases on dissolution of partnership where it has been held that the mere issue of proceedings to wind up the partnership show a desire by the plaintiffs to put an end to the partnership so that if it is a partnership at will it ceases on the issue of the statement of claim.

However, it does not seem to me that a summons which seeks a declaration that the option has already been exercised can itself operate as a notice to the landlord that the option is being exercised. As far as I can see, this contention was not put forward until the actual hearing of the case as a last resort. Thus, although it may be that an appropriately worded summons may have the effect of exercising an unexercised option, the summons in the present case did not have that effect. No reasonable landlord reading the summons would take it that the summons itself was exercising the option if it had not already been exercised.
There are two or three loose ends that I have not yet considered. I really do not need to consider these because they make no difference to the result, but in case the matter should go elsewhere, I will briefly deal with them.

The first is the submission of counsel for the defendant that in any event Mr
Ware, the person to whom Mr Tsaoucis made his 1995 communication was not a person who was authorised to receive notice of the exercise of the option. The submission was that Mr Ware was not the secretary of the club or its general manager, and under the [Registered Clubs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/), [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rca1976173/s32.html), it was only a person in that office who was the chief executive officer of the club and thus clothed with authority to receive it. I do not consider that this submission is correct. It is possible to notify the landlord of the exercise of option by any method which would come to the knowledge of its controllers, and I would have thought that a communication to Mr Ware would in the circumstances have been sufficient.

The next submission is that Mr Tsaoucis did not make it clear which of his four options he was exercising. Whilst this is semantically true, it seems to me in the circumstances that the only reasonable construction was not that Mr
Tsaoucis was merely flailing the air, but he was seeking to exercise the option that was available to him, namely, the first of the plaintiffs' two options.

However, for the reasons that I have given the plaintiffs must fail and the suit must be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
