

Regina versus Fernando Matter No 70071/95 [1997] NSWSC 323 (21 August 1997) 
Regina versus Brendan FERNANDO 
Regina versus Vester Allan FERNANDO /95 August 1997 
Abadee J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division /95 - REGINA versus Brendan FERNANDO 
REGINA versus Vester Allan FERNANDO 
SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: The prisoners appeared before me and a jury on 6 May 1997. They were indicted upon two charges set forth in the one indictment. The first charged each with the murder of Sandra Hoare at Walgett on 9 December 1994. The second charge alleged aggravated sexual intercourse with the same victim on the same date, being an offence contrary to the provisions of <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). 
After a long trial each of the prisoners were found guilty of the murder of
Sandra Hoare as charged. In addition, the prisoner Brendan Fernando was found guilty of the charge of aggravated sexual assault. The maximum penalty for such an offence which is one contrary to [s
J](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61j.html) is penal servitude for 20 years. Next, in accordance with my direction, the jury found the accused Vester Fernando not guilty of the charge of aggravated sexual assault. However, the jury found Vester Fernando guilty of an assault with intent to commit such an offence: see <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). He is liable to be punished accordingly. The punishment for that offence should not be greater than that provided for the full offence. As the Crown correctly submitted, without dissent, the courts generally pay regard to the maximum penalty for the completed offence in "offences of this type". The offences for which both prisoners are now to be sentenced are thus as stated.

The Crown case against the prisoner Vester Fernando was based substantially upon circumstantial evidence. At the trial he gave sworn evidence to the effect that at the time of the occurrence giving rise to the relevant events, he was in bed in the home of his sister. His case was rejected by the jury. As and against Brendan Fernando, the case was one based substantially upon admissions and confessional material, some of which in my view, the jury did not accept. Nor do I, particularly his evidence in relation to seeking to distance himself from involvement in the actual murder. At the trial he did not really argue that he should not in the circumstances be found not guilty of aggravated sexual assault, despite his not guilty plea.

As a matter of history it is appropriate to record that although the prisoner
Vester Fernando was charged with aggravated sexual assault, the Crown was unable on the evidence admissible against him, or to prove that actual sexual intercourse had taken place. He is in no way being sentenced upon the basis of his having committed that offence, but only upon the basis of his having been found guilty of the offence of assault with intent to commit that offence.

In relation to the sentencing proceedings and as a matter of history, Vester
Fernando gave no evidence.

In relation to Brendan Fernando, I record that he gave no evidence at the trial. This was his right. That he chose not to do so is not relevant for sentencing purposes. In relation to the matter of sentencing he also did not give evidence.

I turn to consider the offence of murder.
 [Section
A(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) provides that a person sentenced who commits the crime of murder is liable to penal servitude for life. However, the law authorises the passing of a lesser sentence than penal servitude for life. I have a discretionary power to sentence for a lesser period. Under the law a principal in the second degree is liable to the same punishment as a principal in the first degree. [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/index.html#p2) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) which relates to the setting of minimum and additional terms when sentencing a person to imprisonment for an offence does not apply to the sentencing of a person "to imprisonment for life or any other indeterminate period" ([Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) [s (c)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13.html)
As was said by the Court of Criminal Appeal in Regina versus Boyd (CCA 18
September 1995, unreported) (referred to in Regina versus Baker (CCA 20
September 1995, unreported)): "It is to be borne in mind that the Parliament of New South Wales in enacting [s 19A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html) of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) has recently declared that it is consistent with current community standards in this State for a person convicted of murder to be sentenced to serve the remainder of his life in prison".

The imposition of the maximum penalty for any offence including murder is a sentencing option reserved for cases which can properly be characterised as falling within the worst category of cases for which that penalty is prescribed: Ibbs versus The Queen <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR 447] at 451-452. When determining whether circumstances of the offence disclose the worst category of case, it is incorrect to consider whether it might be possible to envisage a worst case since "ingenuity can always conjure upon a case of greater heinousness": Veen versus The Queen (No ) <case>; [(1987-1988) 164 CLR 465] at : "The imagination is not required to ascend to great heights to identify a case which is to head the category as the worst case" per Wilson J at 489;
Regina versus Holden & Johnston [(1983) 3 NSWLR 245]; Regina v Twala (CCA 4 November 1994, unreported). In Twala Badgery-Parker J (with whom Carruthers and Finlay JJ agreed) said (at 7): "However, in order to characterise any case as being in the worst case category, it must be possible to point to particular features which are of very great heinousness and it must be possible to postulate the absence of facts mitigating the seriousness of the crime (as distinct from the subjective features mitigating the penalty to be imposed) ...".

Counsel for the Crown and Vester Fernando accepted that in referring to the circumstances which would prevent the imposition of a life sentence, the sentencing judge should look only to those objective features which would relevantly mitigate the seriousness of the offences.

In order to determine whether a case falls within the worst case one does not adopt the approach urged by Mr Wendler for Vester Fernando (indeed, also by Mr
Parker for Brendan Fernando) for example, that the case should be of the type where there has been a multiple murder, or murder of a child or of children.
These may be examples of the worst category case, but they are no more than that. Indeed, such cases may provide single instant examples of when the circumstances of a particular case will answer the description of the worst category case: cf R versus Milat (Hunt CJ at CL 27 July 1996, unreported) (multiple murders); R versus Garforth (CCA 23 May 1994, unreported) a case involving murder of the young nine year old schoolgirl Ebony Simpson. These cases lay down no rules of what will be the relevant heinousness of conduct in all cases. Heinousness of the conduct is also to be determined by reference to the particular facts of the case as found.

In Regina versus Kalajzich (16 May 1997, unreported) Hunt CJ at CL (in dealing with an application made pursuant to the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/)) expressed views which in fact specifically advert to some of the matters raised by Mr Wendler and indeed, by Mr Parker. He said at pp 16-17 and I quote in some detail: "The maximum penalty for murder of penal servitude for life, meaning for the term of the prisoner's natural life, is (as I have said) reserved for cases falling within the worst category of cases, but it is not reserved only for those cases where the prisoner is likely to remain a continuing danger to society for the rest of his life or for those cases where there is no chance of rehabilitation; the maximum may be appropriate where the level of culpability is so extreme that the community interest in retribution and punishment can only be met by such a punishment. It must nevertheless be possible in the individual case to point to its particular features which are of very great heinousness, and there must be an absence of any facts mitigating the objective seriousness of the crime (as distinct from any subjective features mitigating the penalty to be imposed).

On behalf of the applicant, it was argued that this case had none of the particularly heinous features of the various cases in which life sentences have been imposed pursuant to [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), in that there were no multiple killings, the single killing was not sex- related or a thrill killing, there was no extended suffering or extraordinary violence, and the applicant is not a lingering danger to the community, On the other hand, it was submitted, there is a powerful subjective case, in that the applicant is well on the way to rehabilitation, he has strong family support and he has no prior convictions.

I do not obtain much assistance by comparing the facts of the present case directly with the facts of those cases in which life sentences have been imposed pursuant to [s
A.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html)
The fact that other cases - actual or envisaged - may be worse than the present case does not mean that the present case does not fall within the worst category." [my emphasis] 
In Baker Allen J when discussing the matter of the maximum penalty for murder observed: "It would be foolish in the extreme to attempt to give a list of cases which would warrant the Court taking the most extreme measure available to the law".

Having referred to these matters I return to state several other matters. The standard of proof in sentencing proceedings is, as it is at the trial, proof beyond reasonable doubt. Next, two prisoners are to be sentenced. Neither is to be sentenced except on the basis of facts which, by evidence admissible against him, are proved to my satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt. This may indicate in some cases a different degree of criminality of one accused to a co-accused, therefore attracting a more lenient sentence. Further, the offender must be sentenced by reference to his or her own circumstances and not simply by reference to the sentence on the co-accused.

The principles to be applied in sentencing have also been developed by reference to the purposes of criminal punishment.

The purposes of criminal punishment are various "... protection of society, deterrence of the offender and of others who might be tempted to offend, retribution and reform. The purposes may overlap. They are guide posts to the appropriate sentence": Veen (No 2) at 476.

However, sentencing is essentially a discretionary exercise requiring consideration of variable facts and circumstances of individual cases and the application to those facts of the principles of sentencing.

There can be no doubt that the protection of human life and personal safety is a primary objective of the criminal justice system. Equally on sentencing one should have regard to community standards and impose sentences which should accord with the general moral sense of the community, and further or alternatively. Further, it is appropriate that it appear that punishment fitting the crime has been imposed, with the community seeing that offenders have also received their "just desserts".

It is always important in seeking to determine the sentence appropriate to a particular crime to have regard to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively, for without such an assessment the other factors requiring consideration before arriving at the proper sentence to be imposed cannot properly be given their place.

I now turn to consider the facts and circumstances in relation to the offences in respect of which sentences are to be imposed.

During the evening of 8 December 1994 and the early hours of 9 December 1994,
Vester Fernando together with Brendan Fernando, his cousin, were around and about the main street of Walgett. Vester Fernando had in his possession his machete.

Later again in the early hours of the morning of 9 December 1994 Vester and
Brendan Fernando met up with Michael Jackson. Vester had his machete with him.
They called to Jackson and asked him whether he wanted to steal a car with them. At the beginning he was apparently reluctant to do so. However, Vester in the presence of Brendan said to him don't worry about anyone grabbing him because he had a machete. He showed the machete to Jackson. Vester also said "If anyone grabs you I'll kill them". Brendan said they would go up to the top end (where the hospital was located) because there should be some good cars up there. Jackson and both the Fernandos walked towards the hospital.

En route to the Walgett hospital Jackson left the prisoners. They then broke into a Sigma station wagon parked outside the Peg Cross Ward of the hospital.
An attempt was made to start the car and property including cassette tapes was stolen from the car. I am satisfied that at some time whilst these events were taking place that Brendan Fernando observed the deceased through a window.
Both prisoners then entered the ward of the hospital.

At the relevant time, on duty in the Geriatric ward, working alone was the deceased Sandra Hoare. She was a young woman, aged 21. She had recently graduated as a nurse. In mentioning these matters I am not to be suggesting punishment for homicide varies according to the personal qualities and characteristics of the victim but rather as has been said "the qualities of a particular victim may serve as a useful reminder of the quality of human life, itself and of all that is involved in taking it away": Regina versus McDonald (CCA 12 December 1995, unreported). The personal qualities of a victim also serve to focus upon an important aspect of sentencing law, namely the protection of human life and personal safety are primary objectives of the system of criminal justice.

When Sandra Hoare left home to commence duty at about 10.40pm on 8 December ,she was wearing a bra and underpants, a blouse, blue slacks and shoes and sockettes. The last contact anyone had with her was about 12.30am on the morning of 9 December 1994 when she was spoken to over the phone in her ward by another nurse. At about 2.50am she was found to be missing. The fact is she had been forcibly abducted from the hospital ward by both men. A geriatric patient in the ward was seen to have been suffering from various injuries including bleeding from the wound to the top of the head. The doctor gave evidence describing the injuries to the elderly patient's head. He said that one of the machetes found in the dam on 10 December 1994 and which I find was
Vester's machete could have caused such injury. I am satisfied that the machete had been used by Vester Fernando to assault the patient in the ward.
This was done in the presence or vicinity of Brendan Fernando. I am satisfied that the deceased was aware of what had happened.

After the deceased was found missing a search for her was made. Subsequently, three sets of footprints were found leading from near the eastern hospital gate going north and then east to a treed area of the oval some distance from the No 2 Oval of Walgett. The location was some walking distance away from the hospital, and in a dark location. I find the deceased was taken to that darkened location by the two prisoners. Indeed, I am satisfied that the deceased was forcibly abducted more or less at machete point from the hospital. This weapon was used to force the deceased to accompany the two men.
Vester Fernando had his machete and was using it to threaten the deceased.
Whilst Vester was holding his machete, the property stolen from the car was probably being carried by Brendan. I find that the three sets of footprints found leading to the treed area at the south end of the No 2 Oval were the footprints of Brendan and Vester Fernando and the deceased. I also consider that during the journey to the oval she was being threatened by Vester with the machete and to the full knowledge of Brendan Fernando. In the latter's presence, both on route to the Oval and subsequently, prior to her death,
Vester probably inflicted upon her one or more of the cuts found on post mortem to have occurred to her face and jaw, and which I will describe in greater detail in due course.

At the No 2 Oval I am satisfied that the prisoner, Vester Fernando committed the offence of assault with intent of which he was found guilty. Brendan committed the sexual offence of which he too was found guilty. She was sexually assaulted in the most degrading circumstances. I am satisfied that at the treed location at No 2 Oval, the deceased was either forced to remove her clothes, or her clothes were physically removed. She was told to lay down on what was wet ground. In confessional admissions to the police made by Brendan
Fernando (admitted against Brendan only) Brendan admitted that he deliberately held both the girl's legs, whilst she was sexually assaulted by Vester. This is an admission as and against Brendan Fernando and I treat it as such for sentencing purposes. Both men were however involved. I am satisfied that force was also used. I am satisfied that some of the bruising found later on her body and one or more of the non lethal cuts or wounds were inflicted at the No Oval location when she was assaulted. However, after the assault the deceased was not released. She was forced to continue to accompany the two prisoners. Vester retained the machete. This was used to force the girl to continue with them. Brendan knew it was being used for that purpose. In relation to his actual knowledge of what Vester was doing with the machete, including holding it to the deceased woman's throat, I refer in passing to questions and answers 88, 164 to 166 in what I will refer to as the Brendan
Fernando "run-around" transcript.

After having been assaulted at the No 2 Oval. the deceased was not permitted to dress properly. Her bra and pants were retained by the prisoners, both or either of them. I am satisfied that her state of partial undress at the time her body when found, save for the knotted piece of blouse around her neck, probably reflected her dress situation at the time when she was forced to leave the No 2 Oval.

The journey from the No 2 Oval to the paddock where her body was found was some hundreds of metres away. A distance of approximately 400 metres was been mentioned. It must have taken some little time for the three persons to have walked this distance. I am satisfied that the two prisoners and the deceased walked, generally side by side to the east and then south to the locus where the deceased was murdered.

I now turn to consider what happened at the death scene. I find that Vester
Fernando killed her with his machete. I am satisfied that both men physically participated in her actual killing. I am satisfied that at the location where she was killed, the three persons paused for some little time before the deceased was ultimately killed. Precisely for how long I cannot say. I accept that one or more of the cuts to the jaw could well have been inflicted at this location by Vester Fernando before the lethal wounds were inflicted by him. I find that from the time of the abduction to the time of her ultimate death, a period of about one hour had elapsed.

In the circumstances of this case it is appropriate to describe in some detail the injuries based on the evidence of Dr Du Flou, which I accept.

At post mortem deep incised (cut) wounds were located on the neck. They were severe injuries one of which almost caused a beheading. The two wounds may be briefly described. There was a 180mm horizontally aligned gaping incised wound on the left side of the neck extending from the midline anteriorly (front) passing around the neck and 50mm to the right of the midline at the base of the neck. This injury was unsurvivable. Three cut or saw marks could be identified on the superior edge of the wounds posteriorly. To put it another way a number of cut marks were seen consistent with a sawing motion and more than one involving backward and forward or side to side motions. The wounds were from side to side involving motions of sawing. The injury to the neck passed through numerous layers of muscles, the internal jugular vein was entirely severed in the mid neck region. The left vertebral artery had been entirely severed at the level of the C6 vertebra. The track of the wound ended between vertebral C6 and C7. This wound was probably the fatal or lethal wound or injury. In addition, there was found to be another very significant injury a 150mm gaping transversely aligned incised wound (a cut wound from side to side across the front of the her neck). This second injury was probably sustained before the first injury, and would have potentially killed her but for the other injuries. Examination of the wound revealed three cut marks on the right side of the wound and two cut marks (including a sawing motion) on the left. The wounds suggest that the deceased was almost beheaded or decapitated.

After she was murdered a piece of blood stained blouse was loosely tied around her neck with a knot on the left side which Dr Du Flou considered had been applied to the neck after the two injuries were sustained. There were no cuts to the fabric, consistent with it being applied after the lethal wounds were inflicted.

Also found on post mortem were a number of incised cut wounds. There were four wounds or cuts to the deceased's left side of the jaw of sufficient depth to strike the jaw bone. I find that these were caused by the point of a machete being used by Vester and were inflicted as I have indicated at one or more times after the abduction and prior to the infliction by him of the actual death wounds. Another wound was to the left jaw line. In my view this occurred prior to the infliction of the injuries that killed the deceased.

In addition there were scratch marks on the right side of the neck. These too
I find were caused by the point of the machete. There were five areas of bruising to the deceased's body which in my view were sustained prior to the death. The bruising to the right upper arm and left arm could have been caused by restraint of the deceased even by knees on the upper arm. On post mortem internal examination there was found a small bruise on the scalp, likely to have been inflicted by blunt force to the head. Again in my opinion this injury was caused prior to death.

Following her death a torn part of the deceased's blouse was tied around the deceased's neck by one or both of the prisoners. Attempts were made to partly cover the woman's head with dirt. These actions must have taken some little time to carry out. The woman's body was then left lying in the open paddock where it was discovered at about 4pm on Friday, 9 December.

Following the death, the two prisoners left the scene. They had with them some of the girl's clothes which were never found, and had with them property stolen by them earlier that evening. Vester had his machete. Two sets of footprints side by side led immediately from the body south across the paddock through the town environs across another paddock and then to a levee bank, indeed, to a small tree on the west of the bank. These footprints were the footprints of the two prisoners. Part of the stolen property was found in such location. The murder weapon was later recovered from a dam in the vicinity.

Having carefully set out the objective facts and circumstances in some considerable detail, one might perhaps readily conclude from such alone, this crime of murder falls into the worst category case of murder.

In my view there are further aggravating features or factual characteristics increasing the objective seriousness of the crime of murder. The aggravating features exist in respect of the murder cases against both prisoners. The additional features or matters in my view increase the objective seriousness of the crime of murder and amply warrant treating this case of murder in both instances as being in the worst category of case.

The particular features of the case which further impress me as bringing this crime of murder within the worst category of a murder case, I shall now identify. There was an element of premeditation and planning prior to the actual killing. I do not consider the killing was a mere spur of the moment offence. The offence of murder was committed in company. Prior to the killing there was a forcible abduction involving the use of a machete followed by the assault offence committed upon a young woman. I should note that it has not been submitted that merely because the two prisoners will be sentenced in respect of the earlier assault on the deceased in the No 2 Oval that such must be disregarded in evaluating the seriousness of the homicide itself. It has not been suggested that to have regard to such when dealing with this crime of murder would infringe any principle discussed in De Simoni versus The Queen <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383.] Nor is it submitted that any principle discussed in Garforth would be transgressed. It has been accepted by all parties that such matters are part of the circumstances to be considered in these cases against both prisoners in relation to the crime or offence of murder. However, even if it were otherwise, such would not of itself be a matter that would affect my ultimate conclusion that this crime of murder falls within the worst category case of murder in relation to the offenders. Whilst I am unable in terms to make a specific finding that the death was involved in a slow or painful death, the evidence showing the nature of the two terrible injuries (including sawing motion) in the circumstances that I have described, would suggest that there were some elements of both.

Next, there was extended concentrated suffering over a period of an hour or so. There was accompanying degradation and humiliation. The injuries to the jaw and face caused by the use of the machete, being a form of physical torture ought not to be overlooked. There is the mental torture, terror and great fear that must have been present. Indeed, such mental torture would no doubt have been even more severe after the assault at the oval. When she was not released after the assault, the deceased woman no doubt would have suffered even more greatly. Next, this is a case involving two strong men killing a young defenceless and vulnerable woman who had done them no harm and with callous indifference to human life. Another important aggravating feature is that the deceased nurse was taken by force, from a hospital in an outback country town, where she would have expected to have been secure and safe when working. There was no respect for the hospital, or for the deceased nurse working within it, tending the aged, ill and infirm. The horrendous savage injuries were also inflicted with extraordinary violence, the mode and manner of their infliction reflecting callous indifference to life. As I have indicated this killing was not merely one involving a single injury. These matters which involve both prisoners, further point to the crime of murder as falling within the worst category of murder, in respect of each of the prisoners. Next, as in the case against Vester Fernando, a matter of considerable significance in terms of a further aggravating feature is the fact that the crime was committed whilst he was on parole. He was at the time of the murder serving an additional term for another violent crime, that of assault with intent to rob being in company. That this aggravating feature does not exist in the case of Brendan Fernando does not of itself cause me to reach any different conclusion as to how Brendan Fernando's case should be viewed, or alter the category of murder into which his should be placed.

Finally, I would also find were it necessary, to do so, that the murder was probably committed to help ensure that the deceased could not identify the prisoners who had been involved in the events and offences which occurred preceding her death. Further, she was a potential witness against the prisoners and would have been able to assist in bringing them to justice for their conduct and criminality. She was in any event an actual victim herself.

It is appropriate to further examine with some care and in some detail the involvement and participating role of Brendan Fernando in the actual killing.

Whilst I am satisfied that the actual wound(s) responsible for the death of the victim were actually physically inflicted by Vester, I am also satisfied that at the time of such infliction Brendan was physically involved in holding the deceased. His attempt in the record of interview to distance himself from actual immediate physical presence, participation and involvement, and upon the basis that he was walking away at the time when the lethal injuries were actually inflicted, should be firmly rejected. I am satisfied that but for the use of the machete, he was fully involved as a full active willing participant including being as I have said, physically involved at the time of the infliction of the lethal injuries by Vester Fernando. There are a number of indicia pointing to such a conclusion. In the first place he was willing to be a physical participant and was a physical participant in the holding of the girl at the No 2 Oval. On his own admission he had physically held the girl whilst she was being assaulted. He was thus, not adverse to physical participation or providing physical help in the assault offence. He had been involved and participated in her abduction from the hospital. He knew that
Vester had the machete and that it was being used to force her to accompany them. The three persons walked together from the hospital during which time he knew that the machete was being held by Vester to the young woman's throat. He knew of its use in the assault at the No 2 Oval.

There are other significant reasons for concluding that Brendan physically participated and assisted Vester in the actual killing of the girl. They are as follows: there are the three sets of footprints up to the body and two sets of footprints leading away from the head of the body or from the body. These footprints clearly indicates that the two men, Vester and Brendan walked away from the murder location side by side. The two sets of footprints leading away from the body, is a very highly damaging piece of evidence indicating joint involvement of both men in the actual killing itself. Despite Brendan
Fernando's denials the footprints are very significant and point to both physical presence and indeed, physical participation in the killing itself. As
I have said there were two significant lethal wounds involving in addition sawing motions, which took some little time at least to inflict. As I have already stated in my view the deceased's body, or part of it was being held by
Brendan Fernando at the time Vester Fernando inflicted the lethal injuries.
There is the evidence of struggle by the deceased of feet moving, or perhaps even some arcing. The ground disturbance suggests violent movement of the girl and suggests that she needed to be also restrained. As I have said Brendan had no qualms about holding her before at No 2 Oval. Subsequent to the actual killing there is evidence that the head was partly buried in the dirt. There is evidence that following infliction of the death wounds, a piece of the girl's blouse was then tied around her throat with a knot on the left side.
The evidence also points to involvement of the two prisoners in the partial burying. The two prisoners were at the scene for some time after the murder being active at such location before leaving side by side.

The prisoner Brendan gave no evidence. This further makes it easier for me to determine and find that his participation in the killing also involved his physically holding the deceased whilst Vester inflicted the lethal wounds. I reject his statement to the police of non immediate physical presence or participation in the death of the deceased and that he was walking away.

For the above reasons I find that Brendan Fernando's participation involved his physically helping, holding the deceased whilst the lethal injuries were being inflicted by Vester Fernando. However, even if he were not at the very precise moment when the death inflicting injuries were being imposed, physically holding the deceased, such matter would not of itself in all the circumstances cause me to conclude that Brendan Fernando's offence did not fall within the worst category of case. Were it necessary to do so, I would also further find that he was assisting after the lethal injuries were inflicted in relation to either or both the partial burying of the head and the tying of the blouse around the deceased's neck.

Mr Parker, on behalf of Brendan Fernando, accepted that there was no positive authority to the effect that a principal in the second degree would not have such extreme culpability as to potentially place such offender in the worst category or suggest that such a person is less culpable. However, I do not need authority. In my view the level of culpability of Brendan Fernando, the objective circumstances the further and additional aggravating features involved are such as to warrant his offence as being treated as falling within the worst case category of murder.

Before turning to matters advanced on behalf of the prisoners it is convenient to deal with several other matters.

The level of culpability of Vester Fernando, the gravity of the objective circumstances that I have referred to in detail and the further and additional aggravating features in my opinion also warrant treating the murder offence by
Vester Fernando as being within the worst case category of murder.

Before turning to consider matters raised by or on behalf of the respective prisoners it is appropriate if I deal with several other matters.

First, what I shall call the Victim's Impact Statement tendered without objection under <case> of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/). It is not argued by either prisoner that the material was not receivable because of non compliance with any procedural requirement or was not in form of a statement within the legislation. The report of Dr Skinner of 10 July signed by Mrs Hoare, the deceased's mother on 12 August 1997, in circumstances which need not be detailed, makes sad and moving reading. No person reading it would not be moved by it or feel a high sense of sympathy and compassion towards the mother. This said, I should add having presided at this trial for many weeks, as a judge, even without the statement, I do understand how this tragic death of her daughter would impact upon Mrs Hoare. The statement confirms such. What
Mrs Hoare has actually told Dr Skinner does elicit my full sympathy and understanding. That said I must determine how and whether the statement is relevant to my task as a sentencing judge.

The legislation requires me to receive the statement in evidence as I have done but provides that I must not consider it in relation to the sentence to be imposed unless I consider it to be appropriate to do so: <case>. I agree with the reasons and observations of Hunt CJ at CL in Regina versus Previtera (27 May 1997, unreported) that it is difficult to conceive of a case where the offence involves the death of the victim to see how a statement of the kind I am considering by a member of the family could be relevant to the sentence to be imposed, or properly bear upon the question of sentence. Such views were followed and applied by Hidden J in Regina versus Audsley (30 May 1997, unreported). For these reasons I do not consider it appropriate to have regard to the statement in determining the sentences to be imposed in either the case of Vester Fernando or Brendan Fernando. However, before leaving this subject there is another matter that I would choose to make further comment upon. I do not see how the Victim's Impact Statement can further or alternatively be relied upon for the purpose of assisting me in determining whether or not a case of murder can or should be categorised as being in the worst category of case or helps me on that question. I have already indicated at the beginning of my judgment the relevant principles and discussed the law relevant to this question. As the Crown Prosecutor correctly and properly observed a Victim's
Impact Statement in a case such as the present "can't have any effect".
However, the sentences at the end of the day, to be imposed are, in the result not affected by my not having regard to the Victim's Impact Statement as being relevant to the question of sentence. Those sentences will, I believe, reveal to the victim or victims left behind, that justice has been done. Further one would hope that the bringing to justice of these two prisoners and their sentencing, will bring some peace of mind and comfort to Mrs Hoare, and provide her with some assistance in reconstructing with her life as best she can.

Next it is appropriate if I now advert to the records of each of the two prisoners. Neither record attracts any possible leniency.

Vester Fernando (DOB 15 April 1970) has a long record of crimes against property and crimes of violence dating back to 1986. His conviction for personal crimes of violence include offences of robbery with wounding (1989); for assault with intent to rob being in company (1993). As I have mentioned the present offence of murder was committed whilst he was on parole for that offence.

Brendan Fernando (DOB 16 October 1971) too has a lengthy record extending back to 1987. His record includes property offences, a number of offences of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, and assault. He has a conviction for robbery (1991).

Each has served prison sentences. Neither has learnt from his experience.

Another matter particularly relevant to the matter of sentencing is the age of each prisoner. Brendan is now aged almost 26 years and Vester Fernando is aged years. Life Expectancy Tables suggest a life expectancy for Brendan
Fernando of 50 years or so, and for Vester Fernando 49 years or so. I am deeply conscious that were I to find that each of their cases attracted the maximum penalty that they would face respectively at least 50 years and 49 years in gaol, if the maximum penalties were imposed. These matters emphasise the grim reality of a maximum sentence of life in cases such as the present. I take these matters into account, but I do not shrink from my responsibility and duty to impose life sentences, if such are the proper sentences in the circumstances.

Before turning to the matter of considering in particular mitigating features and subjective considerations in each of the two cases, it is worthwhile making a number of general observations relevant to each of the two cases that
I am to consider. First, there are some cases where the level of culpability is so extreme that the community interest in retribution and punishment can only be met through the imposition of the maximum penalty: see Garforth.
Next, rehabilitation and the prospect of offering a person some hope from incarceration, whilst being important considerations and are to be taken into account in favour of persons in the position of each of the prisoners, nevertheless, the requirement of retributive judgments involving the objective features of an instant case may amply warrant not only a case being regarded as in the worst category of case but as warranting the imposition of the maximum penalty: see Baker and Garforth. Indeed, as the decision of Hunt CJ at CL in Milat illustrates there may in some cases falling within the category of the worst class of cases, where there is even little utility in considering the prospects of rehabilitation. Indeed, it may be that in such cases the subjective circumstances generally of a prisoner himself can not play any real decisive part. In Milat Hunt CJ at CL emphasised that apart from a horrible crime or crimes requiring sentences operating by way of retribution, there may also be a need for the sentence to operate by way of public deterrence to ensure that those whose character may incline them to similar behaviour in the future will be reminded powerfully that severe punishment will be imposed should they give in to temptation. May I add this message by way of some plain speaking. To those persons who might be tempted to commit, as in this case, murder, stop and think again. Reflect for a moment about your age, and where, you may spend the rest of your life.

Next, the punishment should be seen to fit the crime. The sentences should also accord with the general moral sense of the community, and I do not overlook this in my sentencing.

Next both Mr Wendler (and later Mr Parker) have referred me to the decision of
Wood J in R versus Fernando [(1992) 76 A Crim R 58], (not either of the present prisoners) and rely upon it in the instant case. In that case Wood J referred to the relevance of aboriginality and that such relevance is not necessarily to mitigate punishment but rather to explain or throw light on the particular offence and the circumstances of the offender.
He observed that abuse of alcohol by a person standing for sentence may reflect socio-economic circumstances. That these matters should be considered in appropriate cases, has been accepted by the Court of Criminal Appeal: cf
Regina versus Ryan (30 October 1995, unreported).

However, the weight of such matters is for another matter. Absent the reference to and reliance upon Fernando, I would not have found it necessary to refer to the fact that both prisoners were indigenous or aboriginal persons. By reference to that decision it is submitted by counsel that socio-economic factors including alcohol abuse should be brought into mitigating account in imposing sentences against both Brendan and Vester
Fernando. That sentencing principles are to be applied irrespective of the identity of a particular offender or his membership of an ethnic or other group is that all people are equal before the law is not in dispute. However, in sentencing courts are required to take into account "all material facts including those facts which exist by reason of an offenders membership of an ethnic or other group": R versus Neal <case>; [(1982) 7 A Crim R 129.] 
In respect of both Vester and Brendan Fernando I would make several observations. Each has, as I have said, a somewhat lamentable record of crime.
One can but surmise that the issues raised in Fernando's case have been perhaps raised before in respect of previous criminal proceedings. I make no finding that such is the case. Nevertheless, in sentencing I have had regard and give such weight to the matters raised by counsel by reference to that decision in each of the cases.

Next, the matter of rehabilitation has been raised, more particularly so in the case of Brendan Fernando than by Vester Fernando. It too is a relevant matter to consider on sentencing. In Garforth there was a rejection of the proposition that it is only where there is no chance of rehabilitation that the maximum penalty for life can be imposed. The subject of consideration of rehabilitation prospects, depending on the evidence, may or may not be found to be poor.

I now turn to the specific mitigating features and subjective considerations raised in Vester Fernando's case. From the Bar Table Mr Wendler referred to the prisoner's background and education. He comes from a large family and was educated to Year 9 when he left school. He obtained work. His antecedent report disclosed significant contact with the criminal justice system. He has a prior background of offending said to be associated with ingestion of drugs and alcohol. No medical evidence was called touching on these matters. Prior to these offences he had been in custody and ended up in a rehabilitation centre at Brewarrina. He was on parole at the time of the offences. Mr Wendler has been submitted a sentence should take into account a prospect of rehabilitation. As to rehabilitation I do not feel that on the evidence his prospects of rehabilitation are other than very poor. One only has to look at the past as a guide. Indeed, the case is one where because of the horrendous nature of the murder there is not any real utility in considering the prospects of his rehabilitation at all. However, I have considered the matter.

Next, his background, and his alcohol problem has been mentioned. In the circumstances of this, it is difficult to see what either has got to do with the case. Neither can be any form of excuse for what happened. As regards the matter of alcohol his caring father gave evidence. In relation to Vester's consumption of alcohol from an early age, drinking, he said is "the main problem with all aboriginal children out in Walgett" (this is a matter of concern, a view one supported to an extent by some of the evidence in the case). In my view matters of alcohol abuse or socio-economic circumstances can at most have but little weight in the evaluation of the sentences to be imposed. Indeed, in this case there is little from any mitigating circumstances that can be obtained. In Vester Fernando's case it cannot be said subjective consideration or mitigating circumstances can play any significant part in sentence.

The matter of totality has not been raised on behalf of Vester Fernando. It is also accepted that any sentence for the non murder offence should be for a fixed concurrent term.

In relation to the offence for the assault with intent, it has a penalty at large. It is for that offence he is to be sentenced, but as the Crown correctly submitted (without dispute) it is proper to have regard to the maximum penalty for the completed offence. The sentence I propose to impose will be a fixed term sentence concurrent with the sentence for murder. On any view the non murder offence was objectively a very serious and grave one.

The sentences to be imposed in respect of Vester Fernando will, when imposed, need to commence on 27 November 1996, being the date when parole for this earlier sentence expired. This is the date also accepted by the Crown and Mr
Wendler.

I turn to the submissions in relation to mitigating features and subjective considerations advanced on behalf of Brendan Fernando. I do not however, restate those matters which I have already dealt with pertaining to him.

Much of what I have said in relation to matters such as retribution, deterrence, community interest in appropriate punishment, apply equally to
Brendan Fernando and I do not pause to repeat what I have said.

As in the case of Vester, his sentence too should accord with the general moral sense of the community, with the punishment being commensurate with his extreme level of culpability.

Mr Parker on behalf of Brendan Fernando too has relied upon the matter of
Brendan's aboriginality (including suggested associated alcohol abuse). He also referred to, and relied on Fernando's case. Mr Parker submitted I should not ignore the aboriginality of Brendan Fernando and his "small town background" in considering the particular individual, and as being also relevant to consideration of eventual rehabilitation. I would surmise that having regard to Brendan's history, some of the issues in Fernando's case would have been raised before in prior proceedings. Indeed, I would not rate the prospects of rehabilitation as being of any real moment on the basis of the evidence before me. I would regard his prospects to say the least, as poor. In the circumstances of this case again there is little utility in considering any further prospects of his rehabilitation. In my view in the circumstances of this case, none of these matters raised by Mr Parker should be regarded as being significantly relevant mitigating factors for the purposes of sentence. I have also had regard to reports from the Department of
Community Affairs, the contents thereof and school record showing he left
Walgett High School in February 1987. He was then aged 16 years. I take these matters into account. However, these matters carry no or little weight in the circumstances of his case.

Next, it has been submitted in Brendan Fernando's case that I should have regard to the evidence of Associate Professor Hayes, Head of the Department of
Behavioural Sciences suggesting that the prisoner Brendan Fernando may have an intellectual disability that is somehow relevant. There is no dispute that psychological and psychiatric evidence on intelligence is a matter that is, or may be, relevant to sentencing: Regina versus Van Gelder (CCA 28 February , unreported). However, I am not compelled to accept Professor Hayes' evidence, the results of her tests, or their reliability on the matter of the presence or extent of suggested intellectual disability. Indeed, even if present I would be bound to conclude it is even a circumstance or a mitigating feature that has much weight. However, on the facts I do not find the presence of such disability that can play any relevant role. In any event if there were some disability of the type described by Professor Hayes, in the circumstances it would carry little weight. This is so because of the objective facts.
Indeed, one should also be careful not to readily cause offence to the other law abiding citizens, who may have the same intellectual disability, that it is submitted Brendan Fernando has.

I do not accept Professor Hayes' claim based on tests conducted by her that
Brendan has a mild intellectual disability or even her suggestion of possible brain damage. In saying this I put to one side that Brendan Fernando has not even given evidence on sentencing in relation to his involvement in testing programs. There are however, more significant reasons for rejecting her views.
I accept the evidence of Dr Skinner that Brendan Fernando has no brain damage, as well as and her evidence that Brendan's "behaviour" was somewhat inconsistent with the test results administered by Professor Hayes. Dr Skinner said she would be more guided by person's functions than simply by testing. I also have regard to the impressive evidence of two lay witnesses, whose evidence I feel I can safely and properly rely upon. Their commonsense, their capacity to assess and evaluate Brendan Fernando based on actual dealings is accepted by me. Constable Mayers gave evidence at the trial of knowing the various inhabitants of Walgett, both Aboriginal and non Aboriginal between -1992 and September 1993 to March 1995. He knew Brendan Fernando, who he described as being a "very intelligent" person. More significantly is the most impressive evidence of Mr Trindall, an Aboriginal Liaison Officer with the
Walgett police for the last nine years. He gave evidence at the trial. I would regard him as being particularly well qualified, being also an aboriginal person, to give evidence about Brendan Fernando. He said he had known him for many years having had frequent dealings and conversations with Brendan over those years. He gave evidence of knowing 95% of the aboriginal population in
Walgett. He described Brendan Fernando's intelligence, as average as any other person in the town. He agreed in cross-examination he had no expertise in assessing the level of a person's intelligence, giving what I consider was a somewhat common sense answer to the effect, "he had only common knowledge".
Commonsense and common knowledge are good ingredients for assessing and evaluating a person.

Thus in my opinion I do not find that Brendan Fernando has a mild intellectual disability hovering around as was suggested in the mild range of intellectual disability. But even were it to be otherwise, in the circumstances of this case it is not in my view a relevant mitigating feature, of any moment.

Mr Parker asked me to take into account Brendan Fernando's background and that he came from a background of "no great advantage". Whatever such words may mean, what they have to do with the matter is not clear. Such can provide no mitigating excuse in the circumstances of this case. Many people in the community come from similar backgrounds and commit no offences, and remain law abiding citizens. I have already given weight to the submission that I should give him a goal and structure a sentence to promote rehabilitation having regard to his life expectancy and present age. In my view this submission should be rejected in the circumstances of this case. Retribution, indeed also the matter of general deterrence, point in the opposite direction and point to the imposition of the most severe punishment.

So far as this murder is concerned, whilst I have given weight to the matters raised on behalf of Brendan Fernando as mitigating factors and subjective considerations in the result I am of the view that the subjective considerations in this case can play but little part in sentencing. His level of culpability for the murder is also so extreme that the community interest in retribution (indeed in general deterrence as well) and punishment, points to the need to impose the severest of sentences.

Like in Vester Fernando's case no argument has been advanced by reference to the principle of totality. It is accepted that a fixed term of imprisonment needs to be imposed for the very serious offence of aggravated sexual assault.

As to Brendan Fernando's offence of aggravated sexual assault, as I have said carries a penalty of 20 years penal servitude. In the instant case the prisoner has been convicted of the completed offence. Vester Fernando was convicted of an assault with intent. Brendan Fernando has been in custody since 10 December 1994.

In sentencing both Vester and Brendan Fernando, there is the matter of totality, since sentencing in each case for two offences. I propose to impose in each case concurrent fixed term sentences. Because the sentences are to be concurrent fixed term ones there is no point in fixing for the non murder offences minimum and additional terms.

The sentences for the non murder offences in both Vester Fernando's case and
Brendan Fernando's case will thus be concurrent fixed terms since they respectively will be overlapped or subsumed in the longer sentences for murder.

Before proceeding to formal sentencing I wish to state that I make no apology for the length and detail of my reasons. I have been considering grave and weighty matters concerning the sentencing of two prisoners including for the offence of murder and an offence which carries, upon conviction, a maximum penalty of life.

Further, I now make clear that the appropriate and intended sentence for murder to be imposed on Vester Fernando, should for reasons stated be that of penal servitude for life.

In the case of Brendan Fernando I likewise, make it clear that the appropriate and intended sentence to be imposed for murder should, for the reasons given, also be penal servitude for life.

Vester Fernando, for the offence of assault with intent to have sexual intercourse without consent and in circumstances of aggravation, I sentence you to a concurrent fixed term of penal servitude for 10 years commencing on November 1996 and concluding on 26 November 2006. On the charge of murder
I sentence you to penal servitude for life, commencing on 27 November 1996 and to be served for the term of your natural life.

Brendan Fernando, for the offence of aggravated sexual assault, I sentence you to a concurrent fixed term to penal servitude for 10 years commencing on 10
December 1994 and concluding on 9 December 2004. On the charge of murder, I sentence you to penal servitude for life commencing on 10 December 1994 and to be served for the term of your natural life.
 ---------------- * * * 
