

McAllister versus The Proprietors of Strata Plan 8092 Matter No Ca 40795/96 [1998] NSWSC 452 (19 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 November 1998 
SANDRA CORALIE McALLISTER versus THE PROPRIETORS OF STRATA PLAN 8092 
CA 40795/96; DC 6021/94 October 1998 
Mason P, Sheppard AJA, Fitzgerald AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT - PATTEN DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40795/96 
DELIVERED: 19 OCTOBER 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 28 SEPTEMBER 1998 
PARTIES: SANDRA CORALIE MCALLISTER V THE 
PROPRIETORS OF STRATA PLAN 8092 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P; SHEPPARD AJA; FITZGERALD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: A J KATZMANN SC 
Respondent: A G JAMIESON 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: CARROLL & O'DEA 
Respondent: W R GHIONI 
CATCHWORDS: 
Appeal and new trial - findings of fact - assessment of expert evidence - no appealable error demonstrated.

Negligence - standard of care - correct test applied by trial judge 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 17 
SANDRA CORALIE McALLISTER v THE PROPRIETORS OF STRATA PLAN NO 8092 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: The appellant was severely injured when she slipped and fell down a carpeted stairway near the front door to her upper storey home unit in Carlton. The accident occurred shortly before 3.00am on 26 November 1992. The appellant was carrying a bag of rubbish to the ground floor garbage bin after having cleaned up her unit following a dinner party. She was bare footed. After traversing a narrow carpeted landing she began to descend the stairs leading downwards. At the top of the stairs she grasped a railing with her left hand and put her left foot on the top step. It slipped from under her and she commenced to fall. Her attempts to save herself only led to serious injury which included a displacement fracture of the right malleus, a displacement fracture of the right fibula and a compound fracture of the right tibia. 
The appellant claimed damages for negligence, including in her amended
Statement of Claim the following particulars of negligence: 
Failing to remedy defects in the stairs so as to make them safe for the passage of persons like the Plaintiff.

Allowing the steps to become and remain slippery.

Failing to install appropriate anti-slip strips at each nosing, including that at the edge of the landing, as required by Ordinance 70.

Installing a type of carpet with hazardously low frictional properties.

Failing to replace the carpet with a carpet or other material with better frictional properties.

There was an issue at the trial concerning the immediate cause of the appellant's fall. The respondent's case was that the appellant was hurrying to catch up with a departing guest; and that the appellant was affected by alcohol, she having conceded that she had drunk in the order of a bottle of wine during the course of the evening. Patten DCJ did not find it necessary to resolve these issues. Specifically, he recorded in his judgment that he found it unnecessary to determine whether the appellant was proceeding cautiously to descend the stairs with the garbage or was in a hurry to catch up with her departing guest. Senior counsel for the appellant was critical of this aspect of the judgment. However, it was a course open to his Honour provided that the ground upon which the verdict in the respondent's favour was entered can be independently sustained. It can, for the reasons which follow.

The stairs were part of the common property at 27-29 Bembridge Street Carlton.
There was no dispute that the respondent owed a duty of care to the appellant stemming from the relationship between an occupier of common property and the occupier of a residential unit. The learned trial judge acknowledged this. He also recognised that there was a foreseeable risk that if the stairs were "dangerous", persons would slip or lose their footing while descending them, particularly if affected by alcohol or tired. However, foreseeability of risk of injury is not determinative of negligence in the legal sense. His Honour reminded himself of the principles set out in the frequently cited passage in
Wyong Shire Council versus Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47-8.

In finding a verdict for the defendant, the primary judge expressed his determinative reasons as follows: 
In the light of the evidence given in this case I am satisfied that the carpeting on the stairs was competently laid and that it was of a type and quality suitable for the purpose. To the extent that the evidence of Dr Adams and the report of Associate Professor Yandell differ as to the dynamic coefficient of friction applicable to the carpet I prefer what I regard as the more scientific measurement of Associate Professor Yandell. Dr Adams whilst preferring his method conceded that its validity depends heavily upon the skill and experience of the person carrying out the measurement. That being so
I am of the opinion that the carpet itself was not inherently hazardous.
Despite the evidence of Dr Adams I conclude that the Defendant's failure to install anti-slip treads or strips at the edge of each stair did not constitute a breach of its duty. The strips were not, as it seems to me, required by an applicable standard, nor, in the light of my finding as to the adequacy of the carpet, were the strips required by ordinary common law principles. There remains the aspect to which Mr Leatherbarrow directed closing submissions namely that the carpet at the edges of the stairs was worn, that the Defendant knew or should have known of this and that some appropriate remedial action should have been taken. The difficulty with these submissions, as I see it, is that there was no evidence in the case that the edges of the stairs were in fact significantly worn.

A number of photographs of the stairs were put in evidence and Mr
Leatherbarrow submitted that I should conclude from an examination of them that the edges were worn in a way which presented a danger to persons descending the stairs. My examination of the photographs does not however lead me to that conclusion nor do I think that in the absence of evidence (there being direct evidence to the contrary) it would be appropriate to draw such a conclusion even if it appeared available. The matter of wear at the edges of the stairs is not mentioned by Dr Adams in his report and the direct evidence of Mr Howard, an expert on the subject, suggests that when he inspected them they were in good condition and that the only sign of wear was at the foot of the flight well away from where the Plaintiff suffered her injury.

In my view the Plaintiff has simply failed to establish that the stairs upon which she fell were in any way dangerous. The question whether the Defendant knew or should have known of a danger thus does not arise. The Plaintiff's action must fail.

I shall now address the appellant's grounds of appeal (changing the order slightly).
 . FINDINGS IN RELATION TO WEAR IN THE CARPET 
The appellant seeks in various ways to challenge the trial judge's conclusion, set out in the passage quoted above, that the carpet on the top step was "not inherently hazardous" and not "significantly worn". To the extent that these findings were based upon expert evidence, the appellant's submissions will be addressed separately below.

So far as based on visual evidence, these findings betray no error. The photographs are equivocal and are clearly capable of supporting the trial judge's conclusion that they do not demonstrate that the edges of the steps were worn in a way which presented a danger to persons descending the stairs.
Mr Howard, a manager with the firm that had supplied and installed the carpet in 1986, had inspected the stairs in the year of trial (1996). He found that the carpet was in well-maintained condition with no looseness or tears. It was open to the trial judge to accept this unchallenged evidence. His Honour's finding to that effect was not undercut by the description of Mr Howard as "an expert on the subject", a statement that was accurate in its obvious context. Dr Adams' evidence to the contrary was hypothetical and unrelated to the particular facts (AB 82), and by way of a leading question in re- examination by counsel for the appellant (AB 99W).

The appellant also challenged the obviously favourable reference in the judgment (AB 261) to evidence from Mrs Carr and Mrs Bansky about the non- slippery condition of the stairs. However, it was clearly open to the trial judge to accept the evidence of the witnesses, each of whom was cross- examined. The fact that Mrs Carr was not a resident (she was the landlady of a resident) in no way undermined this finding. (See also the eye-witness evidence of Mr Baxendale, referred to below.) 
The main plank in the appellant's attack on the eye-witness evidence was the challenge to the statement that there was "the absence of evidence" that the edges of the stairs were worn in a way which presented a danger to persons descending the stairs. The appellant relied upon the evidence of the appellant herself and of Ms Livljanic (who was a guest of the appellant on the night of the accident). However these criticisms of the trial judge are misplaced. It is surprising that the only evidence from the appellant on the subject related to the very occasion in question. The absence of evidence from the appellant about other occasions when she observed the slipperiness of the stairs is fairly telling. It would be circular to reason from the equivocal circumstances of the particular fall, to a conclusion that the appellant was giving general evidence about the dangerous condition of the stairs. As regards Ms Livljanic, her evidence in chief suggestive of a near accident due to slipping was shown under cross-examination to relate to the carpet on the landing at the top of the steps. The trial judge was not obliged to see this as evidence of the slipperiness of the top step. He might have been able to do so, had the appropriate evidentiary foundations been laid. But they were not.
 . MISDIRECTION AS TO APPROPRIATE TEST OF NEGLIGENCE 
It was submitted that Patten DCJ erred in determining liability by reference to an anachronistic test of "dangerousness" (cf Indermaur versus Dames [(1866) LR 1 CP 274)] instead of the test of what a reasonable person would do by way of response to a foreseeable risk (cf Australian Safeway Stores
Pty Ltd versus Zaluzna [(1987) 162 CLR 479).] It was suggested that the trial judge treated the appellant as bearing an onus of establishing that the stairs were dangerous.

This complaint is unsustainable. The passages relied upon (at 258U, 262T and
K and R) do not support the challenge. As indicated, the judge directed himself in the terms of Shirt's Case. The central issue in the trial was whether the carpet was or had become slippery to a degree that a reasonable occupier was not entitled to leave things as they were. His Honour considered the specific issues that the parties had raised about the extent to which the carpet had become worn and whether the nature of the carpet or the wear and tear that it had sustained in the six and half years since it had been laid should have led to the installation of anti-slip strips at each "nosing". His reasons for rejecting the appellant's case on those matters reveals no error.
It is perfectly understandable that he should summarise the various complaints of the appellant as involving (compendiously) the question whether the "stairs ... were in any way dangerous".
 . ASSESSMENT OF THE EXPERT EVIDENCE 
The relevant grounds of appeal (2(c) and (d)) were quite limited, namely that the trial judge erred in that he: 
Accepted the evidence of Associate Professor Yandell over that of Dr
Adams "as to the dynamic co-efficient of friction applicable to the carpet" when, inter alia, Associate Professor Yandell's tests were performed on a piece of carpet used only as a doormat in wet weather and which therefore bore little similarity to the carpet covering the subject stairs which was tested by Dr Adams; 
Gave insufficient weight to the background, qualifications and experience of Dr Adams as set out in Exhibit F (his "Curriculum Vitae") merely stating that he "has a doctorate of philosophy in psychology but carries on business as a consultant or expert in the application of principles of safety management".

A significant part of the appellant's case at trial was the evidence of Dr
Neil Adams, a witness described by the trial judge as having "a doctorate of philosophy in psychology but carr[ying] on business as a consultant or expert in the application of principles of safety management". I think it unfortunate that (notwithstanding the challenge in cross-examination to Dr
Adams' academic qualifications and experience so far as they touched the case at hand) his Honour used this somewhat dismissive description of a witness who was a Visiting Fellow of the Department of Safety Science at the University of
New South Wales with very extensive experience in applied ergonomics and safety science (AB 76-7, 85). But I do not read the judge as regarding Dr
Adams as incapable of giving expert evidence. His Honour's preference for the respondent's experts turned upon more substantial grounds, which in my view were clearly open.

In a report dated 21 May 1996 Dr Adams gave evidence based upon his inspection of the stairway conducted on 9 May 1996. He described the stairs as "carpeted with a coarse textured commercial-type carpet". In cross examination he agreed it was "your average commercial carpet that you see laid in home units" (AB 87). Dr Adams gave evidence of a downslope on the surface of the first step. On this point the trial judge preferred what he described as the more accurate investigation of a consulting engineer, Mr Baxendale, who had been called by the respondent.

The presently critical part of Dr Adams' evidence related to measurements he performed concerning the slip-resistance (coefficients of friction) of the carpet. He measured these coefficients on "static" and "dynamic" bases, explaining why the latter was appropriate for the task at hand (AB 78-9).
Because of the narrowness of the steps, the measurement of slip-resistance occurred on the surface of the landing. The method used was described by Dr
Adams as "the simple weighted-slider technique (`Bigfoot')".

In his initial report, a subsequent report of 5 November 1996 and his oral evidence, Dr Adams addressed the accuracy of the "Bigfoot" or "weighted-shoe" technique, particularly in comparison with a method such as the TORTUS technique. In doing so, he was confronted with the criticism of this technique by the respondent's experts (see below). Issue was clearly joined on the accuracy of this method of determining the coefficient of friction of a particular piece of carpet.

Based on the Bigfoot method Dr Adams found that the carpet on the landing had particular static and dynamic coefficients of friction when tested by reference to a composition resin sole, a worn leather sole and a PVC synthetic sole. He regarded the first two as having "greater similarity to a bare footed sole" than the third, and "in the range that would have made the carpet categorised as hazardously slippery".

At trial, the respondent relied on the written and oral evidence of Mr
Baxendale, a consulting engineer together with the report of Associate
Professor Yandell, a civil engineer that was put into evidence without objection or cross-examination. Mr Baxendale visited the site in 1994. In a report dated 15 June 1994 he described the carpet "by observation [as] provid[ing] a suitable non-slip finish". Mr Baxendale provided a later report dated 11 July 1996 which responded to Dr Adams' first written report. Mr
Baxendale strongly challenged Dr Adams' report, describing it as "weighted to produce a result". Among detailed criticisms, he addressed Dr Adams' suggestion that a dynamic coefficient of friction of less than 0.4 would be unsatisfactory (AB 224). Mr Baxendale was particularly critical of Dr Adams' rejection of the methodology for measuring coefficients of friction that were generally acceptable to design engineers and embodied in published
Australia/New Zealand Standards. In particular he challenged Dr Adams' reliance upon what he described as the "non-Code specified method of measurement used by Dr Adams". He further described the Bigfoot method as productive of results that: can be readily influenced by the operator and are quite variable. A demonstration of this test procedure would clearly prove this point. We further suggest that this type of test is not intended for materials such as "single coarse textured" carpet particularly in conjunction with bare feet. We suggest also that attempting to compare the coefficient of friction of skin (on a foot) with a relatively rigid material such as the sole of a shoe is meaningless for obvious reasons.

Mr Baxendale gave detailed reasons for his rejection of Dr Adams' methodology (at AB 224-6), and they were such that it was clearly open to the trial judge to prefer Mr Baxendale and thereby reject Dr Adams. Indeed, the last sentence of the passage just quoted indicates that the judge should have been sceptical about the attempt to extrapolate a relevant conclusion from Dr Adams' tests.
Mr Baxendale's reasons were supported by a letter from Associate Professor
Yandell from the School of Civil Engineering at the University of New South
Wales. Professor Yandell tested a section of carpet with the TORTUS device.
Professor Yandell's measurements produced a coefficient of friction varying from 0.7 to 1.5 using the "more appropriately damped meter". This easily satisfied the Australian Standard AS/NZS 3661.1: 1993 entitled "Slip
Resistance of Pedestrian Surfaces - Part 1: Requirements". That standard states that the average value should be 0.4 or above with no reading less than .35.

The relevant Standard was put into evidence. It is a complex document. Of present relevance it may be noted that it adopts the TORTUS as an acceptable tester (AB 242-4). Although this was a 1992 accident, the Standard did not lack persuasive effect on this account.

The appellant accepts that the trial judge's preference for Associate
Professor Yandell's "more scientific" measurement was the basis for his rejection of Dr Adam's measurements. In my view it was clearly open to the judge to prefer one expert over another, and it was not incumbent upon his
Honour to spell out all of his reasons (Ahmedi versus Ahmedi [(1991) 23 NSWLR ).](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281991%29%2023%20NSWLR%20288 "View LawCiteRecord" ) I have considered the particular criticisms raised by the appellant, but they do not persuade me of appealable error. Associate Professor Yandell did not test the carpet in situ, nor did he remove carpet from the particular stair upon which the appellant slipped. But it was open to the trial judge to find that the sample chosen (AB 103) was a fair sample, at least as fair as that selected by Dr Adams who used carpet on the landing as distinct from the step.

I reject the submission that the trial judge failed to have regard to the criticisms of the methodology used by Associate Professor Yandell. Issue was well and truly joined between the experts. Although Associate Professor
Yandell was not required to attend for cross examination on his report, it was open to the judge to consider that the TORTUS was an acceptable method and that it was used acceptably, as Associate Professor Yandell asserted.

It is true that the trial judge did not address Dr Adam's criticisms of the
Australian and New Zealand Standard against which Associate Professor Yandell tested the carpet sample. But he was not bound to do so on pain of causing an appealable error. After all, Dr Adams had not espoused that standard. And
Associate Professor Yandell's measurements (with TORTUS) clearly satisfied even Dr Adams' requirements for a carpet that was not slippery to the bare- footed pedestrian.

In argument Ms Katzmann SC sought to expand the attack so as to include criticism of the absence of reasons. Quite apart from this not being a ground of appeal, I would reject this challenge. While trial judges must expose their essential reasoning processes, it bears repeating that they are not obliged to address each and every issue joined between experts or advanced by counsel.
The case relied upon by senior counsel for the appellant recognises this very distinction (see Mifsud versus Campbell [(1991) 21 NSWLR 725] at 728
D-E. See also Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Ltd versus International Pools
Australia Ltd [(1995) 36 NSWLR 242] at -8.) 
The appeal should be dismissed with costs.

FITZGERALD AJA: I agree with Mason P. 
SHEPPARD AJA: In this matter I agree with the judgment of Mason P and with the orders which he proposes. * * * 
