

Academy Theatres P/L versus Valhalla Cinemas P/L [1996] NSWSC 426 (13 September )

ACADEMY THEATRES PTY. LIMITED versus VALHALLA CINEMAS PTY. LIMITED /85 
Friday 13th September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an appeal from two findings made by Master Macready on the taking of partnership accounts between the appellant, which I will call Academy, and the respondent, which I will call Valhalla.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
I begin with a brief outline of the background facts.

In 1973 Academy took a 20 year lease on a building in Paddington, which it converted into two cinemas. Between 1973 and 1977, Academy conducted a business there under the name Academy Twin Cinemas.

Prior to the formation of the partnership, Valhalla had conducted a cinema business in Melbourne under the name Valhalla. The partnership commenced on th October 1977, and between that date and the dissolution of the partnership on 31st March 1981, the parties conducted the partnership business at the Paddington premises under the name Academy Valhalla Twin Cinemas. The terms of the partnership were mainly contained in an unsigned Epitome of
Agreement.

In December 1979, without the consent of Academy, Valhalla opened a cinema at
Glebe under the name Valhalla, and it continued to operate that cinema until after the dissolution of the partnership. It appears that towards the end of Academy gave six months notice of termination of the partnership.
Valhalla accepted this, and the parties went their separate ways in March .

Following the dissolution of the partnership, Academy continued to conduct a cinema at the premises under the name Academy Twin Cinemas. Subsequently, by agreement taking effect on 16th December 1983, the owners of Academy agreed with another company that Academy would provide its cinemas for a period of two years, plus 2 two-year options, in return for periodic payments plus a sum of $20,000.00 said to be for "the goodwill attached to the business".

During the term of the partnership, an advertising account had been maintained with John Fairfax & Sons in the name of Academy Valhalla Twin Cinemas.
That account was continued after the end of the partnership in 1981, being used by both Academy and Valhalla for their individual advertising. Valhalla claimed that in 1984 it paid amounts totalling $8,814.77 due on that account, in respect of advertising placed by Academy for its sole benefit after the end of the partnership.

THE MASTER'S FINDINGS 
The two findings of the Master which are challenged concern, firstly, this payment for advertising and, secondly, goodwill.

In relation to the payment for advertising, the Master found that the duty of good faith between partners continued so long as partnership affairs remained unsettled; that Valhalla, as well as Academy, was liable to John Fairfax for the debt; and that, accordingly, the payment was claimable in the partnership accounting.

On the matter of goodwill, the Master found that goodwill was a partnership asset; that Academy retained the partnership goodwill after the conclusion of the partnership; that Academy should account for half the value of the goodwill to Valhalla; and that the value of this goodwill was $20,000.00, this being the amount specified in the 1983 agreement, to which I have referred.

Mr. Waugh, for the appellant, has provided comprehensive written submissions on both these issues, which I will leave with the papers. I will be very brief in outlining the submissions which I consider to be material.

ADVERTISING PAYMENT 
On the matter of the advertising payment, Mr. Waugh did not dispute the
Master's finding that the payment by Valhalla was for advertising placed by
Academy for Academy's benefit after the end of the partnership; but he submitted that the continuance of the common account with John Fairfax was pursuant to a separate agreement made after the end of the partnership and that, accordingly, the payment was not relevant to the partnership accounts.

He noted that the Master had relied on two principles of law namely that (a) each partner will remain liable for the future acts of his former co-partner until such time as dissolution is notified to the creditor in question; and both the authority of each partner and the duties which he owes to the other partners continue whilst the partnership affairs are being wound up.

In relation to the first principle, Mr. Waugh submitted that it related purely to the situation as between ex-partners and creditors, not as between the partners inter se. He submitted that this was confirmed by ss.36 and 38 of the
Partnership Act which incorporated these principles.

As regards the second principle relied on by the Master, Mr. Waugh referred to the fuller statement of that principle at p.759 of Lindley & Banks on
Partnership, 7th Ed. which is as follows: 
For the purposes of winding up, the partnership is deemed to continue; the good faith and honourable conduct due from every partner to his co-partners during the continuance of the partnership being equally due so long as its affairs remain unsettled; and that which was partnership property before, continuing to be so for the purpose of dissolution, as the rights of the partners require.

Mr. Waugh submitted that this principle was subject to the overall qualification represented by the words "for the purposes of winding up", and that it was clear that the operation of this advertising account was not for the purposes of the winding up, and that the payment by Valhalla of liability incurred by Academy was also not for the purposes of the winding up.

In my opinion, it is correct to say that the first principle relied on by the
Master does essentially concern the relationship between partners and third parties. However, it does support the finding made by the Master that Valhalla was in truth liable to John Fairfax for the debt incurred by Academy for the benefit of Academy. That finding, which I do not understand to be under challenge, would mean that Valhalla would be entitled to be paid that money by
Academy, at least under a claim for money paid at common law.

As to whether it is appropriate or not to include this matter in partnership accounts, it seems to me that this is essentially a matter of fact and degree; that is, whether the transaction has sufficient connection with the partnership to regard it as being appropriately within the matters to be settled between the partners in the course of winding up the partnership. In my opinion, in circumstances where the account which gave rise to the problem was in fact an account used during the partnership term and continued thereafter, and where the payment in question happened at a time when accounts between the partners were still unsettled, it was appropriate to deal with the claim as part of settling the partnership accounts.

I would add this. It seems to me that a defence of this nature, namely to the effect that, while one partner accepts that a sum is owing to another, this should be disregarded in partnership accounts, is a defence which would need to be clearly raised; so that, if there was any substance to it, the other party to the proceedings would have an opportunity to seek an amendment so as to have the matter dealt with at the same time as the partnership accounts are dealt with, in accordance with the terms and spirit of [s.63](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/s63.html) of the [Supreme Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sca183/). If that had happened in these proceedings, such an amendment, in my opinion, would clearly have been justified notwithstanding the expiry of any limitation period, by virtue of Pt.20 r.4.

GOODWILL 
Turning to the question of goodwill, the Master found that the pre-existing goodwill, which he described as "patronage of the theatre in that area", was to be included as a partnership asset; that such goodwill was built upon during the period of the partnership; that the goodwill was retained by
Academy after dissolution; and that the value of this goodwill was $20,000.
However, the Master also found that, by opening the Valhalla Cinema at Glebe in December 1979 Valhalla had acquired for itself part of the goodwill of the partnership; and he also found that another asset used by the partnership, namely the theatre complex, was Academy's property and not a partnership asset, and that Academy was entitled to continue to use that asset after the dissolution of the partnership.

Mr. Waugh submitted (1) that the Master was in error in finding that the pre- existing goodwill was made a partnership asset; (2) that Academy was not liable to account for any improvement in the goodwill during the term of the partnership; (3) that the evidence did not support a value of $20,000 for the goodwill or any other value; and (4) that Academy did not secure the benefit of the partnership goodwill for itself so as to give rise to a liability to account.

Because I have reached a firm view that Academy is entitled to succeed on the basis of the third and fourth of those submissions, even accepting that the
Master was otherwise correct, it is convenient to begin with those submissions. In order to determine the value of any goodwill for which Academy could be liable to account, it would be necessary to identify clearly the goodwill in question.

On that matter it is relevant to consider the case of Smith versus Everett <case>; [(1859) 27 Beav 446], which was referred to in the Master's judgment and relied on by Mr. Waugh. In that case one of two partners in a bank, which carried on business under the name New
Sarum Bank, died and the survivor sold the business for 10,000 Pounds. The
Master of the Rolls, Sir John Romilly, held that the estate of the deceased partner was entitled to a half share of so much of that 10,000 Pounds as was attributable to goodwill.

The business in that case had been carried on in premises which were owned by the surviving partner; and the Master of the Rolls pointed out that any sale of the goodwill of the business would not have prevented the surviving partner from carrying on the very same business on the very same premises as before, albeit under a different name. Accordingly, when he specified the enquiry that was to be made, he said this at p.453 (ER p.178): 
It follows therefore that it would be necessary to ascertain, by enquiry, what portion of the 10,000 Pounds was properly attributable to the goodwill of the business, but having regard to the fact that Mr. Everett could, after the sale, carry on the same business alone, with a very slight alteration in the title of the firm, and that he could have done so on the same premises, and, in addition, that he alone had the right to continue to issue bank notes, and that he alone could confer that right upon any other person.

When he came to direct the enquiry the Master of the Rolls did so in the following terms, at pp.455-6 (ER p.179): 
I must then direct an inquiry how much of the 10,000 Pounds was paid in respect of the share of Mr. Smith in the goodwill of the business, having regard, in making such inquiries, to the following facts:-
That the premises in which the partnership business was carried on belonged to the defendant Mr. Everett.
That the defendant Mr. Everett was entitled to carry on the business of a banker at Salisbury, in the same premises, after the goodwill had been sold.
That there survived to Mr. Everett the sole and exclusive right of issuing notes.

The report concludes with a note that the enquiry resulted in a finding that ,000 Pounds of the 10,000 Pounds amount was paid in respect of the share of
Mr. Smith, the deceased partner, in the goodwill.

In the present case there was no actual sale of the business; so the question is, what was the value of the goodwill which could have been sold assuming that it was sold, in the most advantageous manner and at the appropriate time (see Mellersh versus Keen <case>; [(1860) 28 Beav 453], [54 ER 440).] It is clear that the goodwill in this case did not include that associated with the carrying on of a cinema business at the Paddington premises: as found by the Master, those premises comprising two cinemas, or rather, more accurately, the continuing lease of those premises, was Academy's property, which it was entitled to use, and to use as a cinema.

Accordingly, consistently with Smith v. Everett, it would appear that the goodwill of the partnership could be no more than that associated with the business name and the business records and connections. If that had been sold there would, presumably, have been an obligation on the partners not to use the business name or a name sufficiently similar to cause confusion. In some cases, such a sale would also involve an obligation on the partners not to solicit customers, and perhaps suppliers if there were any element of exclusivity in the suppliers; but there is no suggestion that either of those matters would be relevant in this case. (Cf. Page v. McKensey, Windeyer J, /12/83, Court of Appeal, 28/2/85).

In my opinion, this means that what was called goodwill in the 1983 agreement was very different from any partnership goodwill which could have been the subject of a sale as at the dissolution of the partnership. What was dealt with under the 1983 agreement was the right to operate a cinema in the very premises, and the right to use the name "Academy Twin" was included; that is, the goodwill was not confined to that associated with a name, but was also that associated with the actual premises. For that reason, I do not believe that the price paid in respect of goodwill in that agreement is any guide at all to the value of the partnership goodwill.

If I were satisfied that the goodwill of the partnership which could have been the subject of a sale at the termination of the partnership had a substantial value, albeit a different value from that referred to in the 1983 agreement, I may have had to do my best to fix upon such a value; but in my opinion the agreement does not enable me even to decide that the goodwill which could have been sold at the conclusion of the partnership had any substantial value at all.

There is a further problem when assessing any goodwill for which Academy might have to account, which appears from the Master's judgment. As I have mentioned, he found that Valhalla acquired some of the partnership goodwill by opening the Valhalla Cinema at Glebe, and also that Valhalla was continuing to operate that cinema after dissolution. Of course, that could mean that
Valhalla might have been obliged under s.30 of the Partnership Act to account for all the profits of that venture, if that had been sought; but it was not sought. However, quite apart from this, the facts to which I have referred meant that, at the time of dissolution, Valhalla itself actually had some of the goodwill of the partnership.

The Master took this into account to some extent, by noting that the valuation of the goodwill retained by Academy had to be the value of goodwill in circumstances of competition from Valhalla; but, having found the value of the goodwill retained by Academy as affected by the competition, he did not go on to deduct from it the value of the partnership goodwill which he had found had been taken by Valhalla for its own benefit.

Mr. Cameron for Valhalla submitted that the Master's findings about the taking of goodwill by Valhalla were not justified by the evidence, and that those findings did not matter anyway. He submitted that, if Academy had wished to rely for its benefit on the value of the goodwill taken by Valhalla, that is a matter which Academy should have alleged and proved. He submitted that the partnership goodwill was associated with a name in a locality, namely
Paddington, and that there was no evidence that any use of part of the name in a different locality had any value whatsoever. He referred me to Duncan v.
Reid [(1976) 2 NSWLR 105] at 115.

In my opinion, there clearly was evidence which justified the Master's finding that Valhalla operated another cinema in Glebe without the consent of Academy, and was continuing to do so; and that this involved some appropriation of goodwill associated with the partnership name. As for the submission that all this was a matter for Academy to allege and prove, this would have force if what had been taken by Valhalla and what had been taken by Academy were two separate identifiable pieces of property, or even two separate identifiable parts of goodwill. In my opinion they were not.

The goodwill with which the Master was concerned was the goodwill of a business associated with the name Academy Valhalla Twin Cinemas, but excluding goodwill associated with the particular premises. Two years after the name
Valhalla became known to Sydney audiences through the partnership activities,
Valhalla set up the Valhalla Cinema in Glebe, which it continued to operate after dissolution of the partnership. At the end of the partnership, Academy continued to use the cinema building at Paddington, which it was perfectly entitled to do, but did so under the name Academy Twin Cinema. I do not see that any separate identifiable part of the value of the goodwill of the business associated with the name Academy Valhalla Twin Cinemas, excluding, as
I have said, the goodwill associated with the actual cinema complex itself, can be regarded as going to Academy. It seems to me that the most that can be said is that Academy ended up with some of the partnership goodwill and
Valhalla ended up with some. In those circumstances, it is difficult to see how Academy could be liable to account at all; and, even if Academy were liable to account, in my opinion there is no basis in the evidence for fixing upon any figure for which it was liable to account.

Since I am firmly of the view that Academy is entitled to succeed on this basis, I do not need to consider the first two of Mr. Waugh's submissions. I would mention that, when one has regard to the circumstance that the goodwill associated with the actual premises belonged to Academy and that the only goodwill which could belong to the partnership was essentially that associated with the name Academy Valhalla Twin Cinemas, the conduct of Valhalla in using the name Valhalla for its own benefit, about two years after commencement of the partnership, would tend to suggest that Valhalla never regarded the name under which the partnership conducted its business as a focus of goodwill rights held by the partners. However that may be, it is enough to say that, for the reasons I have indicated, in my opinion the appeal must succeed in relation to the goodwill question.

CONCLUSION 
On the question of costs, Mr. Waugh submits that there should be a costs order in Academy's favour. He submitted that Academy has been successful on the appeal, and that Valhalla chose to oppose the appeal and cause these costs to be incurred. That may have had some force if the appeal had been entirely successful. In circumstances where Valhalla has had some success on the appeal, in my opinion it would be unfair to Valhalla to do anything other than to follow the principle applied by the Master and order each party to pay its own costs.

For those reasons I make these orders.

I order that the Master's certificate dated 17th October 1995 be amended by deleting item 1, added as a surcharge in the sum of $10,000.00, by deleting the amounts allowed as interest on that sum in the sum of $8,725.48, and amending the total due to the sum of $11,836.81.

I order that the judgment in this matter ordered on 17th October 1995 and entered on 31st October 1995 be altered by substituting for $30,562.29 in both places where it appears the sum of $11,836.81.

I order that each party pay its own costs of this appeal.

I order that any amount paid into Court as security for costs by Academy be paid out to Academy.

Exhibits may be returned after 28 days.
 * * * 
