

Franklins Limited versus Mooney-Smith - by her tutor, W J Tomlinson Matter No /97 [1998] NSWSC 355 (16 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 September 1998 
FRANKLINS LIMITED versus KRISTA MOONEY-SMITH - BY HER TUTOR, WARRICK JAMES TOMLINSON /97 March 1998 
Black AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a stated case against a decision by a magistrate of 13 May 1997. By the stated case a number of contentions are put forward criticising the magistrate for making various findings, alternatively, not specifically recording certain mental processes through which it is said he should have gone. 
The matter related to an accident involving a child in a supermarket on 24 May
That child was injured when a shopping trolley owned and used by the defendant overturned on to her. In paragraph (4) various allegations of negligence are set out and then in paragraph (2) of the stated case the magistrate records finding the following facts and he sets out a total of 16 paragraphs incorporating a number of findings relating to the signs referred to the trolleys, findings relating to the nature and type of trolley provided based upon a report from structural engineers and also upon Exhibit 11 emanating from the defendant, as they were, currently they are the appellant, and so on.

Significant in the findings of facts are references to the trolley involved being more unstable and more likely than other trolleys to overturn and a conclusion that the defendants or appellant's trolley was less safe than the other two makes of trolley. The magistrate refers to a concession by the defendant that the relevant trolley had been withdrawn and replaced with a different type of trolley, the different type of trolley being a safer kind of trolley referred to in the engineer's report. He also refers to the fact that the defendant, current appellant, had prior knowledge of problems and criticisms relating to this trolley before the date of the accident in question.

The magistrate then went on, in paragraph (3), to express his determination in relation to the liability of the defendant and the substantial criticism, as I understand it, that is mounted against that is that he did not expressly in his grounds of determination go through the exercise referred to principally in passage in the case of Wyong Shire Council v. Shirt & Ors <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] at 47 and 48.

It is not open, in my view, on the stated case to conclude that the magistrate did not go through that exercise. Indeed, various findings of fact set out in paragraph (2) of the stated case indicate the contrary and, accordingly, I do not regard that attack on behalf of the appellant as having succeeded.

The other criticisms recorded in paragraph (4) under the heading "Appellant's
Contentions of Stated Case", apart from the one I have just dealt with, appeared to me to seek to say that the magistrate made findings of fact which were not open to him. In my view, the evidence was there to support the findings of fact which were made and, indeed, not only the evidence was there but also the absence of evidence if it was sought to attach any particular significance to the substantive criticisms, namely, alternative systems, alternative stores and so on. Indeed, in relation to that, it seems to me clear that the report of the structural engineers covered that situation because there it expressly refers, as is seen in paragraph 2.10, to two other well-known stores and the trolleys available there. So there probably was evidence there for the magistrate to consider.

Accordingly, I am not satisfied that any of the criticisms of the magistrate's findings are made out and I dismiss the summons with costs.
 * * * 
