

Valassis versus M D Nikolaidis and Co, Solicitors Matter No Ca 40089/96 [1998]
NSWSC 372 (7 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
DENNIS VALASSIS versus M D NIKOLAIDIS & CO, SOLICITORS 
CA 40089/96 September 1998 
Mason P 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by Mr Valassis appearing in person. He seeks by a notice of motion filed on 19 August, returnable today, various categories of relief. That notice of motion is supported by Mr Valassis' affidavit of 28 August 1998. That affidavit in turn refers to earlier evidence filed either in the Court of Appeal or before other judicial officers of the Supreme Court. Mr Valassis has also indicated to me in his oral submissions that he wants to rely upon written material and evidence which is material which he sought leave to lodge at an earlier stage in the Court of Appeal. 
The dispute which Mr Valassis wishes to raise concerns a bill of costs that was taxed. It relates to a small amount of money. The taxing decision was the subject of an appeal to a Master which appeal was dismissed on 22 November
Thereafter there have been a number of applications in the Court of
Appeal. On 29 March 1996 Handley JA and Cole JA refused leave to appeal indicating that they were satisfied that there was no arguable question of principle which would attract a grant of leave. Mr Valassis subsequently sought a review of that decision. Handley JA and Cole JA conducted that review but on 3 May 1996 refused the motion for review. Still further proceedings were lodged. On 3 August 1998 the matter came again before Handley JA who considered the material which had been filed as well as the material which Mr
Valassis indicated he wished to rely upon and for which he sought leave to file. Handley JA was satisfied that the application was hopeless, and that the
Court was not obliged to impose a lengthy hearing on the opponents or to spend further time in hearing completely hopeless applications. The motions were dismissed with costs. A further application was brought before Registrar Jupp on 17 August 1998 and then there is the present application.

I am quite satisfied that Mr Valassis is endeavouring to ventilate again the very same matter that was dismissed by Handley JA and Cole JA and to rely in substance upon the same arguments and the same material which either he put before the Court then or sought to put before the Court then. I am also satisfied that that is material which was available to him at the time of the review by the Master.

Whether there is any material that is strictly new or not is ultimately not to the point because, as has been indicated more than once at earlier stages in these proceedings, it is errors of principle and not mere errors of fact that normally attract a grant of leave. Particularly is this so in a matter involving a small sum of money and an issue of costs. I propose therefore to dismiss the notice of motion and to order that the claimant pay the opponent's costs on an indemnity basis.

I indicated during the course of the oral submissions that I permitted Mr
Valassis to make that there comes a time when the repeated filing of process in a Court must be viewed by the Court as an indication by the party filing those proceedings that that party holds the Court's process in contempt. I'm quite satisfied that the present application is an abuse of process. I would repeat the warning which I gave to Mr Valassis in the course of argument that he is in my view at risk of showing himself to be in contempt of the Court by these repeated applications. I would also indicate that the Court has the power to refer the papers to the Attorney General for the purpose of an application being made that Mr Valassis be declared a vexatious litigant. I am reluctant to do that. I would like to thing that Mr Valassis is simply misguided in his understanding of Court processes, but there comes a time when the Court can explain the matter in words of one syllable and can only infer that if the explanation is not understood it is because of refusal to understand rather than simple ignorance. I think that stage has now been reached.

The application is dismissed with the order for costs that I indicated.
 * * * 
