

Regina versus Daynon Glenn Adam [1997] NSWSC 2 (6 January 1997) 
REGINA versus Daynon Glenn ADAM /96 
Friday 29 November 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, McINERNEY J, IRELAND J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal, although out of time, against a judgment of Shillington DCJ given on 4 February 1993. The application with which we are dealing was filed on 26 April 1996.

On 8 January 1992 the applicant was sentenced by Kinchington DCJ in the
District Court in respect of offences of armed robbery and whilst being armed assault with intent to rob. The applicant was sentenced to penal servitude for two years, which was ordered to be served by way of periodic detention. He was also made the subject of a three year good behaviour bond in respect of certain offences.

The applicant only ever turned up on one occasion in order to serve his sentence of periodic detention. According to evidence he gave in later proceedings he was physically attacked on that occasion and, as a result of that, he decided not to go back to serve the remainder of his period of penal servitude. He absented himself.

The authorities did not manage to arrest the applicant for a long period of time but, on 4 February 1994, in his absence they took proceedings before
Shillington DCJ in the District Court under the provisions of the Periodic
Detention of Prisoners Act 1991, which prescribed the consequences that were to follow if a prisoner fails to turn up to serve periodic detention.

As the legislation stood at the relevant time, one of the consequences was that the judge had a discretionary power relating to cancelling the order for periodic detention which, in practical terms, would mean that the balance of the term would be served in full time custody. As the legislation stood it also produced the consequence that the prisoner would get, as it were, a windfall gain in relation to the term that had not been served whilst he was absenting himself.

The relevant provisions were considered by this Court in R v
Somerville [(1995) 36 NSWLR 184.] As senior counsel for the applicant has pointed out, they are not without some complexity.

Shillington DCJ, as appears from the transcript, had his attention specifically drawn to the discretionary power he had to impose a minimum and an additional term, and the transcript makes it clear that he declined to exercise that discretion. He directed that the applicant serve a fixed term of weeks in custody. That was later altered in a minor respect in circumstances which are not presently material.

The applicant was arrested on 23 January 1996. He has since been in full time custody. He is due for release from custody on 6 January 1997.

The applicant took legal advice, shortly after his arrest in January 1996, in early February 1996. He was not advised to appeal to this Court at that stage.
He was advised to take proceedings under the Criminal Procedure Act. These were commenced in February 1996 and came before Flannery DCJ. Senior counsel for the applicant has told us that one of the points of law that the applicant desires to argue in the present application, if leave is granted by this
Court, was a point which could have been raised before Flannery DCJ, and if it had been raised it would have provided a basis on which his Honour could have come to a decision different from that which he did. Flannery DCJ ultimately took the view that there was no error of law in what occurred before
Shillington DCJ and accordingly the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Act did not enable him to do anything about the matter 
Subsequently, on legal advice, the applicant on 26 April 1996 applied for leave to appeal to this Court against Shillington DCJ's decision.

As I have indicated, the applicant only has a very short period of time to serve.

One of the points of law the applicant desires to argue is a point which could have been taken before Flannery DCJ and which was not taken.

There was significant delay in commencing these proceedings between the time that the applicant first took legal advice in February and the time when this application was commenced in April. That delay in turn took place against the background of the circumstances that I have already mentioned.

In my view the court should refuse the leave sought.

McINERNEY J: I agree.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The application for leave is refused.

Application for leave to appeal against sentence out of time - leave refused.
 * * * 
