

Goldspar Australia Pty Ltd versus Kwa Design Group Pty Ltd Matter No 3314/98 [1998] NSWSC 502 (29 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 November 1998 
GOLDSPAR AUSTRALIA PTY LTD versus KWA DESIGN GROUP PTY LTD /98 October 1998 
Austin J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
PARTIES: GOLDSPAR AUSTRALIA PTY LTD versus KWA DESIGN GROUP PTY LTD 
Title of Court: Supreme Court of New South Wales (Equity Division) 
File No: 3314/98 
Delivered: Sydney, 29 October 1998 
Hearing Date: 23 October 1998 
Judgment of : Austin J 
CATCHWORDS: Statutory demand - affidavit verifying - failure to state that matters relating to the debt are true - genuine dispute as to existence or amount of debt - whether affidavit filed with application to set aside demand is a "supporting affidavit". 
Corporations Law, ss459E(3), 459G(3), 459H(1)(a), 459J(1)(b) and (2) 
Supreme Court Rules, Part 90A, r15 
Federal Court Rules, Order 71, r36AB 
B & M Quality Constructions Pty Ltd versus Buyrite Steel Supplies Ltd [(1994) 15 ACSR 433]; [13 ACLC 88] 
Dromore Fresh Produce Pty Ltd versus W Paton (Fertilizers) Pty Ltd (1997) ACSR ; [15 ACLC 424] 
Eyota Pty Ltd versus Hanave Pty Ltd [(1994) 12 ACSR 785] 
Graywinter Properties Pty Ltd versus Gas & Fuel Corporation Superannuation
Fund <case>; [(1996) 21 ACSR 581]; [14 ACLC 1703] 
Kezarne Pty Ltd versus Sydney Asbestos Removal Services Pty Ltd, (Supreme Court of New South Wales, Austin J, unreported, 25 September 1998) 
Polaroid Australia Pty Ltd versus Minicomp Pty Ltd [(1998) 16 ACLC 529] 
Portrait Express (Sales) Pty Ltd versus Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd [(1996) 132
FLR 300] 
Sacon Constructions Pty Ltd versus Concrite Quarries Pty Ltd [(1997) 15 ACLC ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2015%20ACLC%201303 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Spencer Constructions Pty Ltd versus G & M Aldridge Pty Ltd <case>; [1997 76 FCR 452] 
Verte Pty Ltd versus Grisbrook [(1997) 15 ACLC 1306] 
Zenaust Imports Pty Ltd versus Alembic Chemicals Works Co. Ltd [(1998) 28 ACSR ]

Representations: 
Counsel 
Plaintiff: J Chippindall 
Defendant: J Johnson 
Solicitors 
Plaintiff: Brook Worthington 
Defendant: Parish Patience 
Number of Pages: 18 
GOLDSPAR AUSTRALIA PTY LTD versus KWA DESIGN GROUP PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT 
By a summons filed on 28 July 1998, the plaintiff applied under s459G of the
Corporations Law for an order setting aside the defendant's statutory demand.
The demand was dated 9 July 1998 and was for $97,365.36.

The plaintiff contends that the statutory demand should be set aside for two reasons. First the plaintiff claims that the affidavit verifying the demand, which by s459E(3) must accompany the demand in the absence of any judgment for the debt, fails to comply with the rules. Secondly, the plaintiff claims that there is a genuine dispute between it and the defendant about the existence or amount of the debt, within s459H(1)(a). The defendant denies these claims and also submits that the affidavit supporting the plaintiff's application to set aside the demand does not comply with the requirements of s459G(3).

The Affidavit Verifying the Demand 
The plaintiff's first claim is largely independent of the facts of the dispute, and can be dealt with as a separate and preliminary matter. The statutory demand asserts that the plaintiff owes the defendant $97,365.36, "being the total of the amount of the debts described in the Schedule". The schedule describes the debt as "services rendered by the creditor to the company as detailed in" a number of invoices. Then there is a list of invoice dates, invoice numbers and amounts. There are fourteen invoices bearing dates beginning 31 July 1997 (wrongly stated in the Schedule to be 31 July 1998) to May 1998. The total amount invoiced is stated to be $334,832.20. The total amount paid, namely $237,466.84 is then deducted, showing a net amount owing of $97,365.36.

The substantive provisions of the affidavit of Robert Matchett sworn on 9 July are: "1. I am the Managing Director of K W A Design Group Pty Ltd (´the creditor').
On 25 June 1997, the creditor agreed to provide design development and project management services to Goldspar Australia Pty Ltd (´the debtor').
After that date, the creditor performed work for and at the request of the debtor and the creditor rendered invoices for that work from time to time.
On 19 May 1998, the creditor terminated the agreement and demanded that the debtor pay $97,365. The debtor has failed or refused to pay $97,365 owing pursuant to the agreement between the debtor and the creditor.
I believe that the amount of $97,365.36, being the debt specified in the accompanying demand, is due and payable by the debtor to the creditor.
I make this affidavit from knowledge and information of which I am personally aware and from documents reviewed by me in my capacity as Managing
Director of the creditor.
I believe there is no genuine dispute about the existence or the amount of the debt referred to in paragraph 3." 
At the end of the affidavit there appears the "Important Note" required by the
Supreme Court and Federal Court rules. The affidavit is formatted as an affidavit in the Federal Court of Australia. The top right corner refers to "Form 20 (Order 71, r38)". This is clearly a mistaken reference but no point has been made of it in the proceedings before me, and I would not regard an affidavit which otherwise complies with the rules as deficient merely on this ground.

The plaintiff claims that the statutory demand should be set aside because this affidavit does not comply with the Rules, for four reasons which are set out below. The "rules" with which the affidavit must comply, in accordance with s459E(3)(b), are the rules of either the Federal Court or the Supreme
Court, as the case requires (definition of "rules" in s9). Though the issue has arisen for determination by the Supreme Court of New South Wales, Part 80A r15(5) states that an affidavit in support of a statutory demand that complies with the rules of the Federal Court of Australia is taken to be an affidavit that complies with r15. Therefore compliance with either the applicable
Federal Court rule or the applicable Supreme Court rule would suffice.
Fortunately in July 1998, at the time when the statutory demand was served, the requirements of the applicable Federal Court rule, namely Order 71, r36AB and Form 93BA were not materially different from the requirements of the applicable rule of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, namely Part 80A r15.
Since on its face the affidavit purports to comply with the Federal Court rule, I shall refer to it, though I shall also make cross-references to the
Supreme Court rule.

The plaintiff's first complaint about Mr Matchett's affidavit is that it does not set out in detail the source of the deponent's knowledge of the matters stated in the affidavit. The relevant rule simply requires that the affidavit must "state the source of the deponent's knowledge of the matters stated in the affidavit concerning the debt or debts": Order 71, r36AB(1)(c) (Part 80A, r15(1)(c)). Paragraph 5 of Mr Matchett's affidavit purports to state the source of his knowledge. He says he makes the affidavit from knowledge and information of which he is personally aware in his capacity as managing director. He also says that he has reviewed documents, again in his capacity as managing director. In my opinion that is adequate compliance with subpara of the rule. It is not necessary to do more than "state" the source of the deponent's knowledge, and there is no requirement to give a long or detailed explanation.

Secondly, the plaintiff says that the affidavit does not state that the deponent believes these matters to be true. The requirement to make such a statement is found in Order 71, r36AB(1)(d) (Part 80A, r15(1)(d)). The omission from Mr Matchett's affidavit of a positive statement in compliance with subpara (d) appears to flow from an anomaly in both the Federal Court and
Supreme Court rules. The rule itself requires the deponent to state that he believes the relevant matters to be true, and also requires that the affidavit be in accordance with the prescribed form: Order 71, r36AB(3)(a) (Part 80A, r15(3)(a)). However, while the prescribed form directs the deponent to set out the matters in subparas (b) and (c) of the rules, it does not require that the matter referred to in subpara (d) be set out (see Form 93BA (Federal Court) and Form 154FA (Supreme Court)). In the present case Mr Matchett's affidavit has faithfully followed the form.

It is arguable that it is implied in the structure of the form that subpara is complied with by the statement, prescribed by the form but not in terms dictated by the rule, that the deponent believes that the amount of the debt specified in the demand is due and payable. The more literal view, which I am inclined to prefer, is that the affidavit does not fully comply with the rules unless a paragraph is added to the text of the prescribed form stating what is required by subpara (d). However, in my opinion, the deponent's failure expressly to comply with subpara (d) in an affidavit which otherwise complies with the rule and the prescribed form does not of itself provide a sufficient "other reason" to set aside the demand under s459J(1)(b): Spencer
Constructions Pty Ltd versus G & M Aldridge Pty Ltd <case>; [1997 76 FCR 452], 458. Para 4 of Mr Matchett's affidavit says that the deponent believes that the stated amount is due and payable, and further, Mr
Matchett's statements about the debt are made in the form of an affidavit, clearly implying that he believes his statements to be true. That being so, the omission to state formally that he believes the matters set out in his affidavit to be true can only be a technicality; indeed, a technical omission induced by the prescribed form.

The present circumstances are distinguishable from B & M Quality
Constructions Pty Ltd versus Buyrite Steel Supplies Ltd [(1994) 15 ACSR 433] because in this case the deponent is the managing director of the creditor and the affidavit states his belief that there is no genuine dispute about the debt.
In that case the main problem was that the deponent was a licensed commercial agent, and further, McLelland CJ in Eq.'s remarks at 435 were directed to a case where the affidavit failed to state that the deponent believed there was a genuine dispute about the debt. The present circumstances are also distinguishable from the affidavit considered by Bryson J in Portrait Express
Pty Ltd versus Kodak (Australasia) Pty Ltd [(1996) 132 FLR 300], because in that case the affidavit failed to comply with subparas (c), (d) and (e) of the Supreme Court rule and was not in the prescribed form. Similarly, the affidavit which I considered in Kezarne Pty Ltd versus Sydney Asbestos Removal
Services Pty Ltd (unreported, 25 September 1998) failed to comply with subparas (c), (d) and (e), and was not in the prescribed form, and did not contain the "Important Note" which is set out in the form.

My conclusion, therefore, is that Mr Matchett's affidavit does not comply with the requirement in subpara (d) of both the Federal Court and Supreme Court rules that the affidavit must state that the deponent believes that the matters in the affidavit concerning the debt are true. However, I do not regard this non-compliance with the rule as anything more than a mere technicality, certainly not in itself justifying the setting aside of the statutory demand.

My conclusion on this point is reinforced by s459J(2), as interpreted by the
Full Federal Court in the Spencer Constructions case which was cited above.
The Federal Court's view in that case implies that a defect in an affidavit verifying a statutory demand is capable of falling within s459J(2), which states that except as provided in s459J(1), the court must not set aside a statutory demand merely because of a defect. In the circumstances of the present case, failure to comply with subpara (d) was merely because of a defect.

Thirdly, the plaintiff said that Mr Matchett's affidavit does not link his position as managing director with his knowledge of the debt. Presumably this submission is intended to show that the affidavit has not adequately stated the source of the deponent's knowledge about the matters stated in the affidavit concerning the debt. I disagree with this submission. Para 5 makes it clear that the deponent's knowledge arises in his capacity as managing director of the creditor.

Fourthly, the plaintiff contends that the affidavit fails to state that the deponent is an officer of the corporation having knowledge of the facts so far as they are known to the corporation: Order 71, r36AB(2)(a) (Part 80A, r15(2)(a)). In my judgment in Kezarne I noted competing arguments as to whether the rule implies that the deponent should expressly state these matters, and I found it unnecessary to resolve the issue. It is also unnecessary to resolve the issue in the present case. In my opinion the affidavit in the present case says enough to comply with subpara (2)(a), whatever precisely may be required to comply with that provision. It is clear that Mr Matchett was an appropriate deponent because he is the managing director of the defendant, and he deposes to the fact that his knowledge arises out of personal awareness and the review of documents in his capacity as managing director.

It follows, therefore, that the plaintiff fails in its contention that the statutory demand should be set aside on the ground that the affidavit verifying the demand does not comply with the rules.

The "Genuine Dispute" Ground 
The plaintiff's business is to manufacture and supply street poles, flag poles, yacht masts and similar extruded aluminium material. The defendant is a design consultancy company. In June 1997 the Council of the City of Sydney published advertisements inviting tenders for the manufacture and supply of "Smartpoles". A "Smartpole" is a street pole which is designed to perform a number of functions such as street lighting, traffic directions/lights and the support of telephone and power lines. Both the plaintiff and the defendant were interested in working on this project. After contact with the Council, the defendant contacted the plaintiff and after discussions, the plaintiff engaged the defendant to perform design consultancy services in support of the plaintiff's tender. In their discussions about the tender, the plaintiff and the defendant concluded that the design which was the subject of the invitation to tender had a number of serious flaws. Therefore the plaintiff submitted a conforming tender and a non-conforming tender, and it was the non- conforming tender that was successful. Considerable work was needed to prepare the tenders, and after the plaintiff's tender was successful a large number of variations were made at the request of the Council, and also other interested parties such as the Roads and Traffic Authority, Telstra, Optus and Energy
Australia.

The defendant's fees were the subject of substantial negotiation and correspondence. As agreed, the fees included work charged at an hourly rate, and a success fee, and a fee for full production documentation. As it became increasingly clear that the plaintiff's tender would be successful, the defendant looked for ways to recoup what it saw as a shortfall between the agreed fees and its "internal billings" (what it should have billed) during the preparation of the tender. The defendant's facsimile of 25 August 1997 refers to a success fee of $25,000, and its facsimile of 4 September 1997 refers to a success fee of $35,000, the first $25,000 of which to be paid on successful completion of the design, refinement and report generation stage of the project (that is, Council approval) and the remaining amount to be paid upon placement of the first production order.

The defendant invoiced the plaintiff on a regular basis for work done on the project and one of those invoices, dated 23 September 1997, was for "project management and design fees as per agreement" in the sum of $35,000. This appears to be the success fee referred to in the defendant's facsimile of 4
September 1997. Some of the invoices included another fee for "project management", namely charges at an hourly rate for the services of Mr Matchett, the managing director of the defendant. It appears that the plaintiff did not object to the defendant's invoices for the period from July to December when they were sent. However, the defendant sent a facsimile to the plaintiff as "clarification of the breakup of fees" on 4 December 1997.

On 30 January 1998 the plaintiff wrote to the Council setting out extra costs incurred in modifications requested by the Council after the closing of the tender, and enclosing a summary of fees supplied by the defendant. The correspondence suggests that Council officers were becoming concerned about the project costs in the first half of 1998 and were requiring justification for all additional fees. The defendant continued to send the plaintiff invoices for work done. The plaintiff negotiated with the Council to justify its billings and for additional fees. The defendant was involved in those negotiations as is evident from its facsimile to the plaintiff dated 18 March
That facsimile also shows the defendant's increasing anxiety at the level of its outstanding fees. The defendant claimed intellectual property in the Smartpole and purported to refuse the plaintiff authority to assign that intellectual property to the Council unless satisfactory arrangements were made for payment of its fees.

Eventually on 1 June 1998 the plaintiff wrote to the defendant reporting on the outcome of a meeting with the Council at which the level of design fees charged by KWA was discussed and the Council agreed to pay part of the amount claimed. According to the letter of 1 June 1998, Council officers stated that work undertaken without the Council's authorisation would not be paid. Council refused $170,000 of the total claims made against it. The letter of 1 June said that the plaintiff would honour its obligations to the defendant, "but in doing so must crucially look at all aspects of your accounts". The letter claimed that the defendant's account for production drawings exceeded the original agreement by $6,078 and that billings in the sum of $30,449 for project management were not part of the original agreement.

The defendant's response to the plaintiff's letter of 1 June 1998 came not from the defendant but from its solicitors. In their letter of 5 June 1998, the defendant's solicitors stated that the work on production drawings was performed at the plaintiff's express request and that the invoice for it was not disputed at the time it was rendered. Further, they claimed that the project management tasks were performed at the specific request and with the verbal approval of the plaintiff, which had had the benefit of those services.
The letter claims it to be "clear" that the plaintiff's rejection of the defendant's account was caused not by any legitimate argument about liability but through some perceived necessity arising from the Council's decision to refuse payment of those costs. The defendant, according to its solicitor, rejected that as a legitimate basis to refuse payment. The letter concluded with a threat to take various steps including the commencement of winding up proceedings.

There followed correspondence between the parties and their solicitors in which the defendant reiterated its claim to intellectual property rights over the Smartpole and threatened proceedings for liquidation, and also threatened to inform the Council and the plaintiff's suppliers that the parties were in dispute. This was described by the plaintiff's solicitors as "standover tactics" and they alleged that Mr Matchett had made defamatory statements to
Council officers and demanded their retraction. Significantly for present issue, in their correspondence the defendant's solicitors pursued the theme that the plaintiff's claims to reduction of the debt in respect of production drawings and project management fees were spurious and that there was no legitimate basis to refuse payment; and the plaintiff's solicitors stated (in their letter of 23 June 1998) that their client had sought independent advice on the appropriateness of the defendant's charges.

The reference to "independent advice" may be a reference to the advice tendered, by letter of 24 June 1998, by Taylor Thomson Whitting Pty Ltd, in which the view is expressed that the defendant had charged for very much more time for certain aspects of the job than would be reasonable. Notwithstanding that opinion, the defendant's solicitors continued to assert that there was no bona fide dispute between the parties.

In the hearing of present proceedings the plaintiff tendered evidence of two additional kinds with respect to its claim that the defendant has overcharged.
First, the plaintiff read two affidavits by Lachlan Menzies, dated 24
September and 14 October 1998. According to Mr Menzies' evidence, he commenced work as the administration/sales officer of the plaintiff in July 1997. The plaintiff's managing director asked him to correct drawings prepared by the defendant for the Smartpole project, check that the drawings were satisfactory and thereafter liaise with the plaintiff's toolmaker at the foundries which made the aluminium casting on the basis of those drawings. Mr Menzies has given evidence that he found it extremely difficult to obtain the current issue of drawings from the defendant. He prepared a table which shows that a significant number of the drawings held by the plaintiff are not the final drawings which the plaintiff expected to receive from the defendant.

The invoices rendered by the defendant to the plaintiff were normally accompanied by a document of the defendant called a project diary, which shows the amounts of time allegedly spent by the defendant performing the work set out in the invoices. Mr Menzies prepared a detailed schedule which shows the amount of time which the defendant claimed to have spent on the work set out in various items in the invoices. Mr Menzies expressed the opinion that this is excessive. For example, the third page of annexure B to Mr Menzies' affidavit of 24 September 1998 contains an item of work described as "eng.
banner fax", for which 3.5 hours is claimed. Similarly, on the ninth page of annexure B five hours is claimed for "fax SCC minutes from EA. meeting". On the tenth, eleventh and twelfth pages of annexure B are two items where five hours is allocated in each case to "follow up" certain matters. Other similar matters are highlighted by Mr Menzies in annexure B. Annexure C to his affidavit of 24 September 1998 is a schedule prepared by Mr Menzies which collates the items of work and time claims which he questions, and includes his comments on each item. At that stage, the total number of hours which he questioned was 611, but in his affidavit of 14 October 1998 he reduced that figure to 511 hours.

Mr Menzies has also gave evidence that the plaintiff was forced to complete the designs for which final drawings had not been received, and its employees had to do this work manually. As an illustration of the problem, he refers to a document called "installation procedures and loading parameters for the
Smartpole - Issue D", which is in evidence. He says it was necessary for the plaintiff to produce for itself the final outline of the document, and that the final draft of the document has never been received from the defendant (Mr
Menzies' affidavit of 14 September 1998, para 14, says that the document "has never been received by the defendant", but I assume the word "by" should read "from").

Secondly, the plaintiff's manager of sales and marketing, Antony Barnes, gave evidence that the defendant had charged $14,816.25 for "the installation document", and that the only installation document was Issue D, of which the defendant provided a draft but never the final document.

In summary, the plaintiff now claims that it has been overcharged: $30,449 for project management fees not agreed to be paid; $6,078 for production drawings in excess of the agreed amount; $24,501.30 for goods not delivered (presumably including the installation document referred to above); $42,091.75 for 511 hours of work at hourly rates, said to be excessive.

According to Mr Menzies, if all of these disputed items were resolved in favour of the plaintiff, the defendant would owe the plaintiff $5,755.57.

It is not my task in the present proceedings to seek to resolve the competing claims of the plaintiff and the defendant. The question for me to resolve is whether, for the purposes of s459H(1)(a), there is a genuine dispute between the plaintiff and the defendant about the existence or amount of the debt to which the defendant's statutory demand relates. The test for determining whether there is a genuine dispute was fully considered by the Full Federal
Court in the Spencer Constructions case, cited above. In my opinion one of the most useful expositions of the test is found in the judgment of McLelland
CJ in Eq in Eyota Pty Ltd versus Hanave Pty Ltd [(1994) 12 ACSR 785], 787 where his Honour said: "In my opinion [the] expression connotes a plausible contention requiring investigation, and raises much the same sort of considerations as the ´serious question to be tried' criterion which arises on an application for an interlocutory injunction or for the extension or removal of a caveat. This does not mean that the court must accept uncritically as giving rise to a genuine dispute, every statement in an affidavit ´however equivocal, lacking in precision, inconsistent with undisputed contemporary documents or other statements by the same deponent, or inherently improbable in itself, it may be' not having ´sufficient prima facie plausibility to merit further investigation as to [its] truth' (cf Eng Mee Yong versus Letchumanan [[1980] AC ] at ), or ´a patently feeble legal argument or an assertion of facts unsupported by evidence': cf South Australia versus Wall [(1980) 24 SASR ]
at 194." 
The Full Federal Court's conclusion, after reviewing the authorities, is also helpful. They said (at 464): "In our view a ´genuine' dispute requires that ? The dispute be bona fide and truly exist in fact; ? The grounds for alleging the existence of a dispute are real and not spurious, hypothetical, illusory or misconceived." 
The defendant's Counsel urged me to conclude on the facts that the matters of dispute raised by the plaintiff are not genuine. He submitted that all of the matters relied upon by the plaintiff to show the existence of a genuine dispute are mere assertion. However, having reviewed the evidence, and applying as best I can the tests set out by the Full Federal Court and
McLelland CJ in Eq., I find that the plaintiff has established the existence of a genuine dispute with respect to the whole of the debt.

It is true, on the evidence, that the plaintiff did not complain about the defendant's invoices until writing its letter of 1 June 1998. However, there is a plausible explanation for this. Until that time, the plaintiff was in intense negotiation with the Council, as was well known to the defendant, seeking to justify its charges, including the charges for design fees which it had passed on to the Council from the defendant. It was only when the Council decided not to meet these expenses that the plaintiff reviewed the invoices closely, since the Council's decision meant that the plaintiff would have to meet a substantial part of the defendant's fees out of its own pocket. As soon as the Council's decision was known, the plaintiff raised questions about the fees for project management and production drawings. Further questions about excessive charges were raised a few weeks later. Though a different picture may emerge on a full hearing, I cannot conclude in these proceedings that the plaintiff's claims are without substance.

As to the project management fees, I note that in the defendant's facsimile of June 1997 which sets out the fee basis and hourly charges for categories of work, project management is referred to as a service available for $85 per hour. Subsequent correspondence (see especially the defendant's facsimile of 4
September 1997) refers to a fixed "success fee" of $35,000 and what appears to be that fee is then described in invoice 1549 on 23 September 1997 as "project management and design fees". In later invoices hourly charges appear for project management at $95 per hour. Given the context of a contractor looking for ways to recoup fees for work at the tender stage, which would otherwise not be recoverable, there is an arguable case that the project management fee is an additional charge which was never agreed.

As to the fees for production drawings, it appears from the defendant's facsimile of 25 August 1997 that the agreed fee was $29,750 for "full production documentation" and it is therefore arguable that the defendant has purported to charge an additional amount of $6,078 for the drawings, which was not agreed.

The plaintiff's other two claims were made later, but in the circumstances I do not regard the delay as completely destroying their plausibility. There is evidence in Mr Menzies' affidavit that a significant quantity of final plans and the final draft of Issue ID were not delivered by the defendant, yet the defendant has purported to charge for drawings and documents. As to the plaintiff's allegation that excessive and unreasonable amounts of time have been charged for work, evidence from Taylor Thomson Whitting Pty Ltd was obtained less than four weeks after the plaintiff raised the first matters of complaint. Though that evidence is general and does not quantify the excess, it suggests that an arguable case of overcharging may emerge. Mr Menzies' evidence expands and gives content to such a case. While a debtor cannot call a genuine dispute into existence merely by asserting that too much time was taken to do the work, in this case the plaintiff's evidence goes well beyond an asserted conclusion, providing detailed schedules which particularise the items of alleged excessive charging.

The defendant's Counsel points out that Taylor Thomson Whitting Pty Ltd's letter of 24 June 1998 contains hearsay assertions with respect to the conduct of the defendant. However, it also contains opinion evidence as to whether the defendant's charges were excessive. It may be that the court would admit that evidence as evidence of an expert opinion at the trial of the dispute. It is true that Taylor Thomson Whitting Pty Ltd's opinion is not fully substantiated in the letter and that deficiency may affect its weight and probative value.
Nonetheless the letter is significant evidence of the existence of a genuine dispute. The defendant's Counsel also attacked the evidence of Mr Menzies. He pointed out that in a trial of the plaintiff's claims there would be a real question about the admissibility of evidence of Mr Menzies' opinions, and submitted that the probative value of Mr Menzies' evidence is diminished because he did not make any enquiries of the defendant or the Council and was acting under the instructions of the plaintiff's managing director and Mr
Barnes. I allowed limited cross-examination of Mr Menzies and during cross- examination he disclosed that he has some qualifications which are arguably a relevant basis for his opinions, and I therefore cannot conclude at this stage that his evidence would be wholly inadmissible at a trial of the dispute. As to its probative value, in my opinion Mr Menzies' opinions are far less significant than the detailed schedules which he attaches to his affidavit.
The schedule detailing the plans which were not finalised is evidence of matters within his personal knowledge. The schedule which tabulates the defendant's claims for payment at hourly rates was, he said, extracted from the defendant's own information and if that is so, the schedule speaks for itself. Making all due allowances in light of the submissions of the defendant's Counsel, I still regard Mr Menzies' evidence as of some use in reaching my conclusion that a genuine dispute exists.

I believe I must also take into account the sequence of correspondence. Before the end of May 1998 the defendant was agitating for payment but had also assisted the plaintiff in its representations to the Council. Both the plaintiff and the defendant must have realised that if the Council accepted all relevant charges there would be no issue between them. The plaintiff raised its first two claims as soon as it became evident that the Council's payment would leave a shortfall. From that point the defendant refused to accept the possibility that the plaintiff's claims may be bona fide claims worthy of consideration. This was not the common case of a debtor seeking to dispute the debt as a last minute act of desperation.

The defendant's Counsel also submitted that I should draw adverse inferences from the facts that neither the plaintiff's managing director, Mr Douglas
Rawson-Harris, nor the author of the letter of 1 June 1998, Mr Bill Edwards, gave evidence. However, there is evidence in Mr Worthington's affidavit of 28
July 1998 that Mr Rawson Harris was overseas at the time when the application to set aside the statutory demand was made. No doubt it would have been possible for him to swear an affidavit after his return, but given that other evidence had been prepared it may simply have been decided that evidence from him was not necessary at that stage, where the only issue was whether there is a genuine dispute. As to Mr Edwards, in my opinion it is sufficient that Mr
Barnes has given evidence that he caused the letter of 1 June 1998 to be written by the company's accountant.

Having regard to all of the above circumstances, my conclusion is that the plaintiff has made out his case that there is a genuine dispute between the parties as to the existence or amount of the debt which is the subject of the demand. In the light of Mr Menzies' affidavit of 14 October 1998 and the submissions of Counsel for the plaintiff, it cannot be said that there is any "admitted total" for the purposes of s459H(2) and therefore there is no substantiated amount for the purpose of varying the demand under s459H(4). The defendant claimed that the plaintiff's letter of 1 June 1998 admitted the balance of the amount claimed by the defendant, after deducting the plaintiff's claims with respect to project management fees and production drawings. I am inclined to doubt that on its proper construction the letter of June 1998 admitted the balance of the debt, since it stated an intention to "crucially look at all aspects of your accounts", evidently a continuing process. But it is clear from later correspondence that any such admission, if made, was withdrawn before the statutory demand was served (see, for example, the letter from the plaintiff's solicitors to the defendant's solicitors dated June 1998). In these circumstances, it would not be appropriate for me to vary the demand, and the proper order is to set it aside, unless I am prevented from doing so by a defect in the plaintiff's affidavit in support of the summons. I now turn to that question.

Affidavit in Support of the Application to Set the Statutory Demand Aside 
Section 459G(3) states that an application is made in accordance with this section only if, within 21 days after the statutory demand is served, an affidavit supporting the application is filed with the Court, and the application and supporting affidavit are served on the creditor. In addition,
Order 71, r36B of the Federal Court Rules requires that an application under s459G(1) must be accompanied by an affidavit: "(a) stating any material facts relied upon by the applicant in support of the application; identifying the grounds on which it is said that the Court should make an order under section 459H or 459J of the Corporations Law setting aside the demand." 
There is no similar requirement in the Rules of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales.

In Graywinter Properties Pty Ltd versus Gas & Fuel Corporation Superannuation
Fund <case>; [(1996) 21 ACSR 581], it was held that compliance with s459G(3) is a condition of the court's jurisdiction, and therefore the court cannot act on the application unless a "supporting affidavit" has been filed and served within the requisite time.

The question is, how far must the affidavit go in order for it to be properly classified as an affidavit which supports the application? Where the application is based on a genuine dispute within s459H(1)(a), to what extent must the affidavit which is filed with the application demonstrate in its terms, without reliance on subsequently filed evidence, that a genuine dispute exists? In Graywinter, Sundberg J said (at 587) that the affidavit must "disclose facts showing there is a genuine dispute between the parties". In his view a mere assertion that there is a genuine dispute is not enough. He added: "An affidavit which exhibits an exchange of correspondence between the parties or between their solicitors from which it appears that a claim is made and rejected for reasons given can qualify as a supporting affidavit." 
He rejected the view that the affidavit must contain sufficient material to make out a case under s459H.

In Graywinter the affidavit was very short and simply asserted that the creditor had agreed to a compromise, terms payment and to forebear to sue, and that a judgment which had been entered for the debt had been entered erroneously. On that ground, the deponent said, a genuine dispute existed.
Sundberg J held that the affidavit was sufficient to qualify as a supporting affidavit.

In contrast, in Dromore Fresh Produce Pty Ltd versus W Paton (Fertilizers) Pty
Ltd [(1997) 23 ACSR 230], Young J held that an affidavit by the plaintiff's solicitor which simply said that the plaintiff disputes that it is indebted to the defendant was insufficient to qualify as an affidavit supporting the application to set the demand aside, for the purposes of s459G(3). Similarly in Sacon Constructions Pty Ltd versus Concrite Quarries Pty Ltd [(1997) 15 ACLC ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281997%29%2015%20ACLC%201303 "View LawCiteRecord" ), Emmett J applied the principle stated in the Graywinter case but held that an affidavit which merely asserted that the debt was disputed and that the debtor had a cross claim equal to or greater than the amount claimed, did not satisfy the requirement that the affidavit must "support" the application.
The same reasoning was applied to a similar affidavit by Santow J in Zenaust
Imports Pty Ltd versus Alembic Chemicals Works Co. Ltd [(1998) 28 ACSR 465.] Similarly in Verte Pty Ltd versus Grisbrook [(1997) 15 ACLC 1306], Master
Sanderson of the Supreme Court of Western Australia applied the principle in the Graywinter case and held that an affidavit which merely denied indebtedness and asserted a genuine dispute, and then purported to explain that the information necessary to found the application could not be filed because the person in possession of it was overseas, was insufficient to support the application.

I agree with the principles enunciated by Sundberg J in the Graywinter case.
A comparison of the affidavit held to be sufficient in that case with the affidavits held to be insufficient in the Dromore, Sacon Constructions,
Zenaust and Verte cases is instructive for present purposes. In the latter three cases, no attempt was made to state the grounds upon which it was alleged that a genuine dispute existed. In the Graywinter case there was an assertion of factual grounds, namely an agreed compromise, but the assertion was made in the barest form.

In the present case, the affidavit supporting the application is the affidavit of Brook Michael Worthington dated 28 July 1998. Mr Worthington is the plaintiff's solicitor, and states that he is duly authorised to make the affidavit on behalf of the company. Though the defendant's Counsel submitted that I should draw adverse inferences from the absence of any evidence by the plaintiff's managing director, it was not contended that a supporting affidavit must necessarily be inadequate if the deponent is not a director of the applicant company. Mr Worthington's affidavit annexes twelve items of correspondence. It then says that Douglas Rawson-Harris is one of the two directors of the plaintiff and the only director who has knowledge of the matters giving rise to the defendant's claim, and states that he is overseas.
Mr Worthington says he has been informed by Mr Rawson-Harris and verily believes that the company disputes that there is any liability to the defendant or at all.

In my opinion, Mr Worthington's affidavit satisfies the requirement of s459G(3) that an affidavit supporting the application be filed. Since the application is in the Supreme Court of New South Wales, which has no equivalent to Order 71, r36B, I do not need to consider whether Mr
Worthington's affidavit would satisfy that rule. I have formed the view that the affidavit is adequate for the purposes of s459G(3) because the correspondence which is annexed to it identifies matters which have led to my conclusion that there is a genuine dispute between the parties. In particular, the plaintiff's letter of 1 June 1998 is annexed, and shows a dispute about project management fees and production drawings, and the affidavit also annexes the letter of the plaintiff's solicitors of 23 June 1998 which refers to seeking independent advice on the appropriateness of the defendant's charges, and Taylor Thomson Whitting Pty Ltd's letter of 24 June 1998 which expresses the opinion that some charges are excessive, and the plaintiff's solicitors' letter of 6 July 1998 which refers to that opinion.

I agree with Sundberg J's observation in Graywinter that an affidavit may be sufficient for the purposes of s459G(3) if it verifies a body of correspondence containing assertions and denials of indebtedness, from which it is apparent that the parties are genuinely in dispute about the claimed debt. A careful perusal of the correspondence annexed to Mr Worthington's affidavit leaves the reader in no doubt that the plaintiff disputes the whole of the alleged debt and does so on three of the four grounds which were relied on at the hearing before me. The ground not mentioned is that the defendant has purported to charge for drawings and documents which were never provided in final form. There is a question whether, in a case where the plaintiff relies on several grounds for establishing the existence of a genuine dispute, it is confined at the hearing to the grounds mentioned in the supporting affidavit and cannot add additional grounds. In the present case, however, it is unnecessary to decide that question because, in my opinion, the correspondence adequately conveys the notion that the plaintiff contends that the defendant's invoices are excessive both in respect of the amount of time for which charges are made and in respect of the items billed.

I therefore conclude that Mr Worthington's affidavit of 28 July 1998 was a "supporting affidavit" for the purposes of s459G(3), and further that its contents did not prevent the plaintiff from making out the case which it made out at the hearing.

Conclusions 
For the reasons given, I propose to order pursuant to s459G of the
Corporations Law that the statutory demand dated 9 July 1998 served by the defendant on the plaintiff is set aside.

On the question of costs, while the plaintiff's contention that the affidavit verifying the statutory demand was defective has failed, the plaintiff has nonetheless succeeded on the question of genuine dispute and I have decided that it is entitled to the relief which it sought. In my opinion, therefore, costs should follow the event.

I have considered whether this is an appropriate case for granting indemnity costs to the plaintiff, having regard to the observations of Santow J in
Polaroid Australia Pty Ltd versus Minicomp Pty Ltd [(1998) 16 ACLC 529], 536.
There is evidence in the correspondence that the defendant sought to use the statutory demand procedure to force payment of a genuinely contested debt, in disregard of the basic principle that a winding up order will not be made on a debt which is genuinely disputed. The correspondence by the defendant's solicitors can only be described as uncompromising and aggressive (see the letters of the defendant's solicitors dated 5 June 1998, 19 June 1998 and 10
July 1998). Nevertheless, I have concluded that in this case I should order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs on the normal party and party basis. In reaching this conclusion I take into account the fact that the plaintiff did not object to the defendant's invoices until it had become apparent on 1 June 1998 that the Council would not meet all of the plaintiff's claims for payment, and consequently there would be a shortfall in design fees. That being so, I do not see this as a case involving the kind of abusive use of the statutory demand procedure which would justify indemnity costs.
 * * * 
