

In the matter of Towncars Franchises Sydney Pty Limited [2013] NSWSC 1235 (24 July 2013) 
Last Updated: 9 October 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
In the matter of Towncars Franchises Sydney Pty Limited  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): 
Wednesday 24 July 2013  
Decision Date: July 2013  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Brereton J  
Decision: 
The creditor's statutory demand be set aside.  
Catchwords: 
CORPORATIONS - creditor's statutory demand - application to set aside creditor's statutory demand - originating process filed by director - director cannot commence proceedings to set aside a statutory demand - director not a proper and necessary party to proceeding to set aside a statutory demand - UCPR r 7.1(2) requires that a solicitor be appointed to act for defendant company - whether appropriate for the Court to dispense with rule  
CORPORATIONS - creditor's statutory demand - application to set aside creditor's statutory demand - whether genuine dispute - whether guarantee under a contract founds a claim for unliquidated damages or for a debt  
JUDGMENT (EX TEMPORE)
HIS HONOUR: The present proceedings were purportedly initiated by originating process filed on 10 May 2013 and signed on behalf of the plaintiff Towncars Franchises Sydney Pty Limited by a director, Daniel Breen. The originating process purported to nominate as the plaintiff's address for service one David Windsor, lawyer and commercial counsel, at a post office box in Victoria, which, it seems, is in fact the address of the solicitors acting for the defendant, not the plaintiff; accordingly, the originating process is defective in failing to specify an address for service for the plaintiff in the state. 
More significantly, the originating process is defective because of UCPR r 7.1, which provides, by sub-rule (2), that a company may commence and carry on proceedings in any Court by a solicitor or by a director of the company, but then, by sub-rule (3), provides that in the case of proceedings in the Supreme Court, a company may commence proceedings by a director "only if the director is also a plaintiff in the proceedings". As I have previously explained (see In the matter of DB Mahaffy & Associates Pty Limited  <case> and In the Matter of DB Mahaffy & Co Pty Limited <case>, the effect of the rule is that in this court a company cannot commence proceedings to set aside a statutory demand by a director, nor is it open to join a director as plaintiff as a director is not a proper or necessary party in proceedings to set aside a statutory demand served on a company, only the company is the appropriate plaintiff (see also the recent judgment of Hallen J Tanamerah Estates Pty Ltd versus Tibra Capital Pty Ltd <case>
Moreover, r 7.2 provides that where a person commences or carries on proceedings as a director of a company, that person must file with the originating process an affidavit as to his authority to act in that capacity together with a copy of the instrument evidencing that authority, and the affidavit must contain a statement to the effect that the director is a director of the company, has been authorised by a resolution of the directors to commence and carry on the proceedings, that the authority has not been revoked, and that the director is aware that he or she may be liable to pay some or all of the costs of the proceedings. None of those requirements has been satisfied in this case. [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/), [s 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s14.html), provides that in relation to particular civil proceedings the Court may, by order, dispense with any requirement of the rules of Court if satisfied that it is appropriate to do so in the circumstances of the case. The question is whether, in the circumstances of this particular case, I should dispense with the requirements of [rules 7.1](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s7.1.html) and 7.2, or any of them, and, if so, upon what terms 
The relevant circumstances are, first, that the application is a relatively straightforward one under <case> of the (Cth) [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/); secondly, that it is said that the corporation - although there is no evidence of it - is not in a position to afford to retain solicitors or counsel; thirdly, that the documentation filed to this point indicates that those acting for the company appear to have a sufficient grasp of the issues and ability to present them such that the Court will not be unduly inconvenienced by the absence of an admitted practitioner as advocate; and fourthly, that the matter has proceeded to this point without the point having hitherto been taken. 
In those circumstances I am inclined to dispense with the rules to the extent of permitting the plaintiff to continue the proceedings by a direction, but subject to the requirement that the director in question, who I take to be Mr Breen who signed the originating process, acknowledge that he may be personally liable for the costs of the proceedings. Mr Breen having acknowledged that he may be made personally liable for the costs of the proceedings, I order pursuant to [Civil Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) [s 14](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/s14.html) that the requirements of UCPR r 7.1 and 7.2, in so far as they would otherwise require the proceedings to be commenced and continued only by a solicitor, be dispensed with, and be deemed to have been dispensed with from 10 May 2013 when the originating process was filed. 
I should also impose an additional requirement on the leave to the plaintiff which is that a proper notice of address for service be notified. It will be noted that in lieu of the address for service specified in the originating process, the plaintiff's address for service is 32 Delhi Road North Ryde in the State of New South Wales.
The rules also require that prior to appearing before the Court the defendant file a notice of appearance specifying an address for service. There is no indication on the file that that has been done. I will grant leave to Mr Hourigan to appear for the defendant upon his undertaking as counsel that a notice of appearance will be filed in the Registry within twenty-four hours. 
By originating process filed on 10 May 2012, the plaintiff Towncars Franchises Sydney Pty Limited applies, pursuant to (Cth) [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) [s 459G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459g.html), for an order setting aside a statutory demand issued and served on it by the defendant Town Car Hire Pty Limited on 19 April 2013 on the grounds that there is a genuine dispute as to the existence of the indebtedness claimed in the demand. 
The approach of the Court in applications of this kind and to the characterisation of a "genuine dispute" for the purposes of [s 459H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459h.html) has been well-established in cases such as Eyota Pty Limited versus Hanave Pty Limited [(1994) 12 ACSR 785], at 103, to the effect that the task faced by a company challenging a statutory demand on the genuine dispute ground is by no means at all a difficult or demanding one, and the company will fail in that task only if it is found, upon the hearing of its [s 459G](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459g.html) application, that the contentions upon which it relies in mounting its challenge are so devoid of substance that no further investigation is warranted. Once the company shows that even one issue has a sufficient degree of cogency to be arguable, a finding of genuine dispute must follow. The Court does not engage in any form of balancing exercise between the strength of competing contentions, and if it sees any factor that on rational grounds indicates an arguable case on the part of the company it must find that a genuine dispute exists, even where any case apparently available to be advanced against the company seems stronger. As has been said in many cases, therefore, the threshold that a plaintiff on an application such as the present must surmount is a relatively low one. 
The plaintiff operates a franchise-based hire car business in Sydney and in Melbourne. The defendant operates a town car hire business in Melbourne, with two cars. On or about 19 January 2012, the plaintiff granted to the defendant a franchise to operate a Towncars franchise in Victoria. The franchise was for an initial term of six months with options to renew for two further five-year terms and also provided that, insofar as the defendant continued to operate the franchise following the conclusion of the term of the agreement, it would continue on a month to month basis.
Of central importance to the present matter is a "dispatch guarantee" which was included in the franchise agreement as a special condition pursuant to item 18(c) in the schedule, and which provided as follows: 
Towncars [the plaintiff] guarantee that the franchisee [the defendant] will receive bookings that will result in Gross Revenue of at least $12,000 per month per car for the first 12 months of this agreement.
In the franchise agreement, 'booking' was defined to mean 'a request for hire car services made by a customer to Towncars [the plaintiff] and accepted by Towncars'. "Gross Revenue" was defined to mean: 
All income whatsoever derived by the franchisee in relation to the franchise business, whether cash or credit, arising from the provision of approved services by the franchisee (excluding GST, tolls, park entry fees, gratuities, tips, airport fees and parking fees).
By clause 7, the franchise agreement provided that Towncars would allocate bookings, first to the franchisee who owns the franchise for the territory in which the journey commenced and, if that franchisee declines or fails to accept the booking within the time specified in the dispatch rules, then, secondly, to the franchisee who was the owner of the territory in which the journey terminates and, if that franchisee declines or fails to accept the booking within the time specified in the dispatch rules, then, thirdly, to the network, in which case the booking will be allocated to the first member of the network to accept the booking.
By clause 10, the franchisee agreed to pay Towncars a royalty which, by reference to item 16 in the schedule, represented 7.5 percent of gross revenue.
By clause 11, the franchisee agreed to pay a network fee in consideration for use of the dispatch terminal and dispatch system and participation in the network which, by reference to item 11 of the schedule, was defined as $399 per month per vehicle indexed on 1 July each year.
By clause 12, in consideration of the allocation of bookings and management of the dispatch rules and the development and maintenance of customer relations, the franchisee agreed to pay Towncars a dispatch fee which, by reference to item 15 of the schedule, was 12.5 percent of gross revenue in Band 1 and then 7.5 percent of gross revenue in Band 2. Band 1 comprised gross revenue per calendar month up to $10,000, and Band 2 gross revenue over that amount.
Under clause 15, the franchisee was responsible for acquiring or securing, by way of lease or hire purchase or otherwise, the use for the term of a vehicle that complied with Towncars' specifications, to ensure that such vehicle complied with the Towncars' image and system and was clean and undamaged and in full working order, and to acquire computer hardware and software suitable for use in the franchise business that complied with Towncars' specification.
The creditor's statutory demand claimed a sum of $84,133.87 said to be inclusive of GST, described as "balance of gross revenue guaranteed by the debtor company to the creditor pursuant to a signed franchise agreement between the creditor and debtor company in relation to the period 1 February 2012 to 31 January 2013." The basis of the calculation that produces the sum claimed in the demand appears from the affidavit of the defendant's director Gary James Rowe of 19 June 2013. He says that between February 2012 and January 2013, the defendant received bookings that resulted in total gross revenue of $207,960.25 including GST and, in addition, was paid, pursuant to the guarantee, sums totalling $24,705.88; whereas the guarantee on the basis of two vehicles at $12,000 per month each, entitled the franchisee to a minimum gross revenue of $316,800; thus, the amount claimed in the demand is the difference between the revenue actually received and the gross revenue said to be guaranteed.
The fundamental dispute is whether the guarantee founds a claim for a liquidated sum, such as to amount to a debt within [s 459E](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459e.html), or does no more than found a claim for unliquidated damages. It is, at the outset, to be observed that the guarantee in terms guaranteed the receipt of "bookings", as defined, and not of gross revenue. The question is whether the franchisee was offered or allocated or referred bookings that, if accepted, would generate gross revenue of at least the amount in question. What the guarantee does not do is to guarantee payment, or receipt, of $12,000 per month. It guarantees the referral of a certain quantity of bookings. If the guarantee is not satisfied, then the franchisee is entitled to be compensated for the loss it suffers by reason of the guarantee not being satisfied; but that loss by no means equates to the difference between actual receipts and $12,000 per month per car. This is so for several reasons.
The first is that, as was ultimately conceded, the dispatch fee and the royalty must be deducted; but, moreover, it seems to me that if the cars are not on the road they are not consuming fuel, which must be one of the greatest costs of a business of this kind and, had the franchisee received bookings to the extent guaranteed, then its fuel costs resulting from those bookings would have been greater than in fact they were. All this demonstrates that the amount referred to in the guarantee cannot be said to be a sum certain.
In Rothwells Limited versus Nommack (No. 100) Pty Limited (1988) 13 ACLR 421, McPherson J said (at 422), in the context of the statutory demand procedure under former Companies (Qld) Code 1981, <case>(a): 
A debt is a liquidated sum in money presently due, owing and payable by one person, called 'the debtor' to another person called 'the creditor'. It is in that sense that the word 'indebted' is used in the statutory provision.
In Reinsurance Corporation Limited versus Odyssey Re (Bermuda) Limited <case>; [(2000) 36 ACSR 348], his Honour said that although the contract was one of indemnity, which indemnified against the 'ultimate net loss', it was clear that there were many different items which had to be taken into account when determining the ultimate net loss and therefore that the defendant's right was to damages for breach of the contract of an indemnity but, in the absence of quantification by arbitration or judgment, the claim was not one for debt.
His Honour concluded that there was therefore a genuine dispute in respect of the amount of the debt, or some other reason why the demand should be set aside. The Master's judgment was upheld on appeal by Windeyer J in Odyssey Re (Bermuda) versus Reinsurance Australia <case>; [(2001) 19 ACLC 987.] (at 250): 
One might well think that a sum due under an insurance policy constituted a debt. On this assumption, the plaintiff's solicitors were entitled to appropriate the drafts to the principal sums due, since otherwise they would have been deemed to have been appropriated to the payment of interest, the balance only being appropriated to payment of the principal amounts. However, as a matter of law, a claim under a contract of insurance is a claim for damages for breach of contract.
Windeyer J followed that and other decisions, and said: 
While it is true that the indemnity is for the insured's part of the ultimate net loss determined in accordance with article 5, it must be borne in mind that under the definition of 'ultimate net loss' there is incorporated the words 'the sum actually paid by the reinsured in settlement of losses or liability after making deductions or recovery'.
As his Honour said, the position is that in all of the decided cases, it was either held or conceded that a claim under a policy of insurance granting certain indemnity in consideration of payment of premiums was a claim of unliquidated damages for breach of contract in the event of non-payment, subject to the one exception in the case of a total loss under a valued policy. The position in respect of a policy of insurance or reinsurance is, in my mind, closely analogous to that under a guarantee. Indeed, in many respects, the position here is a fortiori those cases.
As Barrett J said in CGI versus APRA Consulting, supra, at 15: 
The statutory demand procedure made available by <case> may be availed of by a person in respect of a 'debt' that the company owes to the person. A debt is a sum certain owing, as distinct from a right to recover damages for breach of contract.
In the present case there is no sum certain. The defendant's right is to recover damages for breach of contract. That is an unliquidated claim for damages, not a claim for a liquidated sum. The fact that the plaintiff has, in correspondence, indicated that at least on a provisional basis a reasonable way of calculating it - or a way which it uses in other franchise agreements - is to use a discount of 50 percent, does not mean or does not transpose this claim into a claim which can be characterised as a liquidated claim simply by application of a 50 percent discount.
I am satisfied that the debt alleged does not exist, and that the defendant's claim is properly one for damages for an unliquidated sum. On that basis, it is unnecessary to refer to the other grounds advanced by the plaintiff.
I order that the creditor's statutory demand made by the defendant on the plaintiff dated 19 April 2013 be set aside.
In circumstances where the plaintiff has not been legally represented in the proceedings, I think it inappropriate to make an order for costs on the basis of advice sought from a lawyer who did not go on the record. I order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs fixed in the sum of $2,800 (representing the filing fee).
 * * * 
