

Regina versus Mohammad Asim [1997] NSWSC 76 (7 March 1997) 
REGINA versus MOHAMMAD ASIM /96 
Friday 7 March 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Cole JA, Grove J, Simpson J 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - DRUG MISUSE AND TRAFFICKING ACT - INTENDED USE OF DRUGS AS A LEVER TO INDUCE OWNER TO PAY MONEY ALLEGEDLY OWING TO POSSESSOR - CIRCUMSTANCES NOT COMPREHENDED BY PROVISO TO s29 AND POSSESSOR OF REQUISITE QUANTITY GUILTY OF SUPPLY - CAREY [1990 20 NSWLR 292] DISTINGUISHED - "CONTROLLED DELIVERY" OF POWDER SUBSTITUTED FOR DRUG BY POLICE - REPRESENTATION THAT SUBSTANCE IS NARCOTIC - s40(1) "PURPOSE OF BEING SUPPLIED" PHRASE IS DESCRIPTIVE OF POINT IN ISSUE IN CONTEXT OF SECTION - OFFENDER LIABLE FOR PUNISHMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH AMOUNT OF DRUG REPRESENTED TO BE SUBJECT OF DEALING 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I agree with Grove J.
 
GROVE J: This is an appeal by Mohammad Asim who was convicted after a trial before Mitchelmore DCJ and a jury at Sydney District Court of an offence of supplying a quantity of prohibited drug contrary to [s 25(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s25.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking Act 1985](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/). The appellant was sentenced to imprisonment for a total of six years with a minimum term of four years dating from 29 April 1994. Essentially two matters have been raised in this appeal. One is a ground against conviction relating to an alleged error in direction by the trial judge. The other is focussed against sentence and relates first to the culpability of the appellant in terms of the quantity of prohibited drug (heroin) in possession at the relevant time and, second, to the taking into account of allegedly impermissible factors on sentence. It is therefore unnecessary to recount the details of the evidence at length.

The appellant was in Australia pursuing studies. During 1993 he discussed with one Moreno the importation of a small quantity of heroin from Pakistan to which country the appellant was travelling on 30 November 1993. Australian
Federal Police came to know of the intention and covert operations included activity by an investigative assistant named Ayub Mohammed assuming an identity as "Mohammed Khan". The appellant returned from Pakistan to Australia on 6 April 1994 and thereafter told Moreno that he had organized an ounce of heroin to "come over". Later in that month the appellant told Moreno that he had organized for more than one ounce to arrive. Federal police imported heroin into Australia which was made up into a package of substitute which contained only 40 grams of genuine drug. On 27 April 1994 Moreno was contacted by "Mohammed Khan" and, although there was an original plan for the appellant to accompany him, in the event Moreno went on his own and collected the package from a hotel. He took the bag home and later went out when he was arrested by police.

Moreno agreed to cooperate with law enforcement authorities. A warrant was obtained and he was fitted with a listening device and proceeded on 28 April to carry out a "controlled delivery" of the bag containing the package of substitute material accompanied by 40 grams of drug. The appellant was arrested thereafter. The product of the listening device included conversation between Moreno and the appellant wherein the latter asserted - in obvious reference to the package which was the focus of the delivery - that it was two kilos. Moreno responded that it was one and a half. In interview with police, the content of which was not challenged at trial the appellant said that he knew that there was heroin in the bag although he claimed that he was not expecting to receive it.

The first ground claimed that the trial judge erred in law in directing the jury that to use drugs as leverage is to supply them.

The appellant's case at trial was that insofar as he was in actual possession of the drugs he had them with the intention of returning them to the person whom he believed was entitled to them. The learned trial judge correctly directed the jury that if on the balance of probabilities they were satisfied of that circumstance they must find the appellant not guilty: R versus Carey [1990 20 NSWLR 292]; R versus Liberti [1991 55 A Crim R 120.] The basis for the direction is found in the proviso to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) of the [Drug Misuse and Trafficking
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/) which relevantly provides: "A person who has in his or her possession an amount of a prohibited drug which is not less than the traffickable quantity of the prohibited drug shall, for the purposes of this division, be deemed to have the prohibited drug in his or her possession for supply, unless - the person proves that he or she had the prohibited drug in his or her possession other than for supply ....................." 
The appellant gave evidence. In cross examination he was asked about evidence which he had given in the Supreme and District Courts (in bail applications) when he had said that he believed that the owner of the drugs was one Janus
Khan to whom he had paid money for the purpose of obtaining a visa for the wife of a friend which had not been forthcoming and accordingly Janus Khan was indebted to him. He had testified in those earlier proceedings that he had intended to use the drug as a lever to persuade Janus Khan to repay this indebtedness. This circumstance was conveniently described at trial as "possession for leverage". There was lengthy debate at trial as to whether that circumstance if proved was capable of fulfilling the requirements of the proviso to [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html)
The learned judge ruled that possession for leverage could not establish what was required by that proviso. That conclusion was apparently not disputed by counsel for the appellant (who did not appear on the appeal) although the discussion took place in the context of the apparency that the claim being made by the appellant at trial was that he was a mere bailee intending to return the property to a true owner rather than adhering to the proposition advanced on the bail applications. Indeed, in cross examination at trial the appellant rejected the suggestion that he was in possession of the drug for leverage. He testified that Janus Khan's home was in Peshawar (Transcript p ).

In any event no objection was taken to his Honour's direction to the jury namely: "using heroin to obtain money is supply, to use drugs as leverage is to supply them". His Honour added the comment that counsel for the accused had not sought to argue otherwise.

Shortly stated, the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant is that he lost a fair chance of acquittal because if the jury took the view that his evidence on the previous occasions was to be accepted it was open to them to find that the condition of the proviso was fulfilled and that on the balance of probabilities he did not have the drugs in possession for supply. In my view the conclusion and consequent direction of the trial judge were correct.
It is to be remembered that the word supply retains its ordinary meaning as well as the extended meaning contained in the definition in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s3.html) of the statute. In effect the appellant had claimed in the bail hearings that the situation was that he intended to propose to Janus Khan that he would give him the drug if the money from the failed visa transaction was forthcoming.

In addition to Carey supra, the appellant referred to R versus Tuckey [1991 57
A Crim R 468] which was said to be indistinguishable in principle from the present circumstances. There a vendor of clothing had refused to deliver items until paid and the purchaser persuaded him to part with possession by leaving a bag of cocaine as "collateral". Tuckey testified that he expected the "depositor" to return, make payment and collect his goods. He was not going to do anything with the cocaine.

It was argued that both Carey (where the appellant had been asked to mind drugs by her sister and stated that, if they were not retrieved, she intended to flush them down the lavatory) and Tuckey confirmed that the ordinary meaning of "supply" did not include returning of goods to an owner.
Unembroidered by facts that is correct but there are circumstances in which the mere status of the transferee as owner would not see the notion of supply excluded.

In each of Carey and Tuckey there had been a bailment by the owner to the recipient and the possession of the latter was not for supply but for return in accordance with that bailment. Possession for leverage involved the applicant receiving the goods from a party other than the owner and nominating to that owner the terms and conditions upon which he was prepared to transfer the goods to him. The transfer of possession from the appellant to Janus Khan in those circumstances would seem to me to fit the ordinary meaning of the word supply without any need to call in aid the extended definitions. The notion of exchange of goods for money is ancient and whether it is looked at as barter or trade the notion of passing over the goods in such circumstances fits comfortably with the ordinary meaning of the word supply. Thus, as having in possession for supply is, by statutory definition, to supply, possession for leverage also fits the meaning and is not comprehended by the proviso to [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s29.html) 
The next ground was that "there was no evidence to sustain the charge of which the appellant was convicted, that charge requiring possession of an amount of heroin of one kg or above, and the evidence showing possession by the appellant of 40 grams".

The circumstances in which the package came to contain only 40 grams of genuine heroin have been set out above. The submissions on behalf of the appellant acknowledge that the total weight of the parcel delivered to the appellant was 1.5 kilograms although it consisted of a harmless white powder together with 40 grams of heroin. Reference was made to what is described as the admixture rule in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s4.html) of the statute but it is also acknowledged that the heroin was not physically mixed with the white powder and that rule was regarded at trial, and remains on appeal, quite irrelevant. The Crown relied upon [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s40.html) of the abovementioned Act to inculpate the appellant in relation to the quantification of the material beyond and above the 40 grams of genuine drug.
 [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dmata1985256/s40.html) provides: "A substance (not being a prohibited drug) which, for the purpose of its being supplied, is represented (whether verbally, in writing, or by conduct) as being a prohibited drug or a specified prohibited drug, for the purposes of this Act and the Regulations, be deemed to be a prohibited drug or the specified prohibited drug as the case required." 
In relation to this provision the appellant argued that the words "for the purpose of its being supplied" mean something less than relating or connected to its supply. The argument was developed that the representation must be made before the supply occurred and in this case there was no such previous representation.

That analysis of the facts is not correct. This conclusion is available from a reading of the exchange between the appellant and Moreno as captured by the listening device on the occasion of delivery. The evidence of Moreno was that he passed the package to the appellant and the conversation involved discussion about weight, purity and heroin and in the context of the discussion it is bordering on fanciful to suggest that there was absent any representation that the package was a package of heroin.

It is true that some of the conversation occurred after Moreno physically brought the package to the appellant but I reject the distinction which the appellant has sought to draw from the phrase "purpose of its being supplied" which is descriptive of a point in issue rather than a temporally qualified objective.

It was acknowledged that, if the appellant were to succeed in this argument the result would be substitution of a conviction for supplying a traffickable rather than a commercial quantity of drug. As the argument has failed there is no need to explore the Crown's contentions that the sentence should not, in any event, be varied. It suffices to note that in the District Court it was conceded by the Crown that the appellant would have been charged with being knowingly concerned in the importation of the drug but for the obstacle to that prosecution arising out of Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [184 CLR 19.]
Paradoxically the maximum sentence for the importation offence is set at 25 years imprisonment and a practical effect of s16G of the Crimes Act in New South Wales is to reduce the assessed sentence by approximately one third whereas the maximum sentence prescribed for the offence upon which the appellant was indicted and convicted is set at imprisonment for life. The Crown acknowledged that the appellant should be treated as if the former and more favourable (to him) maximum pertained.

It was argued, however, that the sentencing judge manifested error in taking into account the circumstances of importation when considering sentence. He remarked that the appellant "provided the link with Pakistan and this the heroin" and he expressly noted that he took "cognizance of the whole transaction and the involvement of the (appellant)".

Involvement in importation was not said to be taken into account in particular aggravation of the offence for which the appellant stood for sentence but as a circumstance in which the appellant committed that offence. The admission of evidence at trial about those circumstances was not challenged and, as was pointed out by counsel for the Crown, the joint judgment in Ridgeway (@ 44) anticipated that such material might be adduced in a "State offence" trial in language that carried no hint of disapproval.

I do not perceive any error in the findings, approach or assessment of the sentencing judge. I comment that the sentence appears considerably within the lower range of discretionary judgment which offers a positive demonstration of the absence of infecting error contrary to the interests of the appellant.

I propose that the appeal against conviction be dismissed. Leave to appeal against sentence should be granted but that appeal also dismissed and the conviction and sentence confirmed.

SIMPSON J: I agree with the judgment of Mr Justice Grove and with his reasons therefor.
 * * * 
