

Sherry versus Australasian Conference Association Ltd t/a Sydney Adventist
Hospital and Others [2001] NSWSC 1153 (12 December 2001) 
Last Updated: 27 December 2001 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Sherry versus Australasian Conference Association Ltd t/a Sydney
Adventist Hospital & Others <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION: Common Law Division  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20437/00  
HEARING DATE{S): 12 December 2001  
JUDGMENT DATE: 12/12/2001  
PARTIES: 
Ann Elizabeth Sherry 
Australasion Conference Association Ltd t/a Sydney Adventist Hospital 
Dr David Marshman 
Dr Ross Wilson 
Dr Shaun Walsh  
JUDGMENT OF: Sperling J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
Mr D Jordan for the Plaintiff 
Ms M Haire for the First Defendant 
Mr B Cran for the Second, Third & Fourth Defendants  
SOLICITORS: 
Gray & Perkins for the Plaintiff 
Ebsworth & Ebsworth Solicitors for the First Defendant 
Blake Dawson Waldron for the Second, Third & Fourth Defendants  
CATCHWORDS: 
Interrogatories 
No question of principle  
ACTS CITED:  
DECISION: 
See paragraphs12 & 15 of the judgment  
JUDGMENT:  - 3 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
Professional Negligence List  
Sperling J  
Wednesday 12 December 2001  /00 Ann Elizabeth Sherry versus Australasian Conference Association Limited - Trading As Sydney Adventist Hospital & Ors  
Judgment  HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff sues the body responsible for the Sydney
Adventist Hospital as first defendant, and relevantly a surgeon, Dr Marshman, in relation to a surgical procedure carried out on the deceased.  The procedure came within the broad category of being "off-pump" and within that category it came within the more particular description of a repair to the left anterior descending artery of the heart through a left thoracotomy procedure.  In the statement of claim (paragraph 58) negligence on the part of Dr
Marshman is particularised as including "failing to provide services to the deceased in accordance with the standard expected in relation to the procedure carried out", and there are more particular allegations of acts and omissions.  In addition to the allegations of negligence in the Amended Statement of
Claim, certain further particulars have been provided by correspondence, including that, if Dr Marshman did not believe that Sydney Adventist Hospital was able to provide the necessary standard of care, the procedure should have been performed elsewhere; and, secondly, that Dr Marshman should have ensured, before opting to carry out the procedure at the hospital or before actually doing so, that the hospital staff were adequately instructed in relation to the care of the deceased.  In answer to interrogatories previously administered, Dr Marshman has stated that his prior experience in relation to off-pump surgery amounted to seven cases, and in relation to the more particular type of surgery, two cases.  The plaintiff now moves the court for an order that Dr Marshman answer supplementary interrogatories specifying his prior training in relation to off-pump surgery and in relation to the more particular type of surgery, and also as to how many of the procedures mentioned in the prior answers were performed at the Sydney Adventist Hospital.  Subsequent to the previous interrogatories being administered, the plaintiff received a medical report by a Dr Boscoe in which, among other things, Dr
Boscoe identified what, to him, indicated inexperience with the particular type of operation. I would take the tenor of his observations to apply equally to training.  Objection is taken to answering the proposed additional interrogatories on the ground that they are not relevant. In support of that position, it is pointed out that there is no specific allegation made on behalf of the plaintiff that Dr Marshman was so inexperienced and/or poorly trained that he should not have been carrying out this procedure, nor any allegation which would make it relevant to know the incidence of such surgery carried out by Dr
Marshman at this particular hospital.  I have to disagree with those submissions. Relevance in relation to interrogatories is a very liberal test. A party may interrogate in order to obtain information that would be of assistance in the trial or which may be of such assistance, notwithstanding that the answers themselves might not be tenderable because they do not meet the more refined notion of relevance applicable to the admissibility of evidence.  In a broad way, the experience and training of a surgeon may tend to proof of allegations of negligence by making the likelihood of such negligence more or less feasible. Information as to the experience and training of a surgeon may therefore provide the opposite party with a basis upon which to explore at the trial ways in which any limitations in experience and/or training may have tended to bring about alleged acts or omissions. Those considerations are sufficient to support the plaintiff's claim for answer to the further interrogatories concerning Dr Marshman's training.  As to the extent to which relevant surgery was carried out by Dr Marshman at the particular hospital that, it seems to me, is relevant to the plaintiff's case as particularised, namely, that, if Dr Marshman did not believe the hospital was adequately set up for this particular kind of surgery, the procedure should have been carried out elsewhere or, I suppose, some more conventional kind of surgery should have been carried out at the particular hospital. Obviously enough, an answer to the question would not adduce all relevant matters pertaining to the allegation to which I have referre; but an answer would be relevant to the issue, in that it would provide information which bore upon the question, or at least provided material for use at the trial in relation to that question.  For these reasons I make orders pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 of the
Minute of Orders, which I have initialled and placed with the papers earlier today.  The plaintiff seeks an order for costs of the application that the second defendant answer the supplementary interrogatories. The interrogatories do not require much in the way of time, effort or cost to answer. They are also, in my view, interrogatories which the plaintiff was in principle plainly entitled to have answered.  On behalf of the second defendant it is submitted that costs should not follow the event without qualification because the supplementary interrogatories could have been administered along with earlier interrogatories and because the present application comes late. There is something to be said for those arguments, but they do not seem to me to outweigh the plaintiffs prima facie entitlement to have the costs of a motion on which the plaintiff has succeeded.  Accordingly, I order the second defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of the motion for supplementary interrogatories.  -o0o-  
LAST UPDATED: 13/12/2001 * * * 
