

Matthews versus Eastley Matter No 11033/97 [1998] NSWSC 11 (13 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 April 1998 
ANDREW DONALD MATTHEWS versus GEORGE EASTLEY & JUDITH MAY EASTLEY /97 March 1998 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: By his summons the plaintiff seeks determination of a question asked by stated case following the failure of his action against the defendants in the Local Court at Bowral. In that court the plaintiff sought damages upon two causes of action first, an action on the case for injury to a reversionary interest in land and second, conversion of certain wood pruned from trees on that land. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court on appeal is limited by the Local Courts (Civil Claims) Act <case> which, inter alia, directs the incorporation and adaption of the procedures specified in [ss 101](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/s101.html)-[115](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/s115.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/). 
I am considerably handicapped by the form in which the stated case has been presented. No statement of facts found by the magistrate appears. Under the form heading "Facts" is an annexure note referring to attached transcript of evidence, copy exhibits, reasons for judgment and sundry other documents.
Grounds for determination are not stated but, in similar fashion to the "Facts", there appears an annexure note referring to attached copy written submissions by the parties (at the Local Court) and the reasons for judgment.
It is something of an understatement to say that the presentation of the
Stated Case leaves much to be desired. The deficiencies go beyond inherent difficulty in adapting the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/) procedures to civil claims and beyond the often recognized awkwardness of stated case as a vehicle for appeal.

The requirements of a stated case are nothing new. There is an abundance of authority which can be found conveniently collected, for example, in the notes to the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/) in Criminal Law and Procedure (Butterworths) para 1127 et seq. In Dixon v
Bridge 1966 84 WN [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/index.html#p2) @ 255
Asprey JA commented: "........if facts are to be relied upon by the appellant in support of an argument, then those facts should be found by the court of first instance and set forth in the case and should not be argumentatively determined on appeal from a perusal of depositions annexed to the case." 
In Glover versus MacDougall 1976 NSWLR 359 Yeldham J observed: "However, it is my view that the authorities over many years have made it quite clear that, unless one of the matters for determination by this Court is whether or not there is any evidence of primary facts found by the magistrate, the depositions cannot be referred to at the hearing of a case stated under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/s101.html) except, as was pointed out in McNeall versus Croker [(1939) 56 WN 57] for the purpose of deciding whether in fact all the material findings have been stated by the magistrate. It is also clear from the authorities that the magistrate, in the stated case, which I appreciate in practice is drafted by the parties, should categorically and clearly set out all the facts found by him upon the evidence before him which are relevant to the questions posed for determination by this Court. In this regard I would refer to what is said in
Addison and Patterson, Appeals from Magistrates, in McNeall versus Croker [(1939) WN 57] to which I have referred, in Ex parte Benson; Re
Harris [(1948) 66 WN 18] and in Orange City Council versus Canobalas Shire Council [(1969) 91 WN ] at 679 et seq." 
Despite the foregoing, and with reservation, I heard argument without determining whether it was possible to deal with the matter without returning the case to the Local Court for adequate statement. In so doing I took into account that counsel for both sides indicated a desire and preparedness to proceed; that both sides had been represented at the settlement of the stated case in the Local Court - the defendants raised no objection there and seemingly joined in the deficient draft presented for signature - and the no doubt mounting legal costs being incurred by the parties.

The plaintiff owned some land at Mittagong tenanted by persons named Lake. A written document evidenced a lease of the land which purported to be granted by the plaintiff's mother as lessor to the Lakes for a period from 17 December to 17 June 1994. The defendants owned a parcel of adjoining land.
Although it was contested, they contended that they obtained permission from the Lakes to enter the plaintiff's land in about February 1994 for the purpose of pruning eight cherry laurel trees partly overhanging their boundary.
Ultimately the statement of claim pleaded that six were "severely pruned" and two were "heavily pruned".

As mentioned, the plaintiff claimed damage to his reversionary interest in the land and conversion of the timber and foliage offcut by the pruning. He did not sue for trespass in apparent recognition of the, albeit opaque, arrangements for demise putting the Lakes in possession. The magistrate found for the defendants on both claims.

The plaintiff advanced some sixteen specific grounds as contentions of error set out in the stated case. Those numbered 1 and 2 can be dealt with shortly.
It was submitted that the plaintiff was entitled on each cause of action to a verdict on the pleadings because, it was asserted, the facts alleged in the
Statement of Claim were not denied in the Defence. The Statement of Claim was divided into five numbered paragraphs, the last of which was a formal claim for damages. Paragraphs 1 and 2 were expressly denied in paragraph 1 of the
Defence; paragraph 3 (which relates to damage) was denied in paragraph 3 of the Defence and paragraph 4 was denied in paragraph 4 of the Defence. It is true that the Defence denials were accompanied by contentions arguably inconsistent with them but the assertion that there was no denial in the pleading is simply wrong and, I would add, an alternative posture in a pleading is no novelty.

A group of grounds sought to attack the magistrate's judgment by assertions of bias, unreasonableness, reliance on irrelevant matters, failure to advert to relevant matters and failure to accept uncontradicted evidence. The grounds are numbered 5 to 9 inclusive. The allegation of bias is not sustained. In his judgment the magistrate used strong language in rejecting the plaintiff's claims and he remarked upon his perception of motives for the claims being pursued. There is nothing to indicate that he held those views before he heard and assessed the evidence and his expressions convey an opinion formed as a result of so doing. A reasonable bystander would not infer impartiality from findings of lack of merit even if those findings are expressed with some intensity. The gravamen of these complaints is really an accusation of hyperbole which I would concede is not often useful. It is something of a paradox that there is a sample within the plaintiff's contentions. In support of the allegation of unreasonableness an outline of submission proposed that "the decision stands for the proposition that a person can enter another's land, cut down trees and carry off timber without incurring liability". It was conceded that the reference to entry was a mis-statement. There was no allegation of trespass to land. There was no finding that trees were cut down nor that timber was harvested. At highest, the magistrate found that woody component was cut from the trees. The submission is not based upon a fair reading of the reasons for judgment nor does it represent what appear to be the findings of fact.

The grounds based upon relevant/irrelevant factors were sought to be supported by extraction of various remarks in the judgment and isolated examination of them. The plaintiff has been content, and indeed urged that the stated case be dealt with as presented. There are critical findings of fact in the judgment.
In relation to the first cause of action the magistrate recorded "I find as a matter of fact that the evidence does not reveal any injury to the reversion as asserted in the plaintiff's case". In relation to the second cause of action he recorded "I find as a matter of fact that the wood had no value and was no more than rubbish after it was cut down". I reiterate that "cut down" needs to be read in the context of the findings that the trees were pruned and not destroyed.

Had findings of fact been stated in the requisite fashion, I would have had no jurisdiction to go behind them, the appeal being limited to error in point of law. The deficiencies in presentation should not lead to expansion of jurisdiction. Argument that the magistrate was bound to find matters in favour of the plaintiff which were not the subject of particular cross examination cannot be sustained. The judgment makes it relatively clear (and the contrary was not suggested) that the defendants did argue at trial that the plaintiff had in fact suffered no damage.

Counsel for the plaintiff provided a series of references commencing with
Browne versus Dunn 1894 6R 67 and cases commenting upon it and dealing with like issues. I refer to some of them. Allied Pastoral Holdings P/L versus Commissioner of Taxation [1983 1 NSWLR 1] dealt at length with the aspects of fairness of practice and cogency of unchallenged evidence said to be enshrined in the lastmentioned case. Commercial Union Assurance versus Ferricom P/L [1992 22 NSWLR 389] referred to the inhibition upon drawing of inference where crucial questions are not asked of a witness. Ghazal versus GIO [1992 29 NSWLR 336] noted the duty to specify the case being put by a party, in the instance an allegation of fraud. As I have noted, the material put before this court makes it plain that the parties were at issue at trial whether there was any injury at all to the reversion and whether the offcuts were worthless. It was not necessary, as the submissions imply, ritually to put the contradiction of all of the content of the evidence of witnesses, expert or otherwise, when the scope of contest has fairly been made manifest.

It should be recorded that the attack on the magistrate's decision included assertion that it was tainted by "Wednesbury" unreasonableness. (Associated
Provincial Picture Houses Ltd versus Wednesbury Corporation <case>; [1948 1
KB 223).] I am unpersuaded that the magistrate's conclusions are to be so categorized.

Grounds numbered 3 and 4 assert that verdicts for the defendants were not open on the evidence.

It was conceded that damage was an essential ingredient in the tort claim for injury to the reversionary interest in the land. That concession was consistent with the law in respect of the companion tort giving remedy for interference with chattels. On that topic Professor Fleming has written : "But although a reversionary owner cannot sue in trover i.e. he can recover neither the value of the chattel nor the value of his interest therein, he has an action on the case for such damage as he may sustain from being deprived of the benefit of his reversionary interest. Thus, he may sue if the chattel has been destroyed or permanently damaged or so disposed of that a valid title thereto has become vested in a third party, as by sale in market overt. But he cannot complain if the chattel has merely been wrongfully taken or detained from its temporary possessor, because it is wholly speculative whether his own reversionary interest will be impaired thereby". Tancred versus Allgood <case>; [1859 4 H & N 438]; [(157 ER 910). (The] Law of Torts, seventh edn p 60).

The plaintiff referred to The Metropolitan Association For Improving The
Dwellings Of The Industrious Classes versus Petch [5 CB (NS) 502], and submitted that pruning was "the like" of cutting down timber trees and necessarily an injury to the land (and the reversionary interest in it). The court was then dealing with a pleading point. Willes J said: "The declaration in an action of this sort must either state something which is necessarily an injury to the reversion, as, the cutting down timber-trees, or the like; or if it state something else which may or may not be an injury to the reversion, it must go on to aver that the reversionary interest of the plaintiff is thereby injured." 
I am unpersuaded that the pruning of trees forming a hedge is a like activity to cutting down a timber tree but, in any event, the case is not authority for imputing necessary error to the magistrate's finding.

In Rodrigues versus Upton 1894 XX VR 539, Hodges J cited from Baxter versus Taylor <case>; [4 B & Ad 72:] "A reversioner cannot maintain an action on the case against a stranger for merely entering upon his land held by a tenant on lease, though the entry be made in exercise of an alleged right-of-way; such an act during the tenancy not being necessarily injurious to the reversion." 
He then observed "So that it was there held that an action could not be maintained by a reversioner unless there was injury to the reversion ......." (Emphasis added).

The concession that proof of damage was an essential ingredient of the tort sued upon as the first cause of action was correctly made. An action on the case for injury to reversion is not in the category of vindicatory causes where damages are payable even in the absence of loss. For contrast, see for example Plenty versus Dillon & Ors <case>; [1991 CLR 635 (Trespass).] The magistrate's finding of fact that the reversionary interest in the land had not been impaired led to judgment in favour of the defendants and that conclusion has not been shown to be erroneous in point of law.

The plaintiff contended that an award of at least nominal damages ought to have been made in respect of the conversion. There is force in that argument, although the practical consequence of upholding it is likely to be nugatory.
It is convenient to recall some basics: "Conversion may be defined as an intentional exercise of control over a chattel which so seriously interferes with the right of another to control it that the intermeddler may justly be required to pay its full value.
Characteristic of this tort is that the ordinary measure of damages is the full value of the chattel. In truth, the action is proprietary in substance, only tortious in form. As has been perceptively observed, the action in effect forces an involuntary purchase on the converter; it permits the plaintiff to say to him: `You have bought yourself something'. This in turn provides the clue for determining whether a tortious intermeddling is serious enough to justify the drastic sanction of compelling the wrongdoer to buy the plaintiff out." (Law of Torts, op cit p 49).

The magistrate held that the offcuts were rubbish but they were the plaintiff's rubbish. He also found that they were of no value and the question is whether that finding can properly translate into judgment for the defendants or whether the plaintiff having proved the conversion of his chattels (the valueless offcuts) ought to have had judgment for nominal damages. The tort of conversion is committed upon a plaintiff who was actually deprived of goods in his possession. It lies in respect of timber upon severance from the freehold. Possibly because of the cryptic circumstances surrounding the occupation of the Lakes, the magistrate appears to have found that the plaintiff was in relevant possession of the goods at the time and he seems to have based his decision upon the finding of no value. My tentative expressions are made necessary by the absence of a precise statement of what facts were found.

The value of goods is the prima facie measure of damages recoverable for the commission of the tort. I would not consider commercial value an ingredient of the tort. I consider the plaintiff's position is comparable to the situation in Cotterill versus Hobby <case>; [1825 4
B & C 465] [(107 ER 1133).] There the plaintiff proved that the defendant carried away the branches of some trees but gave no evidence of value and he was held entitled to nominal damages in trover. The magistrate's finding of fact that the offcuts were worthless is impregnable in these proceedings. It would follow that valueless goods were converted and the tort was committed but the damages are nominal. The question of exemplary damages does not arise in the stated case: cf Healing versus Inglis Electrix <case>; [1968 121 CLR 584.] 
There is also an outstanding issue concerning the order that the plaintiff pay the defendants indemnity costs. It is acknowledged that the magistrate had jurisdiction to make such an order but the complaint relates to procedural fairness. After the evidence was concluded on 9 February 1996 this exchange is recorded: "(Counsel for plaintiff): Your Worship I can indicate that I would like to make written submissions in relation to the question of costs and what I propose, with the Court's leave, is to make those written submissions in a separate document to be sealed your Worship, to be considered after your
Worship considers the question of liability and damages. Is that an appropriate course of action your Worship? 
Bench: Sounds good to me, if there's no difficulty with that from the other side. I'm certainly not going to deal with costs till I determine liability.
 (Counsel for defendant): It would resolve the difficulty your Worship." 
Apparently this was overlooked when judgment was delivered (on 9 May 1996) and the order which I have mentioned was preremptorily made. The plaintiff is entitled to redress in this regard and the matter should be returned to the magistrate for appropriate adjudication.

In the result the judgment in favour of the defendants on the cause of action for injury to reversionary estate should stand but the judgment in their favour for conversion of the tree loppings should be set aside and judgment entered for the plaintiff for at least nominal damages. Both sides have had partial success on the appeal although an award of nominal damages in lieu of judgment for opponents would be less than triumphal. However the plaintiff has also succeeded in having the issue of costs reconsidered. The balance of the situation leads me to the conclusion that the parties should respectively bear their own costs of the stated case.

The question posed in the stated case, whether the determination of the magistrate was erroneous in point of law should, to the extent abovementioned, be answered in the affirmative.

The judgment for the defendants upon the cause of action pleaded in conversion and the order for costs made in Bowral Local Court are set aside and those matters are remitted to that court to be dealt with according to law.

The judgment for the defendants upon the cause of action pleaded as an action on the case for injury to reversionary estate will stand.

There is no order for costs of the summons and the stated case.
 * * * 
