

Coates Hire Operations Pty Limited versus D-Link Homes Pty Limited [2011] NSWSC (31 October 2011) 
Last Updated: 13 December 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Coates Hire Operations Pty Limited versus D-Link Homes Pty Limited  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): , 31 August 2011  
Decision Date: October 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
White J  
Decision: 
Refer to paragraph [83] of judgment.  
Catchwords: 
CORPORATIONS - insolvency - winding up in insolvency - whether statutory demand served on the defendant - presumption statutory demand was delivered in ordinary course of post not rebutted - presumption of insolvency arises  
CORPORATIONS - insolvency - application for winding up in insolvency - where presumption of insolvency arises - whether company has adduced "fullest and best" evidence to rebut presumption of insolvency - what "fullest and best" evidence requires  
CORPORATIONS - insolvency - application for winding up in insolvency - where presumption of insolvency arises - whether company is insolvent because it would not be able to pay debt owed to a director if he were to call for its payment where no intention to make such a call - company not insolvent as a matter of commercial reality  
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR : This is an application that the defendant ("D-Link Homes") be wound up in insolvency. The plaintiff relies on the presumption of insolvency arising from non-compliance with a statutory demand. 
D-Link Homes denies that it was served with the statutory demand. It says there is no presumption of insolvency. It says that in any event it is solvent. It disputes the debt claimed by the plaintiff. It has paid the amount of that debt into its solicitor's trust account. 
The plaintiff contends that the evidence relied on by the defendant is not the " fullest and best " evidence of solvency. It also says the defendant is insolvent whether or not there is a presumption of insolvency. 
The issues are: 
Whether the statutory demand was served on the defendant;
If the presumption of insolvency has arisen, whether the defendant has adduced the " fullest and best " evidence to rebut the presumption of insolvency, and what that requires; and
Whether the defendant has displaced the presumption of insolvency and proved it is solvent;
I have concluded that the statutory demand was served. I have concluded that by [s 140](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of the [Evidence Act 1995](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) the defendant need establish that it is solvent on the balance of probabilities and that the presumption of insolvency is capable of being rebutted if the evidence is sufficiently persuasive, even if more or better evidence of solvency could be adduced. I have concluded that the presumption of insolvency has been rebutted, as the only debt the defendant could not pay is a large debt owed by it to its director, but he does not intend to demand payment of the debt. 
The plaintiff's claimed debt and service of the statutory demand 
The defendant is a builder. The plaintiff claims that the defendant owes it the sum of $43,916.58, being the total of seven invoices said to have been delivered between 31 August 2010 and 16 December 2010. The debt is said to have arisen from the hire of equipment supplied by the plaintiff to the defendant. 
The plaintiff retained a mercantile agent, Oceanic Mercantile Pty Ltd ("Oceanic Mercantile"), to recover the debt. The defendant's director is Mr Linh Hoang. He told Mr Justin Napiza from Oceanic Mercantile that one of the items of machinery was defective, but he was prepared to pay $28,000 if the plaintiff was prepared to settle for that amount. There was a dispute between Mr Napiza and Mr Hoang as to whether Mr Hoang admitted the full amount of the debt and merely sought time to pay. I prefer Mr Hoang's evidence. Mr Napiza's file note of 8 February 2011 records that Mr Hoang had a dispute with the charge. On 17 February 2011 Mr Napiza advised Mr Hoang that the plaintiff was willing to accept $40,000 in settlement of the matter if payment were made within 14 days. He advised that if the offer was not accepted Oceanic Mercantile may be instructed to commence legal action by way of statement of claim. That offer was not accepted. On 8 March 2011 Mr Hoang offered to pay $2,000 per month for 24 months. That was not acceptable to the plaintiff. In the course of these communications Mr Hoang indicated that the defendant was suffering financial hardship. In his email of 11 February 2011 he said: " ...we have been trouble with cash flow due to we did the job for the client of 26-28 Gray Street, Southport QLD. [T] he work we done worth $300,000.00 but [unfortunately] the developer went broke so we did not get any payment that put our company to financial hardship. ... [C] urrently we own [sic] a huge amount of debt from sub-contractors and suppliers but we try so hard to solve out the problem. "
On 8 March 2011 Mr Hoang wrote: "[A] <case> know my business are gonna take long time to recovery and it can't be out positive in sort [sic] term due to problem with that job. [O] n the other hand I have to solve out the problem with other party [sic] such as: Boral, Bunning, Steel Company ... [Y] ou can see I willing to deal with Coates Hire [plaintiff] and other suppliers too " .
On 9 March 2011 the plaintiff instructed Oceanic Mercantile to prepare a statutory demand. On that day Mr Napiza telephoned Mr Hoang and advised that the plaintiff had instructed his company to proceed with legal action. Mr Hoang advised Mr Napiza that he was suffering severe financial hardship and was unable to commit to any higher payment or to make a part-payment. 
Oceanic Mercantile prepared the statutory demand. It was signed by Ms Penny Dobson, the Credit Risk Manager of the plaintiff, on 11 March 2011. Notwithstanding Mr Napiza's file note of 8 February 2011 referred to above, Ms Dobson swore an affidavit verifying that there was no dispute about the existence or amount of the debt. 
Mr Napiza placed the statutory demand in an envelope addressed to the defendant at its registered office at 165 Inala Avenue, Inala, Queensland. He affixed the necessary postage stamp and placed it into an Australia Post post box at Westfield Shopping Centre in Bondi Junction. 
The defendant denied that the statutory demand was received at its registered office. The question is whether the presumption that it was delivered to the registered office in the due course of post has been rebutted. 
The registered office of the defendant is the private residence of its sole director, Mr Hoang. He deposed that he personally checked all of the mail delivered to the address, including that addressed to the company. He said that whilst he received by post the originating process and supporting documents, the statutory demand was not ever delivered. He said that the letter box at the house was secured by a padlock to which he and his wife had a key. 
The statutory demand was not returned to the sender. 
As noted above, Mr Napiza also received instructions to prepare a statement of claim for the debt. The statement of claim also joined Mr Hoang as a defendant as guarantor. The statement of claim was filed in the Local Court on 16 March 2011. Mr Napiza prepared a file note that on 17 March 2011 the statement of claim was sent to the defendant by post at its registered office in Inala. He also sent the document to a process server for personal service on Mr Hoang. Mr Hoang admitted receiving the statement of claim by post. He deposed that he was personally served with a copy of it on 29 March 2011. Mr Hoang deposed that immediately after he was served with the statement of claim, he telephoned a lawyer to obtain legal assistance. At the suggestion of an acquaintance who had previously acted for him in relation to conveyancing matters, he contacted Slater & Gordon, solicitors, on or about 31 March 2011. 
It might be inferred that because Mr Hoang sought legal assistance promptly after being served with a copy of the statement of claim that he would have sought such assistance promptly after receiving a statutory demand, if the statutory demand had been delivered to his residence, which was the company's registered office in Inala. This inference is weakened by the fact that it appears that it was only after Mr Hoang was personally served with a copy of the statement of claim that he sought legal assistance in respect of it, rather than seeking such assistance immediately after having received a copy of the statement of claim in the mail. 
Mr Napiza deposed that on 22 March 2011 he telephoned Mr Hoang who told him " I received the statutory demand. I will have my solicitor respond in due course. I don't want to discuss the matter further with Oceanic Mercantile ." Mr Napiza made a file note of this conversation. 
Mr Hoang denied this conversation. He said that Mr Napiza commenced the conversation by saying words to the effect that Coates had started legal action and that he would be getting the papers in the next couple of days. According to Mr Hoang he told Mr Napiza that when he received the papers he would get his lawyer involved. 
Counsel for the defendant submitted that in making the telephone call of 22 March 2011 Mr Napiza was following a standard practice of following up the service by post of the statement of claim and that the absence of such a follow-up call a few days after the alleged postage of the statutory demand was some evidence that contrary to Mr Napiza's evidence, the statutory demand was not posted. 
However, Mr Napiza had a contemporaneous record of posting the statutory demand. I think the timing of the telephone call on 22 March 2011 was consistent with his following-up service of either or both of the statutory demand or the statement of claim. 
In my view the presumption that the statutory demand was delivered in the ordinary course of post has not been rebutted. If, as he deposed, Mr Hoang did not receive the statutory demand, it would not mean that the statutory demand was not served, provided it was received in the letter box at the company's registered office. No evidence was called from Mr Hoang's wife who also had a key to the letter box. 
In any event, I consider that I ought to accept Mr Napiza's evidence that Mr Hoang admitted receipt of the statutory demand, as that evidence is corroborated by a contemporaneous file note. 
For these reasons I find that the statutory demand was served by being delivered by post to the company's registered office. The presumption of insolvency arose. 
The defendant did not seek leave under [s 459S](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459s.html) of the [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) (Cth) to oppose the winding-up application on a ground on which it could have relied in an application to set aside the statutory demand, namely, that there was a genuine dispute about the plaintiff's debt. The defendant could not take that course because it was the defendant's position that it was solvent whether or not it owed the debt claimed by the plaintiff ( Switz Pty Ltd versus Glowbind Pty Ltd  <case>; [(2000) 48 NSWLR 661).] 
Evidence of Solvency 
The defendant led evidence from Ms Jane Nguyen, a certified practising accountant specialising in taxation for small businesses. She had formerly acted as a tax auditor with the Australian Taxation Office. She was provided by Mr Hoang the financial records of the company. These were said to comprise books of account, contracts, bank statements, loan statements and invoices. She examined the records over a period of two days on 19 and 20 July 2011 and physically inspected items of plant and equipment. As a result of her examination of the records with which she was provided and her discussions with Mr Hoang, she prepared a balance sheet as at 20 July 2011, a profit and loss statement for the 12 months to 30 June 2011, and a cashflow forecast for 12 months from July 2011 to June 2012. 
Set out below is the balance sheet as at 20 July 2011: [Balance
Sheet](http://www.caselaw.nsw.gov.au/assets/main/lib150003/coateshirevd- linkhomesjgn2balancesheet.pdf)
The fixed asset building and improvements was included at cost. The property was purchased on 22 June 2009 for $479,000. Cash at hand was verified by bank statements. Ms Nguyen was provided with invoices verifying the prices at which the equipment and motor vehicles were purchased. The amounts for which the equipment was recorded at cost in the balance sheet included GST. 
Ms Nguyen was provided with invoices for the trade debtors. There were four such debtors. An invoice of $200,000 was issued to AQL Capital Pty Ltd ("AQL Capital") dated 10 January 2011. This was described as moneys due for building work done described as " footing and basement garage " for a project at 26-28 Gray Street, Southport. The invoice was unpaid as at 20 July 2011. Mr Hoang is a one-third shareholder and a director of AQL Capital. He annexed a copy of what he described as the " major works contract schedule " between the defendant and AQL Capital for the defendant to construct the development for a contract price of $1.95 million inclusive of GST. The documents supplied stated " DA & BA supplied by owner ". A progress payment of $195,000 was due on completion of the basement stage. The document also stated " Party responsible for extra excavations and foundations: allow $50,000 ". That clause is obscure. The date for practical completion of the entire development was 1 June 2011. In his email to Mr Napiza of 11 February 2011 Mr Hoang said: "[ We] have been trouble with cashflow due to we did the job for the client at 26-28 Gray Street, Southport QLD. [T] he work we done worth $300,000.00 but [unfortunately] the developer went broke so we did not get any payment ... ".
Mr Duc An Nguyen is a director of AQL Capital. (It was not suggested that Ms Nguyen was related to him.) He acknowledged that the defendant had paid the fees to obtain the development approval and building approval. These fees were payable by AQL Capital. He said that the defendant had also paid for excavation work and had completed about 75 per cent of the basement stage. He said that the directors of AQL Capital had agreed to pay $100,000 to the defendant on account of moneys owed to the defendant and that the payment would be made in mid to late August 2011. 
AQL Capital paid $100,000 in August 2011. There must be a serious question as to its ability to pay the remaining $100,000 said to be due. 
A debt of $50,000 was said to be due by a debtor described as " Steven and Simpson ". An invoice dated 9 June 2011 for this debt described it as due as a part-payment owed for the finishing of two slabs at a property in Queensland. The two remaining debts are said to arise from invoices issued to Tran and Thu in February 2011 and Kawai and Chisako in July 2011 for $26,000 and $6,650 respectively. The latter debt was reduced to $4,550. 
The liabilities of the defendant shown in the balance sheet prepared by Ms Nguyen as at 20 July 2011 consisted of credit card debt of $24,606, trade creditors of only $3,407, a debt due to the Australian Taxation Office of $8,936 ($3,011 for income tax and $5,925 for GST) and long term liabilities under the bank loan for the purchase of the property at Inala and for the purchase of a Toyota Hilux vehicle and a Bobcat of $79,675, and a director's loan of $458,621. 
The credit card debt was confirmed by credit card statements. The debt owed to Westpac for the purchase of the property at Inala was also confirmed by bank records. The liabilities to Esanda Finance in respect of the motor vehicle and the Bobcat were also confirmed by statements from the financier. Ms Nguyen verified the tax debt through the ATO portal. 
The figure for trade creditors of $3,407 seems low. It consisted of a sum of $2,000 payable to LHD Air Conditioning and Electrical for the supply of the electrical services at jobs at Wallace Street, Moorooka and Fortitude Valley, and $1,407 as a debt for what was called " onsite rental ". 
Ms Nguyen's balance sheet for the company as at 20 July 2011 did not include an amount for a liability of the defendant to the plaintiff that was the subject of the statutory demand. She explained the omission on the basis that the company disputed the debt. However, it is not open to the defendant on this application to dispute the debt. It would be an additional liability owed to trade creditors. 
A critical question on the issue of the defendant's solvency is whether all of the defendant's trade creditors were disclosed to Ms Nguyen. In his email of 11 February 2011 to Mr Napiza, Mr Hoang had said that as at that date the company owed " a huge amount of debt from sub-contractors and suppliers ". There was no evidence as to what the debt owed to sub-contractors and suppliers was as at 11 February 2011. Neither Ms Nguyen nor Mr Hoang was asked any questions about the statement he made about those debts in his email of 11 February 2011. Mr Hoang deposed that as at 30 August 2011 the company owed no money to trade creditors. He was not cross-examined about that statement. Nor was he cross-examined about how it was that the " huge amount " owed to trade creditors as at 11 February 2011 had been reduced to nil by 30 August 2011. In the absence of such questioning, I would infer that the reason was that Mr Hoang satisfied the trade creditors and this was reflected in the debt owed by the defendant to him. Ms Nguyen gave evidence that Mr Hoang showed her " a few evidences " of when he paid debts on behalf of the company. She asked Mr Hoang who were the company's major suppliers. He showed her statements of account with the two major suppliers, Bunnings and Boral Concrete, which showed a balance of account of $0. 
Ms Nguyen prepared a profit and loss statement for the period from July 2010 through to June 2011. It was prepared for the purposes of her report as to solvency. It omitted depreciation as an expense. The profit and loss statement showed that the company made a net profit of $59,679. This did not include an allowance for depreciation, nor, presumably, the expense incurred to the plaintiff. The profit and loss statement prepared by Ms Nguyen stated that the company's gross income was $1,056,924, the cost of sales was $914,698, and other expenses totalled $82,547. 
Ms Nguyen also prepared a cash flow forecast. It was as follows: [Cash
Flow](http://www.caselaw.nsw.gov.au/assets/main/lib150003/coateshirevd- linkhomesjgn2cashflow.pdf)
Ms Nguyen was not questioned about her cash flow forecast. She clearly assumed the continuance of the AQL project. But whilst there must be serious doubt about AQL Capital's ability to pay future project costs, if it is unable to do so there would be corresponding reductions in projected costs. 
There were changes to the company's financial position after the preparation of the balance sheet and the profit and loss statement as at 20 July 2011. On 25 August 2011 Mr Hoang caused the tipper truck, loading ramps, Bobcat and excavator owned by the company to be auctioned. The truck and truck tray were sold for $32,690. The loading ramps which were an attachment to the Bobcat and excavator sold for $1,157. The Bobcat was sold for $25,130. The trade creditors noted in the balance sheet as at 20 July 2011 had been paid. $1,000 had been paid on account of the tax debt. This was in accordance with an arrangement made by the company with the Australian Taxation Office. The debt owed by AQL Capital was reduced to $100,000. The $50,000 debt owed by " Steven and Simpson " had been reduced to $20,000. 
As at 30 August 2011 the company's bank account was in credit in the amount of $50,998.42. $43,916.60 was held in the defendant's solicitor's trust account in respect of the debt claimed by the plaintiff. The net proceeds of sale of the equipment referred to above totalled $58,977 from which $25,130 was payable to Esanda Finance. Following discharge of that debt the company would have further cash of $33,847. It would be liable for the GST on the sales. 
The evidence adduced by the defendant is that the debts the company owes are a small tax debt, the mortgage debt owed to Westpac, credit card debt, the debt that is to be taken to be owed to the plaintiff, and the debt owing to Mr Hoang. Moneys are held in the defendant's solicitor's trust account in respect of the debt owed to the plaintiff. The mortgage debt owed to Westpac is payable by regular monthly instalments and has been regularly paid. Credit card debt as at 30 August 2011 totalled $24,047.32, but monthly payments were up to date. The company's cash reserves are more than adequate to meet that debt. 
However, I doubt that the company could pay the debt owed to Mr Hoang if it were called on. The company's balance sheet as at 20 July 2011 showed a surplus of assets over liabilities of only $47,823. This did not take into account the debt that is taken to be owed to the plaintiff. The assets of the company if realised would be insufficient to pay that debt unless at least the debts owed by the remaining trade debtors (brought to account in the sum of $140,000) were fully realised. There is no evidence that the remaining trade debts are fully collectable. Even though $100,000 has apparently been paid by AQL Capital, there is no evidence that it is able to pay the further moneys said to be owing. 
An accountant who gave evidence for the plaintiff, Mr John Sawley, gave evidence that because Mr Hoang is an employee of the defendant, and because he has not paid rent to the defendant for the house in which he resides, the defendant will be liable for fringe benefits tax. He estimated that the amount payable would be approximately $20,000 per year for each year in which Mr Hoang has been living in the property plus interest and penalties. 
However, Mr Hoang is the sole shareholder as well as the sole director of the defendant. There is nothing to show that his living rent-free in the property in which the company owns is a benefit provided to Mr Hoang in the course of or as a term of his employment. Mr Sawley ultimately accepted that his opinion that the defendant had a liability for fringe benefits tax was based on an assumption that the accommodation was supplied to Mr Hoang as part of his employment, or employment contract, or employment package. There is no basis for that assumption. Unless the fringe benefit is provided " in respect of " the employment of an employee, no liability to fringe benefits tax arises ( [Fringe Benefits Tax Assessment Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fbtaa1986312/) (Cth), [s 136(1)).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fbtaa1986312/s136.html) The mere fact that Mr Hoang did not pay rent to the company that owned the house in which he lived and that he received wages from the company, does not mean that the provision of accommodation was a benefit provided in respect of his employment. 
Mr Sawley also raised a question as to whether the defendant had a contingent liability for liquidated damages or damages to AQL Capital for the delay in practical completion of the development. That issue was not pursued. The evidence is that the delays are due to the proprietor, not to defendant as builder. 
Solvency is essentially a cash flow test. Whilst the whole of the company's financial position is relevant to determining its solvency, the company is not insolvent merely because its liabilities may exceed its assets. The converse is also true. If the defendant's evidence is otherwise sufficient, the question is whether the company is insolvent because if it were called on now to pay the debt owed to Mr Hoang, it could not do so. Mr Hoang does not intend to call up the debt. " Fullest and best evidence " of solvency 
The plaintiff submitted that the defendant had not led the " fullest and best " evidence of solvency and on this ground alone had failed to displace the presumption of insolvency. Mr Sawley was critical of the adequacy of the accounts prepared by Ms Nguyen, being the balance sheet of the company as at 20 July 2011 and a profit and loss statement for the 12 months to 30 June 2011. 
First, Mr Sawley said that the accounts did not balance when the current year's profit from 30 June to 20 July 2011 ($6,045) was taken into account. However, that proposition is not established. Mr Sawley based that opinion on the fact that the net profit of the company for the 12 months to 30 June 2011 was shown as $59,679 and said that that amount would normally be called " Current Year earnings " in the balance sheet under " Equity ". He observed that the " Equity " breakdown in current year earnings in the balance sheet showed only $6,045. But the current year earnings in the balance sheet were earnings for the period from 1 July to 20 July 2011 and not the earnings to 30 June 2011. The balance sheet as at 20 July 2011 showing retained earnings of $41,775. That does not mean that the profit and loss statement and the balance sheet did not balance. It means that in the years prior to 1 July 2010 there were losses of $17,904. 
A more significant criticism might have been the failure to produce prior year accounts. 
Mr Sawley said that it did not appear from the accounts whether they had been prepared on a cash basis or on an accruals basis. Ms Nguyen verified that they had been prepared on the accruals basis. 
Mr Sawley was critical of the work done by Ms Nguyen to verify the amounts owed to creditors and the recoverability of the debts owed to the company. He said that a program that an auditor would be expected to undertake to verify creditors would include but not be limited to: 
Obtaining a list of trade and other creditors; 
Review delivery dockets and orders; 
Review all usual creditor invoices and statements from regular suppliers such as concrete suppliers, material suppliers, subcontractors, wages, superannuation etc; 
Comparison to prior year amounts; 
Investigating the creditor's ledger if one were kept; 
Obtaining a positive confirmation of selected creditor balances.
He observed that Ms Nguyen made no allowance for the debt the subject of the statutory demand and owed to the plaintiff. In relation to verifying the value of trade debtors, Mr Sawley said that it was insufficient for Ms Nguyen merely to inspect invoices and that there should be positive confirmation from the debtors of the amount owing. 
Part of the amounts shown as trade debtors in the balance sheet as at 20 July 2011 were later collected. I agree with the criticisms of Mr Sawley in relation to the assessment of the recoverability of the balance of the trade debtors. 
In relation to the verification of trade creditors, Ms Nguyen said that she ascertained the amount of outstanding trade creditors from the invoices that had not been paid as at 20 July 2011. She said that she ascertained who the creditors were from the invoices. She gave the following evidence: "Q. How did you ascertain whether the invoices you were shown were all of the invoices that had been issued? 
A. I just have to ask him, interview him, do you owe, who are your major suppliers, like Bunnings and Boral, "Are you owing them any money?" They said no. "Can you show me the letter saying you are not owing them money?" And they showed me the balance of account is zero. They are the two major suppliers;
Bunnings and Boral Concrete." 
On 30 August 2011 Mr Hoang swore that the trade creditors outstanding as at 22 July 2011 had been paid. 
Solvency is a question of fact to be proved on the balance of probabilities ( [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) , [s 140).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) The question is whether the presumption of insolvency having been raised, the standard of the evidence is sufficient to rebut that presumption so that it could be concluded on the balance of probabilities that the defendant is solvent. In Expile Pty Ltd versus Jabbs Excavations Pty Ltd  <case>; [(2003) 21 ACLC 1354] "The authorities which govern the operation of s459G of the Corporations Law seem to me to establish the following propositions: 
The respondent is presumed to be insolvent and as such bears the onus of proving its solvency: s459C(2) and s459C(3); Elite Motor Campers Australia v
Leisureport Pty Ltd (1996) 22 ACSR 235 per Spender J; Commissioner of
Taxation versus Simionato Holdings Pty Ltd. <case>; [(1997) 15 ACLC 477] per Mansfield J. 
In order to discharge that onus the Court should ordinarily be presented with the 'fullest and best' evidence of the financial position of the respondent: Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Begonia (1993) 11 ACLC 1075 at per Hayne J. 
Unaudited accounts and unverified claims of ownership or valuation are not ordinarily probative of solvency. Nor are bald assertions of solvency arising from a general review of the accounts, even if made by qualified accountants who have detailed knowledge of how those accounts were prepared: Simionato
Holdings Pty Ltd (supra); Re Citic Commodity Trading Pty Ltd versus JBL
Enterprises (WA) Pty Ltd  <case> per Heerey J; Leslie versus Howship Holdings Pty Ltd [(1997) 15 ACLC 459] at 463 per
Sackville J. ... "
The plaintiff submits that the defendant has not adduced the " fullest and best " evidence of its financial position and therefore the presumption of insolvency has not been discharged. 
If the requirement that the onus is only to be discharged if the company presents the " fullest and best " evidence of its financial position is to be taken literally then the plaintiff is undoubtedly correct. The defendant could have given better evidence of its financial position. Where the solvency of a trading company is in issue there would be few if any cases in which it could not be said that some further piece of evidence in relation to the company's financial position might not have been available. In a large concern the standard, if taken literally, would be practically impossible to meet. 
The origin of the requirement for the " fullest and best " evidence of the financial position is the statement of Hayne J in Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Begonia (1993) 11 ACLC 1075 at 1081. Hayne J used the expression in describing evidence relied upon by the company that the terms of a loan between it and a related company were that it was only liable to pay the related company such sum as the related company was liable to pay the bank. The only evidence about the arrangement was from a director of the related company who described the effect of the agreement. No document was produced and no evidence was given by the individuals of any conversations that might be said to give rise to such a term if the alleged term were part of an oral contract. Hayne J admitted the evidence of the director and assumed that the effect of the agreement between the companies was as stated. His Honour held that as the related company had no defence to the claim by the bank, the company in question was insolvent because it admitted in those circumstances that it owed the same amount to the related company. Hayne J said (at 1081): " Ordinarily one would expect that on an application of this kind the company would provide the fullest and best possible material in support of its case.
Thus one would ordinarily expect that the agreements between Texel and Redlock (for I would assume them to be written and not oral) would be produced in evidence. "
Hayne J was describing the nature of the evidence one would expect a company to lead in opposition to the application that it be wound up in insolvency. His Honour did not say that only the fullest and best possible evidence of a company's financial position would be sufficient to displace a presumption of insolvency. 
Another of the cases cited by Weinberg J in the passage set out above is Leslie versus Howship Holdings Pty Ltd [(1997) 15 ACLC 459.] in relation to that failure, but concluded nonetheless that it was probable that the facility would be extended (at 474-475). His Honour also observed that the evidence as to the extent of trade creditors was " less than satisfactory " (at 475). But in the light of all of the evidence, his Honour concluded that if there were trade creditors not recorded in the balance sheet that was tendered, they would not make a significant difference to the company's solvency at the date of hearing (at 476). 
In Expile Pty Ltd versus Jabbs Excavations Pty Ltd , the Court of Appeal stressed the requirement for " proper verification " of the company's assets and liabilities (at [16]). The court repeated with approval the observations of Weinberg J set out above and found that in the circumstances of that case there had not been proper verification. In part, this was supported by findings that evidence adduced by the company was not " the fullest and best " evidence (e.g. para [23]). However, it appears to me that this was a matter of emphasis. The court's conclusion was (at [30]): " Summing up: the respondent's failure to answer the Notice to Produce, and to comply with the judge's direction for production, coupled with the constraints on Mr Billingham contacting third party creditors and leasing companies, judged against the paucity of documentation as to ownership of plant and equipment, plus the deficiencies of the accounts and the lack of hard evidence of realistic borrowing capacity to fund repayment of the true short-term liabilities, render entirely apposite the observation of Spigelman
CJ in Switz Pty Ltd versus Glowbind Pty Ltd <case>; <case>: 'The process of proving solvency is not some kind of forensic game. Solvency is a matter peculiarly within the knowledge of the company. The primary source of information on the solvency of the company must be the company itself.' 
The respondent company failed to provide and verify the information necessary to prove its solvency. "
In the present case there was external verification of the company's assets and liabilities. The verification of recoverable trade debtors is inadequate. That is reflected in my findings of the available assets to meet debts. The verification of creditors other than trade creditors was verified by Ms Nguyen by the review of credit card statements, the search of the ATO portal (in relation to tax debts), the review of the loan statements from equipment financiers, and the tender of bank statements showing the amount of the loan and the making of regular loan repayments. The absence of liabilities to the principal suppliers was verified by Ms Nguyen by review of the statements. The real question is whether I should be satisfied that there were no outstanding trade creditors. Ms Nguyen was dependent on what she was told by Mr Hoang and reviewed only the invoices she was shown. Mr Hoang deposed that by the time of the hearing all trade creditors had been paid. He was not cross-examined on that evidence. There is nothing to contradict it. Whilst the value of trade creditors of $3,407 at 20 July 2011 is low, it is not surprisingly low given that Mr Hoang had evidently paid the company's debts himself which was reflected in the company's liability to him. There is an outstanding trade creditor, namely the plaintiff. For the purposes of this winding-up application, the defendant cannot dispute that debt. But I do not think that Mr Hoang's credit on this issue is significantly affected by his not including the debt that is to be taken to be owed to the plaintiff as a debt to " trade creditors " where the defendant is defending the separate proceeding brought by the plaintiff to recover that debt. 
Further verification could have been attempted. Ms Nguyen could have got a list of all prior trade creditors. She could have checked the identity of prior trade creditors by reviewing delivery dockets and orders and prior invoices. She could have contacted them to verify that they had all been paid either by the company or by Mr Hoang. Does the failure to achieve that level of verification mean that the presumption of insolvency is not rebutted where Mr Hoang has given unchallenged evidence that there are no outstanding trade creditors? 
Ultimately the question of solvency is to be decided on the balance of probabilities. Proof is not required beyond reasonable doubt. I believe Mr Hoang's evidence that all trade creditors have been paid. Bearing in mind the need for proper verification of a company's financial position, I am nonetheless satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the company is able to pay its debts as they become due and payable, except for the debt owing to Mr Hoang. 
Solvency where debt owed to director could not be paid if called on [Section 95A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s95a.html) of the [Corporations Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/) provides that a person who is not solvent is insolvent and that a person is solvent if, and only if, the person is able to pay all the person's debts, as and when they become due and payable. The words " due " and " payable " are synonymous. The question is whether the company is insolvent because it would not be able to pay the debt owed to Mr Hoang if he were to call for its payment, notwithstanding that Mr Hoang does not intend to make such a call. The debt is not the subject of any formal loan agreement. Nor has Mr Hoang in his personal capacity made an agreement with himself in his capacity as sole director of the company as to whether or when the debt is to be paid. The debt has arisen, at least in part, by Mr Hoang personally discharging liabilities of the company. The liability is a debt for the purposes of [s 95A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s95a.html) ( Edwards versus Australian Securities and Investments Commission  <case>; [(2009) 76 ACSR 369] at 169). 
The assessment of solvency must be made as a matter of " commercial reality " having regard to the " practical business environment " (e.g. Lewis versus Doran  <case>; [(2004) 22 ACLC 1009] the company did not dispute that it was unable to pay a substantial debt owed to its director. The director gave evidence that was accepted that he would not in the immediate future ask for the debt to be discharged. Harper J held that there was no good reason why the director should seek to be repaid and good reasons why he should not. His Honour concluded that it followed that as the company was not obliged to repay the debt then or in the immediate future and could pay its other debts, it was not insolvent (at 621). 
In Brooks versus Heritage Hotel Adelaide Pty Ltd Olsson J held that where a debt was payable only on demand, it did not become legally due and payable until demand was made. In that case the company owed its most substantial debt to another company controlled by its director. The director deposed that the debt was payable on demand and no demand had been made, and there was no present intention to do so. Olsson J held that whilst the company would be precipitated into a condition of insolvency if the related party debt were called up, as that debt was only payable on demand and no demand had been made, and as there was no intention to make a demand for the debt such that it would become due and payable in the near future, and as the other obligations of the company were being met, the company was not insolvent (at 64-65). 
The same approach was adopted by Scott J in Totterdell versus Nicol-Bermeister [(1995) 13 ACLC 1521] Giles JA (with whom Hodgson and McColl JJA agreed) referred to Re Kerisbeck Pty Ltd with apparent approval (at [112]). His Honour said (at [109]): " ... there is no compelling reason to exclude from consideration funds which can be gained from borrowings secured on assets of third parties, or even unsecured borrowings. If the company can borrow without security, it will have funds to pay its debts as they fall due and will be solvent, provided of course that the borrowing is on deferred payment terms or otherwise such that the lender itself is not a creditor whose debt can not be repaid as and when it becomes due and payable. It comes down to a question of fact, in which the key concept is ability to pay the company's debts as and when they become due and payable ." (Emphasis in original.)
The Court of Appeal upheld Palmer J's finding that the company was solvent. Giles JA noted that the funds made available by other companies in the group to enable the company to pay its debts as and when they fell due were themselves debts repayable on demand (at <case>; [(2005) 54 ACSR 583], Barrett J said (at [99]): " I accept that funds which, on a realistic commercial assessment, are capable of being raised from outside sources are relevant to the question whether a company is solvent. But the availability of such funds in the form of a loan will not enhance solvency (or have the potential to avoid a finding of insolvency) unless the loan terms are such as to exclude the loan liability from consideration in its own right as part of the debts due or near due. In other words, availability of loan funds for a very short term or payable on demand, as a source from which debts overdue may be paid, does not enhance solvency: it merely substitutes one form of immediate (or near immediate) obligation for another. "
I do not understand his Honour to be saying that it is always necessary to treat a loan payable on demand as a debt that is due or near due and to be taken into account on a determination of solvency. It depends upon whether the court is satisfied that demand will not be made within the reasonably immediate future. 
I accept Mr Hoang's evidence that he has no present intention of requiring the company to repay what he calls the loans amounting to $458,621. 
There was no evidence that any particular terms were agreed upon between Mr Hoang and the company as to when the debt would be payable. Mr Hoang described the debt as arising as a result of loans made by him to the company, and that is how it is described in the balance sheet. However, there was no evidence as to how the company borrowed money from him. There was evidence that at least some part, if not all, of the debt owed to Mr Hoang arose as a result of his paying creditors of the company. The liability that the company thereby incurred to Mr Hoang would not be a liability for money lent, unless there were an agreement for a loan. The moneys would be recoverable by Mr Hoang from the company on a cause of action for money paid by Mr Hoang for the defendant at its request. I was referred to no authority that such a cause of action would lie only after demand was made for the debt that was unsatisfied. No such requirement appears in Bullen & Leake, Precedents of Pleadings, 3 rd ed (1868) at p 42 dealing with the indebitatus count for money paid. 
As a matter of " commercial reality " it makes no difference whether the debt owed by the company to Mr Hoang is payable on demand or without demand. [Section 95A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s95a.html) has been construed as if it provided that a company is solvent if it is able to pay all its debts as and when they become due and payable as a matter of commercial reality. 
Although the defendant has not established that the debt owed to Mr Hoang is only payable on demand, as a matter of " commercial reality " the position is the same as if the debt were payable only on demand. Applying [s 95A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s95a.html) in the sense referred to above, the defendant is solvent. 
If this construction of [s 95A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s95a.html) is wrong, nonetheless winding up is a discretionary remedy. If the position were that the defendant is insolvent because the debt owed to Mr Hoang is payable without demand, even though he has no intention of claiming payment, the question would be whether as a matter of discretion a winding-up order should be refused. The nature of a debt that is said to make a company insolvent is a material consideration in whether a winding-up order should be made (see e.g. In the matter of the Redhead Coal Mining Company Limited [(1892) 3 BC 50).]
As Mr Hoang will not seek to enforce the debt owed to him by the company in the reasonably immediate future, as a matter of substance, the position would be the same as if the debt were payable only on demand. I would incline to the view that the appropriate exercise of the discretion would not be to make a winding-up order on the ground of insolvency, given that the finding of insolvency would turn upon a technicality of no commercial substance. However, adopting a construction of [s 95A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s95a.html) that does not turn on such technicalities, the question of discretion does not arise. 
For these reasons I order that the originating process be dismissed. The exhibits may be returned after 28 days. I will hear the parties on costs. * * * 
