

Jamoo versus Nationwide News Pty Ltd [2002] NSWSC 1062 (4 November 2002) 
Last Updated: 15 November 2002 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: JAMOO versus NATIONWIDE NEWS PTY LTD <case>  
CURRENT JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 20338 OF 2002  
HEARING DATE{S): 4 November 2002  
JUDGMENT DATE: 04/11/2002  
PARTIES: 
GEORGE JAMOO  v  
NATIONWIDE NEWS PTY LTD  
JUDGMENT OF: Levine J  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): Not Applicable  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Not Applicable  
COUNSEL: 
T Molomby SC  
T Blackburn  
SOLICITORS: 
John McEnroe & Co  
Gallagher De Reszke  
CATCHWORDS: 
Imputations - capacity  
ACTS CITED:  [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/)  
DECISION: 
See paragraphs 13-18  
JUDGMENT:  - 5 - 
DLJ:1 
Ex tempore revised 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DEFAMATION LIST  
JUSTICE DAVID LEVINE  
MONDAY 4 NOVEMBER 2002  OF 2002  
GEORGE JAMOO  v  
NATIONWIDE NEWS PTY LTD  
JUDGMENT (Imputations - capacity)  Mr George Jamoo has instituted proceedings against Naionwide News Pty Ltd claiming damages for defamation. The article of which he complains was published in The Daily Telegraph on 18 June this year. The text of the article will be appended to these reasons when published.  Annexed to the statement of claim is the text, together with a photocopy of the article as published. It is apparent that the article was published on a business page in The Daily Telegraph. It is clear that its text is underneath what I will describe as a general headline, namely "Bottom of the
Harbour", with a graphic of the bridge and deep waters beneath it, and the byline of the journalist. The article's more direct headline "Karl's Clobber had its Price" is, as Mr Molomby suggested, enigmatic.  The article in very general terms deals with the relationship between the plaintiff, Mr Suleman, and a business "Karl for Men", which was a clothing business. The plaintiff contends that the matter complained of in its natural and ordinary meaning carries the following imputations:  
That he was so greedy that he agreed to run "Karl for Men" clothing, a business he knew nothing about, because he was offered $4250 a week for five years.  
That he took part in removing large sums of money from the "Karl for Men" account, shortly before that business went into liquidation, to prevent those funds falling into the hands of the liquidator.  
That he was so influenced by generous financial arrangements made for his benefit by Karl Suleman that he paid $40,000 from the "Karl for Men" account, which should have been paid to the liquidators of the business of Karl
Suleman.  
That he paid $40,000 from the "Karl for Men" account, which should have been paid to the liquidator of the business to Karl Suleman.  The defendant contends that the matter is incapable of carrying any of them.  It is fair to observe, on a capacity argument such as this, and as has been submitted in effect by the plaintiff, that the general headline in particular conveys a theme, a theme that would be understood by the ordinary, reasonable reader as referring to murky aspects of the collapse of businesses in circumstances akin to those the subject of the Costigan inquiry. The colour for the copy is provided by that generalised headline.  In relation to the first imputation, it is submitted for the defendant that this article is incapable of denoting anything to do with agreed. It is capable of denoting of the plaintiff that he does not look a gift horse in the mouth. It is capable of denoting, I suppose, that any person would be foolish, irrespective of want of experience in the clothing trade, to reject so generous an offer. It is not incapable of carrying an additional component of greed. This is one of those imputations to which the differing minds principle applies. I add that the context to which I have referred at the beginning of these reasons is important in permitting this matter to be resolved by the tribunal of fact.  As to imputations (b), (c) and (d), in relation specially to (b), it is submitted that the ordinary, reasonable reader has been assumed by the pleader to have knowledge of the law of preference payments in the context of company liquidations. I am not persuaded that that can be said of the ordinary reasonable reader, nor that it necessarily follows that it was in the mind of the pleader.  The thrust of this article is the haemorrhaging of money - and that is my word - from this business at some time within a month prior to the company being put into liquidation, an event which brought about, according to the article, the impoverishment of several thousand investors. That is a theme arguably stark, available to colour that which deals with the $40,000 (which a reader must understand, I would have thought, to be in cash in a safe), and the assertion that suppliers had to be paid.  On the capacity argument I am not persuaded, first as I have said, that the ordinary reasonable reader is to be taken to have understood the intricacies of preference payments in corporate collapses. Nor am I persuaded that the ordinary reasonable reader with the well known attributes would go through such an article, in respect of which such a theme has been set, with such refinement, as to distinguish events that might be reported as having occurred before the liquidator was appointed, or being understood as having occurred at some other time.  Imputation (b), as I have said, is capable of arising for the reasons I have outlined.  I am persuaded that the same can be said of imputations (c) and (d) on a capacity argument. Whether the tribunal of fact in the end will be persuaded by the submission advanced for the plaintiff today as to the relationship between the price to be paid, or the favour to be returned in relation to (c) and (d), will be a matter of fact to be determined in due course.  This in the end is one of those cases where it cannot be said on a capacity basis that anything is so strained, unreasonable or simply not rationally available for the consideration of the tribunal of fact.  All imputations I find as a matter of law are capable of being carried by this matter complained of.  I direct the defendant within 14 days to file a defence in relation to issues to be tried by a jury under [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/).  Pursuant to SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/index.html#p31) r 2 I direct the trial by jury of issues joined by the parties on the pleadings pursuant to [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html) of the [Defamation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/).  I further direct the defendant at the time of filing its 7A defence, to indicate to the plaintiff in writing whether there will be any issue that the defendant, Nationwide News Pty Ltd published the Daily Telegraph on 18 June , which contained the matter complained of.  By directing the defendant to do that, I am not to be understood as directing the defendant otherwise to be making any admissions in respect of the issues to be tried by the jury.  I place the matter in the list to be called up for [section
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s7a.html) trial. The defendant is to pay the plaintiff's costs of today.
 
SCHEDULE A . BOTTOM OF THE HARBOUR with Peter Gosnell.  . Karl's Clobber had its price.  "Limited experience" in the rag trade didn't stop George 
Jamoo accepting a typically madcap proposal from the fallen  king of Fairfield, Karl Suleman. 
The computer systems graduate from the University of 
Technology became the manager of Suleman's Karl for Men  clothing business without a qualm. 
Having been subpoenaed to give evidence at the public  examination into Karl Suleman Enterprizes, Jamoo told the  audience in the Supreme Court 7C yesterday that Suleman "loved  clothes" and had told him he "wanted to have his own clothing  store". 
If he had any misgivings about stepping in to run a business he  knew nothing about, they would have been alleviated by  the money on offer - $4250 a week for five years. 
Not that it was as straightforward as that. This is Karl 
Suleman Enterprizes we're talking about. 
Jamoo told the court he met Suleman in May, 2001. 
He said the high profile western Sydney entrepreneur asked  him to devise a database for KSE. 
Some time later he was offered an investment contract  in Karl Suleman Enterprizes, based on an investment  of $170,000. 
The clincher for Jamoo was that he didn't have to  put the $170,000 in himself ... old moneybags 
Suleman handled that. 
In exchange, Jamoo said he was to work out the  bugs now swarming around the KSE and Froggy IT  systems in plague proportions. 
The Karl for Men proposal actually came a little  later with Suleman putting an initial $350,000 in  start up capital. 
Around early October, a month before the KSE collapse  and subsequent impoverishment of several thousand  investors, money started whooshing out of the Karl for Men  account in big licks. 
Suppliers had to be paid, Jamoo said, and once that was done  he kept $40,000 in a safe at his home briefly before passing it on  to Suleman. 
He told the court he paid all remaining monies to KSE's  liquidator.  [Picture of George Jamoo carrying a sports bag dressed in a suit and tie]  photograph caption reads ..."George Jamoo ... his partner loved clothing".  
LAST UPDATED: 13/11/2002 * * * 
