

Regina versus Zanon Gornicki [1996] NSWSC 646 (20 December 1996) 
REGINA versus ZANON GORNICKI /96 
Friday 20 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GROVE J, BRUCE J, COOPER AJ 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is a stated case listed for hearing today. The matter has been in the list for some considerable time and it is not appropriate now, nor is it necessary, for this court to investigate any question of responsibility for delay. Until recently the appellant has been represented by a firm of solicitors. During last week material has come from that firm of solicitors and directly to the Registry of the Court of Criminal Appeal from the appellant which demonstrates that the appellant is presently resident in Israel. In one facsimile transmission he indicated that he did not have a visa for re-entry into Australia.

The stated case arises out of the conviction of the appellant before a magistrate for an offence of attempting to obtain possession of a prohibited import, namely, a drug commonly referred to as Ecstasy. The facts are based upon the receipt of some of that drug by post to a General Post Office box which had been leased to the appellant. After conviction by the magistrate the appellant exercised his right of appeal to the District Court.

It is in respect of an indication of the presiding judge in the District Court that he intended to dismiss the appeal that the present stated case comes.
Before making some brief reference to the case, I should indicate that by facsimile transmission the appellant has sought that this court adjourn the hearing. The request is general.

At commencement today and after 10am he was called outside the court and, unsurprisingly, he did not appear. Neither did any legal representative appear for him.

The stated case is in a form which concludes with an enquiry to this court, after setting out relevant findings of fact: "On the facts found by me, was it in law open to me to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant knew at the time of the collection from the GPO box that the package contained a prohibited import?" 
The case was finally signed by the learned judge of the District Court on 15
August 1996.

On 19 February 1996 this Court handed down judgment in Comptroller General of Customs versus D'Aquino Bros Pty Ltd. In the course of judgment in that case
Hunt CJ at CL made these observations: "The procedure provided by <case> of the Criminal Appeal Act is intended to permit the District Court judge to obtain advice from this Court upon questions of law which will assist that judge in determining the fate of the appeal to that Court pursuant to the [Justices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/). The procedure is not intended to provide a means of challenging the ultimate determination made (or to be made) by the judge upon that appeal to the District Court as there is no right of appeal to this Court from that determination. The question asked here is in form no more than an attempt to exercise such a right of appeal. It is for that reason that this Court has said, and often repeated, that it is necessary for the particular question or questions of law upon which advice is sought to be specifically stated." 
In my view, the question here asked is, as was the case there, in form no more than an attempt to exercise a right of appeal. In the whole of the circumstances, in my view the appropriate course to take is to strike out the stated case and return the matter to the District Court for the appeal to that
Court to be dealt with in accordance with its own procedures.

I propose that orders to that effect be made.

BRUCE J: I agree.

COOPER AJ: I agree.

GROVE J: The orders of the Court, therefore, are that the appeal is struck out and the matter is returned to the District Court to be dealt with in accordance with the procedures of that Court.
 (Mr Johnson made application for an order for costs.) 
GROVE J: We note your application, Mr Johnson. We decline to make an order for costs.
 * * * 
