

Hunter versus Koulouris [2011] NSWSC 887 (30 August 2011) 
Last Updated: 31 August 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Hunter versus Koulouris  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): April 2011  
Decision Date: August 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Davies J  
Decision: 
The parties should bring in Short Minutes to reflect these reasons  
Catchwords: 
TRADE AND COMMERCE - restraints of trade - buy out of one partner in business - restraint on departing partner - whether restraint reasonable in time - appropriate test to be applied - restraint not more than was reasonable for protection of the business.  
Legislation Cited: [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/)  
Cases Cited: 
Hanna versus OAMPS Insurance Brokers Ltd <case> 
Herbert Morris Ltd versus Saxelby <case> 
Lindner versus Murdoch's Garage <case>; <case>; [(2002) 84 SASR 86] 
Nordenfelt versus Maxim Nordenfelt Guns & Ammunition Co Ltd <case> 
Orton versus Melman <case> 
Synavant Australia Pty Ltd versus Harris <case> 
Woolworths Ltd versus Olson <case>  
Texts Cited: 
Category: 
Principal judgment  
Parties: 
James Henry Hunter (First Plaintiff) 
Johnson Professional Window Films Pty Ltd (Second Plaintiff) 
Alex Koulouris (First Defendant) 
GTS Films Pty Ltd (Second Defendant) 
SUN-X Australia Pty Ltd (Third Defendant)  
Representation  - Counsel: 
A Rogers (Plaintiffs) 
R D Wilson (Defendants)  - Solicitors: 
Kacir Safi & Halligan Lawyers (Plaintiffs) 
Bowring Macaulay & Barrett (Defendants)  
File number(s): /401791  
Publication Restriction: 
Judgment  
The First Plaintiff (Mr Hunter) and the First Defendant (Mr Koulouris) were in partnership sometime in 1999, which from 26 November 1999 was operated through a company called Johnson Professional Window Films Pty Ltd (the Second Plaintiff). The business was a window film and glass tinting business. 
The parties eventually parted ways in 2008 and at the time a Deed dated 21 July 2008 was executed. The effect of the deed was that Mr Hunter effectively bought Mr Koulouris out of the business. Pursuant to the Deed Mr Koulouris was restrained from competing with the Plaintiffs' business for a period of 5 years. Within that 5 year period Mr Koulouris has allegedly competed with the Plaintiffs and the present proceedings, in which the Plaintiffs seek an injunction against Mr Koulouris and two companies associated with him, involve the validity of the restraint clause in the Deed. 
On the face of it the restraint clause operates throughout Australia and beyond. The Plaintiffs accept that it cannot operate outside Australia, and the main issue between the parties is the validity of the 5 year period in the restraint clause. 
The business  
Mr Hunter has worked in the window film and glass tinting business since about 1985. From 1998 he has traded under the name Johnson Professional Window Films. The company by that name was incorporated in 1999. 
The business was to purchase and sell solar film. Mr Hunter purchased it mainly from the United States and sold it to the domestic Australian market. His main customer base in Australia was a number of solar film installers. Mr Hunter also undertook solar film installation. 
Mr Koulouris had been one of his customers between 1993 and 1999 who purchased and installed solar film. 
In January 1999 Mr Hunter and Mr Koulouris executed a Deed of Partnership to carry on the business of solar film sales and distribution. On 26 November 1999 they incorporated the partnership under the name Johnson Professional Window Films Pty Limited ("Johnsons"). 
At least since the partnership commenced the unincorporated business, and later Johnsons, traded as an exclusive importer and distributor within Australia of certain window film products including solar control, safety, security and speciality window films for the automotive, residential and commercial markets. The manufacturer of the products imported is Johnson Laminating & Coating Inc in the USA. The products were supplied pursuant to a Distributor Agreement between the US Company and Johnsons. 
The Distributor Agreement relevantly provided: 
DISTRIBUTOR AGREEMENT  
This Agreement ("Agreement") made and effective on the first day of June 2001, by and between JOHNSON LAMINATING AND COATING, INC. ("Supplier") and Johnson
Professional Window Films Pty. Ltd. ("Distributor").  
WITNESSETH 
Whereas, Supplier manufactures and sells solar control and security window film affixed with certain of Supplier's trademarks as shown on Exhibit A to this Agreement (the "Trademarks") for use on windows by the automotive, residential and commercial building industries (collectively referred to herein as "Industries"); and 
Whereas, Distributor, in conjunction with its existing business of providing certain materials and services to the Industries, has a demonstrated marketing capability and desires to buy the solar control and security film products bearing any of the Trademarks (the "Product") for sale to others; 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises, covenants and conditions set forth herein, the parties hereto mutually agree as follows.
Appointment  .1. Exclusive Sales and Service Area . In connection with the sale of Product to others and the Service connected therewith, Supplier hereby appoints
Distributor as its exclusive authored distributor in the exclusive service area described on Exhibit B, attached hereto ("Exclusive Service Area"), and agrees to appoint no other distributor for the purpose of providing Product and service in the Exclusive Service Area or which is located in the Exclusive
Service Area, so long as this Agreement is in effect. 
In addition, Clause 13.3 set out various events of default which would enable the innocent party to terminate the agreement. One of those events: .3.8 A change in control of Distributor without specific prior written approval from supplier. 
The business appears to have been a successful one with the turnover increasing from $600,000 in 1999 to $4,500,000 in 2005/2006. Mr Koulouris's wife also worked in the business. The partners drew substantial salaries which in 2007 were $391,000 to Mr Hunter and $361,000 for Mr Koulouris. 
As an adjunct to the core business of the importation and distribution of various window films, the business began sourcing and supplying decorative glass films and vinyls from other manufacturers. This part of the business came to be called "The Sign Division". 
It appears that from the latter part of 2004 differences of opinion arose between Mr Hunter and Mr Koulouris as to the future of The Sign Division within Johnsons. That resulted in an agreement between them whereby Mr Koulouris would purchase all of the stock and equipment relating to The Sign Division and relocate it as a separate entity. Mr Koulouris took over The Sign Division from 1st July 2006 when he rented premises at Narellan. He initially traded as a sole trader but later incorporated the business as GTS Films Pty Limited in which he was the sole director and secretary and his wife Michelle and himself were the two share holders. 
Also from the 1st July 2006 Mr Hunter took full control of the day to day operations of Johnsons. Despite that arrangement Mr Hunter and Mr Koulouris continued to meet regularly on a Monday for lunch where business matters were discussed. 
The separation and the Deed  
The new arrangement did not, however, resolve the ongoing problems between them. There were ongoing disputes about the salaries being paid to each of them and disputes arising out of the level of capital contributions and asset contributions of each of the parties. 
Negotiations continued and letters were exchanged over the early months of 2007. On 18th April 2007 Mr Koulouris sent an email to Mr Hunter saying this: 
Jim  
I have had enough of the games.  
Here's an alternative solution, think it over.  
You win, I'm done!  
Alex 
There was attached to the email the following document: 
Without Prejudice  
Offer to sell AK share to JH  
Payout of Range Rover in full and $ 145,000 transfer ownership to AK  
Transfer ownership of Grange to AK $ 45,000  
JH to purchase AK 50% share of JPWF Warehouse $396k - $346k = AK equity ($50,000) $ 50,000  
Payment to purchase AK shares in JPWF $ 150,000 
Total Sale Price $390,000 
Conditions  
Range Rover to be paid out in full.

JH to pay all applicable stamp duties & legal costs.

AK to resign as director of the JPWF Pty Ltd 
AK & JH Partnership to be dissolved.

AK to be indemnified against any action on Co.

There will be no anti competition clause in sale agreement .  
Offer expires Tuesday, 1st May, 2007 and no part is negotiable.  
If agreeable, solicitors can be instructed to commence preparation of "contract of sale" documents with a view to settling on the 30th June, 2007.
(emphasis added) 
The following day Mr Koulouris sent an email to Scott Davidson, the President of the USA company, telling him of the difficulties that had emerged between him and Mr Hunter. 
On 21 April 2007 Mr Davidson sent an email to both Mr Hunter and Mr Koulouris which relevantly said this: 
Alex and Jim,  
Alex sent me an email yesterday saying that you just don't seem to be able to work it out together. I can not tell you how much it pains me to hear. You asked if I would approve a buy out or sale of the company .  
This obviously has huge bearing on your lives but also affects us greatly. We have allowed you carry our name and reputation which is now tied to you. You have made large incomes and built a position in the market based on the "Johnson" name. There is a reason that we have an "approval" clause in our distribution agreement which is primarily to protect our image, reputation and market. You two not being able to work this out presents a huge problem to
Johnson Laminating.  
The 3 most obvious problems are: 
Whoever leaves the company can not go out and start selling another window film in competition to our brand. Your positions in the market were built on our name and I can not allow anyone to use that against us so one condition for me to agree to any sale would be a solid 5 year non-compete agreement between you . If it is Alex leaving the window film business, this should not be difficult as you have already begun your new business in the graphics arena. Jim would also have to agree to stay out of the graphics business. 
Alex, you have taken the Johnson name and put it into your graphics business. That name will have to change to reflect the fact that there is no tie between the businesses . It was not an issue when you were partners in the Johnson business but if there is this unfortunate separation, the names must be separated as well. It seems that this is a relatively minor issue that can be carried out at minimal cost both financially and from a reputation perspective. 
Divorce often winds up in name calling and reputation bashing. You will have to have a legal agreement for both of you to not disparage the name/reputation of each other or each others businesses. This must have some kind of serious financial consequence or it will have no teeth but if you don't, you will wind up bitching about each other and hurting both of your businesses.  
I feel very strongly about all three of these issues but items 1 and 2 are not negotiable . Protecting our name, market, reputation and the jobs of your employees are paramount to us and we feel that we have the right to demand this as your entire reputation in the market has been built on our name. (emphasis added) 
The reference in paragraph 2 of the above email that I have highlighted was in relation to the fact that when Mr Koulouris commenced to run the Sign Division he registered the trading name of Johnson Professional Graphics. 
On 24 April 2007 Mr Hunter sent an email to Mr Koulouris saying: 
I accept your proposal.  
Do you want me to have Pierre get in touch with your solicitor and is it the same one that has been in contact with Pierre? 
Mr Koulouris said that after he received that email he rang Mr Hunter, probably the following day, and said: 
I got your email and I see you want to proceed but what about what Scott has said in his email?  
Mr Hunter replied:  
Don't worry about that. I will talk him around.  
Mr Koulouris gave evidence that Mr Hunter subsequently advised him that Mr
Hunter had been in contact with Scott "but Scott had been insistent that there had to be a restraint as set out in his email of 21 April 2007". 
Thereafter it appears that the parties continued negotiating with solicitors being brought in on either side at some stage but certainly by early 2008. 
On 12 May 2008 the Plaintiffs' solicitors submitted 2 documents to Mr Koulouris's solicitors in an endeavour to resolve the matter. The first was a Consultancy Agreement whereby GT Films Pty Ltd (scil. GTS Films Pty Ltd) would provide various services to Johnsons. The payment provided under the arrangement was $1,279,200 in equal weekly payments of $8,200 for a period of 156 consecutive weeks being the term of the Agreement. 
The other document was a deed for the resignation of Mr Koulouris from the business and the transfer of his shares to Mr Hunter. One of the recitals to that document noted that Johnsons had agreed to enter into a consultancy agreement with a company associated with Mr Koulouris for a term of 3 years. Clause 4 of the Agreement provided for the simultaneous execution of both Agreements. 
Clause 7 of the draft deed provided: [Part 7](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/index.html#p7) Confidentiality and Non-Compete and Non Disparagement  
A. Protection of the Business  
Non-compete  
During the Restricted Period, Koulouris must not engage or be involved or interested in, either directly or indirectly and whether as a partner, joint venturer, financier, director, secretary, shareholder in or, employee of or consultant to any entity or otherwise, a Protected Business.  
No solicitation of customers  
During the Restricted Period, Koulouris must not approach (either solely or jointly with any other person and in any capacity whatsoever) any person whom
Koulouris is aware or ought to be aware is a customer of or client of the
Business at Completion, for the purpose of persuading that person to cease doing business with the Company or Hunter or reduce the amount of business which the customer or client would normally do with the Company or Hunter.  
No solicitation of Employees  
During the period of 5 years from Completion, Koulouris must not approach or solicit, and must not in any way assist any other person to approach or solicit, any employee of the Company for the purpose of recruiting that person.  ...  
Definitions  
In this Part:  
Koulouris means Alex Koulouris and any heir, successor in title, assign, trustee or any person or entity acting in any capacity for or on behalf Koulouris (sic) or any corporation or other entity in which Koulouris has an interest whether disclosed or otherwise.  
Business means any business actual and incidental conducted by Johnson Professional Window Film Pry Limited ACN 090 685 653.  
Protected Business means any business which is the same or substantially the same actual or incidental as the Business or a part of the Business or provides a service the same as or similar to any of the services provided by the Business; or competes in the Restricted Area with the Business or a part of the Business.  
Restricted Period means the period from Completion up to the expiration of 5 years from the Completion Date.  
Restricted Area means Australia.  
Acknowledgment  
Koulouris acknowledges that all the prohibitions and restrictions contained in this clause are reasonable in the circumstances and necessary to protect the goodwill of the Business as at the Completion Date. Koulouris acknowledges and agrees that a breach of this Part will entitle at their absolute and unfettered discretion Hunter and the Company to terminate the Consultancy
Agreement.  ... 
The evidence did not disclose what the response to those documents was. 
Ultimately on 21 July 2008 a Deed was executed which relevantly provided: 
THIS DEED is made on the 21 day of July 2008 
BETWEEN  
ALEX KOULOURIS of 13 Hindmarsh Avenue, Camden Park in the state of New South Wales, 2570 (Koulouris) of the first part and  
JAMES HENRY HUNTER of 55-57 Garswood Road, Glenmore Park in the state of New South Wales, 2745 (Hunter) of the second part and  
JOHNSON PROFESSIONAL WINDOW FILMS PTY LIMITED ABN 60 090 685 653 of 79 Mandoon Road, Girraween in the said state (JPWF) of the third part  
BACKGROUND  
A. Hunter and Koulouris (collectively called "the parties") are the registered legal owners of one share each in the shares of JPWF.  
B. JPWF is registered under the Corporations Law and carries on the business of importing and distributing window film products within Australia.  
C. Johnson Laminating & Coating Inc. (Johnson USA) manufactures the window film products sold by JPWF in Australia and supplies such products to JPWF pursuant to Distribution Agreements entered into between Johnson USA and JPWF from time to time.  
D. Koulouris has agreed with Hunter for the transfer to Hunter of Koulouris's shares in JPWF with the intent that all of Koulouris's right title and interest in JPWF be transferred and assigned to Hunter.  
E. In the conduct of its business JPWF has various loan arrangements with its bankers and financiers' (sic) for the provision of funds for the acquisition of stock etc and to meet the financiers' requirements in relation to the provision of such funds Hunter has provided his own assets as security for these financial arrangements.  
F. The parties have each provided personal guarantees to JPWF's bankers and financiers to support the security given for the financial accommodation from such bankers and financiers.  
G. Part of the business conducted by JPWF was the importation and sale of sign making vinyls and decorative glass films which business was known as "The Sign
Division" (The Sign Division).  
H. During the first half of 2006 JPWF and the parties determined that The Sign
Division was losing money and consideration was given to the closing down of
The Sign Division. Koulouris negotiated with JPWF and Hunter for the acquisition of The Sign Division from JPWF.  
I. The Sign Division business was acquired by Koulouris from JPWF in June
Such acquisition included the plant and equipment used by JPWF in the conduct of The Sign Division business.  
J. The Sign Division business is now carried on by GTS Films Pty Limited (ABN 304 549) (GTS Films) which is a company controlled by Koulouris.  
K. Hunter and Koulouris are co-owners (as tenants in common in equal shares) of the property 79 Mandoon Road, Girraween being the land comprised in
Certificate of Title Folio Identifier 8/SP36247 (the Premises) from which the
JPWF business is conducted.  
THIS DEED WITNESSES  
Sale and Transfer of Shares  .1 Koulouris agrees to sell and Hunter agrees to purchase Koulouris' 1 (one) ordinary share in JPWF for the price of $500,000.00 (the purchase price).  .2 The purchase price is to be paid as follows:-  
Deposit (on signing this agreement) $ 50,000.00 
Balance (on completion) $450,000.00 
TOTAL $500,000.00  .3 The completion date shall be:-  .3.1 31 July 2008 or  .3.2 Seven (7) days after Johnson USA has given its consent to the transfer of shares  whichever shall be the later.  ...  . Range Rover Registration number NXK 41B  .1 On or before completion JPWF will transfer registration of the Range Rover registration NXK 41 B( the Range Rover) to Koulouris.  .2 Notwithstanding the transfer of the registration referred to in sub paragraph 1 of this clause JPWF will continue to meet all payments due to
Alphera Financial Services (a division of BMW Australia Finance Ltd) on the
Range Rover until the completion of the asset purchase agreement for the acquisition of the Range Rover as and when they fall due.  .3 Hunter hereby guarantees the performance of JPWF's obligation pursuant to this clause.  .4 In the event that JPWF fails to meet the payments to Alphera Financial
Services as and when they fall due and Koulouris is required to make the payments himself then Hunter and or JPWF shall immediately become liable to pay Koulouris a further $100,000.00 (less the lease payments made to Alphera
Financial Services since 1 July 2008) together with interest calculated at the rate of 12% per annum on the balance payable as from the date of demand in writing being made by Koulouris to JPWF and Hunter until such payment is made.  .5 Upon completion of all of the payments to Alphera Financial Services JPWF and Hunter shall do all things necessary to transfer the ownership of the
Range Rover to Koulouris.  . Real Estate  .1 Completion of this Agreement is conditional upon a simultaneous completion of a sale of Koulouris' interest in the Premises to Hunter.  .2 The Second Schedule sets out the terms and conditions of the sale by
Koulouris to Hunter of his interest in the Premises.  .3 Prior to completion of the sale of the Premises Hunter must do all things necessary to enable the National Australia Bank (NAB) to discharge the existing mortgage over the Premises to enable Koulouris to be released from all liability under the mortgage to NAB.  .4 Hunter is to be responsible for payment of all stamp duty, bank fees and charges and registration fees in relation to the transfer to him of Koulouris' interest in the Premises.  .5 Any breach of Hunter's obligation under this Agreement shall be deemed to be a default by Hunter under the contract for sale of the Premises.  . Charges and or Security Interests  .1 JPWF has granted charges over company assets details of which are listed in the Third Schedule.  .2 The parties will do all things necessary to enable any personal guarantees given by Koulouris in support of such charges or in support of any indebtedness by the company to any other third party to be released and discharged on or prior to completion.
 . Loan Accounts  .1 The parties must procure that on or before completion JPWF will execute appropriate discharges or releases in respect of any indebtedness due from either of the parties to JPWF.  .2 The parties must procure that on or before completion all indebtedness due from JPWF to Koulouris is satisfied in full without payment of interest.  . Non Competition Covenant - Koulouris  .1 For a period of five (5) years from 1 July 2008 Koulouris must not:-  .1.1 Engage or be involved or interested in, either directly or indirectly and whether as a partner, joint venturer, financier, director, secretary, shareholder in or, employee of, or consultant to any entity or otherwise of any business which is the same or substantially the same as the business carried on by JPWF.  .1.2 Accept business or work from a client or customer of JPWF except as hereinafter provided.  .1.3 Canvass or solicit orders for goods of a similar type to those being sold or provided by JPWF at completion from any person who at completion has been at any time within the year prior to completion a customer of JPWF.  .1.4 Induce or attempt to induce any supplier to JPWF to cease to supply or to restrict or vary the terms of supply to JPWF.  .1.5 Induce or attempt to induce any employee to leave the employment of
JPWF.  .2 Koulouris acknowledges that the prohibitions and restrictions contained in this clause are reasonable and necessary to protect the business of JPWF.  .3 Notwithstanding the provisions of this clause it is agreed and acknowledged by Hunter that GTS Films now carries on The Sign Division business which includes the importation and sale of sign making vinyl, decorative glass vinyls, and digital printing services associated with such vinyls and that there are many customers of JPWF who are also customers of GTS
Films in its new business.  .4 It will not be a breach of the restrictions in this clause for Koulouris and GTS Films to deal with customers of JPWF provided that it is not for the purpose of carrying on any activities restricted by this clause.  .5 JPWF and GTS Films, in undertaking its new business, both sell tools related to the application of the materials sold (which sale of tools represents a minor part of each of those businesses) and it is agreed and acknowledged that the sale of tools by GTS Films shall not amount to a breach of the restraint in this covenant.  . Indemnity to Koulouris  .1 Hunter and JPWF indemnify Koulouris in respect of any actions, claims, demands, costs or expenses arising out of any claim against JPWF as a consequence of any matter or thing arising and giving rise to a claim against
JPWF whether such matter arose before or after completion.  .2 As from 1 July 2008 Koulouris is not to be responsible or liable for any payments due by JPWF to any of its debtors including the chargees referred to in the Third Schedule to this Agreement and Hunter and JPWF indemnify
Koulouris in respect of any such liability.  ...  . Consent by Johnson USA  .1 Completion of this Agreement is conditional on the consent of Johnson USA to the transfer of shares by Koulouris to Hunter pursuant to this agreement.  .2 The completion is also conditional upon Johnson USA granting to JPWF a new distribution agreement on terms substantially in accordance with the terms of the last current distribution agreement between Johnson USA and JPWF.  .3 Within seven (7) days of an (sic) this Agreement being entered into
Koulouris shall cause a copy of this Agreement to be forwarded to Johnson USA for its c onsideration and approval.  .4 Hunter shall forthwith do all things necessary to arrange for a new distribution agreement to be entered into between JPWF and Johnson USA.  .5 In the event that Johnson USA has not:-  consented to the sale shares as contemplated by this agreement; OR  agreed to grant a new distribution agreement to JPWF  by 31 August 2008 either of the parties to this Agreement (excluding JPWF) can by notice in writing to the other rescind the Agreement.  ...  
SCHEDULE ONE  
Assets to b e transferred to Koulouris (clause 4)  
Subaru Station Wagon registration AL 95 FP  
Range Rover registration NXK 41B  x Roland digital printers model numbers SJ 740 and SP 300  
Saeco Coffee Machine  
Dell lap top computer and all its accessories  
Film cutter/dispenser and attached bench table (currently stored at JPWF
Girraween).  
SCHEDULE TWO  
Real Estate  
See contract for sale annexed  
SCHEDULE THREE  
Charges or Security Interests  
Charge in favour of National Australia Bank created 30 December 1999 registered at Australian Securities and Investment Commission (document no.
).
Charge in favour of Benalom Pty Limited created 1 July 2004 registered no.

Charge in favour of National Australia Bank created 1 September 2005 registered document no. 019694870.
 (emphasis added) 
It was accepted by the Plaintiffs, and not disputed by the Defendants, that the total value of the share purchase in clause 1, the land sale in clause 7 and Schedule 2, together with the arrangements in relation to the assets listed in Schedule 1, had a total monetary value of $675,000. It was not possible to value the release of the charges and guarantees. 
Breaches of restraint clause  
Mr Koulouris gave evidence that he formed the view in early March 2010 that he wanted to get back into the business of retailing or wholesaling solar film. He knew at that time that he was under the restraint provided by <case> of the Deed. 
In about November 2010 Johnsons received by way of facsimile from a business called South Coast Window Tinting what appeared to be an order for certain products from Johnsons. Mr Hunter said that it was clear to him that Johnsons was not the intended recipient of the order. He could tell this from inspecting the document and the codes and notation regarding pick-up at the foot of the document. South Coast Window Tinting had been a customer of Johnsons for the previous 5 years. Shortly after the facsimile arrived David Pratt from South Coast Window Tinting called and asked Johnsons to disregard the document as it had not been intended to send it to them. 
There is also evidence of other material sent to customers of Johnsons with those customers forwarding the material onto to Johnsons. The material contained a trade price list which utilised product references similar to those used by Johnsons. The material contained an order form containing the business name SunX Window Films and Grange Graphics. It contained a number of references to web addresses being www.sunx.com.au and www.grangegraphics.com.au. The material showed the address of Grange Graphics as 9/24 Anzac Ave, Smeaton Grange. That was the address of premises where Mr Koulouris was the sub-lessee from a company called Ibex Interiors Pty Ltd. 
The material that had been forwarded to Johnsons by customers was contained in exhibit JHH-1. It was Mr Hunter's evidence that the material in that exhibit was in direct competition to the material sold and distributed by Johnsons. The material contained statements that the SunX product was distributed by Grange Graphics. There was a business card for Grange Graphics with Mr Koulouris's name and telephone numbers on it. 
The evidence showed that Grange Graphics was owned by GTS Films Pty Ltd. Similarly, a domain name search of the website www.sunx.com.au disclosed that that website was owned by GTS Films Pty Ltd. 
A current search of GTS Films Pty Ltd (as at 4 May 2010) discloses that Michelle Irene Koulouris, the wife of Mr Koulouris, is the sole shareholder, director and secretary of the company. 
Other evidence disclosed that Mr Koulouris was selling solar film in March 2011. 
Given the frequent references to the SunX website when coupled with Grange Graphics, it seems to me reasonable to me to draw the inference, and I draw it, that despite the present ownership of GTS Films by Mrs Koulouris, Mr Koulouris is acting in breach of his restraint through both of those entities. It was not seriously contested that there had been a breach of the restraint clause at least by the First and Second Defendants and I find that there was. As Mr Raoul Wilson of counsel for the Defendants said at the outset, the main issue was whether or not the restraint was reasonable in time. 
The Plaintiffs made an urgent application to Bergin CJ in Eq on 8 December 2010 seeking an interlocutory injunction restraining the Defendants from continuing to engage in any business the same, or substantially the same, as the business carried on by Johnsons. Those interlocutory proceedings were settled with an arrangement for the Defendants to keep separate and identifiable records of all relevant business undertaken and income received from such business on or after 13 December 2010. 
The proceedings were then listed for hearing before me for injunctive relief on a final basis. 
Submissions  
The Defendants submitted that, it if being accepted that the restraint should be limited to Australia, the period of time in restraint was too long. They submitted that the restraint was imposed not by negotiation between the parties but as a result of a non-negotiable term imposed by the US company who were required to consent to the sale of the part of the business. Further, they submitted that the 5 year period bore no relationship to the benefits that Mr Koulouris received under the Deed, particularly because his income whilst working at Johnsons was such that the payment of $600,000 (in fact it was $675,000) was equivalent to income for 1.53 years. They also pointed to the disparity between that figure and what was in effect offered in the draft agreements forwarded by the Plaintiffs' solicitors on 12 May 2008. 
The Defendants particularly pointed to what was said by Rath J in IRAF Pty Ltd versus Graham [[1982] 1 NSWLR 419] at 429: 
To my mind the most important consideration on the question of the period of the restraint is the time required for severing the relationship between the defendant and those clients who would patronize the business after its sale.
There is necessarily a large element of conjecture involved here. Additional evidence might reduce that element, but in the main the matter involved is the exercise of business judgment. For this reason considerable weight should attach to the period the parties themselves have selected. Notwithstanding this, I am satisfied that the period of three years is unreasonably long. 
In that regard the Defendants submitted that Mr Koulouris had really been working separately from the main business since 2006, and that that was ample time to sever the relationship with regard to existing customers. The Defendants submitted, therefore, that a reasonable time for the restraint would have been up to the time proceedings commenced but certainly not beyond the period of 5 years from June 2006. 
Legal principles  [Section 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) [Restraints of Trade Act 1976](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/) relevantly provides:  Extent to which restraint of trade valid  
A restraint of trade is valid to the extent to which it is not against public policy, whether it is in severable terms or not.  
Subsection (1) does not affect the invalidity of a restraint of trade by reason of any matter other than public policy.  
Where, on application by a person subject to the restraint, it appears to the Supreme Court that a restraint of trade is, as regards its application to the applicant, against public policy to any extent by reason of, or partly by reason of, a manifest failure by a person who created or joined in creating the restraint to attempt to make the restraint a reasonable restraint, the
Court, having regard to the circumstances in which the restraint was created, may, on such terms as the Court thinks fit, order that the restraint be, as regards its application to the applicant, altogether invalid or valid to such extent only (not exceeding the extent to which the restraint is not against public policy) as the Court thinks fit and any such order shall, notwithstanding sub-section (1), have effect on and from such date (not being a date earlier than the date on which the order was made) as is specified in the order.  ... 
The present application is not an application by a person subject to the restraint - it is an application by the person having the benefit of the restraint to restrain a breach of it. The onus at common law was on the person seeking to enforce the restraint: Herbert Morris Ltd versus Saxelby [[1916] AC 688]
In the present case, on the basis of all of the evidence adduced before me, it is not necessary to consider the question of onus of proof to determine the matter. 
Other principles that I bear in mind in reaching my decision are these: 
The reasonableness and validity of a restraint clause should be assessed at the time of entry into the contract: Hanna versus OAMPS at [33]; Koops Martin v Dean Reeves  <case> at <case> and the cases cited therein;  
A distinction should be observed between a case of a sale of a business and its goodwill on the one hand, and the case of a restraint by an employer of an employee. A restraint would be more favourably regarded in the former case because of the necessary depreciation in the value of the goodwill sold if there was no such restraint: Herbert Morris at 701; Lindner versus Murdoch's
Garage <case>; [(1950) 83 CLR 628] at 633;  
Particularly in the case of a restraint on an employee there is no one correct test for reasonableness; Hanna versus OAMPS at [41] - [45]. Depending on the circumstances, the test may be how long it would take a reasonably competent replacement employee to establish a rapport with the customers (
Koops at [88]), or it may be how long it would take for the employee to sever his connection with the customers or clients of the person having the benefit of the restraint: Stacks Taree versus Marshall (No. 2)  <case> at <case> - [83]. The issue to be resolved is whether the restraint offers no more than is reasonably necessary to protect the legitimate business interests of Johnsons:
OAMPS versus Hanna at [84]; NE Perry Pty Ltd versus Judge <case>; <case>.  
The Court gives considerable weight to what parties have negotiated and embodied in their contracts, but a contractual consensus cannot be regarded as conclusive even where there is a contractual admission as to reasonableness:
Woolworths Ltd versus Olson  <case> at 39; IRAF Pty Ltd at 429; Synavant Australia Pty Ltd versus Harris  <case> at <case>;  
Under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) of the Act the Court must first determine whether the alleged breach (independently of public policy considerations) does or will infringe the terms of the restraint properly construed. Next, the Court determines whether the restraint, so far as it applies to that breach, is against public policy.
If it is not, the restraint is valid, subject to any order which may be made under [s (3):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html)
Orton versus Melman at 587; Woolworths Ltd versus Olson at [42]. If it is against public policy [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/s4.html) enables the restriction to be narrowed Orton versus Melman at 587-588.  
Was the restraint reasonable?  
There are a number of matters which, in my opinion, make the 5 year period of restraint a reasonable one. 
First, the nature of the business with its exclusive distributorship arrangement with the US company, together with the high salaries being paid points to a valuable business with substantial goodwill to protect. The evidence disclosed that there were only about 10 wholesalers and 1200 retail window tinters in the Australian market. The product itself was a large factor in the growth and prosperity of the business. It was a valuable business which was entitled to protection for a reasonable period of time after the departure of Mr Koulouris from the business. 
Secondly, Mr Koulouris was aware of the extent of the control that the US company had both with regard to changes in the control of Johnsons (clause 13.3.8 of the Distributor Agreement), the exclusive arrangement between the US company and Johnsons, and (at least from the time that negotiations started to sever the relationship between Mr Koulouris and Mr Hunter) the fact that the US company would insist upon a 5 year period of restraint of trade in the event that the 2 partners split. Although in the first instance Mr Koulouris's offer had stipulated that there would be no anti-competition clause in the sale agreement, he knew within a matter of days that that would be unacceptable to the US company and he knew instead what the US company would require. 
Thirdly, Mr Koulouris agreed to the 5 year period and agreed it was reasonable. That is a very important consideration, although not a determinative one, because it involves the exercise of a business judgment: Synavant at [85]. The business judgment is no doubt closely associated with the benefits received by Mr Koulouris and the alternatives available to him, which I will discuss presently. 
The Defendants pointed to the acceptance by Mr Hunter of the first proposal to settle put forward by Mr Koulouris in his email of 18 April 2007. Mr Hunter's explanation of why he accepted that proposal without any qualification was somewhat unsatisfactory. However, the evidence suggests that by the time Mr Hunter sent his acceptance he had already seen the long email of 21 April 2007 from Scott Davidson at Johnsons US. Mr Hunter said that he knew the US company would insist on a restraint, but that does not properly explain why he accepted Mr Koulouris's proposal without qualification. In that regard I found his evidence somewhat unsatisfactory. Nevertheless, that seems to me to be a side issue in a case concerning the reasonableness of the restraint that was ultimately agreed between the parties after further negotiation. Ultimately, Mr Koulouris was free not to accept the 5 year restraint. He had available other options including a winding up of the business, which he chose not to exercise. The starting point in relation to this matter, it seems to me, is that the parties agreed to a 5 year restraint and agreed that it was reasonable. 
Fourthly, Mr Koulouris received in total some $675,000 together with a release of his contingent obligations under guarantees that he had given to Johnsons. The Defendants point to 2 matters suggesting that the benefits Mr Koulouris received are not the equivalent of a restraint for 5 years. They point, first, to the salary that Mr Koulouris was receiving in the years before the Deed was entered into and suggest that what he received was worth something a little less than 2 years salary. However, the authorities do not appear to suggest an enquiry into the relationship between the period of restraint and any payout figure received by the person subject to the restraint. Rather, the applicable tests are those discussed in Koops, Stacks Taree and Hanna versus OAMPS in the Court of Appeal and those tests can be appropriately adapted to a situation like the present. Mr Koulouris's departure is closely analogous to the departure of an employee. Indeed, it may be thought to provide a stronger case for a restraint bearing in mind his prior position and work within Johnsons. 
The Defendants also point to the figures in the draft document sent under cover of the 12 May 2008 communication from the Plaintiff's solicitors. The Consultancy Agreement provided for an arrangement of an overall payment of $1,279,200. The Defendants' submission seems to suggest that, whereas there had been an offer of $1.29 million, the final figure was considerably less at $600,000 (in fact $675,000), although the Defendants' submission did not take account of the release from the guarantees. 
The evidence did not disclose why the arrangement with the Consultancy Agreement and the Deed did not go ahead. What is significant, however, is that in the light of the obligations proposed in the Consultancy Agreement on GTS Films, the $1.29 million cannot be seen to relate simply to a payout figure of Mr Koulouris that subsequently was reduced to $675,000 together with the release of the guarantees. Although the two agreements were intended to be put into effect together, the basis in the documents for the payment of the figure was the consultancy obligations. 
Fifthly, I place some importance on the fact that both Mr Koulouris and Mr Hunter engaged solicitors to act for them in negotiating the Deed that was finally executed. It can reasonably be inferred that appropriate advice was given in relation to the amounts being received by Mr Koulouris, his other options and the restraint clause together with its validity. 
Sixthly, in the light of Mr Koulouris's role with Johnsons both before and after he established The Sign Division, I reject the submission of the Defendants that the appropriate starting point for the time of any restraint should be 1 July 2006 when Mr Koulouris commenced working separately in The Sign Division. The submission assumes, wrongly on the basis of the evidence, that Mr Koulouris did not continue to be actively involved with clients of Johnsons, during the time that he ran The Sign Division. That appears to be a relevant matter when considering the application of the appropriate test for reasonableness. 
In circumstances where this is not a restraint on a former employee who has left the business and a new employee would be coming in to take over the role of the departing employee, the appropriate test is the one adopted by McDougall J in Stacks Taree which concerned "the time required for severing the relationship between [Mr Koulouris] and those clients who would patronize the business after its sale": IRAF at [429]. I accept that the position is not on all fours with that decision because the present arrangement was the buy-out of one partner in a business. Nevertheless, the concern of the Plaintiffs was not for some replacement of Mr Koulouris to "show his or her effectiveness and establish a rapport with customers" ( Koops at [88]) but rather the concern for the severing of the relationship between Mr Koulouris and customers of Johnsons. 
Interestingly, and despite the test employed by Brereton J in Koops , the issue as he described it there was one of "customer connection" (at [28]). That is precisely the position here that forms the basis for the Plaintiffs' submission in justification of the restraint. As Brereton J said at [44]: 
A more robust view is taken where the employee's role includes obtaining and extending custom for the employer's business. When an employee's duty includes to build up the employer's clientele as well as to deal with existing clients, a wide restraint is more likely to be upheld, because in such circumstances the employer is entitled to protection against the employee taking advantage of the period of service to prepare for later competition [ G W Plowman &
Sons Limited versus Ash [[1964] 1 WLR 568]; [[1964] 2
All ER 10]; Normalec Limited versus Britton [[1983] 9 FSR 318], 324; Dean,
The Law of Trade Secrets , 2nd edn, [11.150]. In such a case, the establishment of a customer connection is not merely incidental to the employment, but its purpose. In that context, a covenant is considered reasonable, first, to remove the temptation that by cultivation of the target market during employment, the employee may prepare the ground for its exploitation by himself after the employment ends, rather than for his employer during the employment; and, secondly, to prevent exploitation after termination of the employment by the employee of a connection with the customer which the employer has paid the employee to establish for the employer's benefit. In this context in particular, the fact that in pursuance of his or her obligations under the employment contract an employee has for reward introduced customers who include relatives, friends and acquaintances does not [absent specific agreement to the contrary: see Sharah versus Healey [[1982] 2 NSWLR 223]] remove or cut away the basis which would otherwise exist for a restraint. 
The evidence was that from 1999 to 2006 Mr Koulouris was the managing director of Johnsons. In that position he built a rapport with the clients. At the same time, Mr Hunter was primarily attending to two other businesses of his. It was only from 2006 that Mr Hunter allocated more of his time to the operation of Johnsons. As part of his regular meetings with Mr Hunter, Mr Koulouris had active knowledge of how Johnsons was trading and what it was doing. 
After Mr Koulouris established The Sign Division he had contact with a number of clients who were clients of Johnsons. Mr Koulouris continued to take orders from clients and place them with Mr Hunter or one of his sons. He continued to deal with enquiries from clients about window tinting and solar films. Whilstever Mr Koulouris was still receiving enquiries and placing orders for solar film with Johnsons when he ran The Sign Division which was, in any event, a part of Johnsons and carried on under the name of Johnson Professional Graphics, it would be inappropriate to take the view that time should begin to run for the restraint only when Mr Koulouris commenced to run The Sign Division. 
Conclusion  
In my opinion, the restraint agreed between Mr Hunter and Mr Koulouris in the Deed of 21 July 2008 was no more than was reasonably necessary for the protection of the Plaintiffs. The First Defendant, for himself and through the Second and Third Defendants, has acted in breach of that restraint. They should themselves be restrained from doing so for the period stipulated, that is, until 20 July 2013. 
The parties should bring in Short Minutes to reflect these reasons. * * * 
