

McGuinness versus Registrar-General; Barrett and Anor versus McGuinness Matter Nos /96 [1998] NSWSC 1025 (22 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
McGUINNESS V REGISTRAR-GENERAL /96 
BARRETT and ANOR V McGUINNESS /96 May 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Mr McGuinness, the plaintiff in proceedings No. 2927 of 1996 and the defendant in proceedings No.3113 of 1996, is the registered proprietor of Lot 1 in deposited plan 317207. 
Mr and Mrs Barrett, who are the plaintiffs in proceedings No. 3113 of 1996, are the registered proprietors of Lot 2 in the same deposited plan. Mr and Mrs
Barrett have, since shortly after September 1990, lived in a house known as 79
Gaffney Street Broken Hill, which is in fact erected on the aforesaid Lot 1.

On 10 July 1996, the Registrar-General gave notice to Mr McGuinness that he proposed to amend deposited plan 317207, so that Lot 1 would become Lot 2, and
Lot 2 would become Lot 1. Mr McGuinness then commenced proceedings No.2927 of against the Registrar-General, seeking an injunction against the
Registrar-General making such an amendment.

Subsequently, Mr and Mrs Barrett brought proceedings No. 3113 of 1996 against
Mr McGuinness, seeking declarations to the effect that they were entitled to
Lot 1, and consequential orders.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
I will begin with an outline of facts that are either clearly established or not substantially in dispute.

Following a subdivision of land owned by Ann Louise Wilson, on 2 June 1927 two new certificates of title were issued in her name, one for what later became
Lot 1 in deposited plan 317207 and one for what later became Lot 2 in the same deposited plan.

According to the Certificate of Title issued in respect of Lot 1, there were the following subsequent transactions: 
A transfer dated 27 April 1933 to Dorlyn Ruby Winders 
A transfer dated 12 July 1933 to Samson Simmons 
A transmission application registered 10 May 1971 in favour of the Public Trustee 
A transfer dated 15 September 1971 to Rae Rook 
A transmission application registered 12 June 1974 in favour of Colin Thomas Rook 
A transfer dated 6 May 1980 to Mr McGuinness 
A mortgage registered 22 June 1981 to the Commonwealth Trading Bank 
According to the Certificate of Title issued in respect of Lot 2, there were the following subsequent transactions in relation to that lot: 
A transmission application registered 15 February 1935 in favour of the Douglas Tresize and Stuart John Wilson 
A transfer dated 27 November 1934 to Grace Winifred Davis, registered on 15 February 1935 
A transfer dated 20 July 1951 to Jack Duffy 
A mortgage dated 31 July 1951 to the Cooperative Building Society, Broken Hill (No 2) Limited, the discharge of which was registered on 3 July 1970.

The certificate in respect of Lot 2 was subsequently replaced by computer folio 2/317207 and transactions shown in respect of that computer folio are as follows: 
A transfer registered 30 October 1990 to Mr and Mrs Barrett 
A mortgage registered 29 July 1992 to Westpac Banking Corporation 
There has been evidence from Jack Duffy that he understood that he purchased Gaffney Street from Grace Davis. There has been evidence from the daughter of Jack Duffy to the effect that in 1951 she moved to 79 Gaffney Street with her family, and shared the house for some weeks with the family of Harold and
Grace Davis. It is clear that Jack Duffy then resided continuously in 79
Gaffney Street until his transaction with Mr and Mrs Barrett in 1990.

By contract dated 28 September 1990 Mr and Mrs Barrett agreed to purchase from
Mr Duffy for $8,000.00 certain lands described as 79 Gaffney Street, and also described as Lot 2 in deposited plan 317207 and as being land in folio identifier 2/317207. They moved into 79 Gaffney Street shortly afterwards and have lived there ever since.

Meanwhile, by contract that appears to be undated but which was apparently made some time before 6 May 1980, Mr McGuinness agreed to purchase from Colin
Thomas Rook for $1,500.00 vacant land known as 83 Gaffney Street, Broken Hill, but also described in the contract as being the land in certificate of title volume 4010 folio 28, this being the certificate of title issued in respect of
Lot 1. Mr McGuinness has said in evidence that he believed he was acquiring 83
Gaffney Street.

The sheet from the Valuer-General's department records concerning valuation date 1 July 1993 shows Mr and Mrs Barrett as owners of 79 Gaffney Street and
Mr McGuinness as owner of 83 Gaffney Street.

It appears that Mr and Mrs Barrett first became aware that they were registered as proprietors of land which was in fact No. 83 Gaffney Street in or about March 1995, and it appears that Mr McGuinness first became aware that he was the registered proprietor of land which was in fact 79 Gaffney Street some time later the same year.

In these circumstances I infer (and I do not understand this to be in the least disputed) that when Lot 2 was transmitted to the Public Trustee and then transferred to Mrs Davis in 1934, Mrs Davis believed that she was thereby acquiring 79 Gaffney Street, and I infer that Mrs Davis then lived at 79
Gaffney Street from that time on the basis of that transaction. I infer that this in turn arose from a corresponding mistake when Lot 1 was transferred twice in 1933. Corresponding mistakes continued in relation to both pieces of land until the mistakes were discovered in 1995.

I would mention some legal consequences of this that appear to be not really in dispute. The agreement made by Mr and Mrs Barrett in 1990 was on its true construction an agreement for the purchase of No. 79 or alternatively, subject to one matter to which I will come, could have been rectified to be such an agreement. It may be that the remedy of rectification would not have been available, because Mr Duffy would have been in considerable difficulty giving a good title to No. 79.

Mr McGuinness's agreement in 1980 was similarly an agreement for the purchase of No. 83. Theoretically there could have been proceedings for rectification going back to the source of the mistake in 1933, but there would have been considerable practical difficulties in such proceedings, having regard to the number of successive parties involved.

One other matter that I should mention is that a sequestration order in bankruptcy was made against Mr McGuinness on 21 March 1983. This was terminated by automatic discharge on 22 March 1988. It appears that the trustee in bankruptcy made a formal disclaimer in relation to certain of Mr
McGuinness's property, but not in respect of this property. However, the trustee never became registered as owner of this land; and on 30 October 1991 the trustee wrote to the Broken Hill City Council advising that, on the conclusion of the bankruptcy, the land would vest in the registered owner, and that the trustee had no interest in that property whatsoever.

On behalf of Mr and Mrs Barrett a request No.2286750 dated 2 July 1996 was lodged with the Land Titles Office. This requested that an amendment be made to deposited plan 317207 by transposing the lot numbers, and also requested consequential amendments to various title documents. The request was supported essentially by evidence of the matters I have related. Mr Ticehurst, a principal legal officer, was satisfied that Mr and Mrs Barrett intended to purchase No.79 Gaffney Street, and that Mr McGuinness intended to purchase
No.83 Gaffney Street. He also formed the view that Mr and Mrs Barrett had possessory title which extinguished that of Mr McGuinness, and he noted that the mortgagees of the properties agreed with the amendment that was sought. He determined that the amendment requested should be made and notified Mr
McGuinness of this. It was that which essentially gave rise to these proceedings.

ISSUES 
The following issues have been argued before me.

Firstly, is the Registrar-General entitled to make the proposed amendment?
That in turn involved a number of questions. Firstly, whether that course would be justified by <case>(d) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/), which is in the following terms: (1) The Registrar-General may exercise the following powers, that is to say: ...

The Registrar-General may, subject to this section and upon such evidence as appears to the Registrar-General sufficient, correct errors and omissions in the Register.

Next there were a number of questions concerning possessory title. There was debate as to whether a possessory title was in this case either negated by the evidence, or alternatively not established in favour of Mr and Mrs Barrett by the evidence. And it was submitted that, even if a possessory title was either established or not negated, the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) did not authorise the Registrar-General to give effect to a possessory title in the manner proposed. These questions involved some consideration of following parts of s.45D and s.45E of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/): 
D(1) Where, at any time after the commencement of this Part, a person is in possession of land under the provisions of this Act and: the land is a whole parcel of land, the title of the registered proprietor of an estate or interest in the land would, at or before that time, have been extinguished as against the person so in possession had the statutes of limitation in force at that time and any earlier time applied, while in force, in respect of that land, and the land is comprised in an ordinary folio of the Register or is comprised in a qualified or limited folio of the Register and in the possession by virtue of which the title to that estate or interest would have been extinguished as provided in paragraph (b) commenced after the land was brought under the provisions of this Act by the creation of the qualified or limited folio of the Register, that person in possession may, subject to this section, apply to the Registrar-General to be recorded in the Register as the proprietor of that estate or interest in the land.
 ....

A possessory application may not be made in respect of an estate or interest in land if: the registered proprietor of that or any other estate or interest in the land became so registered without fraud and for valuable consideration, and the whole of the period of adverse possession that would be claimed in the application if it were lodged would not have occurred after that proprietor became so registered, unless the application is made on the basis that the estate or interest applied for will be subject to the estate or interest of that registered proprietor if the application is granted.

E(3) A possessory application shall be granted by recording the applicant in the Register as the proprietor of an estate or interest in the whole parcel of land the subject of the application, being the estate or interest applied for or such lesser estate or interest as the Registrar-General considers appropriate, free from all estates and interests recorded in the Register that would have been extinguished as referred to in section 45D(1)(b) other than: interests referred to in subsection (4), and interests to which the application has been made subject pursuant to section 45D(4).

It also involved some consideration of the Real Estate Limitation of Actions
Act 1833, s.2, and the following of [s.6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s6.html) and s.[27](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s27.html) of the [Limitation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/): 
Real Estate Limitation of Actions Act 1833 . And be it further enacted That after the thirty-first day of December one thousand eight hundred and thirty-three no person shall make an entry or distress or bring an action to recover any land or rent but within twenty years next after the time at which the right to make such entry or distress or to bring such action shall have first accrued to some person through whom he claims or if such right shall not have accrued to any person through whom he claims then within twenty y ears next after the time at which the right to make such entry or distress or to bring such action shall have first accrued to the person making or bringing the same.
 [Limitation Act 1969](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/) (1) Subject to [section 26](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/s26.html), to Division 3 of [Part 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/la1969133/index.html#p3) and to Schedule 5, nothing in this Act: ...
 affects the extinction of the title of a person to land under section 34 of the Imperial Act shortly entitled to Real Property Limitation Act 1833, as adopted and applied by the Act passed in the eighth year of the reign of King William the Fourth, number three, where the period limited by that Imperial Act, as so adopted and applied, to that person for making an entry or distress or bringing an action or suit to recover the land has commenced to run before the commencement of this Act; or ...
 (2) Subject to subsection (3) an action on a cause of action to recover land is not maintainable by a person other than the Crown if brought after the expiration of a limitation period of twelve years running from the date on which the cause of action first accrues to the plaintiff or to a person through whom he claims.

The second matters debated concerned the effect of Mr McGuinness's bankruptcy.
It was submitted on behalf of Mr and Mrs Barrett that, by virtue of the bankruptcy, Mr McGuinness did not have any title to the land whatsoever and had no standing to oppose the Barrett's claim for the land. This involves consideration of the following parts of [ss.58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s58.html), [132](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s132.html) and [133](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s133.html) of the [Bankruptcy Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/): (1) Subject to this Act, where a debtor becomes a bankrupt: the property of the bankrupt, not being after-acquired property, vests forthwith in the Official Trustee, or, if at the time when the debtor becomes a bankrupt, a registered trustee becomes the trustee of the estate of the bankrupt by virtue of section 156A, in that registered trustee; and after-acquired property of the bankrupt vests, as soon as it is acquired by, or devolves on, the bankrupt, in the Official Trustee or, if a registered trustee is the trustee of the estate of the bankrupt, in that registered trustee.

Where a law of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory of the Commonwealth requires the transmission of property to be registered and enables the trustee of the estate of a bankrupt to be registered as the owner of any such property that is part of the property of the bankrupt, that property, notwithstanding that it vests in equity in the trustee by virtue of this section, does not so vest at law until the requirements of that law have been complied with.
 (1) Subject to this section, and to section 158, where a trustee is appointed by the creditors, the property of the bankrupt passes to and vests in the trustee so appointed on the day on which the appointment takes effect.

Subject to this section, the property of the bankrupt passes from trustee to trustee and vests in the trustee for the time being during his or her continuance in office or, if the Official Trustee becomes the trustee, in the Official Trustee, without any conveyance, assignment or transfer.

Where a law of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory of the Commonwealth requires the transmission of property to be registered, and enables the trustee to be registered as the owner of any such property of the bankrupt, that property, notwithstanding that it vests in equity in the trustee by virtue of this section, does not vest in the trustee at law until the requirements of that law have been complied with.
 (1) Subject to this section, the trustee may, notwithstanding that he or she has endeavoured to sell or has taken possession of the property or exercised any act of ownership in relation to it and notwithstanding, in the case or property the transfer of which is required by a law of the Commonwealth or of a State or Territory of the Commonwealth to be registered, that he or she has not become the registered owner of that property, by writing signed by him or her, at any time disclaim the property.
 ...

A disclaimer under subsection (1) or (1A) operates to determine forthwith the rights, interests and liabilities of the bankrupt and his or her property in or in respect of the property disclaimed, and discharges the trustee from all personal liability in respect of the property disclaimed as from the date when the property vested in him or her, but does not, except so far as is necessary for the purpose of releasing the bankrupt and his or her property and the trustee from liability, affect the rights or liabilities of any other person.

The final issues debated concerned whether Mr and Mrs Barrett had an equitable title to 79 Gaffney Street, which could be asserted against Mr McGuinness, notwithstanding his registered title.

Written submissions have been provided on behalf of all parties and I will leave them with the papers. In dealing with the submissions that have been made, I will refer mainly to the oral submissions.

POWER OF REGISTRAR-GENERAL AND POSSESSORY TITLE 
I come first to the issues concerning the powers of the Registrar-General and the question of possessory title.

Evidence 
Before going to the submissions I should mention some additional evidence that was led in relation to this matter. Mr McGuinness gave evidence that, in about , he had a conversation with Jack Duffy in which Jack Duffy suggested that the boundary between the two properties was actually inside the fence of No.
 Gaffney Street. I will return in a moment to the possible significance of that.

Mr McGuinness then gave evidence of a conversation in late 1982 with Mr Duffy, when he asked Mr Duffy whether he could use the back of Mr Duffy's block to store materials. According to Mr McGuinness, Mr Duffy responded: "It is not up to me, you own this land." 
From late 1982 until 1986 Mr McGuinness used what he described as the rear, unfenced portion of 79 Gaffney Street to store materials. The evidence seems to indicate that the rear part of 79 Gaffney Street was unfenced and that the front part, including the house, was fenced so that there was at least some kind of a fence going across the block of 79 Gaffney Street dividing the curtilage of the house from the rear part of the block. The evidence is not clear as to what other fences there were.

One suggestion that has been made is that these events suggest that Mr Duffy believed that his land was in fact wider and not so deep as the actual lot on which 79 Gaffney Street was erected; and some support was sought to be given to that by reference to an earlier subdivision plan, which showed a block of that kind around where 79 Gaffney Street was erected.

Submissions 
Mr Radojev for Mr McGuinness submitted first that s.12(1)(d) could not be used by the Registrar-General in these circumstances because it related only to "errors and omissions in the register"; and he submitted that, on any view of it, the mistake or mistakes in this case could not be regarded as an error or omission in the register.

Mrs Donohoe for the Registrar-General did not advance submissions against that proposition, but rather submitted that s.45E(3) authorised the Registrar-
General to make such alterations to the register as were appropriate to give effect to a possessory title.

Mrs Donohoe submitted that the evidence in this case showed a good possessory title obtained by the Barretts and their predecessors in title as long ago as , that is twenty years after the transaction involving Mrs Davis. Mrs
Donohoe submitted that all statutory title since that time was liable, pursuant to s.45D of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/), to be defeated by this possessory title. If the inference could not be drawn as to continuous possession by Mrs Davis, the statutory title would in any event be defeated by the possession of Mr Duffy since 1951. Mrs Donohoe submitted that whatever was done, in relation to storage of material on the rear of the block, was done by arrangement with and permission of Mr Duffy, and did not affect the continuance of Mr Duffy's possession. Mrs Donohoe referred me to Mulcahy v
Curramore Pty Ltd [(1974) 2 NSWLR 464], particularly at 476D; and also to Newington versus Windeyer [(1985) 3 NSWLR ], especially at 563G.

Mr Radojev submitted that s.45D(1)(b) on its true construction meant that what had to be shown was that the title of the registered proprietor at the time of the application had been, or would have been extinguished; so that what had to be shown in this case was a possessory title sufficient to defeat Mr
McGuinness's title, not the title of any of his predecessors in title. That meant that it had to be a possessory title from some time after Mr McGuinness became the registered proprietor. He submitted that at best for Mr and Mrs
Barrett, time therefore began to run in 1980.

Mr Radojev further submitted that the possessory title had to be in relation to a whole parcel of land. Mr Duffy in substance acknowledged that he had no title to the rear portion of his land: accordingly, one could infer either that Mr Duffy never truly possessed the whole of the parcel of land, or alternatively that his possession of the whole of the land was interrupted for this period.

Decision 
In my opinion Mr Radojev's submissions in relation to s.12(1)(d) are correct.
Although it could be argued that there was an error in the register if it failed to reflect what was truly the beneficial ownership of the piece of property, in my opinion that approach would be so contrary to the intention of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) that it should not be applied. It seems to me that that approach would be inconsistent with the intention of the Act that the register be conclusive.

However, on the interpretation of s.45D(1)(b), I do not accept Mr Radojev's submission. In my opinion, the reference there to "the registered proprietor of an estate or interest" does not mean that the extinguishment must first have occurred as against the particular person who is the registered proprietor at the time of the application, much less that the whole period of adverse possession must have run against that person. In my opinion those words have to be given an ambulatory application, and the paragraph applies wherever the title of any registered proprietor of an estate or interest in the particular land would, at or before the time of the application, have been extinguished.

In my opinion, the interpretation contended for by Mr Radojev is inconsistent with s.45D(4), which protects registered proprietors who have become so registered without fraud and for valuable consideration. An alternative submission, that Mr McGuinness has the protection of s.45D(4), should not succeed. Where, at the time of becoming registered, Mr McGuinness believed he was being registered in respect of another parcel of land, having paid a lesser price for and appropriate to that other less valuable parcel of land, it seems to me that the valuable consideration he provided cannot be considered as being for the land in respect of which he became registered, so that Mr McGuinness does not have the protection of s.45D(4).

The material before me does enable me to infer that there was possession by
Mrs Davis from around 1934. In my opinion, I can infer that her intention was to possess the whole of the actual parcel of land on which her house was built, so in my opinion her possession was of a whole parcel of land.

Even if this approach is incorrect and the Barretts need to rely on Mr Duffy's possession, I do not think the evidence to which I have referred justifies a conclusion contrary to the view that Mr Duffy intended, by his occupation of the house, to possess the whole of the piece of land on which the house was erected.

Although there was no cross-examination either of Mr McGuinness or Mr Duffy, I do not think Mr McGuinness's evidence is enough to justify a conclusion that
Mr Duffy did not believe that he owned the whole of the lot on which No.79 was in fact erected. Without fully understanding all the circumstances, the whole of the conversation, and the whole context in which Mr Duffy spoke, it seems to me very difficult to know what conclusion is to be drawn from the conversation. In my opinion, the occupation by Mr McGuinness of the rear portion of this land was an occupation by the permission of Mr Duffy, and did not interrupt Mr Duffy's possession.

In my opinion therefore a possessory title is shown, on the evidence that I have heard. Certainly it has not been shown that there is no such possessory title.

The remaining question is whether s.45E would authorise the Registrar-General to give effect to this possessory title in the manner proposed. Section 45E(3) says that "a possessory application shall be granted by recording the applicant in the register as the proprietor of an estate for interest in the whole parcel of land" etcetera. In my opinion those words should not be given a narrow construction. In my opinion, the Registrar-General can record these matters by such entries in the register as the Registrar-General thinks appropriate to record that interest. If the Registrar-General thinks that the entries appropriate to record that interest are by way of amendment of a deposited plan, then I see no reason why the Registrar-General cannot give effect to the possessory title in that way. For those reasons I would propose to dismiss Mr McGuinness's action against the Registrar-General.

BANKRUPTCY OF MR. McGUINNESS 
Turning to the other proceedings, the first issues concerned the matter of bankruptcy.

Submissions 
Miss Sofroniou for the Barretts submitted that, by virtue of [s.58](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s58.html) of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/), all his property, including this property, vested in his trustee in bankruptcy. On his discharge in March 1988, the property not sold and distributed by the trustee did not revert to Mr McGuinness, but rather remained in the trustee: see
Daemar versus Industrial Commission of New South Wales (No 2) [(1990) 22 NSWLR ]
at 182-4.

Miss Sofroniou submitted that there had in fact been no disclaimer, because under [s.133](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s133.html) a disclaimer could only be made by a document in writing and that did not happen in this case. Even if there had been a disclaimer, its effect would have been to wholly determine the right of the bankrupt, that is of Mr
McGuinness, both in respect of any equitable title and in respect of any legal title. Miss Sofroniou referred me to Re Tulloch Limited [(1978) ACLC -457.] 
She also referred me to Sistrom versus Urh [(1992) 40 FCR 550], to support the proposition that, because of the bankruptcy legislation, Mr McGuinness could not rely on indefeasibility of title under the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/).

Mr Radojev submitted that under [s.132](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/s132.html) of the [Bankruptcy
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ba1966142/), it was only the equitable title to the land that went to the trustee; the legal title remained with Mr McGuinness. The trustee's letter of October 1991 indicated that the trustee had no interest to assert any equitable title, so that Mr
McGuinness now held his legal title free of any equitable title of the trustee in bankruptcy.

Decision 
In my opinion Mr McGuinness does have the legal title to the land. It would appear from the authorities quoted by Miss Sofroniou that that may be a bare legal title, held as a bare trustee for his trustee in bankruptcy. There is force I think in the submission that the trustee cannot divest himself of this equitable title simply by an informal letter of the type involved in this case. However, it does seem to me that, even as a bare trustee, Mr McGuinness would have standing to assert a title to the property.

EQUITABLE TITLE 
I come now to the final issues in the case, which essentially concern equitable titles to the land, aside from any consideration of possessory title.

Submissions 
In substance Miss Sofroniou submitted that, even though rectification would strictly involve joining all the people who have been interested in the land back to the time of the first mistake, the only people now interested in the land were before the Court, the intention of both of them, when they acquired the land, was clear, and that therefore it was appropriate to regard each as having a good equitable title to the land which they believed they were buying. This would give the Barretts exactly what they bargained for, and would give Mr McGuinness exactly what he bargained for.

Furthermore, Miss Sofroniou submitted, for Mr McGuinness to seek to get for himself something of greater value than he bargained for and paid for, and by that very act to take from the Barretts what they bargained for and paid for, is so unconscionable that equity would impose a constructive trust on Mr
McGuinness, if he sought to take that course.

Indeed, Miss Sofroniou submitted that course was sufficient to fall within the fraud exception of <case> of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/). Miss Sofroniou referred me to Bahr versus Nicolay (No 2) <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 604] and Oh Hiam versus Tham Kong (1980) 2 BPR 97130. She also submitted that Sistrom versus Uhr indicated that Mr McGuinness could not rely on his legal title for indefeasibility against the Barretts' equitable title.

Mr Radojev submitted that even if the matters relied on could give rise to an equitable title, the facts fell far short of what was necessary to overcome the indefeasibility of title given by the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/).

Decision 
In my opinion it is clear, and indeed never denied, that Mr McGuinness intended to purchase No.83 and paid for No.83. It is clear that No.83 is a substantially less valuable property, and I readily infer that the price paid by Mr McGuinness was a price referable to the much less valuable property
No.83 Gaffney Street.

On the other hand, when Mr and Mrs Barrett made their purchase, I infer that they intended to acquire No.79, and that they paid a higher price than would have been appropriate for No.83. They paid a price referable to and appropriate for the greater value of No.79. They are now seeking to have the position rectified to one which would give effect to precisely what the parties originally intended. There is nothing in the history of the case which counts in any way against the fairness of that course.

In those circumstances, it does seem to me that for Mr McGuinness to seek to take advantage of the registered title to gain for himself some valuable property which he never paid for, and deprive Mr and Mrs Barrett of a valuable property which they did pay for, is unconscionable and is a matter appropriate for the remedy of constructive trust.

Furthermore, although to his credit Mr McGuinness has not sought to make a dishonest case on the facts, in that he has at all times admitted what his true intention was when he purchased No.83, in my opinion the attempt to acquire No.79 and to deprive Mr and Mrs Barrett of No.79 can be regarded as dishonest and a matter of moral turpitude, and as therefore bringing the case within the fraud exception to s.43.

For those reasons, in my opinion Mr and Mrs Barrett do have a good equitable title to the land, quite apart from any consideration of possessory title, which they can assert against Mr McGuinness. I would propose in these proceedings to make a declaration substantially to that effect.
 (Counsel addressed on costs.) 
HIS HONOUR: In matter No. 2927 of 1996, I dismiss the proceedings.

I order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings.

In No. 3113 of 1996, I declare that the plaintiffs have a good equitable title to 79 Gaffney Street Broken Hill, that is, to the property comprised in Folio
Identifier 1/317207, which they can assert against the defendant, notwithstanding his registered title.

I give leave to the plaintiffs to apply for injunctive relief, if that should become necessary.

I order that the defendant pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings.

I give leave to the plaintiffs to apply that those costs be on an indemnity basis, any such application to be made within 28 days.

Exhibits may be returned after 28 days.
 * * * 
