

Regina versus Agr Matter No Cca 60563/97 [1998] NSWSC 381 (24 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 29 September 1998 
REGINA versus AGR /97 July 1998 
Mason P, B M James J, Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal from District Court Gibson DCJ 
FILE NO/S: 060563/97 
DELIVERED: 24 July 1998 
HEARING DATE: 24 July 1998 
PARTIES: Regina versus AGR 
JUDGMENT OF: Mason P, Grove, James JJ 
COUNSEL: 
APPLICANT - P Byrne SC/P Hamill 
RESPONDENT - L M B Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: 
APPLICANT - Coyne & Whittemore 
RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: Leave to appeal granted and appeal upheld 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Sentencing - child sexual assault - offender himself sexually abused as child and such abuse contributing to commission of offences - whether sentence is manifestly excessive 
No of pages: 18 
JUDGMENT 
B.M. JAMES J: The applicant AGR has applied for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him in the District Court by his Honour Judge Gibson of Queen's Counsel on 9 October 1997. 
In a trial conducted in May 1997 before his Honour the jury had found the applicant guilty on three charges of committing child sexual assault offences against his younger brother CR. These offences were two offences of indecent assault under section 81 of the Crimes Act, as it then stood, committed when
CR was 9 years old and 10 years old respectively, and an offence of buggery committed when CR was 14 years old. The maximum penalty for each offence of indecent assault was 5 years penal servitude and the maximum penalty for the offence of buggery was 14 years penal servitude.

After the applicant had been found guilty of these three offences he pleaded guilty to a number of further offences, which were summarised by the sentencing judge in his remarks on sentence as follows:
Indecently assaulting JPR, a brother of the applicant and CR.
Indecently assaulting BS. A further matter of indecently assaulting BS was taken into account in sentencing the applicant, pursuant to the Criminal
Procedure Act.
Two offences of having sexual intercourse with JAV, a child under the age of 10 years, namely 7 years. Two further matters of having sexual intercourse with JAV and an offence of indecently assaulting JAV were taken into account in sentencing the applicant. The maximum penalty for having sexual intercourse with a child under the age of 10 years is penal servitude for 20 years.
Two offences of indecently assaulting TMV, TMV being a child under the age of 10 years or under the age of 16 years at the time of the offences. Four further offences committed against TMV were taken into account in sentencing the applicant.

His Honour also sentenced the applicant for an offence of committing an act of indecency on PJH, even though this offence is not specifically referred to in his Honour's remarks on sentence.

The applicant had been on bail until he was found guilty by the jury and his
Honour made the sentences he imposed on 9 October 1997 commence from 21 May , the day on which the jury returned their verdicts.

The sentences the sentencing judge imposed effectively totalled 16 years, with total fixed terms or minimum terms of 12 years. His Honour achieved this result by imposing a fixed term of penal servitude for 6 years from 21 May to 20 May 2003 for the offence of buggery committed against CR, a fixed term of penal servitude for 4 years from 21 May 2003 to 20 May 2007 for an offence of having sexual intercourse with JAV and a sentence of 6 years consisting of a minimum term of 2 years from 21 May 2007 to 20 May 2009 and an additional term of 4 years from 21 May 2009 to 20 May 2013 for an offence of committing an indecent assault on TMV and by making all the sentences for all the other offences fixed terms to be served concurrently with the fixed terms or the minimum term I have already referred to. As I have said, the sentences imposed by his Honour effectively totalled 16 years, with fixed terms or a minimum term totalling 12 years, and it is not suggested that there is any significance in how his Honour chose to construct the sentences he imposed so as to arrive at the overall result.

In his remarks on sentence, the sentencing judge referred briefly to the facts of the offences which had been the subject of the trial. The victim CR was a younger brother of the applicant, being some 10 years younger than the applicant. The counts of indecent assault were "representative" counts. The applicant had indecently assaulted CR many times from the time CR was 3 years old up until the time of the commission of the act of buggery when CR was 14 years old. The act of buggery charged was the only act of buggery which had been committed on CR. After it was committed CR refused to allow the applicant to abuse him sexually any further. The acts of indecent assault consisted of placing the applicant's penis between CR's buttocks, without penetrating the applicant, and ejaculating. The act of buggery occurred when the applicant held CR by the shoulders, so that he was face down, and then anally penetrated him.

In his remarks on sentence, the sentencing judge did not canvas the facts of the offences committed against the other victims. His Honour did note that the applicant had been a friend of the family of JAV and that JAV had been entrusted to his care so that the commission of the offences against JAV represented a betrayal of trust. This court has been supplied with copies of the documents relating to offences committed against the other victims, which were before the sentencing judge. These documents show that the conduct engaged in against the victims other than CR consisted of numerous acts of fondling or rubbing the victim's penis, placing the victim's penis in the applicant's mouth, rubbing his penis against the victim's buttocks and in the case of JAV, three acts of actual anal penetration of the victim.

His Honour noted generally the number of offences (there were 17 and some of the counts were representative counts), the number of victims (there were six) and that the offences had occurred over a period of at least 23 years. The ages of the victims ranged from about 6 years to 15 years.

At the time of sentencing the applicant was 47 years old and single. He was a qualified electrician who had been in steady employment for many years. He had virtually no previous criminal record. In the proceedings on sentence the applicant himself gave evidence and he adduced evidence from two of his sisters and two of his brothers. A number of reports by psychologists and by a psychiatrist were admitted into evidence and two psychologists, Mr Taylor and
Dr Walker, gave evidence.

The applicant gave evidence in the proceedings on sentence that while he was a child he had himself been sexually abused by his own father. The sentencing judge, who had heard the applicant give evidence at the trial in which he had denied his guilt, formed the opinion that the applicant's evidence was unworthy of belief, except where it was corroborated. However, each of the applicant's sisters and brothers who gave evidence in the proceedings on sentence, gave evidence to the effect that he or she had also been sexually abused by their father when they were children and, in the light of this evidence, his Honour accepted the applicant's evidence that he had been sexually abused by his own father when he was a child and that he had had a dysfunctional childhood. His Honour considered that the fact that the applicant had himself been sexually abused while a child and had had a dysfunctional childhood could provide an explanation for the applicant's conduct in committing the offences and was relevant to determining the applicant's prospects of rehabilitation but in his Honour's opinion did not otherwise mitigate the applicant's culpability.

As regards remorse and prospects of rehabilitation, his Honour noted in his remarks on sentence that the applicant had given evidence in the proceedings on sentence that, at the time the offences were committed, the applicant, while knowing that what he was doing was legally wrong, did not believe that he was harming anyone. His Honour accepted that by pleading guilty to a number of the offences, the applicant had shown some remorse. However, his Honour did not accept that the applicant truly felt any remorse for what he had done to
CR. His Honour considered that the applicant was "in denial" in relation to the offences committed against CR. His Honour did accept that the applicant, according to evidence from the psychologists, had taken the first big step in his rehabilitation, by beginning to comprehend that his behaviour had been wrong and harmful to the victims, although his Honour considered that the applicant would require a long period of treatment.

The principal submissions which have been made by counsel for the applicant in support of the application for leave to appeal, either in written submissions or in oral submissions, can be summarised as follows.

It was contended that the objective facts of the offences were not within the worst class of case, because of the absence of evidence of violence, of breaches of trust or of the applicant engaging in the organised abuse of children for sexual purposes, that is being part of some paedophile organisation.

It is true that there was no evidence of violence but there was evidence in some cases of physical constraint by the applicant, for example, by the applicant holding down the victim. The applicant was, of course, the older brother of two of the victims and his Honour expressly found that there had been a breach of trust in the case of the offences committed against JAV.

Counsel for the applicant also referred to a number of miscellaneous subjective factors in favour of the applicant, including: ) The applicant's pleas of guilty to many of the offences, which were significant, as his Honour indeed found, as reflecting some remorse, as saving the complainants the distress of giving evidence, as saving the community the cost of trials and as being part of the first big step in the applicant's rehabilitation, ) The applicant had suffered a significant head injury when he was 20 years old. According to Mr Taylor, the applicant's psychological test results were consistent with his having suffered some brain damage in the accident.
However, as his Honour noted, the sexual assaults on CR had commenced before the time of the accident and after the time of the accident the applicant had been able to complete his apprenticeship as an electrician and to work for many years as an electrician.
 ) The applicant's good employment record and the absence of any relevant criminal record.
 ) Except in the case of CR, the sentencing judge had found that the applicant had shown remorse.
 ) The applicant's sentence would be served on protection. This is, of course, a common feature of sentences for child sexual assault. According to an affidavit by the applicant's solicitor, which was provisionally admitted into evidence to be used only in the case of resentencing by this court, the applicant is currently being held in solitary confinement at Goulburn Gaol, where he is locked in 24 hours a day.

Further submissions by counsel for the applicant focused on the evidence that the applicant had himself been sexually abused as a child and on evidence from the psychologists about the effect of that abuse on the applicant's previous misconduct and on his likely future conduct. As I have stated earlier, the applicant gave evidence which, having regard to the similar evidence given by his brothers and sisters, the sentencing judge was prepared to accept, that he had been sexually abused as a child by his own father.

The applicant said in evidence that the first time he had told anybody that his father had sexually abused him was only about a month before the proceedings on sentence. He said, "I never really gave much thought to it before. The whole lot of it really is a black spot in my memory. I do not like to bring up more than what I already have." 
The psychologists in their reports or in oral evidence expressed the opinion that the sexual abuse the applicant himself had suffered had contributed to his own criminal conduct. For example, Dr Walker said at page 7 of her report, "(The applicant's) sexually deviant behaviour is a product of a highly dysfunctional upbringing where he was sexually abused repeatedly, but not with accompanying emotional distress, by his father. This he considered not abnormal or evil." 
Professor Boettcher, a psychiatrist, in his report expressed the opinion: "(The applicant's) childhood did have a marked contribution to the offending." 
The psychologists also expressed the opinion that the applicant, by recently starting to talk to others, including psychologists, about the sexual abuse he himself had suffered as a child, after many years of ignoring or being in denial about this abuse, was beginning to gain some insight into what he himself had suffered and some insight into the harm he had caused others and that that was an important first step in his rehabilitation.

It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that his Honour had accepted the evidence that the applicant had been sexually abused as a child, that the sexual abuse suffered by the applicant could explain the applicant's own criminal misconduct and that the applicant had taken the first big step in his rehabilitation but that the sentencing judge had not given these matters any weight or sufficient weight. In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge said:- "The fact that he has had a dysfunctional childhood and been sexually assaulted himself may well explain the reason for his conduct over the twenty three-odd years involved and the fact that he has admitted this sexual molestation will go to the likelihood of his rehabilitation as I have said before, but in my view of the law it goes to no other matter in mitigation. It does not in my understanding go to excuse his moral culpability and in my opinion neither R versus Borne and R versus Letts support that proposition and indeed R versus Letts doubts it. It is significant in my opinion that no prior authority could be produced that clearly embraced the proposition that it reduced the moral culpability and I do not take it into consideration in that way." 
It was generally submitted by counsel for the applicant that having regard to all of the submissions made by him, the sentences imposed were manifestly excessive.

The court was referred to a large number of its own previous decisions on sentences for offences of child sexual assault. The possible relevance, in the sentencing of a child sexual assault offender, of evidence that the offender himself had suffered sexual abuse as a child, has been adverted to in a number of decisions of this court. In R versus Lett (27 March 1995) a case referred to by the sentencing judge in his remarks on sentence, where the applicant had killed a child he had sexually assaulted and the applicant had been convicted and sentenced for murder, Hunt CJ at CL, in giving the leading judgment, said at page 5:- "The applicant had been subjected to sexual abuse himself as a child, as already indicated, over a period of about four years commencing when he was eight years of age. This was described by the judge as the 'principal subjective factor', although I do not for myself see how it could properly be given very much (if any) weight. I accept that the psychiatrists see a link between the sexual abuse of a child by an offender and the sexual abuse which the offender himself had received as a child. The link no doubt helps to explain why the offender committed the offence, but it could hardly be said to excuse it. Minds may well differ as to whether such a history should mitigate the offence of child sexual abuse committed by the offender, but I am quite unable to see how it could possibly mitigate the offence of murder committed in order to cover up a child sexual assault committed or attempted by someone with such a history".

In his earlier judgment in R versus Parslow (unreported 16 July 1992) Hunt CJ at CL stated at page 6 of his judgment, without expressing any disapproval: "The sentencing judge had found in the applicant's favour that a more lenient than usual sentence should be imposed by reason of sexual abuse which the applicant had suffered in his own childhood." 
In R versus Balfour (unreported 31 July 1996) in which the applicant had been convicted of a sexual offence on an adult woman, there was evidence before the sentencing judge that the applicant had been systematically abused as a child by a male relative and also expert evidence that the sexual abuse had had a profound effect on the applicant's psychosexual development. The Court of
Criminal Appeal held that it was unable to conclude that the sentencing judge had made what was described as the error of not extending any leniency to the applicant because of the sexual molestation he himself had suffered as a child.

In R versus Barrett (unreported 3 March 1997) it had been accepted by the sentencing judge that the applicant had himself been regularly sexually assaulted while a child. However, on the facts of the particular case, the sentencing judge had been sceptical of the applicant's claim that the applicant, by reason of the sexual abuse he had himself suffered and of what he had been told by the perpetrators, had come to accept that there was nothing wrong with child sexual abuse.

In R versus AB (unreported 7 July 1997) the fact that the applicant, a teaching brother, had himself been molested by teachers in his adolescence and that that was likely to have left its mark on the applicant, was treated by the court as a circumstance favourable to the applicant. See the judgment of
Sperling J at page 38, Gleeson CJ agreeing with the judgment of Sperling J.

In my opinion, if it is established that a child sexual assault offender was himself sexually abused as a child and that that history of sexual abuse has contributed to the offender's own criminality, that is a matter which can be taken into account by a sentencing judge as a factor in mitigation of penalty as reducing the offender's moral culpability for his acts, although the weight which should be given to it will depend very much on the facts of the individual case and will be subject to a wide discretion in the sentencing judge. Evidence that a child sexual assault offender was himself sexually abused as a child can also be relevant to the offender's prospects of rehabilitation, as was recognised by his Honour. However, in holding that that was the only way in which it was open to him to take into account the evidence that the applicant had himself been sexually abused as a child, I consider that his Honour was in error.

I have already set out the objective facts and subjective circumstances of the applicant at length. A very heavy total sentence was clearly warranted and respect must be paid to the very wide sentencing discretion of the sentencing judge. However, I have reached the conclusion that the total effective sentence imposed by his Honour of 16 years did exceed the upper limit of a proper exercise of his Honour's sentencing discretion. In deciding that the offences committed by the applicant, serious as they were, did not warrant a total sentence of the magnitude of the sentence imposed by his Honour, I have taken into account, among other things, the absence of violence in the commission of the offences, even though in some cases there was a holding down of the victim; that the applicant did not occupy a position of trust and authority comparable to that, for example, of a school teacher; the entering of pleas of guilty to many of the offences, which his Honour acknowledged should work in favour of the applicant in a number of respects; the finding made by the sentencing judge that, except in the case of CR, the applicant had exhibited remorse; the finding that the applicant had himself suffered sexual abuse as a child, coupled with the evidence, which his Honour would appear to have accepted, that there was a connection between the applicant's own sexual abuse and dysfunctional childhood and the commission by him of the offences; the evidence, which his Honour would appear to have accepted, that the applicant was, for the first time, confronting his own experience of sexual abuse and gaining some insight into it; and the finding made by his Honour that the applicant had taken "the first big step" in his rehabilitation.

While all cases depend very much on their own facts, I have also had regard to a number of previous decisions of this Court, including R versus Hill (7 July ), R versus Eagles (16 December 1993), R versus Barrett (3 March 1997), R v AB (7 July 1997), R versus Ryan (2 March 1998).

I am also of the opinion that this is a proper case in which to find special circumstances within [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). The special circumstances include that this is the applicant's first time in gaol, the need of the applicant for psychological treatment, and generally the need for a longer than usual period of supervised liberty.

In my opinion, leave to appeal should be granted, the appeal against sentence should be allowed and the sentences imposed on 9 March 1997 should be quashed.

May I say at this stage that what I propose are sentences totalling 12 years, with fixed terms or minimum terms totalling eight years. If my proposal is accepted, it will not matter how such a total is constructed and I have in fact attempted to devise a way of arriving at that result. It is not a matter without some difficulty, because of the multiplicity of the offences and of the sentences. That is a matter to which we can return but I would propose that sentences be imposed of a total effective length of 12 years, with total effective minimum terms or fixed terms of 8 years.

MASON P: I agree. 
GROVE J: I also agree 
JAMES J: There were three key sentences. The result I propose could be achieved by imposing a fixed term of penal servitude for six years from 21 May 1997 to 20 May 2003 for the offence of buggery admitted against CR. That is the present sentence. By imposing a sentence of a fixed term of penal servitude for four years for an offence of having sexual intercourse with JAV but making that sentence commence from 21 May 1997, so that it is served concurrently with part of the first sentence I have referred to and not cumulatively. Then by imposing a sentence of six years for an offence of aggravated indecent assault on TMV but dividing that six years into a minimum term of two years and an additional term of four years, the minimum term of two years would commence on 21 May 2003 and expire on 20 May 2005 and the additional term of four years would commence on 21 May 2005 and expire on 20 May 2009. 
I will repeat that. I propose that the fixed term of six years from 1997 to be reimposed or stand, that the sentence of four years that was to run from 2003 to 2007 be made to run from the date of sentencing and that the only sentence which is imposed cumulatively is a sentence of six years for committing an aggravated indecent assault on TMV; that that sentence should commence in 2003 and consist of a minimum term of two years running from 2003 to 2005 and an additional term of four years running from 2005 to 2009, that all the other sentences be confirmed as to their terms but that they should all be made to commence from the date of sentencing, that is from 21 May 1997.

MASON P: The Order of the Court will be as proposed by James J. * * * 
