

Attrill and Ors versus Richmond River Shire Council Nos. Ca 40229/93; Ed /91 Local Government - Statutes [1996] NSWSC 102 (7 May 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), CLARKE(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
Appeal, by leave earlier granted, from answer given in the Equity Division of the Supreme Court (Hodgson J) to a separated question arising in the course of a trial.
HRNG
SYDNEY, 9 November 1995 #DATE 21:12:1995 #ADD 7:5:1996 
Counsel for the Appellants    J J Garnsey QC with B E Kinsella 
Solicitors for the Appellants   Trenches 
Counsel for the Respondent    T F Robertson 
Solicitors for the Respondent
D M Jones and Associates
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P This appeal challenges the decision of Hodgson J that <case> of the
Local Government Act 1919 affords an Immunity to a local government authority acting in good faith insofar as its actions relate to the likelihood of land being flooded. See [(1993) 30 NSWLR 122 (SC)] 
Conflict of authority as to local council's immunity in flooding
Hodgson J reached his conclusion in determining two questions of law which he isolated for separate trial pursuant to Pt 31 r 2 SCR. By leave of the
Court earlier granted, this appeal is brought from his Honour's answer to the first question. There is no challenge to the answer to the second question which his Honour concluded adversely to the Council's submissions.
There is a conflict of authority within the Equity Division concerning the meaning and operation of <case>. Before Hodgson J reached his conclusion,
Rolfe J in Bennett versus Water Administration Ministerial Corporation,
Supreme
Court , unreported, 6 June 1991 expressed opinions concerning the meaning of <case> which are relevantly similar to those reached by Hodgson J in this case. However, after Hodgson J's decision Young J in Lawrence versus Kempsey Shire
Council (1995) Aust
Torts Reps 81-344 (SC, NSW) reached a different opinion, upon one view favourable to the interests of the present appellants. Hodgson
J does not appear to have been referred to Bennett. Young J does not appear to have referred to Hodgson J's opinion in this case.
In Douglas and Ors versus Bogan Shire Council and Anor [(1994) 82 LGERA 305 (SC],
NSW), 356ff Cole J, dealing with the consequences of the Nyngan floods of , did not have to reach a concluded opinion on the scope of <case>. On appeal to this Court, the issue was canvassed. However, having regard to its conclusion that negligence had not been established, the Court held that it was unnecessary for the Council to rely on the defence provided by <case>. See
Douglas and
Ors versus Water Administration Ministerial Corporation, Court of
Appeal , unreported, 12 September 1995; (1995) NSWJB 104.
 .
It is in this way that it falls to the Court now to resolve the differences of opinion expressed in the Division and to provide guidance as to the meaning of the section. It is still relevant that it should do so.
Although the 1919 Act has been repealed, the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) substantially re-enacts <case> as [s 733](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s733.html) of the new Act. The issue of the immunity provided by the section is thus still a live question. It is notorious that the temperate coastline and semi-arid range-lands of New South
Wales are prone to occasional flooding. Alterations to natural hydrology are the inevitable consequence of land use and development. Each flood, when it comes, is unique. To some extent, society tolerates the assumption that development and engineered structures upon land will, despite the best efforts of flood prediction, sometimes occasion damage and loss. The problem then becomes one of allocating the risk of such land development. Originally, such risks would be assigned by the law according to the merits of the case and the application to the facts of the causes of action relied upon: principally nuisance and negligence. It is into this natural and legal environment that s
A (and now <case>) intrudes.
 
Agreed facts: heightened road surface occasions "ponding"
Before Hodgson J, the parties agreed on the relevant facts upon which his
Honour was asked to provide answers to the two separated questions which were also agreed.
The facts reveal that Mr and Mrs Attrill and Mr and
Mrs Bilson (the appellants) are owners of dairy farms within the shire governed by the
Richmond River Shire Council (the Council).
The Council is the owner of Main
Road 149 between Koraki and Casino. The appellants' farms are situated between the southern bank of the Richmond River and the northern side of the road.
That bank is higher than the level of the bitumen surface of the road. Prior to the construction of the roadworks complained of, the area, including the appellants' farms, drained in a generally southerly direction by way of an existing continuous depression. The road crossed that depression in three places, at each of which a culvert had been constructed. The road has followed its present course for many years. It has been sealed since about 1960. Since before that time, the appellants' farms have been the subject of regular flooding by rainwater and floodwater. However, the latter escaped by overtopping the surface of the road and through the drains provided by the culverts under the road.
Following flooding of the Richmond
River, in 1984, the Council carried out works on the road, raising the surface of the roadway by an average of 150 mm.
It did not, however, carry out work on the culverts to alter their water bearing capacity. The purpose of the Council's work on the road was repairing and reconstructing the same by strengthening the road pavement and placing a new pavement overlay on the road". It was common ground that the Council did not carry out the roadworks "for any purpose associated with the effects of flooding of the plaintiffs' or any other land". Nevertheless, the Council relied upon matters disclosed in a document provided on discovery. This revealed that consideration had been given to deepening the water table to provide effective drainage from the new construction.
On 2 April the Richmond River flooded. On 3 April 1989, the river broke its banks in the vicinity of the appellants' properties and flooded their lands. This flooding was repeated on 27 April 1989. The appellants contend that the effect of the Council's action in raising the surface of the roadway was to increase the area of their land inundated by floodwaters retained by the roadway when those waters rose to a level higher than the former height of the lowest part of the surface of the road. In each of the floods, after the floodwaters had receded, the road "acted as a weir". The rate of the escape of the collected water from the appellants' land was "limited to the flow through the three culverts". The appellants contended (although the Council did not admit) that "as a result, the floodwaters trapped on the (appellants') farms by the increased height of the surface (of the road) took a longer period to subside and covered a greater area than was the case prior to the roadworks".
By summons, the appellants claimed orders from the Supreme Court that the
Council be restrained from carrying out work on the road in such a way as to cause floodwater and rainwater to "pond" upon their land; that it be restrained from permitting the road and its associated works to remain such as to cause water to "pond" in this way; that it be required, by order, to insert additional pipes under the road to provide for drainage required and that it pay damages and interest. To the Points of Claim which followed the summons, the Council filed a defence raising many grounds of resistance.
Amongst the defences was the contention that the Council had acted in good faith in exercise of its powers under the [Local Government Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) and relied on <case> "to exculpate it from any liability which otherwise might accrue".
 
Separated questions: answers and subsequent action
The two questions which Hodgson J was persuaded to isolate for determination prior to the hearing of the appellants' claims on the merits were: 
Can the (Council) rely on s582A of the [Local Government Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) as a defence to the (appellants') claim for damages caused by the (Council's) acts and omissions prior to the commencement of the proceedings? and 
Can the (Council) rely on <case> as a defence to the (appellants') claim for injunctions, prohibitory and mandatory, against acts and omissions after the commencement of proceedings which would constitute a nuisance at general law? 
Hodgson
J concluded that the answer to the first question was "yes". The answer to the second question was "no".
This second answer was contrary to the submissions put at trial by the
Council. No cross-appeal was brought to this Court to challenge that answer.
This Court is therefore not concerned to review Hodgson J's opinion in that regard. Nevertheless, the Court was informed, without objection, that since the determination of the separated questions by Hodgson J, and pending the outcome of these proceedings, the appellants have not had the trial of their claim on the merits. Furthermore, the Council, without any admissions, has in fact constructed new drains under the roadway to provide, in the future, a more efficient means of escape of floodwaters accumulated on the appellants' land during flood time. No doubt this action was stimulated by Hodgson J's answer to the second question. To this extent, the litigation has had some practical utility.
There remains the appellants' claim for damages as to the Councils' past conduct. In the way of that claim stands Hodgson J's determination that <case> of the [Local Government Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) provides immunity to the Council. It is that holding which it is the purpose of this appeal to re-examine.
 
Provisions of the [Local Government Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/)
The relevant provisions of <case> state: "582A (1) A council shall not incur any liability in respect of - 
Any adivice furnished in good faith by the council relating to the likelihood of any land being flooded or the nature or extent of any such flooding; or
Anything done or omitted to be done in good faith by the council insofar as it relates to the likelihood of land being flooded or the nature of extent of any such flooding.

Without limiting the generality of subs (1), that subsection applies to - the preparation or making of an environmental planning instrument or development control plan, or the granting or refusal of consent to a development application, under the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act, 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/); the granting or refusal of an application for the erection of a building under [Part XI](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/index.html#p11) or for the subdivision of land under [Part XIII](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/index.html#p13); the imposition of any condition in relation to an application referred to in paragraph (a) or paragraph (b); advice furnished in a certificate under [section 149](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/s149.html) of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act, 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/); the carrying out of flood mitigation works; and any other thing done or omitted to be done in the exercise of a council's powers, authorities, duties or functions under this or any other Act.

Without limiting any other circumstance in which the council may have acted in good faith, a council shall, unless the contrary is proved, be deemed to have acted in good faith for the purposes of subsection (1) if the advice was furnished, or the thing was done or omitted to be done, substantially in accordance with the principles contained in the relevant manual published under subsection (4) at that time.
 
For the purposes of this section, the Minister for Planning and Environment may, from time to time, publish in the gazette a manual relating to the development of flood liable land.

This section applies to and in respect of: the Crown, a statutory body representing the Crown and a public or local authority constituted by or under any Act; a
member or servant of a council or any other body or authority; a public servant; and a person acting under the direction of a council or of the
Crown or any such body or authority, in the same way as it applies to and in respect of a council.

This section applies to and in respect of any advice furnished or thing done or omitted to be done before the commencement of this section, as well as to and in respect of any adivice furnished or thing done or omitted to be done after the commencement of this section." 
The section was introduced into the Act in 1985. Amendments were made in 1991; but they are not material. One of the agreed facts contained in the Statement of Facts was that on 6 February 1987 there was published in the Gazette, a notice of publication of the New South Wales Government's Flood Plain
Development Manual. This was gazetted pursuant to <case> of the Act.
 
The primary judge's reasoning
Hodgson J recorded the conflicting submissions of the parties. He then came (at 127f) to his conclusions: "I accept that the section should be approached having regard to a prima facie view that the legislature does not intend to take away rights for redress for injury under the general law without reasonably clear words. I also accept that the Second
Reading Speech supports the view that the section was directed to dealing with a perceived mischief arising from the inhibition on councils in dealing with developments in flood-prone land, caused by the possibility of liability for damages in connection with such developments. ...

My view is that the protection in <case> certainly extends to protecting the council from liability for damages in respect of past events. ... It seems to me that the words insofar as it relates to' appearing in para (b) of <case> are words of wide imports ... (I)f something is done or omitted which in fact increases the likelihood of land being flooded, or effects in some significant way the nature or extent of such flooding, then it must, ipso facto, relate to these matters, and, of course, that is what the plaintiffs' allege in this claim. ... Furthermore, it seems to me that <case> suggests that the legislature intended to give a very wide scope to the provision. It seems to me further that the opening words of s 582A(3) 'without limiting etc' do suggest that good faith is not limited to consideration in good faith of flood related matters.

For these reasons it seems to me that s 582A would apply to this case, to the extent of giving a defence in relation to a claim for damages arising from events occurring before the commencement of the proceedings." 
The appellants' challenge his Honour's reasoning and conclusions. The
Council upholds them.
 
Arguments for a narrow construction of the section
In Deredge Pty Limited T/as Sunny Bank Plumbing Excavations v Sinclair [(1993) 30 NSWLR 174 (CA)] at 175, I remarked: "It used to be thought in some legal circles that the task of statutory construction was easy. The words of the statute have but one meaning. All the judge needed to do, to find that meaning, was to look carefully enough. Nowadays we realise that things are not so simple. The words used in a statute may be irremediably ambiguous. Parliament may not have given the slightest consideration to the application of the words to the circumstances that call for their meaning to be ascertained." 
So it is in the present case. There are a number of quite attractive arguments in support of the appellants' construction of the section. These were put with considerable force by the appellant's counsel: 
The construction favoured at first instance affords, so it was said, an intolerably wide immunity to a local authority. On its face this would be an odd result. A narrower construction should be adopted to avoid the injustice of depriving parties of their civil remedies against those (including in a local authority) who do wrongs to them. Restricted construction of statutes in the case of immunities to public authorities and office-holders is by no means new. It represents an established line of authority sanctioned by the High
Court of Australia. See Board of Fire Commissioners of New South Wales v
Arouin(1963) <case>; [109 CLR 105], 117. Before basic civil rights and remedies are taken away from citizens, it can be expected that Parliament will express its will in that regard in the clearest possible language. Republic of Tanzania v
Mbushuu (1994) 2 LRC 335 (HC, Tanz), 340. This approach to construction is adopted by courts not to frustrate the will of Parliament but out of respect for the institution and out of a conviction that it would not ordinarily intend to take away basic rights without saying so in the clearest possible language;
In a sense, the need for a strict construction in this case was emphasised by the very width of the language in which <case> is expressed. The words "in respect of" and "as it relates to" are traditionally words of very wide connection. If those words were given too ample a meaning, they would extend the scope of the immunity to an extremely wide ambit suggesting the need to confine the exemption by the techniques of statutory construction. See
Arthur versus Bokenham (1708) 11 Mod 148, 150; [88 ER 957], 958. Maxwell
Interpretation of Statutes, 12th ed (1969) 116f. The use in paras (a) and (b) of <case> of the word "likelihood" imports notions of substantial, real and not remote chance, thereby helping to restrict the ambit of the exemption to cases where the prospect of flooding is closely connected with the particular works for which the council claims immunity. Cf Boughey versus The Queen <case>; [(1986) 161
CLR 10], 380; 
A further reason for inferring a parliamentary intention to adopt a narrow construction to the section can be seen by contrasting the language of paras (a) and (b) of <case>. If the construction urged for the Council were adopted in respect of the words of para (b) a real question was posed as to what para (a) was intended to do. Thus if "anything done or omitted to be done" was, within the paragraph, to be covered by immunity, why had it been necessary for Parliament to specify, with apparent particularity, the provision of advice relating to the likelihood of land being flooded? That would be something "done or omitted to be done" "insofar as it relates to the likelihood of land being flooded". The fact that Parliament had provided separately as it did in para (b) suggests that something narrower was intended by the apparently wide language. The clue to the narrower category was given, so the appellants asserted, by the list of activities catalogued in <case>.
Generally speaking these were of an environmental planning or flood mitigation character. Insofar as para (f) appeared to embrace a wider class, it should, in turn, be read down, given its context;
Further textual support for the narrower construction could be found in the phrase "insofar as it relates" to the likelihood of land being flooded etc. Those words addressed the legislative attention to the extent only that the likelihood of flooding was within the contemplation of the Act done or omitted by the authority. By introducing the phrase "insofar as" Parliament had clearly signalled its intention to limit the scope of the exemption. That would conform to the purpose which would ordinarily be imputed to Parliament in such a case; 
The requirement of "good faith was also relevant. It suggested the need for positive consideration of the likelihood of flooding, otherwise good faith might not be established. This element was very important in the reasoning of
Young J in Lawrence. However, it is important to emphasise that, at this stage, when the Court is answering preliminary questions, it cannot try any disputed issue of "good faith". The appellants simply asserted that the statutory requirement of "good faith" indicated a narrower, rather than a wider, ambit to the immunity. Cf Mid Density Development Pty Limited v
Rockdale Municipal Council <case>; [(1993) 44 FCR 290 (FFQ], NSW), 356f, and
Above all, the appellants' relied upon the speeches in Parliament in support of the Bill which, when enacted, introduced <case> into the Act. There is no doubt (and Hodgson J accepted) that the Ministerial explanations to
Parliament laid emphasis upon the purpose of implementation of the government's policy in the management and development of flood liable land. If that were the sole purpose, it is clear that the Council's activities here, in improving the subject road, had nothing to do with the implementation of that government policy. See New South Wales Parliamentary Debates (Legislative
Assembly) 16 April 1985, 6023, 6024ff, New South
Wales Parliamentary Debates (Legislative Council) 22 April 1985, 6563, 6564f. In the former passage, the
Minister for Planning and
Environment (Mr Caff) said (at 6025): "... The Government is aware of the need to protect the need of individuals in such circumstances and, in addressing the indemnification issue, understands the importance of striking an appropriate balance between the rights of the individual on the one hand, and the problems being confronted by councils and other public authorities on the other. Accordingly the proposed amendment to the [Local Government Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) has been drafted in a way that requires those protected to act in good faith, and a measure of this good faith will be that they have acted substantially in accordance with the Government's policy at the time, that is the measure of protection provided is limited by compliance with State requirements or, in other words, responsible actions will be protected and irresponsible actions will not be protected. To assist in the interpretation and implementation of the policy, and in assessing the level of responsibility of those protected from time to time, the government will publish relevant flood plain manuals. Next week I shall be releasing the draft of the first manual for public, consultation prior to final adoption by the government." 
Seen in this light, the Bill, as explained to Parliament and as apparently intended by the Government, was confined to providing local authorities with a much narrower immunity than Hodgson J has held. It was this consideration which most significantly affected the reasoning of Young J who held: "for such protection subject to those protected having acted in good faith being that they must have acted substantially in accordance with the Government policy at the time as recorded in the Flood and Liable
Land Manual "
The appellants urged a similar construction on this Court. But the
Council was very critical of it.
 
Language intractable: large immunity
I have much sympathy for the submissions of the appellants. It is possible that the legislation was drafted more widely than the Government intended and more widely than was suggested to the Ministers when they introduced and explained it to the Houses of Parliament. This can sometimes happen when vested public interests, with inside influence in the Departments of State, bring that influence to bear on the drafting process and secure immunities which it was not the intention of the Minister to recommend to
Parliament. Certainly, on the face of things, what was said by Mr Carr and Mr
Hallon suggested a much narrower ambit of immunity than Hodgson J has found.
Nevertheless, for a number of reasons I have concluded that Hodgson J's construction of the legislation is the preferable one. My reasons are:- 
The duty of the Court, in giving meaning to <case> is to find the purpose of Parliament expressed in the statutory language. In Re: Bolton and Ors; ex parte Beane <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 514], 518, Mason CJ, Wilson and Dawson JJ observed: "(The Minister's) speech quite unambiguously asserts (a particular meaning) ... But this of itself, while deserving serious consideration, cannot be determinative; it is available as an aid to interpretation.
The words of the Minister must not be substituted for the text of the law. Particularly is this so when the intention stated by the Minister but unexpressed in the law is restrictive of the liberty of the individual. It is always possible that through oversight or inadvertence the clear intention of the Parliament fails to be translated into the text of the law. However unfortunate it may be when that happens, the task of the Court remains clear.
The junction of the Court is to give effect to the Hill of
Parliament as expressed in the law." 
Here the intention of the Minister was to restrict the immunity which took away the rights of citizens. The expressed views of the Minister were quite restrictive. That would be a reason for struggling to adopt a compatible construction. But if the text is clear, the duty of the Court is to the text.
Indeed, if the text is unambiguous, the Ministerial speech is not even available to throw doubt upon the clearly stated statutory purpose; 
The language used deploys the classic phrases of wide connection. This include "in relation to" "in respect of". In this circumstance, the Court has no authority to narrow the language by a judicial gloss unless the narrowing can be adopted conformably with the apparent purpose of the provision, derived from the words used or the structure and obvious intention of the section.
When, however, the language and structure of this section are examined, it is impossible to narrow the broad ambit of the words chosen. In particular, the inclusion in <case> of par (f) makes it impossible to confine the section to environmental planning decisions. The inclusion of par (f) in sub-s (2) also provides the answer to why it was necessary to include par (a) if par (b) was to be given effect according to its literal terms.
The style of drafting adopted involves apparent overlap. Just as, upon one view, it would have been sufficient in sub-s (2) to express the idea in par (f) so in sub-s (1) it would have been sufficient to express the idea in par (b). But the drafter has chosen a mixture of specific and general language. In sub-s (2) he has made it plain that he is not intending to limit the generality of sub-s (1);
Although Young J was greatly affected in Lawrence by the Ministerial reference to the Flood Liable Land Manual, there are difficulties in his
Honour's reasoning. First, there is no attempt to control the opening paragraphs by the applications of the principles in the Manual. All that the section does by sub-s (3) read with sub-s (4) is, without limiting other circumstances, to deem a Council's action as being "in good faith" if it has conformed to the Manual. The element of "in good faith" is but one ingredient in the immunity provided by <case> both of its paragraphs. Proof by reference to the Manual is but one means afforded to establish the existence of good faith readily. It would have been comparatively easy, and in accordance with the Ministerial statements to Parliament, to have limited the immunity in <case> to acts done in furtherance of the principles contained in the relevant Manual. It is easy to see how, upon a quick reading, a
Minister might have thought that this is what the section was doing. But it is not what the section says. It would involve a mangling of the language and structure of the section to superimpose compliance with the principles of the
Manual upon the provision of the immunity in <case>. Such a construction is beyond the legitimate function of judicial interpretation of legislation.
There is a further problem pointed to by the Council. The Manual, as a matter of fact, was not gazetted until 6 February
Yet the section commenced on January 1986. Upon the appellants' argument there was therefore a gap during which, although the section appeared to operate, there was no relevant government policy to which the immunity could attach. This problem is not addressed in the reasoning of Young J in Lawrence. See also Leon Fink Holdings
Pty Limited v. Australian Film Commission [(1979) 141 CLR 672], 678. 
A number of phrases in the section also indicate that it was intended to have a wide ambit and that this was deliberate.
I have already referred to the traditionally wide words of connection "in respect of" and "relates to" (see
Tooheys Limited and Ors v Commissioner of Stamp Duties <case>; [(1961) 105 CLR 602], , 622) but there is also the very wide ambit of the operation of the immunity in sub-s (5). Most particularly, there is the unusual provision in sub-s (6) that the section will have retrospective operation. Rightly, this is a wholly exceptional provision. Retrospective legislation, and particularly retrospective immunities, are frowned upon. Yet this is what Parliament has enacted. The Court must give effect to that purpose; 
Apart from the obvious width of the language in which <case> is expressed the Council supported its policy. By the time the Bill which introduced the section was before the State Parliament, this jurisdiction had had five years experience with a novel system of planning and development decision making,
There was sufficient confidence in the ability in the system to regulate, in the public interest, the engineering impact of development for the Government to accept, and recommended policy to Parliament, a policy substituting regulatory consideration of flooding risks for the availability of potential verdicts at common law if negligence could be shown. The availability of a remedy in nuisance was said to problematical. See Van Son v. Forestry
Commission of New South Wales [(1995) 86 LGERA 108], 120ff I am inclined to think that this is a retrospective justification of an overwide immunity, taking away the rights of citizens in terms more ample than was explained to the Ministers, and by then to Parliament. But if the language of the Act is plain, this
Court cannot limit that language by reference to policy considerations which appeal to it; and 
Finally, in response to the
Court's questions directed to the apparently overly ample scope of the immunity upon the Council's construction of <case>, the Council pointed to the necessity to establish that its conduct was done "in good faith". This imported, so it was argued, not only subjective honesty but compliance with objective standards such as advertence to the purpose to which the power or function was exercised and a real attempt to exercise that power or function for such purpose. Various other limitations, inherent in the statutory scheme, were also acknowledged ("The conduct engaged in is immunised only in so far as it relates to the likelihood of land being flooded or the nature or extent of the flooding ... The immunity is lost if the conduct impugned does not affect the flooding risks or their consequences. The third restriction .... deals with past conduct and therefore only prevents action for damages and not actions to remedy future conduct ... It does not immunise private conduct nor does it affect public rights which are generally enforceable absence special damage where environmental harm is involved). See eg <case> [Enviornmental Offences and Penalties Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/eoapa343/) and <case> [Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/).") It is unnecessary to determine the suggested limitations or their scope. Certainly, the requirement of "good faith" provides an important and express control on the ambit of the immunity which will repay curial attention. See Mid Density (above); Douglas, 356ff 
Conclusions and orders
The result is, that in my opinion, Hodgson J reached the correct conclusion upon the meaning and application of <case>. The appellants' attempt to limit the application of the immunity in the section to that which was explained by the Ministers to Parliament cannot be supported in the language of the statute as enacted.
This conclusion requires that the appeal from
Hodgson J's answer to the first separated question be dismissed. A question arises as to the costs. At trial, the Council did not seek costs. But in this Court it did.
The issue raised in the appeal is one of importance to local government.
There has been a division of opinion within the Supreme Court. The determination of that dispute in this Court is in the public interest.
Doubtless that is why leave was granted. To a very real extent, the uncertainty about the scope of the section arose from the disharmony between its wide language and the narrower purpose explained by the Ministers to
Parliament. The passage of the new [Local Government Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/) was not utilised as an occasion to remove the uncertainty. In the circumstances, I consider that each party should bear their own costs of the appeal.
Accordingly the orders which I propose are: 
The appeal be dismissed; and 
Proceedings returned to the Equity Division of the Supreme Court for trial.
JUDGE2
CLARKE JA I agree with the reasons and orders of Kirby P. I should indicate that I also agree with the reasons of Hodgson J.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA Although it is not clear that this was so, the two questions which were posed as preliminary questions of law to be determined by Hodgson J would tend to indicate that it was the belief of those advising the Appellants, that what were said to have been the actions of the Respondent in raising the level of the carriageway of
Main Road 149 in the vicinity of the Appellants' lands - and, so it was said, thus, in times of flooding, causing flood waters to pond on the Appellants' lands - constituted what, in the absence of favourable answers to those questions, would be an actionable nuisance on the part of the
Respondent, in respect of which the Appellants would be entitled to an award of damages in respect of past events and an injunction directed towards preventing the occurrence of further ponding in the future.
If this were the belief of those advising the Appellants, I remain to be persuaded that that belief was well founded: on the contrary, if my understanding of the basic facts, and of the general law, be correct, it seems to me that that belief was ill-founded.
As will be apparent from what has been written by Kirby P in his Judgment, the slope of the Appellants' lands is in a general southerly direction down towards Main Road 149, so that, when the Richmond River in the vicinity of the
Appellants' lands floods, the floodwaters drain from its southern banks across the Appellants' lands towards Main Road 149 and beyond - although it seems to be said that much of the water draining away does so by way of a continuous depression, it does not seem to, nor could it, be suggested that that depression constitutes a natural non-perennial watercourse (see, for example,
Gartner versus Kidman ((1) <case>; [(1961-1962) 108 CLR 12] If this be so, then, as I understand the law, although the Respondent, as a lower landholder, has no cause of action against the
Appellants, as higher landholders, because of the natural unconcentrated flow of floodwaters from their land, it was, and is, not bound to receive it - on the contrary, it might put up barriers and pen it back, notwithstanding that so doing might damage the Appellants' lands, at all events if it uses reasonable care and skill and does no more than is reasonably necessary to protect its enjoyment of its own land (see Gartner v
Kidman ((3) (supra) at 47-49 per Windeyer J); see also Gerrard versus Crowe ((4) AC 395, 397-400 per Viscount Cave); Elston versus Dore ((5) <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR ], 488-491 per Gibbs C.J., Wilson and Brennan JJ.)
However, against the possibility that my understanding of the facts, or of the general law, be incorrect, I agree - for the reasons given by both Hodgson
J and Kirby P - that the provisions of s.582A of the
Local Government Act 1919 (now [s.733](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/s733.html) of the [Local Government Act 1993](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lga1993182/)) are apt to provide the Respondent with immunity in respect of a claim for damages arising out of the exercise of its powers.
 .
I agree that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/102.html  
