

Natasha Docker versus Achievement Concepts P/L and Anor [1997] NSWSC 81 (13
March 1997) 
Natasha DOCKER versus ACHIEVEMENT CONCEPTS P/L & ANOR /96 
Thursday 13 March 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT - (On admissibility of reports by Dr Dalton and Dr Bodel - see p 466 of transcript).
 
HIS HONOUR: This morning Mr Steele QC, for the second defendant, tendered a report of Dr Seamus E Dalton, a specialist - among other things - in Sports Medicine, the significant part of which deals with the practicability and advisibility of mats having been placed under the spider web at the time this exercise was undertaken by the plaintiff. 
The effect of the report is that mats could have been placed under the web and would have reduced the risk of injury to the plaintiff. The report is dated 12
March, yesterday, and was served on the first defendant in the early afternoon of yesterday. Mr Stitt QC, for the first defendant, objects to it on the basis of late service and what is asserted to be consequential prejudice to his client.

These proceedings were commenced by the plaintiff against the first defendant in the District Court in April 1993. One of the particulars of negligence alleged was the failure to place matting, or some similar material, on the ground beneath the spider web. It was not until April of last year that the second defendant was joined to the proceedings in the District Court, and in
June of last year the proceedings were removed into this court. As it happens, the plaintiff in the proceedings before me led no expert evidence touching on the question of placement of mats beneath the spider web.

The matter was pursued by Mr Steele, on behalf of the second defendant, in cross-examination of witnesses called by the first defendant in its case. The first defendant has now closed its case. Mr Stitt, for the first defendant, has informed me that if the report of Dr Dalton were admitted it would be necessary for him to seek an adjournment to obtain expert evidence of his own upon the matter, and for him to seek leave to reopen his case for the purpose of leading that evidence, if it were available. To that course, of course, Mr
Steele would not object. Mr Steele did produce to me a report of Dr James
Bodel, orthopaedic surgeon, which had been served by the first defendant but which was not, in fact, tendered in the proceedings.

In the course of that report, Dr Bodel makes reference to the provision of gym mats and expresses the view, in effect, that they may not have had much cushioning effect upon the plaintiff's fall. What is significant, however, is that it is not apparent from that report that Dr Bodel has the knowledge and experience of mats of that kind and, in particular, of their nature and their stability, which is exhibited by Dr Dalton in his report. Accordingly, it appears to me to be reasonable that Mr Stitt should complain that he is not at present in possession of relevant expert evidence on this matter, and would need an adjournment of the proceedings to obtain it.

The service of the report of Dr Dalton, it need hardly be said, is well outside the time required by the rules. This case is now in its eighth day of hearing and has gone well beyond the estimate which was placed upon it when it was listed. The hearing commenced in December of last year and has been resumed this month part-heard.

I have a little time available to devote to the continuation of the hearing next week, but I anticipated that would be little more than would be necessary to deal with final addresses. If the matter were adjourned on Mr Stitt's application, following my admission of Dr Dalton's report, it seems unlikely that the case could be completed next week. If that were so, my commitments are such that it could not be resumed until well towards the end of this year.
Such a delay would be regrettable indeed. It need hardly be said that whenever the matter is completed, there will inevitably be further delay before a judgment can be delivered, as the case raises issues of no little difficulty and certainly is not an appropriate one for an ex tempore judgment.

To balance the competing interests of the expeditious conclusion of the matter against the opportunity of the parties to lead any evidence relevant to the issues raised in it I have not found easy at all, but upon reflection I have come firmly to the conclusion that the balance must lie in favour of completing the matter without further undue delay. It is for those reasons that I reject the tender of the report.

I perhaps should add that Mr Webb QC, for the plaintiff, supported the admission of the report and indicated that if it were admitted he would rely upon it.
 (NOTE: Reports of Dr S Dalton 12/3/97 and Dr J G Bodel 27/2/97 Marked for
Identification 10.) * * * 
