

Kempsey Shire Council versus Van Park Pty Limited Nos. Ca40086/91 and
Dc24129/82 [1995] NSWSC 91 (19 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
SHELLER(1), POWELL(2) AND COLE(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1 September 1995 #DATE 27:9:1995 #ADD 19:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:         M Cashion 
Counsel for the Respondent:     
T S Hale 
Solicitors for the Appellant:       Howard, Sheridan,
Cooney,
Harvey 
Solicitors for the Respondent:       Allen Allen and
Hemsley
ORDER
Appeal dismissed.
JUDGE1
SHELLER JA  I agree with Cole JA.
JUDGE2
POWELL JA The facts which gave rise to these proceedings in the District
Court, and which give rise to the appeal from the Judgment delivered by Grogan
DCJ on 21 January 1991, are set out in the Statement of Agreed Facts which has been reproduced by Cole JA in his Judgment which I have seen, and read, in draft form.
Although, both at first instance, and on appeal, the matter was argued, and although the Judgment of Cole JA, with which I understand
Sheller JA agrees, proceeds, upon the basis that the only question in issue was, and is, whether the Respondent was, at any relevant time, "a ratable person" in respect of the rate sued for, it seems to me, with respect to those who are of a different view, that the first question to be determined - albeit that it involves questions similar to those which were debated at first instance,and which have been debated on the hearing of the appeal - is, whether, or not, the land in respect of which the Appellant claimed to have levied a rate, which rate it sought to recover in the proceedings, was "ratable land" for the purposes of the Local Government
Act 1919 ("LGA"). To those who would assert that such a question cannot be raised in a proceeding to recover unpaid rates (LGA s.599 cf. LGA s.133(2); Hawkesbury Shire Council v. Hills (1); distinguishing Bankstown Municipal Council v. Fripp (2), and overruling
Mosman
Municipal Council v. Spain(3) and Bland Shire Council v. Rural Bank of New
South Wales (4)) I would but point out that, at all relevant times, LGA provided (inter alia) as follows: -  [(1988) 12 NSWLR 461]  (1929) 29 SR 492; [46 WN 174] "118 .....................

The council of a municipality or shire shall in each year make and levy a general rate on the land value of all ratable land in the area. ..................... 
All land in a municipality or shire (whether the property of the
Crown or not) shall be ratable except: - ..................... land which is vested in the Crown or in a public body or in trustees and is used for a public reserved; and .................... land owned by the Crown, not being - land hold under a lease from the Crown by any person for private purposes ................... 
Every rate shall, except where this Act otherwise expressly provides, be paid to the council by the owner of the land in respect of which the rate is levied. .................. 
Where the land is owned by the Crown and is held by any person under a lease therefrom, the rate shall be paid to the council by the holder of the lease: 
Provided that where a Crown lease is transferred by way of mortgage the council may not recover from the mortgagee unless an until it has failed to recover from the mortgagor. 
Where the land is owned by the council the rate shall, unless it is paid to the council by a person liable therefor, be paid by transfers from and to the appropriate fund under this Act. 
Where the land is owned by the council and is held therefrom by any person under a lease granted by the council for a term of not less than one year, the rate shall, if the lease contains an agreement by the lessee to pay municipal or local government rates, whether under those designations or under any words of description which would include municipal or local government rates, or to pay any equivalent sum expressly fixed by reference thereto, be paid to the council by the holder of the lease." and that, LGA s.4 - the interpretation section - at all relevant times provided: "4. In this Act, unless inconsistent with the context or subject-matter - ....................... 'Crown' includes any statutory body representing the Crown. 'Crown lands' has the same meaning as in the Crown Lands Consolidation Act ...................... 'Lease' includes an original or derivative lease under-lease or agreement for the same, and extends to any case where there is the relation of landlord and tenant, whether there is or is not any instrument in writing. 'Lease', in relation to Crown Lands, land owed by or vested in the Crown or land within a State forest, includes a license or permit.... 'Lessee' has a meaning corresponding with that of lease, and includes an original or derivative lessee or under-lessee and any person deriving title under or from a lessee or under-lessee..... ...................... 'Owner' .... in relation to land, includes every person who jointly or severally, whether at law or in equity: - is entitled to the land for any estate of freehold in possession; .......................
 and includes every person who by virtue of this Act is deemed to be the owner; 
Provided that the Crown shall be deemed to be the owner of - all lands of the Crown; and all lands vested in a statutory body representing the Crown. .....................
 'Owned', 'owning', and similar expressions have a meaning corresponding with that of owning. ..................... 'Ratable person', 'person ratable', and similar expressions include the
Crown in respect of ratable land owned by the Crown and mean - an owner in any case where this Act provides that a rate shall be paid to the council by the owner; a holder of a lease in any case where this Act provides that a rate shall be paid to the council by the holder of the lease." 
What I have recorded above will, I think, be sufficient to demonstrate that a person or corporation is not "a ratable person" for the purposes of LGA unless he is, or is deemed to be, the owner of ratable land within the meaning of LGA s. 132(1), or is the holder of a lease in any case - such as the Appellant claims this to have been - where LGA provided - as, for example, in LGA 145 - that the relevant rate should be paid to the council by the holder of the lease.
Before passing on, it should be noted that, notwithstanding the provisions of LGA s. 133(2), 599, as from 1970 (Sutherland Shire Council v.
Leyendekkers(5), not following Salmar Holdings Pty, Limited v. Hornsby
Shire
Council(6); Burns Philp Trustee Co Limited v. Blacktown Municipal Council(7);  [(1970) 91 WN 250]  [(1976) 1 NSWLR 531] 
Sutton v. Blue Mountains City Council(8) there developed within the Court a practice which permitted applications to be made to the Court - originally in its Equity Division - for declarations as to the validity, or otherwise, of a rate which a council had purported to levy, and that, notwithstanding that an appeal had been lodged pursuant to the provisions of LGA s.133(2), or, notwithstanding that no appeal had been lodged within the time limited by LGA s. 133(2).
The first question to be determined thus is, whether the subject land is "ratable land" within the meaning of LGA s. 132.
It is clear that, if as was submitted by the Appellant, the subject land is properly to be regarded as Crown Land, it does not follow that the subject land was not ratable - it would only have been so if - the onus, in my view, lying on the Respondent (Morris v. Woollahra Municipal Council (9); see also
Vines v. Djordjevitch ) - it were shown that the land did not fall within any of the exceptions set out in LGA s.132(1). It is, in my view, clear that, even if, as was submitted by the Appellant, the subject land was to be regarded as Crown Land, it was ratable for it has not been shown to fall within any of the exceptions - the only exception - LGA 132(1)(g)(i) - to which reference was made in the course of the argument was, and is, inapplicable for, if the relevant lease is to be regarded as a lease from the
Crown, it was, and is, a lease for private, and not public, purposes (Council of the Municipality of Randwick v. Rutledge (11); Brush Park  [(1977) 40 LGRA 51], 122(HC)  <case>; [(1955) 91 CLR 512] 
Bowling Club Limited v. Ryde Municipal Council(12); cf. Forster Homes for the
Aged Trust v. Great Lakes Shire Council (13); Cole v. Moree Municipal
Council(14)).
  [(1970) 19 LGRA 380]  [(1976) 1 NSWLR 577]  [(1976) 1 NSWLR 607]
This notwithstanding, the first question remains, whether, for the purposes of LGA, the land is to be regarded as Crown land.
If the reservation from sale, and the appointment of the appellant as trustee had taken place prior to the coming into operation of the amendments to the Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913 effected by the Crown Lands and
Other Acts (Reserves) Amendment Act 1974, and if what appears as if it may have been a common, if not the universal, practice followed in relation to such reserves pursuant to the provisions of the Public Trusts Act 1897, had been followed, the answer to this question may well have been rather easier to determine than it is in the present case. The Public Trusts Act 1897 provided (inter alia) as follows: - "2 (1) The Governor may, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a corporate body as trustees of land set apart, dedicated, or reserved (temporarily or otherwise) for any public purpose before or after the day on which this Act takes effect, and may grant to or vest the said land in such corporate body as aforesaid and may, in like manner, appoint the council for the time being of a municipality as trustees of such land as aforesaid whether the land be within or without the boundaries of the municipality, and may grant to or vest the said land in such council as aforesaid.
 ....................
Where land has, before or after the day on which this
Act takes effect, been set apart, dedicated, or reserved for any public purpose, under any Act, the Governor may by notice in the Gazette, and without any deed, grant, or other assurance, vest the land in the trustees for such estate, and with such powers and subject to such limitations and conditions as he may think fit.
 it having been, as I understand it, a common practice, prior to 1974, for reserved land to be vested in any trustee appointed to the provisions of s.3.
In such a case, clearly enough, an estate was vested in the relevant council, albeit that whether that estate was an estate in fee simple subject to defeasance, or whether it was an estate in fee simple upon a condition, could well have been the subject of significant debate (Attorney-General v.
Cochrane(15)).  [(1970) 91 WN 861], 871-872 per Mason JA (as he then was)
However, with the coming into effect of the amendments to the Crown Lands
Consolidation
Act 1913, effected by the Crown Lands and Other Acts (Reserves)
Amendment Act 1974 - which Act repealed (inter alia) the Public Trusts
Act - the basic scheme which appears to have operated under the provisions of the Public Trusts Act 1897 appears to have been altered.
Although the Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913 as so amended provided - ss. 37AAA, 37BBB - for prescribed lands to be vested in a council for an estate in fee simple in an appropriate case, that power appears to me to be far more limited than was the power vested in the Governor by the provisions of the Public Trusts Act 1897 s. 4, For present purposes, the new scheme under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913 - since repealed by the [Crown Lands Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla1989134/) [s.185](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cla1989134/s185.html), Sch 7 - is sufficiently indicated by the following provisions of the Act as so amended: - "37P. (1) The Minister may, by notification published in the
Gazette, appoint a corporation, whether - a council; .......................
to be the sole trustee of a reserve.
......................
R. The trustees of a reserve appointed under this
Division are charged with the care, control and management of the reserve.
......................
X. (1) Except to the extent that the trustees of a reserve have an estate in fee simple in the reserve apart from this section, the trustees shall, for the purposes only of this Part and of any by-laws, be deemed to have that estate in the reserve.
The trustees of a reserve are not capable of alienating, charging, granting leases of, or licenses in respect of, or in any way disposing of the reserve or any part of the reserve except in accordance with Division 3.
.......................
The revocation of the setting apart, dedication or reservation as to the whole or a part of a reserve divests the trustees of any estate in the whole or that part of the reserve, as the case may be.
........................
(II). (1) The Governor may make by-laws for or with respect to - the care, control and management of any reserve; .........................
the regulation, control or prohibition or parking, camping or residing on any reserve, the making of charges for any such parking, camping or residing, and the collecting and receiving of any such charges; .........................
By-laws made for or with respect to the matters referred to in paragraph (i) of subsection (1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in section 37X or any other provision of this or any other Act.
.........................
(KK). (1) Where the trustees of a reserve have passed a resolution that it is desirable to sell, lease or mortgage the reserve or any part thereof upon specified terms or conditions; ............................
the trustees have applied in writing to the Minister for his consent to the proposed sale, lease or mortgage and have furnished a full statement of the facts relating thereto; and ............................
the Minister may give his consent in writing either as to the whole or as to part of the lands in respect of which the application was made, or may refuse to grant the application.
In the case of an application for consent to a sale or lease under this Division, the Minister may give his consent either generally by authorising the sale or lease subject to such conditions, restrictions, reservations and covenants, and in such manner and within such time, as he thinks desirable, or by approving of a particular contract for sale or lease.
............................
MM. (1) After obtaining the consent of the Minister under section
KK, and not otherwise, the trustees of a reserve may sell, lease or mortgage lands within the reserve according to the terms of the consent.
Notwithstanding subsection (1), where the Minister has given his consent generally under section
KK of the sale or lease of lands within a reserve, the lands shall not be sold or leased in pursuance of the consent unless the price agreed upon or rent reserved has been submitted to him and approved of by him."
In the present case, the Agreed Statement of Facts makes it clear that the subject lands were never vested in the Appellant pursuant to the provisions of ss. 37AAA, 37BBB of the Crown Lands Consolidation Act 1913, it following that the lease granted to the Respondent by the Appellant was granted, not by virtue of any estate vested in it, but, by virtue of the interaction of the provisions of ss. 37P, 37R, 37X, and by virtue of the consent given by the Minister pursuant to the provisions of ss. 37KK, 37MM of the Crown Land Consolidation Act
This being so, it seems to me that it is inescapable that, at all relevant times, the subject lands remained Crown lands and, not falling within any of the exceptions to LGA s. 132(1) were to be regarded as "ratable land" for the purposes of LGA.
It does not, however, follow that the Respondent was, at any relevant time, "a ratable person" for the purposes of LGA. That would be so only if, at the relevant time, the subject lands were to be held by any person in the circumstances contemplated by LGA s. 145(2).
With respect to the argument, so vigorously advanced by Mr. A. M. Bannon who appeared for the Appellant, that the provisions of LGA s.145(2) operate, not merely where a person holds a lease granted by the Crown, but also where a person holds a lease granted by a person or company, the title to grant which lease is derived from the Crown, it seems to me, with respect, that, both in the immediate context in which the word "therefrom" in LGA s.145(2) is used, and also in the context provided by LGA ss.145 and 146, that argument is to be regarded as untenable, it following, that, in the present case, notwithstanding that at all relevant times the subject land was Crown Land, it was not held by the Respondent under a lease from the Crown, and, accordingly, that the Respondent is not "a ratable person" for the purposes of LGA. I note that the view which I have just expressed is one which - although the questions then in issue were not identical with those which have required the decision of the Court on this Appeal - appears to be consonant with the approach taken by Waddell J (as he then was) in Forster Homes for the Aged
Trust v. Great Lakes Shire
Council(16) and Cole v. Moree Municipal Council(17), when, as the Judge of the Land and Valuation Court, he dealt with appeals pursuant to the provisions of LGA s.133(2) in respect of rates which the Respondent councils had sought to levy on Crown lands which had been reserved from sale.
(supra) (supra)
This being so, I agree that the present appeal should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
COLE JA The question for determination on this appeal is: "Whether, under the Local Government Act 1919, as amended, a person being a lessee from a Council of Crown land of which the Council was trustee, was a rateable person."
Although the
Local Government Act 1919 has now been repealed, the Court was informed that the matter was of general importance.
FACTS: The following facts were agreed; 
The land in respect of which the plaintiff claims rates is within the
Kempsey Shire. 
The land is unalienated Crown land known as Reserve 89265. It was reserved from sale for public purposes pursuant to Section. 28 of the
Crown
Lands Consolidation Act 1913, by notification dated 9th August, 1974 published in the NSW Government Gazette No. 95 of 9th
August, 1974 at pages 3130 and . There has never been any Crown grant of the land for any interest to the plaintiff, the defendant, the Macleay Shire Council or to anyone else. 
BY an appointment dated 6th September, 1974, the Minister for Lands in pursuance of the provisions of Section 37P of the Crown Lands Consolidation
Act appointed the Council of the Shire of Macleay sole trustee of Reserve 
BY indenture Of Lease ("the Lease") made the 31st day of January 1975 the
Council of the Shire of Macleay leased Reserve 39865 to the defendant for a term of 30 years. The consent of the Minister of Lands under Section 37KK of the Crown Lands Consolidation Act to the Lease was given by a delegate of the
Minister. The lease was registered in the General
Register of Deeds No,. 852
Book 3131 on 29th June, 1975. 
The Council of the Shire of Macleay made a Development Agreement dated st January, 1975 with Van Park Pty Limited relating to Reserve 89265 and also to other land, being Headland Reserve No, 82364 ("the
Development
Agreement"). The consent of the minister of Lands under Section 37KK to the
Development Agreement was given by a delegate of the Minister and endorsed on the Development Agreement. 
The Council of the Shire of Macleay was amalgamated with the Kempsey
Shire Council and the Macleay River County Council on 1st October 1975 to constitute the Kempsey Shire Council. 
Since the Lease was granted the defendant has occupied Reserve 89265 and has used the land as a caravan park and camp site, and as a shop. The defendant has carried on business thereby hiring out caravan sites and camp sites in the reserve, by selling goods to campers and others from the shop, and by hiring out goods used by campers and surfers. The business has been conducted for the private profit of the company, and the rent payable to the
Council varies with the gross receipts of the business. The defendant exercises practical control over the land leased, so that it is all used for the purpose of the caravan and camp site park and associated shop and hire services.
The public are not able to use the land leased except by hiring caravan and camp site Parks. Caravan sites and camp sites are occupied by members of the Public who have lured the sites from the defendant, together with families or other members of camping parties accompanying them. 
In addition, other members of the public come on to the land leased for the purpose of doing business at the shop, and before and during the year 1979 did in fact (but not as of right) cross the land leased while making their way between the beach and the town or visiting campers. Such Person had not at any time had any right to remain on the land or to camp there without the consent of the defendant. 
The Council of the Shire of Macleay did not levy rates on the Reserve for the year 1975, and the KeMPSeY Shire Council did not levy rates on
Reserve 89265 for the years 1976, 1977 or 1978. A valuation from the
Valuer-general had not been received by the Kempsey Shire Council (Or the
MacleaY Shire Council) prior to 1980. The Kempsey Shire
Council was as at 1976 and thereafter, the relevant rate authority with respect to the land. 
Kempsey Shire Council has levied rates on the subject land as follows:- 
Calendar year 1979     $2,490.00      $2,680.00      $2,748.50
Interest at 10% p.a.
to 31/12/86         $4,659.48
Interest at 17.75 % p.a.
$ 819.90 from 1/1/87 to 23/7/87 (and continuing) $13,397.88
The lease was attached to the statement of agreed facts and was before
Grogan DCJ and this Court.
On this appeal the Court is not concerned with the quantum of any claim but merely with the determination of the matter of principle. Grogan DCJ held that the respondent was not a rateable person, and dismissed the appellant's claim for rates.
THE ISSUE: Pursuant to s.559(3) of the Act, when a person is sued as here for rates, the defences permitted to be raised were limited. The only defence here raised was that contemplated by s.559(1)(c), namely, that the defendant respondent was not at any relevant time a rateable person in respect of the rate levied.
 "Rateable person" is defined in s.4 to : "Include the Crown in respect of rateable land owned by the
Crown and mean - ...
a holder of a lease in any case where this Act provides that a rate shall be paid to the Council by the holder the lease."
The appellant argued that the Act did so provide in S. 145(2) which was in the following terms: "Where the land is owned by the Crown and is held by any person under a lease therefrom, the rate shall be paid to the Council by the holder of the lease: ..."
Mr Cashion, who argued the matter for the appellant Council with admirable clarity and brevity accepted, correctly, that the word "therefrom" meant "the
Crown".
As the lease in question showed the lessor as the Council, and not the
Crown, the natural reading of s.145(2) results in the lease not being a lease "therefrom", meaning from the Crown, and thus the appellant would fail.
To escape this natural reading of the section, three propositions were advanced.
The first was that the wording of s.145(2), and in particular the use of the words "owned" and "held", suggest that the subsection is primarily concerned with matters of title and derivation of title rather than with the party named as lessor. It was argued that had the legislature been concerned primarily with the identity of the parties to the lease, it could have expressed the test contained in the subsection by reference to the words "lessor" and "lessee". Both those words are used elsewhere in the Act and are defined in s.4 of the Act.
However, the focus of the subsection is the leasehold estate held by the respondent and its derivation. That leasehold holding is derived from the Crown.
There are a number of answers to this submission. First, whilst it is true that different expressions may have been used, the legislature chose the expressions it did use. The expression "under a lease therefrom" is clear and unambiguous.
There is no warrant for giving the words a meaning other than their clear meaning. Second, s.145(2) is related to s.132(1)(g). By the latter section all land in a municipality, whether the property of the Crown or not, is rateable except: "Land owned by the Crown, not being - land held under a lease from the Crown by any person for private purposes."
Being a taxing statute, clear words are required to impose a taxation liability(1). This principle mitigates against torturing the language of s.145(2) to impose an impost. Third, the definition of "rateable person" and the provisions of s. 132 make clear that it is only a limited category of land which is rateable, namely, that described in s.145(2). Had the legislature intended to render rateable, land owned by the Crown but which was leased by a trustee holding the land on behalf of the Crown, or by a lessee or sub-lessee who held its interest otherwise than directly from the Crown, it could readily, and clearly, have so provided.  The Commissioner of Taxation v Westraders Pty Ltd <case>; [(1980) 144 CLR 55] at -60 per Barwick CJ.
The second submission was that if the position be otherwise than that asserted by the Council, there would be an anomaly. Such an anomaly would arise because a person who entered into a lease with the Crown in respect of
Crown land for use by the lessee as a caravan park would be a rateable person, whereas if a trustee under the Crown Lands Consolidation Act has been interposed as contemplated by s.37R and the land was leased by the trustee pursuant to s.37MM Crown Lands Consolidation
Act 1913, the lessee would not be a rateable person. It was argued that that could not have been the intention of the legislature.
Accordingly s.145(2) should be construed as thought the words "under a lease therefrom" read "under a lease from the Crown or trustee of Crown land".
There is no warrant for such an insertion in S. 145(2) simply to remove the asserted anomaly(2). That is so, additionally, for the reasons given in relation to the first submission.   B P Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd versus Shire of Hastings CLR 266 at 280.
The third submission depended on use of the first definition of "lease" in s.4 of the Act. "Lease" is there defined as follows: "Lease" includes an original or derivative lease underlease or agreement for the same, and extends to any case where there is the relationship of landlord and tenant, whether there is or is not any instrument in writing." .
This was said to highlight the derivative concept of a lease from the
Crown and show the intention of the legislature in relation to leases referred to in s.145(2).
This construction involves reading the expression "under a lease therefrom" as though it was the expression "under a lease derived therefrom".
There is no warrant for inserting the word derived. Further, the argument, were it correct, would make not only lessees but sub-lessees both rateable in respect of the same piece of land. That could hardly have been intended.
There is no reason to give the words in s.145(2) other than their natural meaning. In consequence Crown land the subject of a lease from trustees does not fall within the land described in s.145(2). It is thus not rateable in consequence of s.132(1)(g), as it does not fall within the exception provided by s.133(1)(g)(i).
Grogan DCJ was correct. The appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/91.html  
