

Toben versus Nationwide News Pty Ltd; Toben versus Mathieson (NoÂ 4) [2016] NSWSC (14 March 2016) 
Last Updated: 1 April 2016 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Plaintiff to pay Ms Milne's costs as agreed or assessed on the ordinary basis.  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - indemnity costs - where proceedings stayed for abuse of process  
JUDGMENT - EX TEMPORE
HER HONOUR: On 30 November 2015, I made an order staying these proceedings as an abuse of process: Toben versus Nationwide News; Toben versus Mathieson <case> On 3 December 2015, I determined an application for costs brought by all but one of the defendants: Toben versus Nationwide News Pty Ltd; Toben versus Mathieson (No 3) <case> I ordered that Dr Toben pay those defendants' costs of the notice of motion determined in the judgment (the abuse of process application) as agreed or assessed on the indemnity basis and that Dr Toben otherwise pay those defendants' costs of the proceedings as agreed or assessed on the ordinary basis.
There was no appearance for the remaining defendant, former Senator Christine Milne, on that date, apparently due to an administrative error on the part of the Court. I ordered that Dr Toben pay her costs as agreed or assessed on the ordinary basis. Dr Toben did not oppose that order. In light of the absence of Ms Milne, I granted her leave to file written submissions seeking any different order.
In accordance with the leave granted and pursuant to r 42.5 of the UCPR, Ms Milne seeks an order that Dr Toben pay her costs on an indemnity basis "except for any costs relating to costs orders made to date". This judgment determines that application.
The award of indemnity costs to the other defendants was an application of the principle stated by the High Court in Oshlack versus Richmond River Council <case>; [193 CLR 72] Ms Milne does not seek to disturb those orders.
Because Dr Toben had been ordered to pay some of Ms Milne's costs, and may have incurred some costs himself, during the period before the other defendants brought their abuse of process application, I concluded that those other defendants' costs (other than those of the abuse of process application) should be assessed on the ordinary basis.
Ms Milne did not actively participate in the abuse of process application. She already has a costs order in her favour for the earlier application before me, which she does not seek to disturb. Just as the newspaper defendants could have brought their application earlier, it would have been open to Ms Milne to take the point on which the defendants were ultimately successful by her own application. In all the circumstances, I am not persuaded that a basis has been established for departing from the order I made on 3 December 2015.
For those reasons, I confirm the order that the plaintiff pay Ms Milne's costs as agreed or assessed on the ordinary basis.
 *

Amendments April 2016 - Typographical error on coversheet * * * 
