

Clive A Chappel versus Beryl Jean Hart [1996] NSWSC 653 (24 December 1996) 
CLIVE A CHAPPEL versus BERYL JEAN HART /94; SC 10158/89 
Tuesday 24 December 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Handley JA, Cohen AJA 
CATCHWORDS: 
TORTS - liability - negligence - doctor's failure to warn of "material risk".

TORTS - liability - causation - "but for" test - "coincidence" test.

EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
On 10 June 1983 the respondent underwent surgery at the hands of the appellant for removal of a pharyngeal pouch in her oesophagus. During this procedure the oesophagus was perforated and a rare complication, mediastinitis, ensued. This resulted in damage to the plaintiff's vocal chords and loss of voice strength that affected her employment as a teacher librarian. The operation was elective though at a later stage it would have become necessary. The respondent did not allege that the operation was negligently performed. Perforation of the oesophagus wall was a well recognised complication occurring without negligence once in 20 to 40 procedures. Mediastinitis will occur after perforation if certain bacteria are present in the oesophagus. Presence of the bacteria is random. The trial judge found that if the plaintiff had been warned of the risk of vocal damage she would have postponed the operation and made further enquiries to minimise the risk.

The appellant challenged the judge's findings of fact and contended that any failure to warn did not cause the condition which was an inherent risk of the operation that could not be eliminated. The respondent cross-claimed that the award of $30,000 for general damages was inadequate.

HELD, dismissing the appeal: (1) The trial judge's findings could not be disturbed; (2) A doctor should warn of a material risk where a patient is likely to attach significance to it and the doctor knows or should have known this: Rogers versus Whittaker <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 479]; (8) There was no basis for disturbing the award of general damages.
 
JUDGMENT 
MAHONEY P: This is another case in which a patient has sued her medical practitioner for failing to warn her of the dangers of a procedure which he advised her to undergo. The facts are set forth in detail in the judgment of Handley JA. Having regard to the way in which the case has been conducted and the findings at the trial have been accepted, it is sufficient that I record the facts now relevant to the issues posed for decision in this appeal as follows. In May 1983 the plaintiff Mrs Jean Hart had a throat condition which caused her physical difficulties. She was referred for consultation to the defendant, an ear nose and throat specialist. He advised her that she should undergo surgery which he would carry out. She said that she asked him to advise her what was involved in such a way that, if her evidence was accepted as accurate, he had a duty to warn her of the risk that what ultimately happened to her could happen. It is accepted that he did not warn her of that risk. Had he warned her of the risk, she would not have undertaken the surgery at that time. Whether and in what way she would have undertaken surgery to alleviate the condition of her throat was the subject of contest at the trial. 
It is proper to record that, during the operation Dr Chappel acted with appropriate care and skill; that is now accepted. Notwithstanding that care and skill, her oesophagus was perforated, she developed an infection , damage was caused to the laryngeal nerve and she suffered paralysis of her right vocal cord.

At the trial, his Honour held that Dr Chappel had a duty to warn her of the risk which in fact materialised, that he had failed to do so, that as the result of that failure she had suffered the damage to which in his judgment he referred and that she should be awarded $172,500.61.

The defendant Dr Chappel has appealed to this Court against his Honour's judgment. Mrs Hart has cross appealed contending that the general damages awarded to her, $30,000, are appealably inadequate.
THE ISSUES: 
Mr Higgs SC for Dr Chappel and Mr Donohoe QC for Mrs Hart, in their written and oral submissions, have reduced the issues in the appeal essentially to three: (a) Whether Mrs Hart sought advice from Dr Chappel in a form such as imposed on him a duty of care to warn her of the relevant risk; (2) If she did not, whether otherwise the circumstances imposed on him a duty to warn her of that risk; and (3) If Dr Chappel owed Mrs Hart a duty to warn her of the risk, and failed to do so, whether that failure caused the damage for which she sought compensation.
THE DUTY TO WARN: 
It will be convenient to consider the first and second issues together.

The plaintiff's case was based upon the principles enunciated in Rogers v
Whitaker <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 479.] For purposes of the present appeal, Mr Higgs' submission assumed that, whilst a medical practitioner is not in all circumstances obliged to warn a patient against all of the risks of the therapy which he advises the patient to undertake, a duty to warn may arise in, inter alia, two circumstances: where the patient, by what she says or does, indicates the desire that she be warned of relevant risks; and where, though no such desire is indicated, the circumstances are such as to impose on the doctor a duty to warn the patient of risks involved in the therapy. He submitted that the present case did not fall into either of these categories.

The doctor's case before this Court, though put in different ways, was essentially to the following effect: that a duty to warn against the risk arose only if the plaintiff had indicated to the doctor anxiety concerning, as it was described, "the safety of her voice"; that her claim that she had indicated anxiety about the safety of her voice was based upon her claim that she had said to the doctor, "I don't want to wind up like Neville Wran" and that he had replied: "Oh, it's nothing like that. There is no risk either way. If any difficulties arise I will take the operation as far as I can in the first stage and stop and then I will return later on and I will complete it in the second stage. As to whether you have it through the mouth or through the neck, that is a matter of personal choice because one is not more risky than the other." 
The question therefore has been seen to turn upon whether the "Neville Wran remark" (as I shall describe it) was made. It was not contested that if it was made, the circumstances of this case were such that a duty to warn of the risk arose.
 (In stating the matter in that way, I have simplified what has been put to this Court. But what I have said sufficiently poses for consideration the issues which the parties have placed before the Court for determination).

The learned judge, after considering the detail of the evidence, stated his finding in this regard as follows: "I have come to the conclusion that Dr Chappel did give to the plaintiff his usual practice warning in relation to perforation. The matter, however, does not rest there.

The plaintiff has asserted unequivocally that she raised with Dr Chappel the question of her voice, the safety of her voice and the question of Neville
Wran. While it is true that she says she made this last comment as a throwaway line, she did raise the safety of her voice with the doctor. It may be because the Neville Wran comment was not said in a formal way that Dr Chappel does not remember that comment. I am of the view that the safety of the voice is a matter of considerable significance.

I have taken into account the emphatic way in which both the plaintiff gave her evidence that she did say the words about the safety of her voice and the emphatic way in which the defendant denied it. As I have said, I believe both were telling the truth as they recall it.

I wish to refer to another matter which I have taken into account in determining whether the plaintiff did, in fact, say the words. The plaintiff is in a situation where she not only has a memory of saying those words but she also has a memory of what was in her mind at the time and of what her concerns were. Dr Chappel, on the other hand, could only observe and have a recollection through what he heard, that is, by hearing the words used. He could not have the matter in his mind in any other way. In my view it is more likely that the words and the issue would remain in the plaintiff's memory, in the forefront of her memory, than they would in the defendant's memory.

I am therefore of the view that the plaintiff did raise the question of the safety of her voice with Dr Chappel and she did say the words she claimed about this question including the Neville Wran comment.
 ...

The case on the findings I have made is a case of failure to warn of the risk to the laryngeal nerve." 
Mr Higgs' submission in this regard was that his Honour's finding that the plaintiff said what she claimed to have said was wrong and that this Court should set that finding aside. His argument did not, I think, dispute that if the finding of the trial judge had been based wholly or in part upon what he had seen of the witnesses before him, it would not be proper for this Court, on appeal, to set the finding aside: Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167]; Devries v Australian National Railways Commission <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 472.] However, his submission was that his Honour had indicated his belief that both of the witnesses "were telling the truth as they recall it"; that in such circumstances the advantage of the trial judge in having seen and heard the witnesses was not relevant; and that this Court should, as on a rehearing, form its own view of the evidence. He submitted that, reviewing the evidence as on a rehearing: see [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html); it should come to the conclusion, as a matter of probability, that the plaintiff did not say what she claimed she said.

I do not think that Mr Higgs' submission in this regard should be accepted.
The advantage which a trial judge has is not limited in the way which Mr
Higgs' submission suggest. In assessing the credibility of a witness, in the sense of whether a witness's evidence should be accepted and acted upon, a judge will have regard, inter alia, to two things: whether the witness is honest and seeking to tell the truth and whether the witness is to be accepted as accurately recounting what occurred: see Public Trustee versus Commonwealth (Court of Appeal, 20 December 1995, unreported). In respect of each of these two matters, honesty and accuracy, the advantage which the trial judge has in seeing and hearing the witnesses may be, and ordinarily is, relevant. That advantage is not limited to the assessment of the honesty of a witness. It is at least as important in determining whether, though honest, the witness in her account of what took place, should be accepted as accurate.

In the present case, the judge accepted that both witnesses were honest and were "telling the truth as they recall it". His conclusion was, as I infer, that Mrs Hart's evidence was accurate and the doctor's evidence was not. Prima facie that finding is one falling within the principle applied in Abalos and in Devries. There is, in my opinion, no such uncertainty about the evidence or otherwise such factors as would warrant putting aside the judge's finding:
Voulis versus Kozary <case>; [(1975) 180 CLR 177.] 
Mr Higgs' submissions in this regard pointed to two things: to, as he suggested, factors which cast doubt upon the credibility of what she said; and to the inherent understanding of evidence.

She was, he submitted, inaccurate in respect of a number of things and was found by the judge to be such. He suggested that in all or most of the matters in contest between her and Dr Chappel, the doctor's evidence was preferred to hers. And, the inference was, this was due to her inaccuracy. Accordingly, the submission suggested, there must be some strong reason why, in this matter alone, she should be preferred to Dr Chappel. Mr Higgs referred to the reasons given by the judge in this regard and suggested that they were not sufficient to warrant his conclusion that the plaintiff's evidence should be accepted.

It is to be borne in mind that, in arriving at a conclusion of fact, the tribunal of fact must take into account all of the evidence, not merely what it sees of the opposing witnesses. Thus, the factual evidence in the case may outweigh the effect of what the tribunal has seen of the witnesses in evidence. More complicated questions may arise. Thus, the acceptability of a witness's evidence may be affected by whether particular facts are accepted, but the acceptance of those other facts may itself be affected by whether the witness's evidence is accepted: reference was made to problems of this kind in
Fabre versus Arenales [(1992) 27 NSWLR 437.] Matters such as these do not determine the present case.

Mr Higgs' submissions suggested that the judge in this case gave reasons for accepting the plaintiff's evidence on the present matter; that those reasons are, on analysis, not acceptable or not sufficient; and that on this ground the judge's acceptance of her evidence should be set aside. The matters to which the judge referred, Mrs Hart's direct recollection of what she said and the concerns which made her recollect it, are not matters which point conclusively to the accuracy of what she said. But, in the absence of other matters, outweighing what his Honour saw of her, they are, in the context of all of the evidence, matters which may have provided the occasion, the motivation, or the like, for saying what she claimed was said and recollecting that it was said. They could be seen by the judge as sufficient to warrant the conclusion at which the judge arrived. I do not think that the Court is justified in putting aside the judge's conclusions in this regard.

It was then suggested that, in matters affecting the position of a professional man of standing, evidence such as was given in this case does not justify a finding of default against him. There is force in this. Facts are not proved merely by showing a chain of evidence between the defendant and the default which is alleged. The judge must be satisfied that the default did occur; there must be, in the Briginshaw sense, the appropriate satisfaction that it did occur. That satisfaction "is not a state of mind that is allowed or established independently of the nature and consequences of the fact or facts to be proved". The seriousness of what is alleged and "the gravity of the consequences" are to be taken into account in deciding whether he is or should be satisfied of them: Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336] at 362. Satisfaction is not to be produced "by inexact proof, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences": ibid.

In the present case there is no fraud or "moral delinquency". But the failure to warn a patient who should be warned is apt to produce serious consequences for the patient and such a failure, in a clear case, may be a serious reflection on the reputation of the doctor. In this case, the patients' desire to be warned was to be spelled out by inference from a particular remark or at least a short conversation. It has been accepted that, if the remark was made or the conversation took place, the patient desired to be warned. To that extent, the failure to recognise her desire to be warned did not perhaps involve professional default of particular seriousness.

But Mr Higgs suggested, I think, that a conversation recollected after some years by a person who, though bona fide, has an interest in recollecting is not a satisfactory basis for a finding which has consequences of the gravity of those here in question. Those who, in practice, have witnessed the malleability of the recollection of upright witnesses and the incidence of error will give weight to what Mr Higgs has urged. For myself, I would be, if not cynical, at least cautious. There is something of unreality in a law which (if I may adapt a metaphor) hazards the whole of the damage suffered by a plaintiff upon the hazard that the plaintiff may be able to recollect, and to recollect accurately, a conversation or remark of this kind.

But, that said, the trial judge was satisfied that sufficient was said to give rise to the duty to warn. He examined the matter with care. Given his acceptance of the plaintiff as honest and taking account of his advantages in judging whether he was, as a probability, accurate, I am of the opinion that his conclusion should be accepted.

The High Court recently referred again to the advantage which the trial judge may have in the assessment of witnesses and to the limitations upon an appellate court. In Zuvela versus Cosmarnan Pty Ltd (High Court, 8 November 1996, not yet reported) the decision at the trial turned upon whether the representative of the plaintiff's employer had made a remark to the plaintiff as the result of which the plaintiff had remained at work when he might have gone home. The judge held that the remark was made. In this Court, the conclusion was drawn that the remark, if made, did not bear the meaning or have the effect that the trial judge had attributed to it and the judgment for the plaintiff was set aside. The High Court held that this Court had erred in setting aside the judgment for the plaintiff. The High Court, in a joint judgment, said: "When a Court of Appeal is reviewing by way of rehearing the findings of fact made by a trial judge who has the advantage of hearing and observing the witnesses, the Court of Appeal should not treat the appeal as a hearing de novo." 
Their Honours then cited from the judgment of Barwick CJ in Whiteley Muir and
Zwanenberg Ltd versus Kerr [(1966) 39 ALJR 505] at 506 a passage including the following: "The trial judge, although not depending in any respect on the credibility of any witness, may have preferred one possible view of the primary facts to another as being in his opinion the more probable. Such a finding may, in my opinion, be disturbed by an appellate court but this should only be done if other probabilities so outweigh that chosen by the primary judge that it can be said that his conclusion was wrong. Again, the trial judge, having found the primary facts, may decide that a particular inference should be drawn from them. Here no doubt the appellate court has more room for setting aside that conclusion. But, even in that case, the fact of the trial judge's decision must be displaced. It is not enough that the appellate court would itself, if trying the matter initially, have drawn a different inference. It must be shown that the trial judge was wrong. This may be achieved by showing that material facts have been overlooked, or given undue or too little weight in deciding the inference to be drawn: or the available inference in the opposite sense to that chosen by the trial judge is so preponderant in the opinion of the appellate court that the trial judge's decision is wrong." 
The jurisdiction of this Court on an appeal such as this is jurisdiction as on a "rehearing": [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s75a.html) of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/). As was pointed out in Warren versus Coombes <case>; [(1979) 142 CLR 531], on a rehearing the appellant is entitled to have the opinion of this Court upon the merits of the case as on a rehearing. But, as the High
Court has emphasised, this Court must give effect, in the manner to which the
High Court has referred, to the advantages which the trial judge had and, in the end, it must be satisfied "that the trial judge was wrong".

In the circumstances of the present case, I am not satisfied that, in accepting that the plaintiff Mrs Hart said what is here in question, the judge was wrong.

On this basis, it is not necessary to consider whether, absent the Neville
Wran remark and such matters, there would yet have been a duty upon Dr Chappel to warn the plaintiff of the risk involved. Having regard to the nature of it, the incidence of the risk, and generally her approach to the operation, I am inclined to think that it would have been proper for him to advise her of it.
But on that matter I express no final conclusion.
CAUSATION: 
In matters of causation in the law it is, in my opinion, always important to ensure that the correct question is addressed. In the present case, prima facie the issue may be stated in the following way. The operation involved a risk of injury: the oesophagus might be perforated, infection might occur, and damage might be done to the patient's body. What the plaintiff said, as the judge interpreted it, involved a request for advice as to what relevant risks existed. This risk was a risk of which she should have been warned and was not. Had she been warned of the risk, she would not have undertaken the operation at that time. (I put aside for the moment what subsequently she would or might have done). Accordingly, the failure to warn her led to her undertaking a risk which, had she been warned, she would not have undertaken.
The risk was realised and the injury involved in it occurred. On this statement of the matter the question is whether the failure to warn her was the, or a, cause of the injury in the relevant sense.

In my opinion, it was. The concept of causality in the law includes but is not limited to the "billiard ball" physical concept of causality: see Hoffmueller v The Commonwealth [(1981) 54 FLR 48] at 60. The law may hold a defendant to have caused a particular injury in circumstances where there is, in the physical sense, no causation. In the present case, on the issue as I have stated it, the failure to warn did not physically cause the plaintiff to undergo the operation: she underwent the operation as the result of her own decision. But the function of the warning, if it had been given, would have been to give her the opportunity to decide whether she should undertake a risk which she might not undertake: its function was to allow her to decide not to undertake that risk. Because the warning was not given, she made the decision to undertake an operation which, unbeknown to her, involved that risk. This, in my opinion, is within the concept of causality within the law. A relevantly analogous situation arose in Barnes v
Hay [(1988) 12 NSWLR 337] at 354-6. In my opinion, there was in the situation as
I have indicated, a causal relationship between the omission to warn or advise and what took place.

As I understand Mr Higgs' concise and carefully directed submissions, there are two matters which should lead the Court to a different conclusion.

First, the risk was reasonably remote. There was discussion in evidence as to (if such a quantification can be made) the number or percentage of cases in which the risk eventuated during a relevant operation. It was, on the evidence, a risk inherent in the operation in the sense that the occurrence of the damage did not depend upon negligence or lack of skill on the part of the surgeon. And it involved, in a sense, a multiple contingency. It involved, inter alia, that the oesophagus be perforated, that, by reason of the perforation, infection should result and that that infection should lead to damage to the relevant nerves. One or more of those might occur without the others. It was only if there was the conjunction of all of these contingencies that the relevant damage would occur. The submission suggested, I think, that the failure to warn should not be seen as the cause of damage which was the result only of the conjunction of such contingencies.

I do not think that that submission should be adopted. There is, as Mr Higgs' submissions suggested, an element of remoteness and contingency in what occurred. But damage resulting from the combination of the perforation, the infection and the nerve damage was something which, on the evidence, was foreseen and it was the fact that such a conjunction of contingencies could occur that was to be the subject of the warning which Dr Chappel should have given and the reason for giving it. Accordingly, I do not think that this submission should succeed.

Second, the submission relied upon the fact that, as it was suggested, Mrs
Hart would in any event have had to undergo such an operation or an operation generally of this kind.

Handley JA has in his judgment shown why, upon the facts, this submission should not succeed. It was not, in any relevant sense, inevitable that Mrs
Hart would undergo the same operation in the same circumstances: as the evidence disclosed, had she been aware of the risk, she would not have had the operation performed by Dr Chappel but by a surgeon of greater experience, such as Professor Benjamin. And the way in which the operation was conducted was not the same as the procedure adopted by Dr Chappel.

But even had the position been that it was inevitable that subsequently Mrs
Hart would have had to undergo the same operation in the same circumstances, I do not think that that would mean that a causal relation did not exist between
Dr Chappel's failure to warn and what in fact happened. Mr Higgs' submissions pointed to, as it was submitted to be, the low degree of risk or probability that, on the occasion of the later operation, there would be the combination of contingencies which would produce the damage which, on this occasion, the plaintiff suffered. The submission suggested that it was unlikely that the damage would have occurred in the later operation and, as I understand the implications of it, that the question should be approached on the basis that, as a matter of probability, the damage would not occur. But, in my opinion, this does not affect the causal relationship which existed in fact between Dr
Chappel's failure to warn and the damage which actually occurred.

Mr Higgs pressed the submission that it cannot be irrelevant, in determining whether, in law, the legal relationship of cause and effect exists, that the plaintiff would have had to undergo the same operation and that, as a matter of probability, it was unlikely that the risk would eventuate and the damage occur. The suggestion was, I think, that the damage was not the result of the failure to warn but merely a coincidence. Reference was made to the discussion of "coincidence" in Causation in The Law by HLA Hart and Tony Honore (2nd ed) 1985 at 164 et seq. In this area of analysis and of law, terms are not closely defined. But, in the relevant sense of "coincidence", I do not think that this case raises the problems of coincidence to which reference has been made in dealing with causality concepts.

There is some attraction in this portion of the defendant's submissions. Mr
Higgs submitted that "coincidence" is an appropriate term to describe what happened in the present case. The damage was not caused by any negligence or lack of skill of the defendant. It was not caused by the mere fact that the operation was carried out because, as the evidence suggested, the damage occurred only in a small number of cases in which the operation was carried out. (The evidence referred to the incidence of the damage in various ways, eg, one case in forty or thereabouts). The evidence did not disclose why the damage happens in one case and not in others. The sequence of what occurred was, as I have said, established: perforation, the existence of the microbe or organism, infection, inflammation, and damage to the nerve. But, as I have suggested, the evidence did not establish why it happened in one case and not in another.

To describe this damage as a coincidence is, in my respectful opinion, to fail to understand the nature of causality and the nature of the concept of causality as employed by the law in imposing liability on one party to pay for the damage suffered by another.

In considering questions of causality it is, I think, ordinarily convenient to treat the concept of causality as referring to (at least) three different things: causality in the strict or physical sense; causality in the more general sense in which in ordinary speech the term is used; and causality in the sense in which it is used for the purposes of the law.

Causality, as used in the law, is not a single concept: it may, for example, be used in one sense in worker's compensation law and in another sense in other branches of the law. And, as used in the law, the concept of causality involves some of the incidents of causality in the first and second sense.
But, in my opinion, it is used in the law to indicate relationships which would not fall within the concept in the first or even perhaps the second sense.

It may be accepted that, in the first sense of causation, what occurred to Mrs
Hart was a coincidence rather than a caused result of the operation. Hume's fundamental insight was that, if it be accepted that every event has a cause, all that one can say of a cause is that it is a necessary and sufficient precedent event to its result; X is the cause of Y if, whenever X occurs, Y will occur. Hume's insight was, of course, much more complicated. For example, he and those who followed recognised that, in a chain of causes, the cause of
Y could be X or causes precedent to X in the chain. And it was recognised that the statement that X is always followed by Y and so was the cause of Y must be qualified by reference to the context or the "field" in which they occur.

The force of Mr Higgs' submission in relation to coincidence takes its force,
I think, from the fact that, as I have indicated, the operation does not always produce, is not always followed by, the damage here in question; that damage follows only infrequently. It is, in this sense, not caused by the operation but a coincidence.

If one were to pursue the concept of causality in this sense it would no doubt be possible to say that, if the physical context or field of discussion were properly defined, the damage could be seen to follow invariably from the operation in the sense to which Hume referred. It would no doubt be possible, upon an exhaustive examination of the occasions on which such damage does occur in the operation, to isolate the factor or factors which determine whether the damage will in the particular case occur. But that has not been done and I do not think that it is useful to pursue the philosophical analysis of the matter in this way.

As I have suggested, the term "cause" is used not only in the first sense but in a much wider group of senses. In JL Mackie The Cement of the Universe (OUP, 1974) there is an examination at length of the various and different situations to which "cause" is applied. Mackie discusses, among many other things, the question whether, to establish the relationship of cause and effect, in the sense of Hume, it is sufficient that the event which is the cause be a necessary and sufficient precedent event to the event which is its result; he discusses whether, for example, it is necessary to find between the two events a "tie" before it is proper to describe the former is the cause of the latter. The fact that the five o'clock whistle blows in a factory in
Sydney and the workers in a factory in Melbourne invariably cease work ordinarily will not mean that the whistle in Sydney is the cause of the cessation of work in Melbourne. The "tie" is absent. It may be said that, in the present case, the tie between the mere fact of the operation and the damage does not clearly appear.

In Causation in the Law, the authors demonstrate, I think, that "cause" in the law is not limited to these first two senses. The authors refer, for example, to its use in the "inter-personal sense". Their analysis of this indicates, in my opinion, that the law may see X as the cause of Y in circumstances in which there is neither an invariable sequence of cause and effect nor a particular tie between the two. The fact that, in the sense of
Hume and others, the effect is a coincidence does not mean that, in the law, it may not be held to have been produced as a result by the act of the defendant.

I think that in this case there was proved, in the legal sense, the necessary relationship of cause and effect between the relevant default (the failure to warn) and the damage suffered by the plaintiff. As I have indicated, it is always necessary to determine precisely what is suggested to be the cause of the damage which the plaintiff suffered. The cause suggested is not the fact of the operation as such. Given that the Neville Wran remark was made, the doctor had the duty to warn: that was admitted. It is the failure of Dr
Chappel to warn Mrs Hart that, if she undertook the operation, she ran the risk that the damage would occur. It is the fact that she was not warned which is, in law, the cause of the damage and, as such, the basis for holding Dr
Chappel responsible for the damage that she suffered.

It is proper that emphasis be given to this. The law does not hold a doctor responsible for failure to warn of the possibility of loss as such when the possibility of the loss is as remote and contingent as was the loss in this case and in Rogers versus Whitaker. The doctor is responsible for the damage by reason of the failure to warn of the existence of the possibility of damage only when, in the circumstances, he has a duty to give a warning of it. When the doctor should warn of the possibility of damage must be determined according to the facts of each case. But where, as here, it is accepted that there was a duty to warn, then the failure to warn may properly be held to be the cause of the damage when the risk eventuates.

Upon the other issues raised in the appeal and the cross-appeal, I agree with the judgment of Handley JA. I agree with the orders proposed by him.

HANDLEY JA: On 10 June 1983 Mrs Hart underwent surgery at the hands of Dr Chappel for removal of a pharyngeal pouch in her oesophagus. During this procedure her oesophagus was perforated and mediastinitis, a rare complication, ensued which caused damage to the plaintiff's vocal chords and loss of voice strength. Mrs Hart sued Dr Chappel for negligence and was awarded damages of $172,500.61 by Donovan AJ.

It was no part of the plaintiff's case at the trial that the procedure had been negligently advised or carried out. Her case was that she had not been warned that the procedure involved a risk of loss or impairment of her voice, and that if she had been warned she would not have had that operation at the hands of Dr Chappel at that time. Instead she would have put off the operation, made further enquiries, taken further advice, and probably had the operation later at the hands of the most qualified surgeon available.

The pouch in the plaintiff's oesophagus collected small scraps of food causing infection and inflammation. The condition is relentlessly progressive and surgery provides the only cure. The procedure involves the removal of the open wall of the pouch by its excision from the wall of the oesophagus. Perforation of the wall of the oesophagus was a well recognised complication of this procedure. Professor Benjamin, a pre-eminent specialist in throat surgery, said that a study undertaken in his unit had shown that this complication occurred once in 20 to 40 procedures. In the great majority of cases, the complication causes no lasting ill effects.

Mediastinitis is a rare complication associated with a perforated oesophagus.
It is caused by bacteria present in the oesophagus escaping through the perforation into the mediastinum which is part of the chest cavity. The resulting infection, in some, but not most, cases inflames the laryngeal nerves which can cause a loss of function in the vocal chords.

The bacteria causing mediastinitis are present in the oesophagus on a random or chance basis, but in any event, relatively rarely. If the bacteria are present and a perforation occurs, mediastinitis will follow. The bacteria are not normally present, and if present one week may not be present the following week or for months or years thereafter.

A perforation of the oesophagus during this procedure can occur without any negligence on the part of the surgeon. Should this complication occur there is apparently nothing the surgeon can do to prevent the patient contracting mediastinitis if the bacteria are present. Partial or total loss of the use of the patient's vocal chords is a serious further complication which is again relatively rare. However there is apparently little that the surgeon can do to prevent this further complication should mediastinitis develop.

The plaintiff was a senior teacher and librarian with the Education
Department. She said that she was concerned about possible damage to her voice. In particular, after she had asked whether the procedure was safer when carried out through the mouth or the neck, she claims she said to Dr Chappel: "I don't want to wind up like Neville Wran". The doctor denied that this was said, but agreed that he had explained that the procedure was equally safe, whether carried out through the mouth or directly through the neck.

On many issues the judge preferred the evidence of the doctor to that of the plaintiff, but he accepted the plaintiff on this one. Mr Donohoe QC challenged this finding, but it was obviously based on the judge's assessment of the credibility of the witnesses, and this Court is not entitled to interfere. The finding was not inconsistent with facts incontrovertibly established and was not glaringly improbable.

The judge found that Dr Chappel had reassured the plaintiff that this was fairly minor surgery. He mentioned the risk of perforation which was a recognised complication of this and similar procedures. The judge found however that he did not warn the plaintiff of the remote risk of partial or total loss of her voice which this procedure entailed.

The judge directed himself in accordance with Rogers versus Whitaker <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 479] at 490: "The law should recognise that a doctor has a duty to warn a patient of a material risk inherent in the proposed treatment; a risk is material if, in the circumstances of the particular case, a reasonable person in the patient's position, if warned of the risk, would be likely to attach significance to it or if the medical practitioner is or should reasonably be aware that the particular patient, if warned of the risk, would be likely to attach significance to it".

This test involves two questions, one of which focuses on the patient and the other on the medical practitioner. A risk is material to the patient if a reasonable person, in his or her position, would attach significance to a warning of its existence. The question then is whether the medical practitioner is or should reasonably be aware that the particular patient, if warned of the risk, would be likely to attach significance to it.

The judge found that in view of the plaintiff's expressed concern (Neville
Wran) and the nature of her employment which was known to the doctor, the risk was material to her and should have been disclosed. These findings were amply supported by evidence and cannot be disturbed by this Court.

The difficult issue in the appeal was that of causation. The only negligence found by the judge was in failing to warn the plaintiff of the risk of damage to her voice. The chance of this occurring was slight, but if it did occur, her loss of voice capacity could well be serious. The judge found that the plaintiff was a person to whom the potential consequences were more important than the statistical risk. There was no dispute that the risk of perforation was inherent in the procedure, and that the complication of mediastinitis was also inherent, depending on the chance presence of the causative bacteria.
These risks can never be totally eliminated being present even when the procedure is carried out by the most eminent surgeon.

The procedure was elective for the plaintiff in June 1983, but as time went by it would become increasingly necessary. Professor Benjamin made it clear that the plaintiff had to undergo surgery sooner or later.

The judge accepted the plaintiff's evidence that if she had been warned of the risk, she would not have undergone surgery when she did. Accordingly "but for" the defendant's negligence in failing to warn the plaintiff, she would not have undergone the surgery on 10 June 1983, and this complication would not have occurred when and how it did. The defendant submitted however that even if the plaintiff had elected to defer surgery, she would have had the operation sooner or later and this complication, which can occur without any negligence, may have occurred anyway.

Whether or not the requisite causal connection exists between a particular breach of duty and particular loss or damage is essentially a question of fact to be resolved on the balance of probabilities as a matter of commonsense and experience. See March versus E & M H Stramare Pty Ltd <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 506], Bennett versus Minister for Community Welfare <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 408], and Medlin versus SGIC <case>; [(1994) 182 CLR 1] at 6. The "but for" test is an important negative criterion of causation, but is not decisive, and policy questions and value judgments are also relevant. See March at 515, 516, 535; Bennett at 412-3, 418-9, .

Mr Higgs SC for the appellant submitted that the present case was covered by
Lord Hoffman's example in Banque Bruxelles Lambert SA versus Eagle Star Insurance
Co Ltd <case>; [[1996] 3 WLR 87] at 94: "Rules which make the wrongdoer liable for all the consequences of his wrongful conduct are exceptional and need to be justified by some special policy. Normally the law limits liability to those consequences which are attributable to that which made the act wrongful. In the case of liability in negligence for providing inaccurate information, this would mean liability for the consequences of the information being inaccurate.

I can illustrate the difference between the ordinary principle and that adopted by the Court of Appeal by an example. A mountaineer about to undertake a difficult climb is concerned about the fitness of his knee. He goes to a doctor who negligently makes a superficial examination and pronounces the knee fit. The climber goes on the expedition, which he would not have undertaken if the doctor had told him the true state of his knee. He suffers an injury which is an entirely foreseeable consequence of mountaineering but has nothing to do with his knee.

On the Court of Appeal's principle the doctor is responsible for the injury suffered by the mountaineer because it is damage which would not have occurred if he had been given correct information about his knee. He would not have gone on the expedition and would have suffered no injury. On what I have suggested is the more usual principle, the doctor is not liable. The injury has not been caused by the doctor's bad advice because it would have occurred even if the advice had been correct".

The example, and the principle it illustrates, carries the appellant some distance, but its relevance in this case depends on the onset of mediastinitis being what might be described as a pure coincidence. The coincidence principle was referred to in March by Mason CJ at 516 where he said: "... a factor which secures the presence of the plaintiff at the place where and at the time when he or she is injured is not causally connected with the injury, unless the risk of the accident occurring at that time was greater; see Hart & Honore (Causation in the Law, 2nd Ed, 1985) at p 122. As
Windeyer observed in Faulkner versus Keffalinos [(1970) 45 ALJR 80] at 86: `But for the first accident the (plaintiff) might still have been employed by the (defendants), and therefore not where he was when the second accident happened; but lawyers must eschew this kind of `but for' or sine qua non reasoning about cause and consequence'."  
The coincidence principle is also considered by Hart & Honore at pp -170. The fact that damage would not have occurred "but for" the negligence, while a necessary test of causation, is not sufficient. This principle was considered by the House of Lords in Hogan versus Bentinck Collieries
Ltd [[1949] 1 All ER 588], where the worker's employment injury was aggravated by negligent medical treatment which was held by the majority to break the chain of causation. See now
Mahony versus J Kruschich (Demolitions) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 156 CLR 522.] The House rejected the "but for" test of causation (there described as causa sine qua non), see per Lord Simonds at 593, and Lord
Normand at 596. Lord McDermott who dissented nevertheless said, at 601, that a causal link between an employment injury and a later injury would not be established if the worker suffered burns because of a fire in the hospital where he was being treated, or if an ambulance taking him to or from hospital was involved in a road accident. At 604, Lord Reid referred to similar examples where causation would not be found although the "but for" test was satisfied.

In my judgment the coincidence principle does not apply in the present case.
The principle depends on the risk being no greater when it materialised for the plaintiff than it would have been but for the negligence. See March at per Mason CJ. In the present case, the application of the principle depends on the risk of the complications being the same during both the actual surgery and the hypothetical surgery that the plaintiff would have undergone at a later date but for the defendant's negligence.

In my opinion Mr Donohoe QC was correct when he said that the risks would not have been the same on both occasions, but were greater during the actual surgery than they would have been during the hypothetical surgery. The risk of mediastinitis was a possible complication of a perforation of the oesophagus.
While perforations could occur during this procedure without negligence, superior skill and experience could reduce this risk. Professor Benjamin had carried out some 150 procedures of this kind without a single perforation, although the general incidence of this complication in his unit was between 1 in 20 and 1 in 40. The defendant had carried out 6 of these procedures personally and had assisted at 6 more. The plaintiff, who the judge found was a cautious woman, may well have retained the best and most experienced surgeon available in order to reduce the risk, and on the evidence and the findings she was likely to do so.

It follows that the risk of mediastinitis in the actual and hypothetical situations was not the same, and the coincidence principle does not apply. In my judgment the plaintiff's negligence should be accepted as a contributing cause of the damage which would not have occurred but for that negligence. The negligence exposed the plaintiff to an increased risk of suffering these complications. On the judge's findings the defendant was bound to advise the plaintiff of a recognised risk of this operation and failed to do so. As a result she underwent surgery in circumstances which materially increased the risk of these complications occurring, and in fact they did occur.

In other situations, typically in industrial accident cases, courts have held that causation has been established where the defendant's breach of duty increased an existing risk to which the plaintiff was exposed, and the risk materialised. Thus in Nicholson versus Atlas Steel Ltd [[1957] 1 WLR 613] HL, a dust disease case, Viscount Simonds said, at 620: "Owing to the default of the respondent, the deceased was exposed to a greater degree of risk than he should have been".

In the same case, Lord Cohen said, at 622: "... the respondent's failure to provide adequate ventilation must increase the risk to which the workmen are exposed (which) establishes that on a balance of probabilities the breach of duty caused or materially contributed to the injury".

See also McGhee versus National Coal Board <case>; [[1973] 1 WLR 1] HL at 4, where Lord Reid held that causation had been established because the defendant's breach of duty "added materially to the risk that this disease might develop". See also per Lord Simon at 8, Lord
Kilbrandon at 10, and Lord Salmon at 12; and Duyvelshaff versus Cathcart &
Ritchie Ltd [(1973) 47 ALJR 410] at 417 per
Gibbs J. In my judgment, causation was established in this case and the appeal fails.

The defendant filed a cross-appeal which challenged the award of $30,000 for general damages as inadequate. Following remedial surgery by Professor
Benjamin, the plaintiff's voice substantially recovered. He said in his report of 27 November 1984 that the plaintiff "obtained a very very good voice except for singing, shouting and at other times her voice would tire. This means that her voice was not adequate in certain group situations and as she is a group leader in her occupation it curtailed her effectiveness". The plaintiff said that her weakened voice caused her embarrassment and that it tires. However there is no associated pain. The judge had a very good opportunity to listen to the plaintiff's voice while she was giving evidence, an opportunity which is denied to this Court. In my judgment, there is simply no basis on which the
Court could disturb this award.

Both the appeal and cross-appeal should be dismissed with costs, to be set off.
 
COHEN AJA: I agree with Mahoney P and Handley JA.
 * * * 
