

Fontana versus Morgan Matter No Ca 40205/97 [1998] NSWSC 792 (7 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 15 February 1999 
MARK FONTANA versus MICHAEL JOHN MORGAN 
CA 40205/97 September 1998 
Meagher JA, Powell JA, Fitzgerald AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM O'REILLY DCJ 
FILE NO/S: CA 40205/97; DC 69/94 (Liverpool) 
DELIVERED: 7 SEPTEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 7 SEPTEMBER 1998 
PARTIES: Mark FONTANA versus Michael John MORGAN 
CORAM: MEAGHER JA; POWELL JA; FITZGERALD AJA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: G SCRAGG 
Respondent: G BATEMAN 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: PHILIP GOLDMAN & CO 
Respondent: HUNT & HUNT 
CATCHWORDS: Negligence - duty to negligent persons. 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 3 
MARK FONTANA versus MICHAEL JOHN MORGAN 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: This is an appeal by a disappointed plaintiff, Mr Mark Fontana against a verdict given against him by his Honour O'Reilly J in the District Court, in an action for damages arising out of a collision between a bicycle ridden by the plaintiff and a motor car driven by the defendant, 
Mr Michael John Morgan. The venue of the accident was a T-section of the F5 off ramp leading to Narellan Road, Campbelltown. The time was 8.50am and the date was 1 April 1993.

Both vehicles intended to travel in an easterly direction towards
Campbelltown. The defendant/respondent was travelling in a northerly direction along the off ramp intending to turn right into Narellan Road. The plaintiff/appellant was riding his bicycle in an easterly direction on the southern side of Narellan Road in what is described as a breakdown lane. It will be observed that as he was riding his bicycle on the southern side of the road he was on the wrong side of the road, a fact which is not mentioned in the appellant's written submissions.

Immediately before the collision the defendant brought his motor car to a halt at a stop sign on the exit ramp in Narellen Road which was a dual lane carriageway divided by a median strip. He looked to the right and to the left and saw nothing untoward. He then commenced to move forward when the collision occurred. It will be observed that his primary sight would be concentrated on the right because that is where the immediate risk would have been coming from and indeed the part of the break in the median strip through which he would pass was itself centred slightly on to his right. Nonetheless his evidence was that although he looked at the right and doubtless concentrated on that, he also looked on his left. His Honour believed every word he said.

He at the time of the collision was travelling at a very low speed. His Honour found the plaintiff was travelling at 10 or 20 kilometres an hour and the defendant was less than that. He had moved about one foot or perhaps one metre from the line of the stop sign. In fact the plaintiff's account does not vary greatly from the defendant's account except in my view to strengthen it by an emphasis on the fact that the plaintiff knowingly rode across the front of the defendant's motor car. He did not do so accidentally.

The learned counsel for the appellant has emphasised a well recognised principle that the driver of a motor car has a duty of care to those who are themselves negligent. He had referred us to the fact that one must keep a reasonable lookout for those on the incorrect side of the road as well as for those on the correct side and he has referred us to the terms of various regulations dealing with stop signs. However because as a matter of law one must keep a weather eye out for those determined not to look after themselves, it does not follow that one always sees them and in the present case the finding of fact by his Honour puts the defendant in that position. Moreover as far as the regulations are concerned, if on the primary findings of fact, namely that the defendant looked carefully both right and left, in my view no interpretation of the regulations can transform a state of non negligence into a state of negligence. For these reasons in my view the appeal should be dismissed with costs, therefore that will be the order of the court.
 * * * 
