

Carnovale and Anor versus Pollack and Another No. 50059/1995 [1995] NSWSC 133 (6 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
ROLFE J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 6 July 1995 #DATE 12:7:1995 #ADD 6:11:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs:   Mr C.A. Evatt 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs: J.Pappas 
Counsel for the Defendants: 
Mr J.T. Svehla 
Solicitors for the Defendants: Nugent Wallman and Carter
ORDER
Cross-claim dismissed.
JUDGE1
Introduction
ROLFE J Mr Philip John Pollack, who is and has been at all material times a solicitor, and his wife, Mrs Susan Pollack, are the registered proprietors as joint tenants for an estate in fee simple of the whole of the land comprised in Folio Identifier 110/773672, upon which is erected a substantial two-storey residence known as 129 Livingstone Avenue, Pymble, which is their home, ("the property").
In the transactions giving rise to the present proceedings Mr
Pollack stated that he acted on behalf of his wife. On 23 March 1994
Mr and
Mrs Pollack gave a first mortgage over the property to Mr James Carnovale and his wife, Mrs Nelle Rose Carnovale, for whom
Mr James Barton Carter acted as solicitor. Mr and Mrs Carnovale had, at the time, money they wished to invest by way of a loan on the security of a first mortgage over real estate. Mr
Carter has had, at all material times, an extensive practice in acting for people, who and which wish to so invest. He said he had many such clients in
March 1994. In these circumstances finance brokers and others desirous of obtaining finance approached him. The extent of this practice may be gauged from a consideration of the fact that he had a mortgage "portfolio" of some $25m, and acted on about four to five occasions per week on the lending of money secured by way of a mortgage as at March 1994.
On 23 March 1994 Mr and Mrs Carnovale lent to Mr and Mrs Pollack $465,000, the repayment of which, together with interest and other amounts, was secured by way of a first registered mortgage over the property. Interest was payable monthly on the twenty third day of each month at the rate of sixteen per centum per annum, reducible to twelve per centum per annum in the event of due payment. The first such payment was to be made on 23 April 1994 and the principal sum was to be repaid on 22 March 1995.
On settlement Mr Pollack, who acted as the solicitor for himself and Mrs
Pollack in the transaction, directed cheques be drawn in favour of Permanent
Trustee Australia Limited in the sum of $417,276.66, American Express
International Inc, ("American Express"), in the sum of $16,000, Sunman and Co in the sum of $2,102, A. Hudson in the sum of $21,087.67, Nugent Wallman and
Carter in the sum of $2,427, and J.W. Byrnes and Associates, ("Byrnes"), in the sum of $6,106.67. These amounts totalled $465,000.
The amount payable to Permanent Trustee Australia Limited was to discharge a first mortgage over the property owed to it as the trustee of the Howard
Mortgage Trust. This mortgage had fallen into default and, sometime before
March 1994, Permanent Trustee
Australia Limited had taken steps to have the property sold. It was scheduled to be auctioned on 29 March 1994. The loan from Mr and Mrs Carnovale was obtained, in circumstances to which I shall have to refer in more detail, to re-finance that mortgage and other liabilities of
Mr and Mrs Pollack identified by the payments made on settlement. The debt to
American Express was one for which Mr
Pollack was alone legally responsible.
By a facsimile transmission dated 16 March 1994 Mr Sunman, the solicitor for
Permanent Trustee
Australia Limited, advised that the amount necessary to discharge the mortgage, as at 18 March 1994, was $418,388.24 and that the costs payable to his firm were $2,102. Mr Pollack gave evidence that he negotiated the amount payable under that mortgage, which would account for the difference between that stated in the facsimile transmission and that for which the cheque was drawn on settlement.
The amount owing to A. Hudson was in respect of a second mortgage granted by Mr and Mrs Pollack to Mr Hudson, who was a client of Mr Carter. This mortgage had also been in default although any default was probably made good during March 1994. However the amount owing under this mortgage had to be paid to ensure Mr and Mrs Carnovale would be able to register their first mortgage.
American
Express obtained judgment against Mr Pollack on 6 October 1993 in the total sum of $19,337.18 for money owing to it. The judgment debt comprised $18,025.01, interest in the sum of $1,128.17 and the costs of a Local Court
Writ of $184. On 12 October 1993 an application was made to record the Local
Court Writ on the title to the property in respect of Mr Pollack's interest in it. This matter also had to be dealt with to enable Mr and Mrs Carnovale's first mortgage to be registered.
The amounts payable to Nugent Wallman and Carter and Byrnes were in respect of legal fees and finance broker's fees respectively on the obtaining of the new loan.
 .
Mr and Mrs Pollack fell into default under the mortgage by failing to pay the first interest payment and, thereafter, although various amounts were paid, defaults continued throughout the term of the mortgage. One result of that was that interest was payable at the higher rate. Not unnaturally complaints were made on behalf of Mr and Mrs Carnovale. Letters of demand and notices pursuant to [s.57(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) of the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) were served. The principal sum was not repaid on 22 March 1995 and, on 3 April 1995, Mr and Mrs
Carnovale issued a Summons seeking the repayment of that amount, the payment of interest and other amounts outstanding, and an order for possession of the property.
The matter came before me on 21 April 1995. It was stated by those appearing on behalf of Mr and Mrs Pollack that there was no defence to the claim for possession, but an adjournment was sought for four weeks to enable them to re-finance the indebtedness. This was opposed by Mr and Mrs Carnovale and, there being no dispute that they were entitled to possession of the property, I ordered judgment for possession in their favour and that the writ of Possession to enforce it not be issued until the expiration of four weeks from April 1995.
In the course of that hearing it was said that certain amounts were, or may be, in dispute. It was not submitted this precluded the entry of judgment for possession, but rather it raised a dispute as to the amount Mr and Mrs
Pollack were obliged to pay to obtain a discharge of the mortgage. As the issues were not articulated with any greater particularity I directed Mr and
Mrs Pollack to file and serve any documents, either by way of a Defence or
Cross-Claim, to give effect to the issues as to amount by 4 pm on 11 May 1995, together with any affidavits on which they proposed to rely, and I stood the proceedings over until 9.30 on 12 May 1995. 
The Cross-Claim
On 19 May 1995 Mr and Mrs Pollack filed a Cross-Claim seeking declarations that the amount payable pursuant to the fifth covenant in the mortgage was a penalty and unenforceable. That provided:- "In the event that the mortgagor does not repay the principal on the due date then the mortgagor shall pay to the mortgagees the sum of $6,200 (one month's interest in the higher rate) which the parties agree is, together with interest at the higher rate from the due date to the date of repayment as provided for in Clause fourthly of the mortgage (see Annexure 'A') to date of repayment, is a genuine pre-estimate of the mortgagees' damage should the mortgage not be repaid on due date."
Mr and Mrs Pollack also sought a declaration that the mortgage was unjust in the circumstances relating to it at the time it was made by virtue of the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act 1980](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/), and orders that the interest rate payable under it be varied to the rate of 10.5 per centum per annum and that
Mr and Mrs Carnovale pay damages to Mr and Mrs Pollack:- "in respect of the loss incurred by the cross-claimants as a result of the principal advance of the mortgage being $465,000, rather than $425,000".
At one stage, on a mention before me, it was said by Counsel then appearing for Mr and Mrs Pollack, who did not appear on the hearing, that this rather strange claim would not be pursued. However it was raised on the hearing.
The Cross-Claim also sought an order that the assessment of damages be remitted to the Master and for an order for consequential relief I indicated that I was not prepared to remit the matter to the Master and that the Court would determine the issues raised on the Cross-Claim. I gave various directions to ensure this was done and the matter came on for hearing before me on Thursday, 6 July 1995, i.e. seven weeks after the Cross-Claim was instituted. If there had been compliance with my directions it would have been heard six days earlier.
On that day an Amended Cross-Claim was filed, the amendments being in paragraphs 2A and 2B, which stated- "2A. A declaration that the terms of the mortgage insofar as they relate to interest at the rate of 16% reducible to 12% per annum are unjust and unfair and such as ought to be set aside pursuant to law and pursuant to the provisions of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/).

PARTICULARS
The cross-defendants agreed to lend to the cross-claimants by way of mortgage monies at the interest rate of 10.5% per annum.
The cross-defendants offered the said sum of 10.5% per annum to the cross-claimants in writing and orally and such a rate was accepted by the cross-claimants.
The cross-defendants by themselves and their solicitor knew that the cross-claimants had to settle and finalise the mortgage on 23 March 1994 because the cross-claimants required the amount of the said mortgage to pay creditors and discharge previous mortgages which were due and payable by the cross-claimants on that day and in default thereof the cross-claimants' property was to be sold up unless settlement of the mortgage was effected on the said day.
When the mortgage documents were presented to the cross-claimants by the cross-defendants and their solicitor on 23 March the amount of interest had been altered and increased by the cross-defendants from 10.5% per annum to 16% per annum reducible to 12%.
The cross-claimants protested at the increase but because they were compelled to settle that day they were forced to sign mortgage documents even though the cross-defendants were in breach of their agreement.
When the cross-claimants signed the mortgage documents on 23 March 1994 they did so under duress and/or under unfair and unjust circumstances.

B. The cross-defendants by themselves and their solicitor in trade or commerce engaged in conduct which was misleading or deceptive or which was likely to mislead or deceive contrary to the provisions of s.42 of the Fair Trading Act.

PARTICULARS 
See particulars in 2A above."
On the hearing
Mr C.A. Evatt of Counsel appeared for Mr and Mrs Pollack, and Mr J.T. Svehla of Counsel appeared for Mr and Mrs Carnovale. The issues presented by Mr Evatt were, firstly, whether the fifth covenant constituted a penalty and was unenforceable, and, secondly, whether some relief should be granted to Mr and Mrs Pollack on the basis that they had been offered a loan of $425,000 at an effective interest rate of 10.5 per centum per annum but, on March 1994, they were confronted with an offer whereby the principal amount was $465,000 and the interest rate was sixteen per centum per annum reducible to twelve per centum per annum. The complaint was that at that stage they had no real alternative but to accept what was being offered to them, because it would not have been possible to arrange other finance prior to the auction sale, which was scheduled for 29 March 1994. A real difficulty arose, in the course of submissions, in seeking to formulate the relief to which Mr and Mrs
Pollack were entitled, if I were to come to the conclusion that the contract was unjust. It was firstly suggested that some relief should be given in relation to the additional $40,000, which was lent. The problem about this was that that amount was used to discharge liabilities Mr and Mrs Pollack or, in the case of American Express,
Mr Pollack, were obliged to repay. Another submission was made that in any event the interest rate should be reduced to what was said to be the agreed interest rate of 10.5 per centum per annum. 
Facts Giving Rise To The Entry Into The Mortgage
Mr Pollack said that he and Mrs Pollack were under pressure to pay out the existing mortgage and that proceedings had been commenced against them seeking possession preparatory to a sale. As a result of negotiations the property was listed for auction on 29 March 1994, and the only way that could be prevented was by obtaining finance to pay out the mortgage.
Mr Pollack said that in late February he made an initial loan application to Byrnes, with whom he had had previous dealings in various capacities, and, on 22 February , he received a letter from Byrnes requesting funds so that a valuation of the property could be obtained, and stating that they were in a position "to lend slightly better than sixty five per cent". A valuation was obtained from Laing and Simmons on 3 March ,
which valued the property "unencumbered and subject to vacant possession" at $625,000.
On 8 March 1994 Byrnes wrote to Mr Carter seeking finance on the basis of a loan for $425,000 for one year, and stating they had "assumed a fixed rate facility of eleven per cent". The amount sought was approximately sixty eight per cent of the value of the property. The letter stated, inter alia:- "Mr Pollack is a solicitor and owns his own practice situated at 301 Pitt Street, Sydney.

Mr Pollack has no outstanding liabilities and on taking his previous year's income into account will easily service the loan."
The letter was signed by a Miss Susan Hamilton on behalf of Mr Reg
Delaney, who was stated to be a director of Byrnes. On 14 March 1994 Mr Carter sent a facsimile transmission, for the attention of Mr Delaney, referring to the application and stating:- "Our client would be interest (sic) at an effective rate of .5% rather than 11%."
The communication stated that "our client" required various information, which was specified.
Mr Pollack said, in paragraph 3 of his affidavit of 11 May 1995, that on the same day he had a telephone conversation with Mr Carter in which he said to Mr Carter that Mr Delaney had told him that the deal "is set at 10.5%, when can we settle?. Mr Pollack said Mr Carter said he would prepare the documents and asked when Mr Pollack needed to settle and he said "as soon as possible and certainly before 29 March". Mr Pollack said he informed Mr Delaney of this. Mr Pollack had had some professional dealings with Mr Carter prior to this, and Mr Carter had acted for Mr Hudson, when that mortgage was granted.
Mr Pollack referred to the writ of Execution lodged against his interest by American Express, and he said that as a result of negotiations between the solicitors for it and him in March 1994 a mortgage was prepared, which was to be registered as a second mortgage after the mortgage to the plaintiffs. In the telephone conversation with Mr Carter he said he had referred to that fact and asked whether Mr and Mrs Carnovale would consent to the registration of a second mortgage, to which Mr Carter replied they would.
I shall return to the negotiations with the solicitors for American Express. In paragraph 8 of his affidavit of 11 May 1995 Mr Pollack said that had he known on 14 March 1994 that the plaintiffs would only advance $465,000 and required interest at the rate of sixteen per centum per annum reducible to twelve per centum per annum for prompt payment, he would have sought alternative finance in the sum of $425,000 at an interest rate of 10.5 or eleven per centum per annum but, by the time he learnt of the amount of the principal and interest, which would actually be payable under the mortgage, "it was too late for my wife and me to be able to obtain other finance. The mortgage was settled on about 23 March and the auction of the property was then cancelled."
In his affidavit of 4 July 1995 Mr Pollack, inter alia, sought to explain how he proposed to re-finance the various debts he and his wife owed. He said that when he made the loan application to Byrnes he calculated that an amount of $425,000 would be sufficient to enable settlement to proceed. He estimated that approximately $418,000 was required to discharge the first mortgage to the Howard Trust, and that approximately $20,000 was required to discharge the second mortgage to A. Hudson. He had had previous discussions with the solicitors for American
Express, who advised him that provided security was given over the property for the debt "they would favourably consider any reasonable proposal for repayment of the debt". He also had "a few thousand dollars himself" and, at the time, he approached a friend, Mr David
Waterhouse, "who indicated to me that he would make available between $10,000 to $20,000 if required". This was, he said in evidence, to be an interest free loan.
On 17 March 1994 Mr Pollack wrote to the solicitors for American Express requesting a withdrawal of the writ of Execution in consideration of Mr and
Mrs Pollack executing a mortgage and, in that letter, he referred to approval of a first mortgage advance in the sum of $425,000 at an interest rate of 10.5 per centurn per annum. On 22 March 1994 he received a letter from the solicitors for American Express, which enclosed for execution, stamping and return a mortgage in duplicate, a deed of priority, a memorandum, an authority and undertaking, a solicitor's certificate, mortgagee's requisitions on title and a memorandum of costs and disbursements. The letter stated certain requirements, which would have to be met. On 23 March 1994 Mr Pollack spoke to a solicitor for American Express, advised of the change in the loan approval and, on the same date, received a letter stating that American Express would only provide the withdrawal of the writ upon being paid $16,000 by way of bank cheque and various costs, and also requiring that the balance of the judgment debt, amounting to $4,678.42 be paid as to $1,500 on or before 1 May 1994, $1,500 on or before 1 June 1994, and the balance together with interest on the balance outstanding on or before 1 July 1994. The letter stated that in the event of any one payment not being met the balance outstanding at the time of default was to become immediately due and payable, and required the return of the mortgage documents, which were to be held unregistered pending compliance with the terms. Mr Pollack was asked to acknowledge his agreement by signing a copy of the letter, which he seems to have done.
On March 1994 Mr Carter wrote to Mr and Mrs Pollack setting out the terms and conditions upon which Mr and Mrs Carnovale were prepared to lend money. The amount of the loan was stated as $465,000, to be secured by a first registered mortgage over the property, with a fixed interest rate of sixteen per centum per annum reducing to twelve per centum per annum for payment by bank cheque "within due date days of the due date". The term of the loan was for one year and interest in the sum of $6,200 per month, reducing to $4,650 for payment by bank cheque "within due date days of the due date", was to be paid monthly. Settlement was to be within seven days "subject to availability of funds".
The letter concluded:- "The conditions on the attached pages form part of this loan approval and you will be bound by those conditions. PLEASE
READ THEM carefully, and after reading those conditions please sign where indicated, and return the copy letter and
Acceptance of Loan and Undertaking to this office as soon as possible."
Mr Pollack said, in his affidavit of 11 May 1995, that he received the letter on 22 March 1994 and, immediately thereafter, telephoned Mr Carter and told him the amounts of principal and interest were incorrect, to which Mr
Carter replied:- "That is the deal, take it or leave it."
Mr Pollack said he told Mr Carter that he, Mr Carter, knew it was too late to enable alternative finance to be obtained and "we have no choice but to accept". Accordingly, he said the offer was accepted and the letter of acceptance was returned to Mr Carter. After American Express learnt of the increase in the principal amount it required payment of $16,000.
Mr Pollack said that before accepting the original offer of $425,000 at .5 per cent he had calculated the interest payable per month would be $3,718, which was an interest payment he and his wife would have been able to meet. There is a problem about this because, in addition to that amount, Mr
Pollack was obliged, had he gone ahead with the second mortgage to American
Express, to pay it $2,500 per month for at least eight months, which would have increased the amount payable to a total of $6,218 per month, or approximately $1,600 more than $4,650 per month, which was the monthly interest payable under the mortgage at the rate of twelve per cent. He continued:- "For almost the whole period of the mortgage, we had difficulty raising the additional money required to pay the interest by the due date, with the result that interest was charged by the plaintiff's at the rate of 16% per month, and the actual payments that my wife and I made under the mortgage was $6,200 per month. During the period of the mortgage up to the expiry on 23 March 1995 myself and my wife have made payments to the mortgagees in the sum of $59,600. If the mortgage had proceeded on the basis of an interest rate of 10.5% the payments due would of (sic) been in the sum of $44,625."
This calculation does not take account of the sum of $2,500 payable monthly, for at least eight months, to American Express. That would have added $20,000 to the sum of $44,625 and led to a payment of some $64,625.
Mr Pollack sought to explain this by saying that there was no need to comply with the requirements of American Express, at least in their terms, because provided American Express was paid some amount at some time it would not have enforced its strict legal rights. However, apart from Mr Pollack's assertion to that effect, and notwithstanding the terms of the letter written by the solicitors for American Express on 23 March 1994, there was no evidence to support his assertion. As American Express had obtained a judgment and had been offered security for the judgment debt it is a little difficult to see why it would have extended such leniency to Mr Pollack.
There was a conflict of evidence as to whether there was an agreement that the amount to be borrowed was increased from $425,000 to $465,000. Mr
Pollack said he had never that to be done, save in so far as he accepted, what he asserted was a fait accompli on 22 March 1994. Mr Carter said that was the amount sought by Byrnes, offered and accepted. 
What Was The Agreement?
The case Mr and Mrs Pollack sought to make was that Mr Carter, knowing of their difficult financial position, and knowing they had little alternative but to accept whatever amount was offered to them, increased the amount to be lent and the interest rate and, thereby, imposed upon them a higher liability than they were otherwise prepared to accept, in circumstances where Mr Carter appreciated they could only avoid taking up the loan on pain of having the property sold. Without putting too fine a point upon it, what was submitted was that Mr Carter had deliberately extorted money from Mr and Mrs Pollack.
The allegation only has to be stated to appreciate its seriousness. However, the fact it is a serious allegation is, obviously enough, not something which would preclude its being determined favourably to Mr and Mrs Pollack if the evidence otherwise supported such a finding.
There are, in my opinion, a number of matters making it improbable that
Mr Carter acted in the way
Mr and Mrs Pollack alleged. I should note two matters at this stage. Firstly, it was not in issue that Mr Carter was acting as the agent for Mr and Mrs Carnovale, so that any improper conduct, or conduct leading to the contract being unjust, would relate to them.
Secondly, it was not in issue that Mr and Mrs Pollack bore the onus of proving the allegations they made.
The matters which, in my opinion, go to the probabilities and which point strongly against the view for which Mr and Mrs Pollack assert are:- 
The amount borrowed was the precise amount Mr and Mrs
Pollack required to discharge their various indebtedness.
suggested there were other means of doing so, the fact is that the money borrowed equated precisely to the amount needed to discharge the liabilities. I appreciate there were two variable figures. Firstly, Mr Pollack was able to negotiate a lower repayment to the first mortgagee. There is no evidence that Mr Carter was aware of this. Secondly, although Mr Pollack asserted he wished to maintain his previous arrangements with American Express, he did, on 23
March 1994, advise its solicitor of the amount he was receiving. One wonders why he did this if he wished to retain what he suggested was the flexible arrangement with
American Express. It may be that he thought that on settlement American Express would become aware of the amount being borrowed and it was better to deal with the matter, rather than cause any problems on settlement.
However, whatever might be the explanation, he was able to liquidate the debt to the extent of $16,000 and come to an arrangement as to the payment of the balance. There is no evidence how Mr Carter would have been able to calculate the exact amount required on settlement. The only reasonable inference, in these circumstances, is that he was told by Mr Delaney.

It is, in my opinion, inherently improbable that Mr
Carter would act in the way Mr and Mrs Pollack assert. He had, and still has, a large practice in the lending of money.
If it were to become common knowledge that he pursued a practice of the type alleged in the present case the reasonable inference is that it would be difficult for him to arrange for the lending of money. I should hasten to add that Mr Carter denied that he had acted in the way alleged in any event.

Mr Pollack was unable to explain why, after the loan was made and settlement had taken place, he did not immediately complain to Mr Carter. At that stage he knew all the facts, which would give rise to the present c omplaint, and one would have expected any person, and particularly a solicitor, upon whom the conduct of which he now complains had been practised, to complain bitterly.

But until these proceedings were commenced, or more accurately, until the Cross-Claim was filed, no complaint was made to Mr Carter after settlement. In my view it is totally improbable that the complaint would not have been made at a very early time if there was any validity in it.

My conclusion about the absence of a complaint is fortified by the failure by Mr and Mrs Pollack to make payments of interest from the commencement. It is not as if they paid the amount they thought they were liable to pay. At the conclusion of the first month the interest payment was not made and the mortgage thereafter, essentially, remained in default. Not only were demands made by Mr Carter on behalf of Mr and Mrs Carnovale, but notices under [s.57(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/s57.html) of the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) were served.
It was apparent that from about June 1994 Mr and Mrs
Carnovale were intent on exercising their rights to payment for the full amount at the interest rate specified in the mortgage. Even if, for some totally unexplained reason, the complaint was not made shortly after settlement, once the mortgage fell into arrears and proceedings of the type to which
I have referred were threatened it is totally inconceivable that Mr and Mrs Pollack would not raise with Mr Carter the problem.
As I have noted previously
Mr Pollack had had business and professional dealings with Mr Carter and no reason is suggested why this matter could not have been taken up with him.

I would also refer, again, to the fact that the payments to the extent of the amount Mr and Mrs Pollack assert they thought they were bound to make were not made. In other words, if there were severe financial constraints upon Mr and Mrs Pollack said to be brought about by the conduct of
Mr Carter, one would have expected, at the least, that payments, on the basis for which they contended, would have been made in pro tanto discharge of the obligation for which
Mr Carter was contending, and in total discharge of the liability for which they were contending.

On 18 March 1994 Byrnes sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Carter stating: - "Your offer of 12% and $2,000 est fee has been rejected by our client, as we previously advised him of your offer of .5%. We are advised to accept 11% payable in arrears."
The significance of this is that there must have been, between the letter of 14 March 1994 and 18 March 1994, a review of the interest rate by Mr
Carter. Mr Carter explained the increase in the interest rate in a manner
I found totally acceptable. The property was valued at $625,000, so that a loan of $425,000 would have been to an amount of about sixty eight per cent of the value. On the other hand the loan of $465,000 was 74.4 per cent of the value.
Mr Carter said, and I accept his evidence, that persons lending on the security of first mortgages were content to lend approximately sixty six per cent of the value at the prevailing interest rate, which was about 10.5 per cent. However, once the percentage of the value of the property rose as high as 74.4 per cent, or thereabouts, the risk increased and the consequence was an increase in the interest being charged. Mr
Carter said, and once again I accept this evidence, it would have been far easier for him to have arranged a loan at $425,000, than one of $465,000, on the security of a property valued at $625,000. However, in dealing with the probabilities, the importance is that something obviously happened between 14 and 18 March 1994 to cause Mr
Carter, firstly, to increase the interest rate to twelve per cent and, secondly, for Byrnes to agree to eleven per cent. I hasten to add that Mr
Pollack denied he gave any such authority.
However that may be the parties were clearly negotiating on the basis of an increased rate above 10.5 per cent and, in my opinion, the proper inference to be drawn is that this was because of the increased amount of principal sought by Mr and Mrs Pollack.
 
Byrnes were acting as the mortgage brokers for Mr and
Mrs Pollack and, on settlement, they were paid, at the direction of Mr Pollack, their fee. There was no evidence that after receiving the offer in the letter of 21 March Mr Pollack took the matter up with Mr Delaney, or anyone else at Byrnes, to ascertain what had happened.
There was no evidence that after settlement Mr Pollack raised the matter with Byrnes, notwithstanding he knew they were dealing with Mr Carter. If the version for which he contends is correct it is inconceivable, in my opinion, that he would not have complained bitterly to
Byrnes. Not only is there no evidence that he did, but neither Mr Delaney, nor anyone else from Byrnes, was called to contradict the evidence of Mr Carter that he was asked to arrange a loan of $465,000. Nor was any evidence called that Mr
Delaney had only asked for a lesser amount.
Nor, as I have said, did Mr Pollack offer any explanation as to why he did not take the matter up with Byrnes before or after settlement, as to why he did not ask Byrnes to try to resolve the matter conformably with the instructions he said he gave, nor why he approved of the payment of the mortgage fee to Byrnes.

The amount being borrowed called for a monthly interest payment of $4,650, which covered the re-financing of the first mortgage and the payments which would otherwise have had to have been made to
American Express. If the original transactions had proceeded
Mr and Mrs Pollack would have had to pay $3,718 per month to Mr and Mrs Carnovale, and $2,500 per month to American Express, i.e. $6,218, so that their monthly repayments would have been some $1,600 more than the $4,650. I have great difficulty, for reasons I have given, in accepting Mr Pollack's evidence that American Express would have accepted lesser terms.

Financially the total deal being offered by Mr and Mrs
Carnovale was more attractive than the two arrangements by some $1,600 per month.

When Mr and Mrs Carnovale inspected the property, which was before the loan was made, Mrs Carnovale noted on the copy of the valuation: "Loan asked for $465,000 at % 12 months". No challenge was made to this evidence and, whilst it may be equivocal in the sense that it may mean Mr Carter asked for this amount from Mr and Mrs
Carnovale, or Mrs
Carnovale was noting what Mr Carter said Mr and Mrs Pollack wanted, the figure being discussed was $465,000.

All of these matters point cogently to an acceptance of the evidence by Mr Carter that the amount of principal was increased from $425,000 to $465,000 at the request of Mr Delaney and that, in making that request, Mr Delaney was acting on instructions he received from Mr Pollack.
Mr Pollack said that when he received the letter of 21 March 1994 on 22
March 1994 he had two alternatives. He could either have accepted the terms, or he could have allowed the property to be sold. He took the decision to accept the terms and he did so in circumstances where he said he was dissatisfied with the way in which the real estate agents negotiating the auction of the property were acting. There was also evidence before me that if the terms had not been accepted it would have taken, in all probability, a further three to four weeks to obtain a loan. This, of course, pointed up another difficulty confronting
Mr and Mrs Pollack. It was not until 3 March that they obtained the valuation, which was then sent to Byrnes and, even at that stage, there were severe time constraints on their obtaining another loan within that period. In my view Mr Pollack took a commercial decision to proceed with the re-financing in circumstances where he had requested that the advance be increased to cover the amount needed to discharge his indebtedness.
 
The Conflict Of Evidence Between Mr Pollack And Mr Carter
For the reasons I have given it seems to me totally improbable Mr Carter would have acted in the way in which Mr and Mrs Pollack allege. There is only one area of the evidence, which causes me to pause about this. Mr Pollack alleged that on 22 March 1994 he telephoned Mr Carter and complained about the principal sum and the interest rate. I have set out what he asserted Mr
Carter's response to be. While Mr Carter denied he would have used the words attributed to him, because he said it was not his way of dealing particularly with other members of the profession, and there was some evidence that Mr
Carter had previously had professional dealings with Mr Pollack, he said he could not remember a complaint about the interest rate or the principal amount. It was submitted on behalf of Mr and Mrs Pollack that this lack of recall was extraordinary and it seemed somewhat strange to me. However, I have come to the conclusion that this is not an aspect of the evidence, which can lead me to the conclusion that Mr Carter acted in the way in which it is alleged he did. Further, the inability of Mr Carter to be able to remember does not, in any way derogate from the view to which I have come that he did not engage in the type of conduct Mr and Mrs Pollack alleged. Nor, in my opinion, does it go any way towards overcoming the probabilities to which I have referred. Indeed, one may take the view that if the complaint was made on March 1994 there was even more reason why Mr Pollack should have been complaining after settlement both to Mr Carter and Byrnes.
There were also certain matters about Mr Pollack's evidence, which left me with some disquiet. Firstly, he was prepared to answer requisitions that there was no judgment outstanding against him when that was not the fact.
There was a judgment in respect of rates outstanding against him. Secondly, he was unable to provide any explanation, which I found convincing, as to why no payments were made conformably with the agreement he thought was in place.
Also I accept the evidence of Mr Carter that Mr Delaney asked for the amount to be increased from $425,000 to $465,000, as the former would not "be sufficient", Tp.31, and his denials, Tp.44, that he had engaged in such conduct.
In the result there was no conduct for or on behalf of the plaintiffs, which was "unjust" within the meaning of the [Contracts Review Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/). Mr Evatt, correctly in my view, accepted that if I did not accept that Mr Carter acted in the way for which his clients contended, relief under that Act could not be established. I agree and, in any event, I would have come to the same conclusion. This makes it unnecessary to consider the type of relief to which
Mr and Mrs Pollack would have been entitled if they had proved unjustness and, indeed, whether, in the exercise of the Court's discretion, any relief should have been granted. 
Is The Sixth Covenant A Penalty?
The interest under the mortgage was sixteen per cent, reducible to twelve per cent for timely payment. The question is whether an amount, additional to interest whilst the money is outstanding, being a further payment of one month's interest at sixteen per cent is a penalty in circumstances where the parties have agreed expressly that it is a genuine pre-estimate of damage. The damage, so it was submitted, was the possible increase in interest rates of which Mr and Mrs Carnovale would not be able to take advantage because of the default.
I have not found the resolution of this question easy. On behalf of Mr and Mrs Pollack it was submitted that the requirement to pay a further one month's interest was not a genuine pre-estimate of damage, but rather a penalty imposed to pressure Mr and Mrs Pollack to repay the principal sum on the expiry date of the mortgage. Reliance was placed upon the well known statements of Lord Dunedin in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co Limited versus New Garage and Motor Co Limited <case>; [(1915) AC 79] at pp.86 to 88, which require the Court to determine whether, as a matter of construction, the terms and inherent circumstances of each contract, judged as at the time of its making, and not of its breach, was a penalty or liquidated damages.
In AMEV-UDC
Finance Limited versus Austin and Anor <case>; [(1986) 162 CLR 170] Mason and Wilson JJ, after considering various authorities said, at p. 190:- "These decisions are more consistent with an underlying policy of restricting the parties, in case of breach of contract, to the recovery of an amount of damages no greater than that for which the law provides. However, there is much to be said for the view that the Courts should return to the
Clydebank and Dunlop concept, thereby allowing parties to a contract greater latitude in determining what their rights and liabilities will be, so that an agreed sum is only characterised as a penalty if it is out of all proportion to damage likely to be suffered as a result of breach: see Robophone
Facilities Limited versus Blank; UK Law Commission, paragraphs , 42, .

From this review of the doctrine of penalties, brief though it is, the following points emerge: (1) equity would only relieve where compensation could be made for the actual damage suffered by the party seeking to recover the penalty; the actual damage suffered by the party was assessed in an action at common law, such as an action of covenant, or upon a special issue quantum damnificatus which could be joined in an action on the case:
Simpson ... ; (3) the expression 'actual damage' seems to have been used in contradistinction to 'agreed sum' or 'liquidated' or 'stipulated' damages, not by way of opposition to damage which was recoverable at law; (4) there seems to have been no instance of equity awarding compensation over and above the amount awarded as common law damages, other than cases in which equity would not relieve against the penalty; and (5) relief was granted, in the case of penal bonds, where there was no express contractual promise to perform the condition (see
Hardy versus Martin), though it seems such a promise could in many cases readily be implied." 
At p.193 their Honours said: -
 "Instead of pursuing a policy of restricting parties to the amount of damages which would be awarded under the general law or developing a new law of compensation for plaintiffs who seek to enforce a penalty clause, the Court should give the parties greater latitude to determine the terms of their contract. In the case of provisions for agreed compensation and, perhaps, provisions limiting liability, that latitude is mutually beneficial to the parties. It makes for greater certainty by allowing the parties to determine more precisely their rights and liabilities consequent upon breach or termination, and thus enables them to provide for compensation in situations where loss may be difficult or impossible to quantify or, if quantifiable, may not be recoverable at common law. And they may do so in a way that avoids costly and time consuming litigation. But equity and the common law have long maintained a supervisory jurisdiction, not to re-write contracts imprudently made, but to relieve against provisions which are so unconscionable or oppressive that their nature is penal rather than compensatory. The test to be applied in drawing that distinction is one of degree and will depend on a number of circumstances, including (1) the degree of disproportion between the stipulated sum and the loss likely to be suffered by the plaintiff, a factor relevant to the oppressiveness of the term to the defendant, and (2) the nature of the relationship between the contracting parties, a factor relevant to the unconscionability of the plaintiff's conduct in seeking to enforce the term.
The Court should not, however, be too ready to find the requisite degree of disproportion lest they impinge on the parties' freedom to settle for themselves the rights and liabilities following a breach of contract. The doctrine of penalties answers, in situations of the present kind, an important aspect of the criticism often levelled against unqualified freedom of contract, namely the possible inequality of bargaining power. In this way the Courts strike a balance between the competing interests of freedom of contract and protection of weak contracting parties: see, generally, Atiyah, The Rise and Fall of Freedom of
Contract esp. Chapter 22."
In AMEV Finance Limited versus Artes Studios Thoroughbreds Pty Limited [(1989) NSWLR 564] Clarke JA, with whom Kirby P and McHugh JA agreed, said, at p.576:- "In these circumstances it seems to me that it is appropriate to re-consider the judgment in W.T. Malouf Pty
Limited versus Brinds Limited and upon that reconsideration to conclude that contractual terms providing for the payment of agreed liquidated damages should be struck down as a penalty only if the agreed sum be either extravagant in amount or imposes an unconscionable or unreasonable burden upon a party.
This approach would give full meaning to the distinction between a genuine attempt to agree as to the damage likely to flow from the event which triggers the operation of the clause and the imposition of a sanction or penalty against breach."
His Honour then referred to the joint judgment of Mason and Wilson JJ at p.193, which I have cited.
At p.578 his Honour said:- "I will therefore approach the question in this case upon the basis that there was an onus upon the respondent to satisfy the Court that there was such a disproportion between the sum payable on termination, calculated in accordance with the terms of the contract, and the likely damage flowing to the appellant upon termination that it should be concluded that the pre-estimate was either extravagant or unconscionable."
In PC Developments Pty Limited versus Revell and Anor [(1991) 22 NSWLR 615] the majority of the Court of Appeal followed, as I understand it, the tests to which I have just referred and, in particular, those stated by Mason and
Wilson JJ.
In Multiplex Constructions Pty Limited versus Abgarus Pty Limited and Anor [(1992) 33 NSWLR 504] Cole J had regard to similar principles and to evidence concerning the circumstances in which an alleged penalty clause was brought into existence as being relevant to unconscionability and, therefore, admissible.
In the present case Mr and Mrs Carnovale remained entitled to interest at the rate of sixteen per cent until such time as the principal was repaid.
However, under the mortgage, that was the interest to which they were entitled whilst the money remained outstanding. The entitlement of Mr and Mrs Pollack to pay the lesser sum only arose when they paid within the time stipulated.
Therefore, in my opinion, it is not correct to look at interest at the rate of sixteen per cent as being a "penalty" and, indeed, the mortgage was structured, as mortgages invariably are, to prevent a penalty arising. The question then is, conformably with the authorities to which I have referred, whether the requirement to pay a further one month's interest is so disproportionate, having regard to the breach, that it should be struck down, in accordance with those principles, as a penalty. In the result Mr and Mrs
Pollack have not satisfied me that that is the case. It seems to me that to strike down this clause as a penalty would be, in the circumstances of this case, to remove, effectively, the rights of the parties to determine a "genuine pre-estimate of damages". That has to be viewed, particularly, having regard to the fact that the assessment thereof was to be made at the time the contract was entered into. Mr and Mrs Pollack have not satisfied me it was not a genuine pre-estimate of damages in the context of the type of contract and the potential for damages against which the mortgagees were seeking to protect themselves. They have not satisfied me that there was any conduct on the part of Mr and Mrs Carnovale, in which I include Mr Carter, which entitles them to challenge this contractual provision. 
The Position Of Mrs Pollack
Mr Evatt submitted that Mrs Pollack was not liable for any of the amount owing to American Express and that, to the extent to which her interest in the property was reduced by the payment of that debt, her position "should be considered". In my view this is a matter to be resolved between Mr and Mrs
Pollack. Further, the position seems no different, in substance, from what would have occurred if the original arrangements had been put in place. 
Amount Of Indebtedness
The amount of the indebtedness was stated in the affidavit of
Paul
William Edmonds of 5 July 1995 to be $528,247.48. Subject to one aspect this figure was not in issue, Whilst it was conceded
Mr and Mrs Pollack had to pay costs for the enforcement of the mortgage on a solicitor and client basis, it was not conceded that the fees set forth in items AA to AI inclusive were such as would be assessed on a solicitor and client basis and, accordingly, that those amounts and the interest components on them were payable. The amounts claimed in those items are $18,015.19, which, when deducted from $528,247.48 left a balance of $510,232.29, which amount is payable by Mr and Mrs Pollack out of the proceeds of sale as at 5
July 1995. The amount will, obviously enough, increase prior to settlement of any sale. However the amount payable as at 5 July 1995 was $510,232.29 to which the costs of enforcement will have to be added.
The parties agreed that if there is a balance, $18,015.19 of it should be held in a trust account pending the assessment of the costs and, upon such assessment, there should be paid from that trust account the costs so assessed. This, of course, presupposes that the sale price will at least equate to the amount claimed of $528,247.48 after the deduction of selling costs. Although I was minded to make some more specific declarations than I propose to, I am of the view that is not appropriate because of the uncertainty as to when and for what amount the property will be sold.

Orders And Declarations
I order that the Cross-Claim be dismissed.
I order Mr and Mrs Pollack pay the costs of Mr and
Mrs Carnovale of the proceedings including the Cross-Claim.
I declare that the amount owed by Mr and Mrs Pollack to Mr and
Mrs
Carnovale as at 5 July 1995 is $510,232.29 and costs of enforcement of the mortgage to be assessed on a solicitor and client basis.
I order the exhibits be returned at the expiration of twenty-eight (28) days from to-day's date unless, within that time, an appeal against this decision has been brought.
I grant liberty to apply in respect of the amount payable to discharge the mortgage on 24 hours' or such shorter notice as a Judge of the Court may allow.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/133.html  
