

Regina versus Too Matter No Cca 60562/96 [1997] NSWSC 659 (17 December 1997) 
Regina versus Moses Bo Too /96 December 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Dunford J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /96 REGINA versus Moses Bo TOO 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Following a trial before Badgery-Parker J and a jury the appellant was convicted of murder. He was sentenced to penal servitude involving a minimum term of thirteen years and six months and an additional term of four years and six months. He appeals against his conviction. An application for leave to appeal against the sentence was not pressed. 
On the afternoon of Saturday 16 September 1995, Steven Kennedy was fatally wounded when he was stabbed in the heart. Although the appellant denied that he stabbed Kennedy, it is not disputed on this appeal that there was ample evidence from which the jury were entitled to conclude that it was the appellant who killed Kennedy.

Because of the limited nature of the issue in the appeal it is possible to summarise the facts of the case, sufficiently for present purposes, fairly briefly. The following summary is substantially taken from the findings of fact made by Badgery-Parker J for sentencing purposes.

Steven Kennedy was killed at a house at 45 Kings Road, Tighes Hill. He had visited the house in the company of his de facto wife, Sharon Davis. Also present were a number of other people, one of whom was a man named Witek. Some of those at the house had been drinking fairly heavily, and Steven Kennedy was substantially affected by liquor.

According to Sharon Davis, the appellant approached her while she was in the kitchen and said he wanted to have sexual intercourse with her. He threatened to rape her. He menaced her with a knife. The jury were entitled to conclude that it was the same knife as that which caused the fatal wound to Kennedy.
Davis called for help. Kennedy responded. He came into the kitchen, and approached the appellant, carrying a nearly empty two litre bottle of bourbon in one hand. What he did with the bottle was the subject of conflicting evidence. Further reference to that will be made below.

A struggle took place between Kennedy and the appellant, in the course of which the two men moved from the kitchen into the dining room. Davis locked herself in a toilet. Witek gave evidence of having observed the struggle. He gave an account of Kennedy lying on the ground with the appellant kneeling over him and punching him.

In his remarks on sentence, Badgery-Parker J said: "Mr Witek observed some punches thrown by the prisoner in that situation, but he did not see the prisoner use the knife. It is abundantly clear, however, that one of the blows, probably the last of the blows, was struck with the knife, because what Mr Witek did see was that when the prisoner got up, leaving Mr Kennedy lying on the ground, Mr Kennedy was bleeding from the wound in the lower left chest, clearly the knife wound, from which, within a few minutes, he died.

I have no doubt that it was at the end of the struggle, when the prisoner had overpowered Mr Kennedy, that the prisoner, as an act of gratuitous aggression which could not be in any sense described as an act of self-defence, inflicted the stab wound which killed Steven Kennedy".

There was a difference between the evidence of Davis and that of Witek as to what Kennedy did with the bourbon bottle when he approached the appellant in the kitchen, following Davis' call for help.

According to Davis, Kennedy had the bottle raised as though he was going to strike the appellant with it. (There is no suggestion that the bottle was, or at any stage became, broken.) According to Witek, on the other hand, Kennedy offered the appellant a drink from the bottle, apparently in an attempt to appease him.

The appellant denied being involved in the stabbing of Kennedy. He said that he had fallen asleep on a lounge and had woken up to see Kennedy bleeding, near him.

The Crown placed considerable reliance upon evidence concerning the movements of, and statements made by, the appellant after he left the house, but it is unnecessary for present purposes to go into the detail of that.

Although counsel for the appellant did not raise self-defence, Badgery-Parker
J left that matter to the jury. The sole ground of appeal against conviction relates to the directions that were given to the jury concerning self-defence.
No complaint about those directions was made at the trial. Before the summing- up Badgery-Parker J foreshadowed, in the absence of the jury, what he had in mind saying, and invited comment. What he proposed met with no demur.

It is convenient to describe the general scheme of the self-defence directions that were given by Badgery-Parker J before coming to the particular matter which has given rise to the complaint made on this appeal.

Badgery-Parker J commenced by saying: "It is necessary for you to turn your minds to this issue, no matter what attitude the accused has taken to it in the course of the trial, because there is evidence before you of an approach by Mr Kennedy to the accused, Mr Kennedy having a bottle, and because it is at least possible that the accused perceived that to be a hostile approach. Because of those matters the law requires me to place this issue before you. It is not in fact as complicated as it may sound and quite frankly I do not expect that you will find it necessary to spend much time on it, but it is a matter for you. You are bound to give consideration to the evidence which appears on the question whether it is reasonably possible that the accused may have done what he did in lawful self-defence." 
Badgery-Parker J reminded the jury of the conflicting evidence as to the use
Kennedy appeared to be making of the bottle. He dealt first with the version of Davis, and I will return to that. When he came to the version given by
Witek, it was that Kennedy walked up to the appellant and offered him a drink from the bottle. The judge said that, on that account of the relevant events, there was nothing to cause the appellant to believe that he was under attack or about to be under attack. He said that if events occurred as Witek described them, the jury might think that any possible basis of self-defence was excluded.

It was the account of events given by Davis, or, more accurately, part of that account, which, Badgery-Parker J said, raised the possibility of self-defence.
In that connection, he said, the question turned upon whether the jury accepted the whole, or only part, of the evidence of Davis. If the jury accepted only that part of her evidence which was to the effect that Kennedy approached the appellant in a threatening manner with a bottle, then there was an issue of self-defence. If, on the other hand, the jury accepted the whole of the account given by Davis, including her evidence that the approach by
Kennedy to the appellant occurred as a response to the appellant's menacing
Davis with a knife, and her calls for help, then there was no viable issue of self-defence.

The directions which give rise to the present appeal were expressed as follows: "She (Davis) said in effect that Kennedy came at the accused with the bourbon bottle in his hand, raised as if to strike, as if to use it as a weapon. If that is what occurred and if that is only what occurred, you may well think it is a reasonable possibility that the accused would have believed it necessary to do something to defend himself against an assault by a drunken man armed with a bottle. But according to Sharon Davis, that is not all that occurred.
According to her evidence Mr Kennedy's approach to the accused with the bottle in that manner was a response to her cry for help at a time when the accused was menacing her with his knife. Now, as to that, members of the jury, I give you this, it is a further direction of law. If you accept Sharon Davis' evidence as to the circumstances in which Mr Kennedy approached the accused with the bottle, then I direct you that no question of self-defence arises at all for your consideration. If you accept that the whole episode which ended with Steven Kennedy being stabbed had started with the accused's assault on Ms
Davis and his menacing her with a knife, no issue of self-defence arises for your consideration." 
That is what is now alleged to have been a misdirection. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that the jury should have been directed that, even if they accepted substantially the whole of the evidence of Sharon Davis, there was an issue of self-defence for them to consider.

It is evident that Badgery-Parker J felt constrained to raise self-defence because of the principles stated in Pemble versus The Queen <case>; [(1970) 124 CLR 107], and because, as he told the jury, they were not bound either to accept or reject the evidence of Davis, or any other witness, as a whole, but could accept parts of the evidence and reject other parts.

The Crown submitted at the trial, and on this appeal, that in truth there was no viable issue of self-defence in the case. On that basis it is submitted that, even if the court were to find some fault with the direction that was given, the case is one for the application of the proviso to [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s6.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) .

In Zecevic versus Director of Public Prosecutions <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 645] at 663-664 Wilson, Dawson and Toohey JJ (with whom Mason CJ agreed) said: "It is ... only in an unusual situation that an attack which is not unlawful will provide reasonable grounds for resort to violence in self-defence. The whole of the surrounding circumstances are to be taken into account and where an accused person has created the situation in which force might lawfully be applied to apprehend him or cause him to desist - where, eg, he is engaged in criminal behaviour of a violent kind - then the only reasonable view of his resistance to that force will be that he is acting, not in self-defence, but as an aggressor in pursuit of his original design. A person may not create a continuing situation of emergency and provoke a lawful attack upon himself and yet claim upon reasonable grounds the right to defend himself against that attack." 
Brennan J said, at 666-667: "A man who threatens deadly force to a person who is attempting to rape his wife or child cannot be killed with impunity by the would-be rapist, even if he believes on reasonable grounds that he would otherwise be killed." 
There were some differences in the reasoning by which the majority and Brennan
J reached the conclusions expressed in the above passages, but the conclusions have direct application to the facts of the present case.

It is true that the case of self-defence left to the jury was, as Badgery-
Parker J acknowledged, thin. There is also much to be said for the Crown's argument that it was unnecessary to raise self-defence at all. However, it is not necessary to express a concluded view on that.

The answer to the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant is contained in the passages from Zecevic quoted above.

I would not give leave to rely on the point now argued but, in any event, after hearing argument on the point, I do not consider it to have merit.

The appeal should be dismissed.
 
REGINA versus Moses Bo TOO 
JUDGMENT 
DUNFORD J: I agree with the Chief Justice. 
REGINA versus Moses Bo TOO 
JUDGMENT 
BARR J: I agree with the Chief Justice. 
REGINA versus Moses Bo TOO 
CRIMINAL LAW - MURDER - SELF-DEFENCE - appellant convicted of murder - appellant had threatened to rape victim's wife - victim responded to wife's call for help and threatened appellant with bottle - after a struggle appellant stabbed victim - HELD - on that factual basis there was no viable case of self-defence to be left to the jury. 
Zecevic versus Director of Public Prosecutions <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 645] applied.

O R D E R 
Appeal dismissed. * * * 
