

Property Builders Pty Limited versus Carlamax Properties Pty Ltd;Property
Builders (Constructions) Pty Limited versus Carlamax Properties Pty Ltd [2011]
NSWSC 1200 (23 September 2011) 
Last Updated: 17 October 2011 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Property Builders Pty Limited versus Carlamax Properties Pty Ltd;Property Builders
Pty Limited versus Carlamax Properties Pty Ltd  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): 
Friday, 23 September 2011  
Decision Date: September 2011  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
White J  
Decision: 
Refer to paras [8]-[11] of judgment.  
Catchwords: 
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - final orders to give effect to reason - further submissions raised - further submissions fail on the merits - costs - no question of principle  
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In my reasons of 14 September 2011 I directed that the plaintiffs provide a calculation in accordance with my reasons of the amount of offsetting claim that I found to be arguable. That calculation has been provided. The amount of the offsetting claim calculated in accordance with my reasons is $120,506.01. Consistently with my reasons, the statutory demand in each matter should be varied by substituting the sum of $528,366.51 for the sum stated in the statutory demand of $648,872.52. 
The plaintiffs raise further submissions. They contend that in the statement of claim the relief sought included a declaration that Property Builders (Constructions) was discharged from its guarantee, and that this means that at least Property Builders (Constructions) does not owe any sum. 
On the basis of my findings that it was arguable that Carlamax breached a duty it owed to the guarantor by agreeing to postpone the priority of its mortgage to the Bank of Adelaide, I accept that it might be arguable that Property Builders (Constructions) was discharged from any liability under its guarantee incurred or arising after Carlamax agreed to the postponement of its mortgage to the Adelaide Bank. I cannot see how the argument could lead to the conclusion that Property Builders (Constructions) was discharged from its guarantee in respect of a liability that had already accrued. 
However, the short answer to the arguments is that the cause of action of Carlamax against Property Builders (Constructions) on the guarantee has merged in the judgment at the District Court of 19 January 2011. As I have said there was no appeal from that judgment. This claim was not pleaded in the District Court. That does not affect the fact that the existence of the debt owed by Property Builders (Constructions) to Carlamax is res judicata . Thus, any offsetting claim available either to Property Builders or to Property Builders (Constructions) can only be a claim for damages or compensation as described in my reasons. 
For these reasons, I do not accept that there should be an order setting aside either statutory demand. 
I should note that Senior Counsel appearing for Carlamax this morning also contends that the argument raised in the plaintiffs' further submissions is not open because it is not advanced in the supporting affidavits. I think that submission in principle is well based, although I have some difficulty in seeing how it can be advanced, whilst at the same time not opposing the plaintiffs relying upon the argument as to an offsetting claim. Be that as it may, I think, on the merits, that the further submission raised by the plaintiffs cannot succeed. 
For these reasons I make the following orders: 
In each matter I order that the statutory demand served by the defendant on the plaintiffs dated 3 February 2011 be varied by substituting the sum of $528,366.51 for the sum of $648,872.52. 
Secondly, in each matter I declare the demand has had effect as varied in accordance with order 1 as from when the demand was served on the plaintiff. 
On the question of costs, the defendant submits it has been substantially successful because the amount claimed in the statutory demand has been reduced by only approximately 20 per cent. On the other hand, the defendants have been successful to that extent. In the circumstances, I think the appropriate order is there be no order as to costs with the intent that each party bear its own costs. I so order. 
The exhibits may be returned after 28 days. * * * 
