

Ashington Holdings Pty Ltd versus Wipema Services Pty Ltd (No. 3) Matter No /98 [1998] NSWSC 453 (1 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 5 November 1998 
ASHINGTON HOLDINGS PTY LTD versus WIPEMA SERVICES PTY LTD (NO. 3) /98 October 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These reasons deal with the question of costs in proceedings between the landlord and tenant of the floor of a city building. 
I heard the first tranche of the proceedings in April of this year. That resulted in me deciding that there was a contract for the tenant to take a new lease, but that it was doubtful whether the landlord was able to actually grant a lease in accordance with the contract in view of the fact that between the vital dates the original building had become the subject of a strata plan.

I dealt with the second tranche of the matter on 4 September 1998 and held that in the circumstances the landlord was not able to give a lease and the contract had become impossible to perform. Accordingly, the summons was dismissed.

The question of costs was argued today. Mr Ashhurst for the plaintiff put that there should be no order as to costs. He said that there were a series of questions, on some of which the plaintiff succeeded and on some of which the defendant succeeded, and that even though, strictly speaking, there were not separate issues the case was in like plight.

Mr Kelso, solicitor, who appeared for the defendant, put that as his client had in the ultimate succeeded it should be entitled to its costs as costs follow the event, and the event was that the plaintiff failed. Alternatively, he put that there should be no order as to costs up to the conclusion of the first tranche and thereafter his client should get its costs.

I believe that the proper exercise of the court's discretion in this matter is to do what Mr Ashhurst submits. I consider that the case is fairly close in principle, though not on the facts, with the decision of the Court of Appeal in Lenning versus Alexander Proudfoot Company World Headquarters (22 April , unreported). In that case Kirby P, as his Honour then was, said at page that the ordinary rule is: "...that costs in civil proceedings between private litigants are in the discretion of the court but will normally follow the event. That is to say, they will normally be ordered in favour of the party which has substantially succeeded in the litigation. ... That general rule is subject to one relevant qualification, that where proceedings involve multiple issues (as this one did) it is appropriate for the Court to take into account, in ordering costs, whether a party has succeeded on some issues and failed on others. In this regard it is appropriate to take into account the time taken by the resolution of particular issues although, necessarily, in a general order of costs, the
Court will not do so with mathematical precision." 
As I have said, the questions in the instant case did not deal with separate issues in the pleading sense, but this is not the sense of that expression in this aspect of the law; it is sufficient that there are two or more distinct points which need to be decided: Forster versus Farquhar [[1893] 1 QB ], and Hughes versus Western Australian Cricket Association (Inc) (1986) 8
ATPR 40-748 at p 48,136.

In my view, looking at the word "issue" in this wide sense, there were virtually two issues, one on which the plaintiff succeeded and the other on which the defendant succeeded. They both took approximately the same time and it is appropriate that there be no order as to costs, and I so order.
 * * * 
