

Regina versus Olbrich Matter No Cca 60800/96 [1998] NSWSC 278 (6 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus REINHOLD ERHARD OLBRICH 
CCA 60800/96 July 1998 
Spigelman CJ, Newman J, Sperling J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
REGINA versus Reinhold Erhard OLBRICH 
The applicant pleaded guilty to a charge under s233B(1)(b) of the [Customs
Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) of importing a trafficable quantity of heroin. The applicant claimed that he was a courier. The sentencing judge rejected the applicant's evidence, finding that he was a principal as far as the drug importation was concerned.
The sentencing judge based the sentence on this fact.

The applicant sought leave to appeal against this sentence, principally on the ground that the sentencing judge was wrong to reject the argument that the onus was on the Crown to prove, beyond reasonable doubt, that the applicant was not a courier.

Held: 
The sentencing judge failed to apply the correct principles. Accordingly, his sentencing discretion miscarried.
 Identification of the precise nature of the involvement of an accused in the importation is an essential aspect of the sentencing process.
 The plea of guilty only establishes the essential legal ingredients of the offence. The relevant ingredient of the offence is "importing". The plea encompasses only the process by which the goods enter Australian territory, with the intention of landing them within Australia.

See eg Wilson versus Chambers & Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1926) 38 CLR 131] @ 139; Bull <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 203] @ 230, 254; White versus Ridley <case>; [(1978) 140 CLR 342] @ 353-4; Courtney-Smith (No 2) (1990) 48 ACrimR @ 63-4. The plea of guilty to a charge involving only the act of importation carried no implication as to the degree of involvement of the accused in any overall scheme for importing drugs into Australia.
 
The onus of proof of matters going to aggravation is on the Crown.

Martin [(1981) 2 NSWLR 640] @ 642;
Traiconi (1970) 49 ACrimR 417 @ 418-9; Blanchard (unreported, Supreme
Court of NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 10 September 1991); Piley [(1991) 56
ACrimR 202] @ 204. The issue of standard of proof may still be open at the level of the High Court: see Anderson <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 520] cf 536 and 526, esp fn 25, 528. However, Australian authority now supports the beyond reasonable doubt standard. (See the review of authorities in Langridge [(1998) 87 ACrimR 1] @ 4-22 and
Storey [(1997) 89 ACrimR 519] @ 522-7, -30, 531 fn 41).

The onus of proof of matters going to mitigation is on the accused, who must establish such matters on the balance of probabilities: Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] @ 253-4; Piley [(1991) 56 ACrimR 202] @ 204;
Yonice [(1994) 72 ACrimR 234] @ 236-7;
Ho (unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 28 February ); See also Ali <case>; [(1996) 2 VR 49] esp @ 59-60; Storey [(1997) 89 ACrimR 519] @ 530, -8.
 Although the language of "aggravation" is not inappropriate what is in fact involved is establishing the objective seriousness of the offence by identifying the context of the offence. The process of characterising the degree of involvement of the accused is a matter akin to "aggravation" rather than "mitigation". Accordingly, the involvement of the importer in the course of events prior to, or subsequent to, the actual act of importation itself is a matter which the Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt.

ORDERS Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal allowed.
 Sentence quashed.
 Remit the matter to the District Court for sentencing.

REGINA versus Reinhold Erhard OLBRICH 
JUDGMENT 
SPIGELMAN CJ: This is an application for leave to appeal against a sentence passed by Judge Howie QC in the District Court. Before his Honour the applicant had adhered to a plea of guilty to a charge brought pursuant to s233B(1)(b) of the [Customs Act 1901](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) (Cth). The charge was that the applicant was in breach of the [Customs Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) by importing a prohibited import namely 1,184 grams of heroin - that quantity being not less than the trafficable quantity. 
His Honour sentenced the applicant to a head sentence of eight and a half years imprisonment with a non parole period of six years.

The facts of the applicant's apprehension are straight forward. On 16 August , the applicant arrived in Sydney at Kingsford Smith airport on a flight from Bangkok which had come via Singapore. In his customs declaration form he declared that he had gems and money with him but made no declaration on any other matter which he was required to declare. Amongst his items of luggage were one whisky bottle, two beer bottles, a plastic design board and a medicine bottle. On inspection by the Customs Service these bottles were found to contain white powder as was the plastic design board. A presumptive test carried out of the powder proved positive to heroin. Initially, the applicant denied any knowledge of the presence of the drug but subsequently stated that the bottles and the board had been given to him by a person named Noi in
Thailand.

While he initially told Federal agents that he was not one hundred percent certain that these items contained heroin, he believed that they must contain drugs because Noi was to pay him $15,000 to bring these items into the country. At first he stated that he was to make a delivery of the items to a person he named, at the Hilton Hotel in Sydney. Investigations revealed that he had no booking at that establishment. When further questioned he said he was in fact to make a delivery of the items in Perth to the nominated person and, while he was willing to take part in a controlled delivery, Federal agents declined to allow this to happen because of the distance involved. When the powder found in the items was subjected to a full analysis it was found to contain 1,184 grams of heroin.

The range of a trafficable quantity of heroin is vast, commencing at 2 grams and ending at 1.5 kilos where the quantity is then delineated by the [Customs
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) as being a commercial quantity.

On sentence, the applicant gave evidence maintaining his earlier statement that he was a courier. He claimed that he had refused offers to act as a drug courier in the past because of his dislike for the activity and that previously had had no need for money. He maintained he needed money when approached by Noi because his son had been arrested for offences in Singapore and had been sentenced to detention in a boys home. It was his claim that he was not aware at the time when Noi approached him what harm heroin could cause. His Honour flatly refused to believe the applicant's story.

Having rejected the applicant's evidence, his Honour found that he was a principal as far as this drug importation was concerned and passed his sentence on this fact. In so finding his Honour rejected an argument advanced on behalf of the applicant that the onus was on the Crown to prove, beyond reasonable doubt, that the applicant was not a courier and, there being no evidence to indicate that he was importing the heroin on his own account, his
Honour should not find that he was a principal.

This argument was the leading one advanced on behalf of the applicant on the appeal, namely, that his Honour was wrong in rejecting the argument advanced before him.

The importance for sentencing of knowing the precise role of a person convicted of importing drugs was clearly stated by Hunt CJ at CL in Raz, unreported, 17 December 1992. There his Honour stated @ pp6-7: "It is always relevant in the sentencing process to know just where a person guilty of importing drugs into Australia ... stands in relation to the organisation for which he commits that offence. He may have been recruited either here or overseas to bring the drugs into Australia for reward on one occasion only, and to hand them over to someone here. Such a person is the `bare or mere courier', and that is at one end of the spectrum of culpability.
At the other end is the principal of the organisation, or other senior person, who recruited the courier or who organised the supply of the drugs overseas or their distribution locally. In between there are many levels. But all are relevant is assessing the culpability of the person who is guilty of one or the other of those offences, and thus the sentence which is appropriate to that culpability.

It was therefore important for the judge to assess the level at which the applicant operated in this organisation in order to determine the degree of his culpability." 
There is a range of culpability, from a mere courier to the mastermind of a system, although there is no proportionate reduction for lower significance.
(See Le Cerf [(1978) 13 SASR 237] @ 239-240;
Laurentiu and Becheru [(1992) 63 ACrimR 402] @ -408).

The sentencing Judge recited the submission made to him, on the basis of
Anderson <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 520], that the Crown bore the onus of establishing beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant was not a courier. His Honour said: "I do not believe that this is the correct approach to take. The offence is one of importing narcotic goods. To the degree that a courier is given some mitigation by being less culpable for that offence than if he were a principal, it seems to me that the prisoner must prove that he is less culpable than the objective facts would otherwise indicate. Otherwise every importer of drugs would have to be treated as a courier by the Courts and by the Crown, unless the Crown could establish that he was not a courier. I do not think that can be correct as a matter of legal principle or logic." 
His Honour concluded after rejecting the applicant's evidence: "Therefore, I am not satisfied that he was bringing this drug into Australia as a courier and I am not prepared to mitigate his sentence on that basis. How do I then proceed to sentence him? Mr Hamill submits that I cannot sentence him on the basis that he was principal. But that seems to me to be the only alternative, having decided that I cannot treat him as a courier. If I dismiss his account of the facts surrounding his importation then for the purposes of assessing his culpability for the offence I should treat him as if he had told the police or this Court nothing about the circumstances of the event at all.
I should simply apply normal sentencing principles, taking into account the nature of offence, the maximum penalty and such other matters which are relevant to an assessment of the objective features of a criminal offence." 
There were a number of matters which could have justified a finding by his
Honour that the applicant was involved in the importation to a much higher level than being a mere courier. These included the following: 
The applicant's brother testified that a month before the offence, the applicant was "in good spirits and said he was making good money".

The applicant had made a large number of trips to Australia from Asia, about 20 in two and a half years.

The applicant used two passports, one for entry into Australia and the other for movements around Asia.

The applicant's address book had a number of names in code, including that of the proposed recipient of the heroin, whom he was to contact.

The applicant paid for his own travel and accommodation.

His Honour posed the issue in terms of a simple duality: "courier" or "principal". The onus of establishing "courier" was placed on the applicant.
His Honour specifically rejected the submission that the issue of the degree of the involvement by the applicant in the importation, was a matter which the prosecution had to establish beyond a reasonable doubt. A factual dispute as to the degree of his involvement was plainly raised. That being so, if the test is that the prosecution must establish the degree of his involvement beyond reasonable doubt, then his Honour failed to apply that test and his sentencing discretion miscarried by reason of an error of law.

The plea of guilty only established the essential legal ingredients of the offence. Any other facts relevant to sentencing had to be established, either by way of submission from counsel on matters not in dispute, or by evidence on matters which were in dispute.

Section 233B(1)(b) relevantly provides: "A person who ...
 imports ... into Australia any prohibited imports ...
 shall be guilty of an offence." 
The charge to which the applicant pleaded guilty was: "That Reinhold Erhard Olbrich on the 15 Day of August 1996, at Mascot in the
State of New South Wales did import into Australia prohibited imports to which section 233B of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) applied to wit, Narcotic goods consisting of a quantity of Heroin not being less than the trafficable quantity applicable to heroin." 
The relevant ingredient of the offence is that of "importing". The plea encompasses only the process by which the goods enter Australian territory, with the intention of landing them within Australia. (See eg Wilson v
Chambers & Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1926) 38 CLR 131] @ 139; Bull <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 203] @ 220, 254; White versus Ridley <case>; [(1978) 140 CLR 342] @ 353-4; Courtney-Smith (No 2) ( [1990) 48 ACrimR 49] @ 63-4).

Nothing in the plea of guilty establishes anything about the degree of involvement of the applicant in the whole process from the acquisition of the heroin abroad to its supply to Australian users.

Plainly the Court had to know something more than the essential ingredients of the offence for sentencing purposes. Pursuant to s235(2)(d)(i) of the [Customs Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/) , the penalty for the offence could range from a small fine to imprisonment for a period of 25 years. Over such a range, additional facts had to be presented to the sentencing Judge by way of common ground or, if contested, they had to be proved in the normal way.

The submissions in this Court were put in terms of whether the alleged status of the applicant as a "principal" was a matter of aggravation, or whether the alleged status as a "courier" was a matter of mitigation.

Whilst the language of aggravation/mitigation is not inappropriate, what is in fact involved is establishing the objective seriousness of the offence. In
Laurentiu and Becheru supra, the charge was possession under s233B(1)(a) of the [Customs
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca1901124/). As Wood J (with whom Sharp J agreed) said: "For his Honour to have sentenced either applicant on the bare fact of possession of the cocaine, the substance of the controlled delivery, would have involved serious error. Without the context of the possession, no assessment could have been made as to where the offences fell in terms of objective seriousness, within the range of uses involving possession of not less than the trafficable quantity of cocaine." (416) 
His Honour referred to Ibbs <case>; [(1987) 163 CLR 447] where @ 452, the High Court said in a joint judgment: "When an offence is defined to include any of several categories of conduct, the heinousness of the conduct in a particular case depends not on the statute defining the offence but on the facts of the case." 
So, in this case, the sentencing judge had to find facts about the context of the importation.

Authority in this Court establishes that the onus of proof of matters going to aggravation is on the Crown. Martin [(1981) 2 NSWLR 640] @ 642;
Traiconi (1970) 49 ACrimR 417 @ 418-9; Blanchard (unreported, Supreme
Court of NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 10 September 1991 @ 126-8; Pilley [(1991) 56 ACrimR 202] @ 204. The issue of the standard of proof may still be open at the level of the High Court (Anderson <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 520] cf 536 and 526, esp fn 25, 528). However, Australian authority now supports the beyond reasonable doubt standard. (See the review of the authorities in Langridge [(1998) 87 ACrimR 1] @ 4-22 and
Storey [(1997) 89 ACrimR 519] @ 522-7, -30, 531 fn 41).

Authority in this Court also establishes the proposition that the onus of proof of matters going to mitigation is on the accused, who must establish such matters on the balance of probabilities: Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR ]
@ 253-4; Pilley supra @ 204; Yonice [(1994) 72 ACrimR 234] @ 236-7;
Ho (unreported, Supreme Court of NSW, Court of Criminal Appeal, 28 February ). See also Ali <case>; [(1996) 2 VR 49] esp @ 59-60 as modified in Storey supra @ 530, 537-8.

Ms Burgess who appeared on behalf of the applicant submitted that an accused had only an evidentiary burden in relation to mitigation, not a burden of proof. She based this submission on the oft repeated statement in the authorities that conflict over facts relevant to sentencing should be decided by "resolving relevant doubt in favour of the accused". (eg O'Neill [(1979) NSWLR 582] @ 588; Chow versus DPP [(1992) 28 NSWLR 593] @ 605).
There is nothing necessarily inconsistent between this general principle and the imposition of an onus of proof on an offender with respect to mitigation.

However, in Law versus Deed [(1970) SASR 374], Bray CJ indicated that matters of mitigation imposed only an evidentiary onus on the accused so that, once raised, the onus is on the prosecution to negative the allegedly mitigating factors beyond reasonable doubt (p379). This passage was referred to with approval in the majority joint judgment in Anderson (p534).
However, the preponderance of authority in this State and elsewhere is against the proposition expressed by Bray CJ.

There is no suggestion in this case that the element of aggravation would warrant conviction for a more serious offence. (cf De Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383] @ 389). In my opinion, the process of characterising the degree of involvement of the accused - the attachment of labels such as "courier" or "principal" is convenient, albeit an oversimplification - is a matter akin to "aggravation" rather than "mitigation".

A number of other cases have involved a factual conflict about degree of involvement with drug trafficking, analogous to that posed in the present case.

Where a conviction for supplying a drug of addiction had to be treated as relating to supply on one occasion only, the evidence that the single occasion was part of a history of commercial supply had to be established by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt. (Martin supra).

A plea of guilty to "producing cannabis" carried no implication that the production was for a commercial purpose, which purpose had to be established as a matter of aggravation. (Anderson supra esp @ 536, 539).

Whether or not the offence of trafficking in a drug of dependence occurred as part of a commercial operation was a matter of aggravation. (Ali @ 61); but whether the offender was a drug addict was a matter of mitigation.
(Ali @ 62-3, 50).

In the case of a conviction for having a prohibited drug in possession, the purpose of commercial supply was treated as a matter of aggravation.
(Pilley supra @ 207-8).

In this case, in my opinion, a plea of guilty to a charge involving only the act of importation carries no implication of any character with respect to the degree of involvement of the accused in any overall scheme for importing drugs into Australia. The authorities which indicate that the existence of a commercial purpose for offences expressed in terms of supply or production is a matter of aggravation are applicable to an offence expressed in terms of importation. The involvement of the importer in the course of events prior to, or subsequent to, the actual act of importation itself is a matter which the
Crown must prove beyond reasonable doubt.

In this regard I agree with the views expressed by Dickson J in the Canadian case of R versus Gardener [(1982) 2 SCR 368] @ 415 where his Honour said: "To my mind, the facts which justify the sanction are no less important than the facts which justify the conviction; both should be subject to the same burden of proof. Crime and punishment are inextricably linked." 
The identification of the precise nature of the involvement of an accused in an act of importation of drugs is an essential aspect of the sentencing process. It is because acts of importation differ so much in their quality and nature that the legislature has given such a wide range of penalties: from a small fine to 25 years imprisonment. It is appropriate to use the language of "aggravation", but what is in truth occurring is the identification of the whole context of the offence actually committed by the accused, which context determines the objective seriousness of the offence.

For constitutional reasons, the Commonwealth enacted legislation which is concerned with the act of importation. This constitutional peg coincides with a point of significant convenience from the point of view of police detection of the drug trade. However, the act of importation itself harms no-one. It is the supply to Australian citizens after importation to which the legislation is in truth directed. (See Laurentiu and Becheru supra @ 417). With respect to effects on Australian society, which the law is designed to protect, the degree of participation of the accused is at least as significant an aspect of the offence as the legal ingredients of importation. It would be contrary to principle for so essential an element not to be required to be established by the Crown beyond reasonable doubt.

Of course, it is not necessary to prove beyond reasonable doubt every specific fact relied upon as relevant when determining the relevant issue ie the degree of the involvement of the accused in the process by which drugs will be made available to Australian citizens. The position is the same as that which prevails with respect to the proof of an offence beyond reasonable doubt: that does not require the proof of each individual fact said to bear upon proof of the offence. (See Shepherd  <case>; [(1991) 170 CLR 573]; Ali supra @ 60-61; Storey supra @ 532).

For the purposes of sentencing, it is the particular role of the person in the scheme by which drugs become available to users in Australia, which must be proven beyond reasonable doubt. It is convenient to describe this role by a general label such as "courier" or "principal". In the absence of relevant evidence, an accused is entitled to be sentenced on the basis most favourable to him.

There was a body of relevant evidence available in this case, but it was not dealt with appropriately. His Honour failed to apply the correct principles because he did not accept that the Crown bore the onus of proof, to the criminal standard, on the issue of the applicant's degree of involvement.
Rather, after rejecting the applicant's evidence that he was a mere "courier", his Honour approached the matter as if the only alternative was a finding that the applicant was a "principal". His Honour did not correctly state either the onus or the standard of proof. He put the onus on the accused. He failed to apply the criminal standard to the Crown. The sentence cannot stand. The case should be remitted to the District Court for re-sentencing.

The orders I propose are: Leave to appeal granted.
 Appeal allowed.
 Sentence quashed.
 Remit the matter to the District Court for sentencing.

REGINA versus Reinhold Erhard OLBRICH 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: I agree with the orders proposed by Spigelman CJ and with his reasons. 
REGINA versus Reinhold Erhard OLBRICH 
JUDGMENT 
NEWMAN J: I agree with the orders proposed by Spigelman CJ and with his reasons. * * * 
