

Regina versus Cummins Matter Nos Cca 60298/97; Cca 60396/97 [1998] NSWSC 550 (23 November 1998) 
Last Updated: 2 December 1998 
REGINA versus ANTHONY ATKINSON CUMMINS 
CCA 60298/97; CCA 60396/97 November 1998 
Abadee J, B M James J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against conviction and severity of sentence imposed by Ducker DCJ and appeal against severity of sentence imposed by Ford DCJ. 
FILE Nos: 60298 of 1997; 60396 of 1997 
DELIVERED: 23 November 1998 
HEARING DATE: 5 November 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Anthony Atkinson CUMMINS 
JUDGMENT OF: Abadee, B M James and Barr JJ. 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: P M Skinner/D Knoll 
Respondent: P G Berman 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: T A Murphy 
Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal Law and Procedure - public policy discretion to exclude evidence obtained after unlawful police conduct - trial judge refused to exclude - Held: no error - Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [(1994-1995) 184 CLR 19] applied. 
Criminal Law and Procedure - sentencing - alleged disparity between sentences of appellant and co-accused - Held: no justifiable sense of grievance.

NO. OF PAGES: 15 
RESERVED/EX TEMPORE: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Dismissed 
REGINA versus Anthony Atkinson CUMMINS 
JUDGMENT 
ABADEE J: I agree with the judgment of Barr J and the reasons therein. 
B.M. JAMES J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgment of Barr J. I agree with his Honour's judgment, including the orders proposed by his Honour. 
BARR J: The appellant, Anthony Atkinson Cummins, appeals against his conviction in the District Court on a charge of knowingly taking part in the supply of a prohibited drug, namely methylamphetamine, in not less than the commercial quantity, and seeks leave to appeal against the sentence for that offence and against a sentence imposed upon him for an unrelated offence. The Court has heard the appeal and the applications together with the consent of the parties. 
The conviction appeal 
The trial was called on before his Honour Judge Ducker and the appellant applied for the exclusion of certain evidence and for a permanent stay of proceedings, both of which his Honour refused. Then the appellant pleaded guilty and the matter proceeded to sentence.

The first ground of appeal asserts that his Honour erred in refusing the appellant's application for a stay of proceedings. For the purposes of this appeal the facts may be taken to be as follows. On 17 March 1994 a man using the name Daniels and a man using the name Joseph went to an hotel at Bexley.
Daniels was an undercover police operative and Joseph was a registered police informant. At the hotel they met a man called Torrisi and then the appellant.
The appellant, Torrisi and Joseph left the hotel, got into Daniels and
Joseph's car and went to a place not far away. Torrisi and Joseph got out of the car and Joseph handed money to the appellant, who drove the car to a house in an adjacent suburb and took the money inside. He returned to the car and drove back to the place where he had left Joseph and Torrisi, collected them and returned them to the hotel. The appellant and Torrisi departed, leaving the car at the hotel. Daniels found 404 grams of methylamphetamine hidden under the carpet in the car.

Torrisi was arrested on 21 March 1994 and charged with the supply of the commercial quantity of the drug. On 26 April 1996 he was granted a permanent stay of proceedings. The appellant was arrested on 3 July 1996.

The basis of the appellant's application for the exclusion of evidence and for a permanent stay was that which had been successfully relied on by Torrisi, who had come before Judge Armitage of Queen's Counsel on 26 April 1996.

In that application documents were tendered and a senior investigator from the
National Crime Authority, Mr Albert Gardner, gave evidence. Torrisi also gave evidence.

Judge Armitage found that late in January or early in February 1994 Torrisi was introduced to Joseph, who immediately told him that he knew a man with a lot of money who wanted to buy methylamphetamines. He asked Torrisi to find him some. Torrisi said that he could not help. Two or three days later Joseph telephoned Torrisi again and told him that he wanted to meet him. Between then and 3 March 1994 Joseph telephoned Torrisi no fewer than 32 times. On each occasion Joseph asked him to supply methylamphetamines; Torrisi said that he did not know anybody who could and that he had not been able to arrange a supply. Over the period he had done nothing about Joseph's requests and it may be taken that he had no intention of complying with them. As well as telephoning him repeatedly, Joseph turned up uninvited at Torrisi's house and made further requests to be supplied with methylamphetamines.

In the end, having been importuned in that manner for over four weeks,
Torrisi, who was in financial difficulties, gave in, made inquiries in the street, found somebody who could supply the drug and arranged a transaction on March 1994. That was the subject of the first charge against him.

Under the same influence he committed further offences on 17 and 21 March
The offence of 17 March was the supply of methylamphetamine in which the appellant was charged with having knowingly taken part.

Judge Armitage concluded that the conduct of the authorities in acquiescing in
Joseph's conduct, and Joseph's conduct in persistently importuning Torrisi over a period of at least four weeks, thereby creating circumstances of temptation for a person known by them to be in financial difficulties, was illegal and improper and had the effect of causing Torrisi to commit a series of offences he would not otherwise have committed.

His Honour took the view that the desirability of admitting the evidence did not outweigh the undesirability of admitting it, given the way it had been obtained, and refused to admit it. When the Crown conceded after the rejection of that evidence that it had no case, his Honour ordered the proceedings to be permanently stayed.

When the appellant's application was heard by Judge Ducker, Mr Gardner again gave evidence. A statement of facts and other documents were tendered and his
Honour was provided with a copy of Judge Armitage's reasons for judgment in
Torrisi's application. However, the appellant did not give evidence.

Counsel for the appellant submitted to Judge Ducker that, although there was no direct evidence that the appellant had been importuned by the police undercover operative or by the authorities (and by that submission counsel meant also that there was no evidence of importuning by the registered informant), because Torrisi had been induced by illegal conduct to supply the drug, that is, because the offence had been caused by that illegal conduct, evidence against the appellant should be rejected as well. Since that would leave the Crown without evidence, the proceedings against him should be permanently stayed.

His Honour observed that the essence of Judge Armitage's reasons for judgment was the effect that the misconduct of the authorities had had on the mind of
Torrisi and that the appellant had had no dealings with Daniels or Joseph until the day of the supply, 17 March 1994. The evidence showed that he played no active part at all in the matter until that day or the day before. In view of those matters, and because the appellant had given no evidence, his Honour concluded that there was no evidence of any coercion, threat, harassment or encouragement that affected what the appellant had done so as to justify the exclusion of the evidence from the case against him.

His Honour rejected a submission that the unlawfulness of the conduct in relation to Torrisi contaminated the whole of the proceedings against any accused involved in the supply of the drug.

It was submitted on appeal that his Honour misapprehended the law as stated in
Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [(1994-1995) 184 CLR 19] and erred by considering or placing too much importance on the question of unfairness to the appellant. Counsel drew a distinction between the discretion to exclude on unfairness grounds evidence obtained by unlawful conduct or by lawful but improper conduct and the wider discretion to exclude on public policy grounds evidence of guilt or of an element of an offence where the commission of the offence is procured by unlawful conduct. See R v
Ireland <case>; [(1976) 126 CLR 321]; Bunning versus Cross <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54]; Cleland versus The Queen <case>; [(1982) 151 CLR 1]; Foster versus The Queen <case>; [(1993) 113 ALR 1]; Pollard versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 176 CLR 177.] 
Reference was made to a passage in the joint judgment of Mason CJ, Deane and
Dawson JJ commencing at 41 - 
Examination of the judgments of (the members of the court appealed from) discloses that their Honours placed disproportionate weight on the question of unfairness to the particular accused. As should be clear from what has been written above, the question of unfairness to a particular accused is ordinarily of but peripheral importance in deciding whether evidence of an illegally procured offence should be excluded on public policy grounds ... The critical question was whether, in all the circumstances of the case, the considerations of public policy favouring exclusion of the evidence of the appellant's offence, namely, the public interest in maintaining the integrity of the courts and of ensuring the observance of the law and minimum standards of propriety by those entrusted with powers of law enforcement, outweighed the obvious public interest in the conviction and punishment of the appellant ...

It was submitted that the central question was whether in the circumstances of any case considerations of public policy in maintaining the integrity of the courts and ensuring observance of the law and minimum standards of propriety in its enforcement are outweighed by the public interest in ensuring the conviction of an offender. Questions of unfairness play little part in the exercise of that discretion. So his Honour should have accepted the facts found by Judge Armitage about the illegality and impropriety of the conduct of the authorities and should have rejected all resulting evidence of what
Torrisi and the appellant said and did. That would have led to the conclusion that there was insufficient evidence to sustain a conviction and to the grant of a permanent stay of proceedings.

The submissions of counsel for the appellant as to the applicable law may be accepted. The courts of justice cannot countenance the use of their processes to prosecute offences that have in substance been artificially created by the misconduct of those whose duty it is to uphold the law. Ridgeway versus The
Queen. Convictions obtained by means of unlawful conduct may be obtained at too high a price. R versus Ireland.

The exercise of the discretion to exclude evidence on public policy grounds requires a balancing of the public interest in the conviction and punishment of those who are guilty of crime and the public interest in maintaining the integrity of the courts and in ensuring the observance of the law and minimum standards of propriety by those entrusted with the powers of law enforcement.
Ridgeway versus The Queen.

Two kinds of cases are recognised in which the conduct of the law enforcement authorities will give rise to this discretion, namely those in which police conduct has induced an accused person to commit the charged offence and those in which the illegal police conduct is itself the principal offence to which the charged offence is ancillary or which creates or itself constitutes an essential ingredient in the charged offence. In the first category of cases, the public interest in the conviction and punishment of crime is likely to prevail, except where the illegality or impropriety of the police conduct is grave and either so calculated or entrenched that the need for the proper administration of criminal justice clearly requires the evidence to be excluded. In the second category of case, unless the conduct has been disowned by those in higher authority and those responsible appropriately dealt with, there will be an extremely strong case for the exclusion of the evidence.
Ridgeway versus The Queen per Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ at 39.

The principal submission on appeal was that the case fell into the second category of cases. It was put that but for the unlawful inducement of Torrisi there would have been no supply of the drug and that the supply was an element of the offence of which the appellant was convicted. It was submitted, taking up an expression used by Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ that the conduct of the police officers had therefore "created" an element of the offence of which the appellant was convicted.

I do not accept that submission. The conduct which their Honours place in the second category of cases is not merely unlawful in an incidental way but itself constitutes the principal offence to which the charged offence is ancillary or itself constitutes an essential ingredient of the charged offence. Those who induced and acquiesced in the inducement of Torrisi did not commit criminal acts of that kind at all.

Additionally or alternatively, counsel contended for the first category. The categories may overlap, of course. In such a case the exercise of the discretion requires an assessment of the effect of the conduct under consideration on each accused person individually and a distinction between them according to that assessment. The exercise may recognise some accused persons as "unwary criminals" and others as "unwary innocents". See R v
Sloane [(1990) 49 A Crim R 270];
Sherman versus United States <case>; [356 US 369.] 
As Judge Armitage found, Torrisi was induced to commit a crime which he would not otherwise have committed. He might be described as an unwary innocent.

The same could not have been said for the appellant, however. As his record showed, he was a dealer in prohibited drugs. As the evidence showed, he permitted himself without coercion to be recruited into the enterprise. That is what Judge Ducker was referring to in his conclusion that there was no evidence of any coercion, threat, harassment or encouragement that affected what the appellant had done so as to justify the exclusion of the evidence against him. The appellant might be described as an unwary criminal.

It was submitted, however, that if a crime is procured by relevantly unlawful conduct there arises a contamination affecting charges brought against anyone engaging in or associated with the same criminal activity. The rationale, as I understood the submission, was that if Torrisi's crime had not been procured, the appellant's could not have been committed.

Ridgeway versus The Queen provides no support for such a submission, because it makes clear that the comparison between the competing public interests must be made case by case, and the result will vary according, among other things, to the position of individual accused persons. The judgments make clear that the weight to be given to the discretion to exclude evidence will vary according to the inducement and it must follow that where several persons involve themselves in criminal activity during and subsequently to unlawful police conduct of the relevant kind, the Court may exclude evidence in the cases of some of them but not others. In Ridgeway versus The Queen itself, the Court referred to the possibility of the appellant's being prosecuted for offences against State law constituted by his possession of the illegally imported heroin, something which would have been impossible without the antecedent unlawful conduct of police officers. 
Peters versus Heffernan [(1997) 88 A Crim R 585] are examples of cases decided after Ridgeway versus The Queen in which accused persons have been held to be answerable for criminal activity committed subsequent to unlawful or improper police conduct. 
Counsel for the appellant also relied on the judgment of this Court in
Bozatsis and Spanakakis [(1997) 97 A Crim R 296], but in my opinion nothing in that case supports the submission.

The application was put to Judge Ducker as a first category case, and his
Honour dealt with it accordingly. In my opinion his Honour correctly concluded that this was not a first category case and did not confuse the application with one that might have given rise to a discretion to exclude evidence on unfairness grounds.

It remains to deal with an attack made on appeal but not made the subject of a separate ground of appeal. As I have said, the appellant did not give evidence. That was the result of a tactical decision made by experienced defence counsel, who did not appear on the appeal and whose competence has not been questioned.

The transcript makes clear that counsel recognised the risk that if the appellant gave evidence in the application to the effect that he had engaged in criminal activity under the influence of police misconduct, and his trial were not stayed, his defence would be compromised. He had no right to make an unsworn statement and if he gave sworn evidence he could be cross-examined about evidence given in the application. He might be forced to remain silent.

Defence counsel attempted to solve the problem in two ways. First, he attempted to state from the bar table the evidence the appellant would give if called. His Honour refused to permit that to be done. No criticism could be made about that.

Although it is not altogether clear from the transcript, the second thing defence counsel tried to do seems to have been to obtain an indication from his Honour that cross-examination would not be allowed about any such evidence the appellant might give. No such indication was forthcoming.

In my opinion his Honour dealt with the matter appropriately. The appellant had no right to the indication or protection sought from the trial judge.

The first ground of appeal therefore fails.

There is a second ground of appeal in which the appellant seeks to go behind his plea of guilty, but since it depends upon success on the first ground there is no need to consider it.

Applications for leave to appeal against sentences 
On 24 February 1997 the appellant pleaded guilty in the District Court to the charge of aggravated breaking, entering and stealing at Balmain on 16 March
He also asked the Court to take into account pursuant to <case> Criminal
Procedure Act two further offences of the same kind, one committed at Allawah on 12 March 1996 and the other at Minto on 4 April 1996.

Each offence attracted a maximum penalty of penal servitude for 20 years.

The applicant appears to have used a similar technique on each occasion. His experience over the years in dealing in illegal drugs made him familiar with methods used by members of the police drug squad during raids on premises.
Copying those methods, he contrived on each occasion to have with him a document purporting to be a search warrant and on the strength of it forcibly entered premises and ransacked them. On each occasion valuable goods and money were stolen. On each occasion his co-accused Linda Cloughessy was present taking part.

On 4 April 1997 Judge Ford took into account the two matters requested and sentenced the appellant to penal servitude for six years, comprising a minimum term of four years six months and an additional term of one year six months.
The minimum term is due to expire on 2 September 2001.

His Honour sentenced Cloughessy on the same charge and took the same two offences into account. His Honour also took into account a number of other offences, apparently of a similar kind, which Cloughessy had committed in the absence of the appellant on 15 May 1996. His Honour imposed a sentence of imprisonment of two years, to be served by way of periodic detention.

On 19 May 1997 his Honour Judge Ducker sentenced the appellant to imprisonment for three years, cumulative upon the sentences imposed by Judge Ford, the term comprising a minimum term of one year and an additional term of two years. The effect was to extend by one year the time before which the applicant should become eligible for release on parole.

No attack was made on the sentence imposed by Judge Ducker, but it was submitted about the sentence imposed by Judge Ford that the very length of it manifested error and that the appellant had a justified sense of grievance by comparison of his own sentence with that imposed on Cloughessy.

It seems to me that there were substantial reasons which made it necessary for
Judge Ford to discriminate between the appellant and Cloughessy. The appellant was 34 years old when sentenced by his Honour, a mature man who had devoted most of his adult years to the commission of serious crime. He had a number of convictions for supplying prohibited drugs, robbery, theft and other offences of dishonesty.

He was the prime mover in each of the three offences, and Cloughessy, a younger person, was led by him.

The appellant had served several terms of imprisonment and had obviously not learned by them, so the need for personal deterrence as well as general deterrence assumed great importance in sentencing.

On the other hand, Cloughessy had only a minor criminal history. She was a sole parent, and there was evidence to show that her daughter would be significantly harmed if removed from her mother, which would have been the result if she had been sentenced to a period of full-time custody. Cloughessy had had an horrific upbringing and was a drug user. She had made a genuine effort to rehabilitate herself, a matter to which his Honour was entitled to have regard.

In my opinion the sentences imposed by Judge Ford on the appellant and
Cloughessy fell within the proper range of his Honour's sentencing discretion.
Accordingly, the appellant has no justified sense of grievance.

I propose the following orders -
Appeal against conviction dismissed;
Applications for leave to appeal against sentences granted, but applications dismissed.
 * * * 
