

A D Osborne versus M J Taylor and Anor [1996] NSWSC 366 (26 August 1996) 
ALAN DAVID OSBORNE versus MICHAEL JOHN TAYLOR & ANOR /92 
Monday 26 August 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff, Alan David Osborne, claims damages for personal injuries suffered by him in a motor vehicle accident which occurred on 13 April 1991. The defendants admitted breach of duty of care and it was agreed that the plaintiff had been guilty of contributory negligence and that the amount of the verdict should be reduced by 20 per cent by reason of his contributory negligence. The assessment of damages is subject to the provisions of the Motor Accidents Act. The plaintiff gave evidence and the plaintiff's mother, two other lay witnesses and two medical practitioners, Dr Gurka and Dr Jungfer, gave evidence in the plaintiff's case. A number of medical reports and other documents were admitted as part of the plaintiff's case. A number of medical reports and other documents tendered by the defendant were admitted into evidence. The defendants did not give or call any oral evidence.

At the hearing the plaintiff's credibility was not really challenged and I have decided that I should accept him as a truthful and reliable witness. The plaintiff was born on 3 March 1969. He was accordingly twenty-two years old at the time of the accident and is now twenty-seven years old. He obtained his
Higher School Certificate in 1986. For his last two years at school he worked a number of nights a week for Kentucky Fried Chicken.

In February 1987 the plaintiff began an apprenticeship with the Department of
Public Works and also began an electrical trades course at a Technical and
Further Education college. In his first year he continued to work casually for
Kentucky Fried Chicken and he also worked as a baker's assistant. In the last year of his apprenticeship he also worked as a security guard. In early 1991 the plaintiff completed his apprenticeship and also completed his electrical trades course, qualifying as an electrical mechanic. On 7 February 1991 he began work as an employee of a Mr Whitly, an electrician. The plaintiff gave evidence, which I accept, that immediately before the accident his intention was at some stage to go out on his own and start his own electrical contracting business. There was admitted into evidence an order form evidencing a job completed by "Alan Osborne Electrical" on 12 April 1991, the day before the accident, at the Airds High School.

The plaintiff said in his evidence that he had no recollection of the motor vehicle accident on 13 April 1991. Indeed, since the accident he has had a period of pre-traumatic amnesia from 2 March 1991 to the date of the accident and a period of post-traumatic amnesia until some time when he woke up in hospital some weeks after the accident. The plaintiff's mother gave evidence that the plaintiff was in a coma for two and a half weeks after the accident and then gradually recovered consciousness. It appears from medical and hospital reports that on 13 April 1991 the plaintiff had been a front seat passenger in a motor vehicle. He was later found unconscious at the accident site with a laceration in the left parietal region. He was taken to
Campbelltown Hospital and then transferred to Westmead Hospital. On 26 April the plaintiff came under the care of Dr J Gurka of the Brain Injury
Rehabilitation Unit at the Westmead Hospital. A number of reports by Dr Gurka were admitted into evidence and, as I have already stated, Dr Gurka gave oral evidence.

On 31 May 1991 the plaintiff was discharged from hospital. The plaintiff said in evidence that he was having difficulties with his temper "exploding with no apparent trigger". He suffered from double vision which required him to wear glasses. His short term memory was very poor. On 5 June 1991 the plaintiff was referred to the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service.

In March 1992 the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service arranged a twelve week trial for the plaintiff as an electrician with the Department of Public Works.
The plaintiff was unable to complete the trial successfully. He suffered from vertigo when he was at heights. His memory deficits made him "dangerous to be around electricity". On one occasion he turned off and taped a wrong circuit breaker.

In May 1993 the plaintiff began working as a trainee enrolled nurse at the
Westmead Hospital. He also began a TAFE course in nursing. In cross- examination the plaintiff said that he took up nursing because he felt that he owed the health system something for saving his own life. At first the plaintiff found nursing very enjoyable. He found the TAFE course difficult but, applying memory strategies he had been taught by the Commonwealth
Rehabilitation Service, he managed to pass the course.

In April 1994, while working as an enrolled nurse, the plaintiff had an accident at work. He was helping a terminally ill patient to go to the toilet, when the patient collapsed, the plaintiff had to take the full weight of the patient's body and the plaintiff injured his back. For the rest of his training period as an enrolled nurse the plaintiff performed only light duties. In cross-examination the plaintiff said that since the accident in
April 1994 he has had recurring pain in his back. He has instructed solicitors to make a workers' compensation claim on his behalf but the evidence is unclear whether a common law action for damages for the injury to his back has been brought.

In May 1994 upon completing his twelve months' training period as an enrolled nurse the plaintiff, in accordance with the usual practice, resigned. He was reemployed by the Western Area Health Service, first on a part-time basis and then on a full-time basis in a psycho-geriatric ward.

On 22 September 1994 the plaintiff had a dispute with a pay clerk at the payroll office at the hospital. The plaintiff had been charged twice with rent for the accommodation he was occupying at the hospital. The plaintiff lost his temper and threatened the pay clerk. Subsequently, the plaintiff was formally warned about his conduct.

On 24 May 1995 the plaintiff saw for the first time Dr Margaret Jungfer, a consultant psychiatrist. Acting on advice from Dr Jungfer, the plaintiff took some leave and then resigned from his position as an enrolled nurse, his resignation becoming effective on 30 August 1995. The plaintiff was having difficulties in controlling his temper, he was disillusioned with the health system, the more disillusioned he became the more difficult he found it to control his temper, his pay as an enrolled nurse was poor, he was feeling suicidal, he had a lack of libido and he was distressed because a relationship with a woman which had lasted for six months had ended.

In July 1995 the plaintiff began a sales representative course at TAFE, which he completed in October 1995. In January 1996 he obtained a job as a sales assistant for a firm selling electrical components at Gladesville. On 10 March he was transferred to work at the Liverpool premises of the same firm, which were much nearer to his home.

While working at Liverpool the plaintiff became involved in an altercation with a customer, who was complaining that he had been sold the wrong sort of batteries. The plaintiff lost his temper and abused the customer. The plaintiff agreed in cross-examination that the customer had been particularly rude. The plaintiff then lost his temper, when he was reprimanded by the manager of the store.

While working at Liverpool, the plaintiff has also had altercations with other staff members. Until very recently no one working at the store knew of the plaintiff's medical condition.

In June 1996 the plaintiff was transferred to work in the storeroom at
Liverpool and this is the position he still holds. The transfer of the plaintiff was partly a redeployment of staff, because the person who had been working in the store had been a casual employee. In the storeroom the plaintiff accepts deliveries of electrical components and puts them on the shelves. The manager of the store has to "book in", that is record, the incoming deliveries. The plaintiff sometimes relieves serving on the counter.
In his work at Liverpool the plaintiff is able to use some of the knowledge he gained during his apprenticeship as an electrician. Of his present job he said in cross-examination"- "I'm almost twenty-eight years old and I believe, whether I enjoy the job or not, I should stay and try and create a career".

His current net pay is $389.37 per week.

The plaintiff said of his present condition that his short-term memory is poor and he writes things in a diary in order to remember them, the left side of his body is still somewhat uncoordinated, his sense of balance is impaired and his vision is blurred when he takes his glasses off. He is liable to lose his temper. He suffers from loss of libido, he has difficulties in forming and maintaining personal relationships. He plays softball once a week in a low level competition and he goes to a gymnasium regularly. Playing indoor cricket, which he used to play before the accident, is beyond him. He has difficulty swimming because of lack of coordination on his left side.

The plaintiff likes working and had wanted to be rich. However, he considers, and I accept, that as a result of the accident he could not set up his own business and he is no longer able to work as an electrician. At the hearing counsel for the defendant accepted that the plaintiff was presently incapacitated from working for himself or working at all as an electrician.

Mr Simmons, the manager of the store at Liverpool at which the plaintiff is employed, gave evidence for the plaintiff. I fully accept Mr Simmons' evidence. Until the week before the hearing Mr Simmons had had no idea that the plaintiff had suffered a brain injury. Mr Simmons said that the plaintiff had had problems communicating with staff and with the customers. A lot of the firm's customers behave abruptly and if a customer is abrupt the plaintiff becomes "blunt" in his dealings with the customer. Mr Simmons had not received any official complaints from customers about the plaintiff but he had been made aware that a couple of the firm's customers were unhappy with the plaintiff. He had received three complaints from staff members about the plaintiff swearing and he had issued three oral warnings to the plaintiff. If the plaintiff offended again Mr Simmons would issue a formal written warning.
After two or three written warnings the plaintiff would be dismissed.

Mr Simmons was asked, "would it be fair to say that within certain limits it is your present intention to do what you can to keep Alan on in the job?" and
Mr Simmons replied, "that's correct". In cross-examination Mr Simmons said that it was his "best assessment after some three months that it (that is the plaintiff working at the Liverpool store) is capable of working". Mr Simmons said that apart from the plaintiff's outbursts, the plaintiff has been a good worker. The plaintiff is to be moved back to serving on the counter. Mr
Simmons added:- "We will have a bit of a talk first and just stress some of the finer points of dealing with the public, and if he has problems to basically bite his lip or come and see me and we will deal with it through other mediums, not necessarily through himself".

Mr Charlwood gave evidence that he had formerly been employed by the
Department of Public Works as an electrician and that the night before the plaintiff's accident he and the plaintiff had made an agreement to start an electrical contracting partnership. However, I do not consider I should give any weight to this evidence. Mr Charlwood was an unimpressive witness. He did leave the employment of the Department of Public Works in August 1992 but he was then unemployed for two years and he is now working as a maintenance worker.

Dr Gurka, the head of the Brain Injury Rehabilitation Unit at Westmead
Hospital and a specialist in rehabilitative medicine, gave evidence in the plaintiff's case. As previously noted, he assumed care of the plaintiff on 26
April 1991. The plaintiff was discharged from the Brain Injury Unit on 31 May but continued to attend as an outpatient every three or four months. Over a period of five years Dr Gurka wrote a series of reports about the plaintiff.
In his first report of 8 July 1991 he said in part:- "As you know this 22 year old was involved, as a front seat passenger, in a motor vehicle accident on 13 April 1991. Although his CT scan indicated no structural abnormality he has had a significant head injury in that he had a post traumatic amnesia of approximately four weeks. He had sensory motor deficits including a left hemiparesis which has largely resolved although he still has some minor weakness and balance impairment. He also has some motor planning problems and difficulty with diplopia which appears to be due to divergent strabismus refractory error".

In his report of 4 October 1991 Dr Gurka said in part:- "He has essentially recovered from his mild left hemiparesis and his persistent problems relate mainly to cognitive and behavioural deficits".
 "On review today, his main complaint relates to a disturbance of impulse control. There is sudden onset of temper tantrums with no obvious precipitant which is short lasting but he has no control of it".

In a report of 11 May 1992 Dr Gurka said in part:- "I am quite concerned about his mental state. He appears to be particularly 'down' and confirmed feelings of decreased self-esteem and confidence".

In a further report of 7 July 1992 Dr Gurka said that the period of post traumatic amnesia of four weeks indicated a severe head injury.

In a medico-legal report of 20 June 1996 Dr Gurka listed the plaintiff's residual symptomatology and ongoing disabilities as follows:-
Decreased memory. The plaintiff needs to write things down to compensate for an impairment of his short term memory.
A persistent lack of coordination on his left side.
A mild communication impairment. When the plaintiff is tired he tends to slur his speech and has difficulty in finding the appropriate word.
A personality change. Since the accident the plaintiff is blunt and short tempered.
Decreased libido.
Depression.

In the same report Dr Gurka expressed the following opinions about the plaintiff's earning capacity:- "With regard to his current occupation, it is likely that Mr Osborne should be able to cope with this from a cognitive point of view. The main risk to him being able to maintain long term employment is related to his personality.
Because of his short temperedness and irritability, Mr Osborne is at risk of getting into conflict with work colleagues and customers which could put his job security in jeopardy. As his employer is unaware of the fact that he has had a brain injury and the possible effects that this may have had on Mr
Osborne, it is also unlikely that his employer will be sympathetic to any personality traits which Mr Osborne may have. At present, Mr Osborne is demonstrating a good ability to cope in his current employment and is also employing good strategies to deal with situations which aggravate him. If Mr
Osborne continues to employ these strategies, the prospects of him maintaining long term employment in his current position are good.

In summary, it is now 5 years since Mr Osborne sustained a very severe traumatic brain injury. He continues to display ongoing symptomatology and disability resulting from his brain injury and these changes can be considered permanent. Impairments in Mr Osborne have resulted in him being unable to return to his previous employment as an electrician and he is now only suited to employment which is fairly routine and structured and not continually laden with novel tasks. The personality and mood changes which have occurred in Mr
Osborne are typical and consistent with those seen following a traumatic brain injury and can be entirely attributed to it. The problems with loss of libido are likely to have been contributed to by his brain injury but also exacerbated by his depression and the medications required to treat his depression. While I consider that Mr Osborne is employable in some capacity, the extent to which he is employable has been very restricted by the effects of his brain injury. His ability to maintain long term employment will depend on appropriate control of his personality and successful treatment of his depression".

In his oral evidence Dr Gurka said that he thought that the plaintiff's condition had stabilised. The plaintiff has more disabilities than are picked up by neuropsychological testing. These disabilities will be permanent and, apart possibly from his depression, will not be responsive to any further treatment. He has an impaired memory function. He has not recovered full physical coordination. He is less organised in his thinking. He has good insight into the changes in himself and the recognition of these changes leads to depression which affects the plaintiff physically and mentally. The plaintiff is more blunt, abrasive and egocentric. He is prone to tiredness because he has to exert himself physically and mentally and tiredness exacerbates all his problems.

Dr Gurka had always been of the opinion that the plaintiff would be unable to return to work as an electrician but because the plaintiff was very keen the trial period with the Department of Public Works had been undertaken. Later in his evidence Dr Gurka said:- "I think the main restrictions are going to be due to his cognitive problems and also his personality change. I think his ability to relate to people has been significantly affected by his injury, and any situation where he is taxed or is challenged he has a low frustration tolerance and his ability to sort of control that is reduced, and I think in the past both through his nursing and
I think also once or twice in his current job, from what he told me when I last saw him, there have been situations where he has sort of lost it with people he works with, lost it meaning, you know, lost his temper. I think that is always going to be a problem for him, and therefore a risk for him being able to maintain employment over a long period of time. The cognitive problems with his loss of ability to learn as efficiently and to forget things and also not to be able to organise things that are very complex and have a lot of detail means that that's also going to limit what he does. So I think his job opportunities have been restricted significantly by his brain injury....But if his employer is aware of his personality and how he can be behaviourally affected by different situations and that employer can be sympathetic, I think his chances then of being able to retain employment over a longer period of time would be greater..." 
When asked about the plaintiff's capacity to enter into personal relationships
Dr Gurka said:- "As I said before, Alan is far more egocentric than he was before his brain injury. He tends to sort of think of himself and not be very endearing to other people. He himself says that he finds it difficult to show the same sort of emotion for others and finds it far more difficult to get intimate with other people. So his ability to communicate intimate feelings to others has certainly been lost. So that's going to affect his ability to develop personal relationships. And as well as that, those personal relationships that he develops are going to be subject to the same sort of behavioural outbursts that he shows in other situations as well. So that whenever he gets into a situation where he may be frustrated or angry, he is more likely to demonstrate that and act it out than he would, even in personal relationships".

Dr Gurka was cross-examined about a report from Westmead Hospital dated 20
August 1992 signed by a Dr McEvoy in the absence of Dr Gurka, which stated that the plaintiff was "much improved", that the plaintiff's memory was "no problem" and that the temper tantrums had "settled completely". These opinions are at variance with the plaintiff's evidence and with the opinions which Dr
Gurka who was the plaintiff's principal carer consistently expressed in a number of reports over several years and I consider I should give them little weight.

Dr Gurka was also cross-examined about a neuropsychological report by Ms
Jennifer Batchelor of 13 September 1991, which was prepared by Ms Batchelor for the Brain Injury Unit. In this report she stated that the plaintiff had performed many psychological tests at a satisfactory level and that "his recent memory remains only mildly disturbed". Dr Gurka agreed that by
September 1991 there was no noticeable frontal lobe impairment revealed by psychometric testing. However, in regard to Ms Batchelor's report and medico- legal reports by Dr Wendy Roberts, psychologist, prepared for the defendant,
Dr Gurka said:- "I think there is a big limitation to how much you can apply the results of neuropsych assessment to what a person can do functionally. Functional memory is not assessed on neuropsych assessment. Many things impact on functional memory. That is your ability to remember things when functioning, including your ability to attend and your ability in terms of what your psychological status and well-being is at the time. So I think what the neuropsychological assessment shows is only a small part of what a person's employment is going to be like. That is why I stressed the point earlier that the best way of assessing is not just neuropsychologically but neuropsych and functional assessment".

Dr Margaret Jungfer is a consultant psychiatrist to whom the plaintiff was referred in May 1995. She diagnosed the plaintiff as suffering from a major depression secondary to a closed head injury, an intermittent explosive disorder and an adjustment disorder with mixed disturbance of emotions and of conduct. In her evidence she said that she considers that the plaintiff is still suffering and will continue to suffer from those conditions, save that the plaintiff has made a good response to medication for his depression.

In May 1995 Dr Jungfer advised the plaintiff to give up nursing. She considered that the plaintiff was not suited "characterologically" to nursing and that the job was too stressful for someone who had suffered a significant brain injury and was subject to episodes of depression.

In her oral evidence Dr Jungfer said that the prognosis for the plaintiff's future employment was "very poor". She said:- "Mr Osborne will have a pattern of employment where he will be able to obtain employment. As a result of the personality changes, intermittent explosive disorder, and his problems with mood control, there will be outbursts at work; he will likely to be cautioned; and ultimately dismissed; and then he will once again need to look for employment. As he gets older that will be more difficult".

As regards the plaintiff's ability to form personal relationships Dr Jungfer said:- "Very poor. Mr Osborne has problems in terms of maintaining sustaining relationships, particularly intimate relationships. That is with women. And characteristically he has problems with regards to knowing how to relate with women; what to say; he is very blunt. And that is a result of his brain injury. He has problems in terms of initiating contact in the first instance, and because of his temper outbursts and his irritability, he would make a very poor partner in fact".

In Dr Jungfer's opinion the plaintiff's loss of libido was a result of the brain injury and was worsened by depression. She considered that the psychometric test results contributed very little to predicting how the plaintiff would function in the real world. At the time of writing her reports she had been unaware of the extent of the plaintiff's deficits as measured by psychometric testing but knowing the results of that testing would not cause her to change her opinions. In her opinion the plaintiff would need continued psychiatric treatment; if he received no treatment there was a significant risk of a completed suicide.

In cross-examination Dr Jungfer said that her opinion about the plaintiff's employment prospects had been based on the plaintiff's temper outbursts and personality change, rather than on any cognitive deficits. At each consultation with the plaintiff this year the plaintiff had commented on his temper as being a significant problem. She accepted that by and large the plaintiff had succeeded in controlling his temper by applying strategies but there were occasions when "things boiled over". She accepted that the persons best able to assess the plaintiff as an employee were those who worked with him on a day to day basis.

The parties were able to reach a considerable measure of agreement on what damages should be awarded to the plaintiff.

It was agreed that damages for past out of pocket expenses should be $44,382.01 and that damages for future out of pocket expenses, consisting of the costs of medication and of psychiatric treatment should be $24,169.
Damages for past loss of earning capacity calculated on the basis of the difference between what the plaintiff would have earned as an employed electrician and what the plaintiff has in fact earned, were agreed at $75,681.60.

The only heads of damages as to which complete agreement was not reached were damages for non economic loss and damages for future loss of earning capacity.

As regards damages for non economic loss I have already summarised the evidence of the plaintiff and the medical evidence. Without attempting to be exhaustive, I will summarise some of the more salient aspects of the evidence which I accept. The plaintiff, as a young man of twenty-two, received a head injury and head lacerations in a motor vehicle accident. He was admitted to hospital. He was unconscious for two and a half weeks and then gradually regained full consciousness. He has periods of pre-traumatic and post- traumatic amnesia. He suffered from a left sided hemiparesis which largely resolved and from blurred vision. He spent about one and half months in hospital and subsequently attended as an outpatient. He has made a fairly good recovery from what was a serious head injury. The plaintiff has suffered and will continue to suffer permanently from some deficits in his ability to think, short term memory loss, a slight lack of physical coordination on his left side, a mild communication impairment, a personality change such that he is more blunt, abrasive and egocentric than he was formally and depressed libido. He is liable and will continue to be liable to recurrent episodes of depression and he suffers and will continue to suffer from an intermittent explosive disorder and adjustment disorder. His depression is increased by his good insight into the effects of the accident on him. The plaintiff has been responding well to medication for his depression. He has to exert himself physically and mentally to cope with his impairments, thus becoming tired and fatigue exacerbates all his problems. It is difficult for him to form or maintain personal relationships. He is unable to play to sports which he previously enjoyed. He was an ambitious young man and he has been deprived of the opportunity of working for himself.

Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff's case was 45 per cent to 60 per cent of "a most extreme case". Counsel for the defendant submitted that the plaintiff's case was 35 per cent to 40 per cent of "a most extreme case". I consider that I should find that the plaintiff is 45 per cent of a most extreme case and I therefore award 45 per cent of $235,000 (the agreed maximum figure), that is $105,750.

As regards damages for future loss of earning capacity, it was agreed that the plaintiff should receive at least damages calculated on the basis of a loss of $96.15 per week, being the difference between wages as an employed electrician and the wages he is earning in his present position. The total amount of such damages after an agreed deduction of 15 per cent for contingencies is $73,718.
The only issue outstanding was what amount, if any, over and above $73,718, the plaintiff should receive as a "buffer" to allow for two factors:-
Loss of the opportunity to become a self employed electrician. If the plaintiff had not been injured and had become a self employed electrician, it is likely that his income would have been greater and perhaps considerably greater than the income of an employed electrician.
The risk of the plaintiff becoming unemployed in the future, because he loses a job or jobs by reason of outbursts of temper, in which event his future income will be less.

Counsel for the defendant did not really dispute that some damages should be awarded for these factors, although he submitted that the amount allowed should be modest and should not exceed $20,000. He also submitted that if I was minded to award a more substantial buffer, I should take into account, adversely to the plaintiff, the plaintiff's back injury which has not fully resolved and which was described by counsel as the plaintiff's "parallel orthopaedic incapacity".

Counsel for the plaintiff did not submit that I could make any attempt at precision in determining the amount of a "buffer". There was no evidence about the earnings of self employed electricians or what the plaintiff's possible career path might have been. Counsel for the plaintiff suggested that I should allow an additional $100 per week up until the plaintiff turns sixty-five, discounted at 5 per cent, and subject to a discount for contingencies of 15 per cent, producing a figure very similar to $73,718, as a buffer for loss of the opportunity to become a self employed electrician and that I should also allow a buffer of $25,000 to allow for the risk of future unemployment.

I consider that I should allow a buffer for loss of the opportunity to become a self employed electrician and that the amount of the buffer should be more than a merely nominal sum. I consider that there was a real possibility that if the plaintiff had not been injured he would have become a self employed electrician. The psychological tests performed after the plaintiff was injured show him even after the injury to be of somewhat above average intelligence.
The plaintiff was and is a highly motivated person. The medical reports speak of the plaintiff as being "most compliant" and "well motivated". The plaintiff worked in a number of jobs as a high school student and then as an apprentice.
Before the accident the plaintiff had qualified as an electrician and had completed his apprenticeship. Before the accident he had already done one electrical job on his own account. It was the plaintiff's wish to attempt the trial as an electrician with the Department of Public Works in 1992, even though Dr Gurka thought he was not capable of working as an electrician. On the other hand, I have to take into account the paucity of the evidence and the many uncertainties. I have decided to allow a lump sum of $35,000, which is some- what less than a sum of $50 per week for thirty-eight years discounted at 5 per cent, less a discount of 15 per cent.

On the question of what buffer should be allowed for the risk of future unemployment, I have regard to the evidence of the plaintiff, Mr Simmons, Dr
Gurka and Dr Jungfer.

The plaintiff has kept his present job for several months. He is well motivated and he has the advantage of a knowledge of electrical components. He has been taught strategies to avoid outbursts of temper. His employer is now aware of the reason for his problems and appears to be sympathetic. He is regarded as a good worker apart from his outbursts of temper. I consider that
Dr Jungfer's prognosis for his prospects of employment is somewhat too pessimistic. Nevertheless, there is a definite risk of future unemployment. I also take into account the plaintiff's back condition. I propose to award a buffer of $15,000 for the risk of loss of employment.

I accordingly award the plaintiff damages as follows:- 
Past out of pocket expenses 44,382.01 
Future out of pocket expenses 24,169.00 
Past loss of earning capacity 75,681.60 
Non economic loss 105,750.00 
Future loss of earning capacity 73,718.00 
Future loss of earning capacity (buffers) $50,000.00 
Total $373,701.00 
If this amount is reduced by 20 per cent, a figure of $298,961.00 is obtained.
There will be judgment for the plaintif for $298,961.00, unless there is some outstanding matter such as interest. Unless the parties wish to address an argument on costs, there will be an order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
