

Kenneth James Gresham and Anor -v- Anthony Hugh Webster and 3 ORS [1997]
NSWSC 158 (24 April 1997) 
KENNETH JAMES GRESHAM & ANOR -v- ANTHONY HUGH WEBSTER & 3 ORS /96 
Thursday, 24 April 1997 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Kenneth James Gresham (Gresham) and Gresham Real Estate Pty Ltd (Gresham R E) sue Anthony Hugh Webster (Webster), Peter Punch (Punch), Redera Management Services Pty Ltd (Redera M S) and Ocean Pacific (Holdings) Pty Ltd (Ocean Pacific) claiming entitlements said to have arisen under joint venture agreements involving Webster, Punch and Redera M S and, in the case of Ocean Pacific seeking repayment of loan monies advanced to it in the sum of $70,000. There has been no dispute over that debt. The only problem is in Ocean Pacific's ability to satisfy that indebtedness. The proceedings have arisen out of a breakdown in commercial relationships which were initiated in the latter part of 1992 aimed at the commercial development of two adjoining properties situated in the Sydney suburb of Bondi. One property was known as 33-33B Ocean Street (the Campion property) while the adjoining property was known as 35-37 Ocean Street (the Davidson property). 
On 25 July 1994 Redera Pty Ltd (Redera), a company controlled by Webster and
Punch acquired options to purchase the Campion property. Those options were extended from time to time as later referred to in these reasons. Prior to its incorporation, Ocean Pacific purported to acquire an option to purchase the
Davidson property on 16 December 1994. Ocean Pacific was not incorporated until 19 December 1994. That option was also extended from time to time. For several years prior to 1994, Webster and Punch were together engaged in property development in the Eastern suburbs of Sydney, originally, as equal shareholders and directors of Redera. In 1992 they caused Redera Constructions
Pty Ltd (Redera Constructions) to be formed for the purpose of carrying out property development work previously undertaken by Redera which became the "holding company". Redera M S acted as project manager for the developments undertaken by Redera Constructions. The three Redera companies were known as the Redera Group.

Webster had no formal qualifications as a builder. He held a Bachelor Degree in Science. Punch was a builder with a Certificate of Building from Sydney
Technical College. All of his working background was as a builder: as an employee, as a builder on his own account and, then, in his association with
Webster through the Redera Group. It was quite apparent that, for practical purposes, Webster was in charge of their affairs within the Redera Group and that Punch applied his energies to doing what he knew best, namely, working as a builder. The evidence disclosed that while he attended meetings related to the conduct of the affairs of Ocean Pacific and of the Redera Group, he played little or no part in discussion and tended not to be present throughout the whole of the meeting.

Gresham's background was that of a real estate agent. With his wife he controlled Gresham R E which, for some twenty years, had carried on the business of property management and consultancy, in addition to the development and sale of residential properties. At the same time Gresham had engaged in that line of business on his own account. If his involvement in business can be gauged from the various offices that he has held, it would seem that he was extremely experienced. He had been Divisional Treasurer of the Real Estate Institute of New South Wales, the founding director and the first vice-president of the New South Wales Institute of Strata Management. He had been a member of the Strata Title Review Board and a member of the
Accounting Standards Sub-Committee of the Council of Auctioneers. He was an associate of the Australian Institute of Valuers and Land Economists and a member of the International Institute of Valuers. He was president of the
Double Bay Chamber of Commerce. He agreed that "in the management side" he had "a very comprehensive corporate and business background".

Leaving aside the claim in debt, Gresham and Gresham R E sought the following relief: "1. An account of profits.
A declaration that First, Second, Third and Fourth Defendants hold the profits of future sales of the developed property at the sites known as 33,
A, 35 and 37 Ocean Street, Bondi, in the State of New South Wales on trust for the First and Second plaintiffs.
Alternatively, an order for damages." (Pars 1-3 of the Amended Summons) 
The claim for relief is based upon two alleged joint venture agreements, one described as a "personal joint venture" between Gresham, Webster and Punch and another described as the "company joint venture" between Gresham R E and
Redera M S. The personal joint venture was said to have been an oral agreement constituted by conversations between Gresham, Webster and Punch prior to 22
December 1994, whereas the company joint venture consisted of a joint venture agreement dated 22 December 1994 between Gresham R E and Redera M S which included in its Sch 3 a declaration of trust of shares by Redera M S in favour of Gresham R E. In addition, it is alleged that there was an oral or implied term that Redera M S "undertook and agreed to act for and on behalf of and in the interests of" Gresham R E. That term was said to have been constituted by the conversations between Gresham, Webster and Punch which preceded the company joint venture. The implication was said to arise "from the nature of the relationship between" Gresham, Webster and Punch.

The distinction drawn between the personal joint venture and the company joint venture is of particular significance having regard to the terms of an agreement between Gresham R E and Redera M S by deed dated 22 June 1995 (the termination of joint venture agreement), cl 2.1 of which was in the following terms: "TERMINATION OF JOINT VENTURE AGREEMENT .1 The parties hereto hereby agree and acknowledge that subject to the provisions of this Deed as and from the Commencement Date all the rights, entitlements, benefits, remedies, obligations and duties in respect of the
Agreement by which the parties whether jointly or severally would have otherwise been entitled or subject to are at an end and the Agreement is hereby terminated ab initio as if the Agreement had not been entered into and the Agreement shall be of no further force or effect." (p 857, volume 3) 
The agreement there referred to is a reference to the joint venture agreement between Gresham R E and Redera M S of 22 December 1994 (the joint venture agreement).

Contemporaneously with the termination of joint venture agreement, Gresham R E and Redera M S entered into a deed of dissolution of trust, cl 2.1 of which provided: "The parties hereto dissolve as and from the Commencement Date the Trust subsisting between them pursuant to Declaration of Trust dated 22 December ." (p 866, volume 3) 
The declaration of trust referred to was that which was the subject of Sch 3 to the joint venture agreement.

By their amended defence, the defendants rely upon the termination of joint venture agreement and other agreements related to it as affecting a termination of the joint venture agreement and as an extinguishment of all rights that the parties to the joint venture agreement may otherwise have had.
If the construction placed upon those 1995 agreements by the defendants is a correct construction, then the plaintiffs are without remedy in respect of the subsequent events which saw the end of Ocean Pacific's interest in the Campion and Davidson properties: that is, unless Gresham can show that there subsisted the personal joint venture. Ocean Pacific relinquished its interest in the
Davidson property for the consideration of $10. The nature of that transaction may have given rise to claims against Webster and Punch for breach of their duties as directors of Ocean Pacific or to some derivative action by Gresham R
E as a shareholder of Ocean Pacific. Those matters arose at the outset of the hearing with the presenting of the plaintiffs' outline of issues and submissions which included the following: "4 Whether the first and second defendants breached either their duties to the plaintiffs pursuant to the joint venture agreement or their duties to the second plaintiff as a shareholder in the fourth defendant by: in the period August to December 1995, causing Redera Pty Ltd to enter into an agreement with Macquarie Bank Ltd pursuant to which Redera Pty Ltd would develop the site and share the profits from such development; .......................
 .4 Furthermore, the plaintiffs contend that in September 1995 the only substantial assets of the fourth defendant were the options over the site. The transfer of those options to the Macquarie Bank Limited for $10 each was in breach of the fourth defendant's duties to its shareholders including Gresham
Real Estate Pty Ltd in that it constituted the sale of the fourth defendant's only substantial assets for nominal consideration. The actions of Mr Webster and Mr Punch as directors in causing the fourth defendant to enter into such a transaction are a breach of their duty to the fourth defendant.
 (Pars 4 and 4.4) (My emphasis) 
The matters emphasised raised allegations to which objection was taken on behalf of the defendants on the basis that they fell outside the ambit of the issues raised by the plaintiffs' summons. I deferred consideration of those objections until counsel for the plaintiffs had the opportunity of considering the plaintiffs' position and, in particular, whether it needed to have leave to amend in order to raise such issues.

The parties returned to this matter after the luncheon adjournment on the first day of hearing where the transcript recorded the following: "RESUMED (Mr Powell stated they proposed to amend the reply, to take up the first of Mr
Dubler's two points, the words "not terminating the unit holder's agreement" and they did not propose to pursue an action against the defendants for a duty owed to the fourth defendant, but they proposed to amend the summons to claim the $70,000. He sought leave to file in Court a further amended reply and amended summons.) 
FURTHER AMENDED REPLY AND AMENDED SUMMONS HANDED UP (Mr Ireland stated in relation to the amended summons, it raises for the first time an uncontroversial claim that the company owes $70,000 and that is not what this litigation is about and that they would want to reserve any costs question that followed from these amendments.) (Mr Dubler stated he did not oppose the amendment. He wished to make clear his understanding of what Mr Powell is doing and in particular he took his Honour to the plaintiff's outline of issues. He stated the real concern is the last sentence of paragraph 4.4, which seeks to allege a breach of directors' duties. His Honour stated what is sought by way of confirmation is that the amendment that is now proposed does not intend to raise an issue referred to in that sentence. Mr Powell stated the submission should have that sentence now deleted, but also on the previous page (iv) the words after the joint venture agreement or their duties to the second plaintiff as the shareholder and the fourth defendant.) 
HIS HONOUR: In this matter I grant leave to the plaintiff to amend the summons and to further amend the reply in the form of the documents so entitled, dated August 1996. It can be noted that leave is granted on the basis that the defendant's costs of the amendment will be paid by the plaintiff. It can also be noted that so far as the claim for $70,000 is concerned, it is the contention of the defendants that that matter has never been in issue and that that aspect is relevant to any order as to costs that may be made in this matter." (T46.1 - .48) 
On the plaintiffs' case it then comes down to determining what joint venture agreements were entered into by either Gresham or Gresham R E in about
December 1994 and whether there were any breaches of any such joint venture agreements by any of the defendants other than Ocean Pacific. It is convenient to address the nature of the joint venture agreement at the outset as I think, after due consideration of its terms, it leaves little or no room for the subsistence of what has been termed a personal joint venture between Gresham,
Punch and Webster. Indeed, the view I have formed is that the discussions and negotiations which took place from time to time between October and December , mainly between Gresham and Webster, should be elevated to no higher status than negotiations leading to and culminating in the joint venture agreement. In my opinion, it is quite artificial to regard those discussions as surviving the company joint venture agreement in some form of a pervasive and continuing personal joint venture agreement overseeing the operation of the joint venture agreement.

On the question of credibility and reliability of witnesses, except where I have specifically adverted to a difficulty in accepting the accuracy of particular evidence or in accepting on face value the significance of certain events, I have not been assisted on questions of credibility or reliability by the benefit of observing any of the witnesses in the giving of evidence. What,
I think, did emerge in the context of reliability of evidence was the fact that on both sides, particularly in the case of Webster and Gresham, the Court was dealing with two experienced business people who were not unaware of the commercial implications of their dealings and who were not unaware of the implications of certain aspects of their evidence. That does not amount to much more than an observation that each put his respective best litigious foot forward from time to time. I have no doubt that Gresham regarded himself as having been eased out of any interest in any benefits that might be derived from the joint development of the Campion and Davidson properties, while, from the Redera camp, I think Gresham was seen as refusing to commit himself or
Gresham R E to the more unpalatable side of funding the operations of Ocean
Pacific required for that development. In that latter respect, in my opinion
Webster was completely frank in the way in which he described the circumstances in which Gresham R E was excluded from participating in any fruits of the development. I have occasion to examine that aspect in greater detail in the course of these reasons.

A final observation in respect of the parties. I had some sympathy for the position of Punch who, as I have described, was very much the builder and who took very little part in the administrative side of the development and the decision making which I think was largely orchestrated by Webster. It is fairly clear that the whole experience has been detrimental to Punch financially and in his personal well being. At the time of the hearing he was in the process of extricating himself from the Redera Group. It would seem that the person most likely to gain a benefit of any significance from the development from within the Redera Group will be Webster, subject to the outcome of this litigation.

There were a number of disputed versions of events and of conversations that occurred during the negotiation period in the second half of 1994, none of which, in my view, amounted to anything. They do not give any indication of the lack of veracity on the part of any of the witnesses, subject only to the general observations I have made concerning the attitude of Gresham and
Webster to the litigation. Questions as to whether Webster and Punch had ever worked in partnership or whether in their discussions with Gresham the word partnership was used are, in my view, of little significance. There was a dispute as to the time Gresham first met Stephen Webster (S Webster), the solicitor brother of Webster, and whether S Webster acted for Gresham and
Gresham R E in addition to the Redera Group and persons associated with it. I regard resolution of those disputes as unrewarding in the determination of the issues in this case. In the same vein, whether Webster was informed by Gresham of the name of a solicitor said to be acting for Gresham or Gresham R E was of little or no assistance in resolving questions of credibility or reliability.
However, to a certain degree, it will be necessary to advert to these matters in analysing the discussions and events that preceded the joint venture agreement in determining whether a personal joint venture survived the joint venture agreement.

The joint venture agreement between Gresham R E and Redera M S recited the fact that Redera had entered into an option over the Campion property and had submitted development applications in respect of that property: further, that
Redera M S and Gresham R E had agreed to form a joint venture company, namely,
Ocean Pacific and had caused it to enter into an option to purchase the
Davidson property and further that they had agreed to cause Ocean Pacific to complete that purchase and develop that property along with the Campion property in the manner provided for in the joint venture agreement. Under the joint venture agreement the joint venture project was defined as meaning the purchase by Ocean Pacific of the Campion and Davidson properties, their consolidation, the obtaining of development and building approvals in respect of those properties and developing them into individual strata title units for sale. The joint venture parties were defined to mean Redera M S and Gresham R
E. The duration of the joint venture was coextensive with the period to completion of the sale of units to be erected on the properties. The joint venture company was identified as Ocean Pacific and its nominal capital of $1,000,000 was divided into two hundred "A" class shares of $1 to be held by
Redera M S and one hundred "B" class shares to be held by Gresham R E. The voting rights attaching to each of the "B" class shares was twice that of each of the "A" class shares. Otherwise the "A" Class shares ranked pari passu with the "B" class shares. Of the two hundred "A" class shares held by Redera M S, twenty were held in trust for Gresham R E. Under the joint venture agreement
Redera M S was required to execute a declaration of trust in favour of Gresham
R E in respect of those shares. The first directors of Ocean Pacific were to be Webster, Gresham and Punch.

The parties acknowledged the contribution of Redera M S in expending funds required for the obtaining of options and in initiating steps to obtain development approval from the responsible authority and that Gresham R E had reimbursed Redera M S to the extent of half of those costs. It was provided that Redera M S in accordance with the terms of the Davidson property option would nominate Ocean Pacific as its nominee for the exercise of that option.
The parties further acknowledged that Gresham R E should be entitled to 40 per cent equity in the joint venture project and in Ocean Pacific and that Redera should have 60 per cent so that the assets of the joint venture owned by
Gresham R E and Redera M S would be held in those proportions as tenants in common. It was provided that Ocean Pacific would engage Redera Constructions as the builder for the joint venture project under a "formal building contract" to be entered into. Liabilities of the joint venture project were provided for in the following terms: "15. LIABILITIES .1 Any and all obligations, losses, damages, fees, costs or other liabilities or responsibilities arising out of the Joint Venture Project shall be borne by Ocean Pacific and the Joint Venture Parties shall when requested to do so be responsible for same as to fifty per cent each.
 .2 The Joint Venture Parties agree and acknowledge that so far as they are able they shall both jointly and severally reimburse or put the Joint Venture
Company in funds when required to do so by the Joint Venture Company and these funds shall be regarded as shareholder loans to the company or shall be provided on such terms as may be agreed between the Joint Venture Company and the respective Joint Venture Party." (Plaintiff's Bundle of Documents, p 164) 
The default provisions of the joint venture agreement provided as follows: "18. TERMINATION CONSEQUENT UPON DEFAULT OR OTHER EVENT 
If either Joint Venture Party shall:- (i) pass an effective resolution for the winding up of itself; be wound up pursuant to the order of a Court of competent jurisdiction; have a receiver appointed of its undertaking; have an official manager or administrator appointed; make an assignment for the benefit of or enter into an arrangement or composition with its creditors; be unable to pay its debts within the meaning of the Corporations Law; convene a meeting of the Directors and/or Members of it to consider a resolution to the effect that it be wound up; have a petition seeking its winding up presented against it which is not withdrawn within the period of forty five (45) days from the date of presentation; or breach or fail to observe its duties and obligations continued in this
Agreement and such breach or failure has contained for a period of thirty (30) days after notice in writing from the non-defaulting Joint Venture Party requiring the defaulting Joint Venture Party to rectify such breach or failure, then and in any one or more of such events (hereinafter referred to as an "event of default"); or commit an event of default as may be provided in this agreement; 
The non defaulting Joint Venture Party shall be at liberty upon or at any time after such event to immediately terminate this Agreement by summary notice in writing to the defaulting Joint Venture Party whereupon the non defaulting
Joint Venture Party shall be under no liability to the defaulting Joint
Venture Party in respect of such termination." (Plaintiff's Bundle of Documents, pp 165-6) 
A further consequence of such default was provided as follows: "19. TRANSFER OF INTEREST UPON DEFAULT .1 Upon the occurrence of an event of default the non-defaulting Joint
Venture Party shall have the right in addition to any other rights it may have immediately upon the occurrence thereof to purchase the right, title, benefit and interest but subject to the relevant liabilities (hereinafter called the "interest") of the defaulting Joint Venture Party in the joint venture and the shares in the Joint Venture Company at an agreed amount or in the event that the amount is not so agreed then in the amount which shall be determined in the following manner:" (Plaintiff's Bundle of Documents, p 166-7) 
There then followed a mechanism for determining value in the case of disagreement.

The parties sought to exclude any implication of a partnership by the following provision: "22. PARTNERSHIP 
Nothing contained in this Agreement shall place nor shall it be construed as placing the parties in the relationship of partners or in any relationship other than at arms length; and nothing in this Agreement shall constitute nor shall it be construed to constitute a party as the agent of any other and no party shall have any authority to act for or assume any obligation liability or responsibility on behalf of or pledge the credit of any other and none of them shall purport to do so.
 (Plaintiff's Bundle of Documents, pp 169-170) 
The joint venture agreement also imposed a mutual obligation of cooperation on the parties in the following terms: "23. FURTHER ASSURANCE 
The parties to this Agreement covenant each with the other that they will execute, do and perform all such other acts, matters and things as may be necessary or convenient to effect in any respect the terms and conditions of this Agreement so as to give effect to the intention of the parties as expressed in this Agreement." (Plaintiff's Bundle of Documents, p 170) 
The form of declaration of trust required of Redera M S in respect of the twenty "A" class shares was incorporated in the joint venture agreement in the form of Sch 3. That trust declaration was made by Redera M S on 22 December .

The joint venture agreement incorporated all of the various matters decided upon between Gresham and Webster in the weeks preceding the execution of the joint venture agreement. To treat those matters as subsisting in the form of some personal joint venture agreement, operating independently of the joint venture agreement, in my opinion, is quite artificial. Moreover, in my view I am entitled to look at the post joint venture agreement conduct of the parties in aid of determining the question whether such a personal joint venture agreement was made, or, if it was, whether it ceased to have any effect. I think that post joint venture agreement conduct of the parties was unequivocal and demonstrated that the only joint venture obligations binding them were those to be found in the joint venture agreement.

Turning to the evidence of what is said to be the personal joint venture agreement, the evidence in chief of Gresham described his prior involvement in property developments which included joint venture arrangements. Before entering into negotiations with them, Gresham was aware of some of the activities of Webster and Punch and of their association with Redera M S.

He said that he was first contacted in August 1994 by Webster seeking assistance in obtaining development approval in relation to the Campion property. That request led Gresham to attend a meeting with Webster and a subsequent meeting on 10 August 1994 with an assistant town planner of
Waverley Municipal Council. Shortly after this meeting, according to Gresham,
Webster informed Gresham of the possibility of obtaining an option over the
Davidson property. In what Gresham described as "the period August 1994 to
November 1994" he "had several more meetings with ... Webster" at which Punch was sometimes present. At one such meeting "at the beginning of November"
Webster enquired of Gresham as follows: "Would you be interested in being involved in part of the Ocean Street redevelopment. We could use your knowledge of strata development and real estate sales and any money you could put in?" (Exhibit A, par 10) 
Gresham showed some interest in this approach and at a meeting which he fixed as occurring on 8 November 1994 at 2.30 pm with Webster, Punch and Jane
Margaret Compton (Compton), the office manager for the Redera Group, Gresham agreed to come into the venture in the following conversation: "(Gresham): "I have thought about what you said and subject to us finalising a deal I am very interested in getting involved as a partner. I can help with the strata marketing plan and in choosing a suitable sales agent and in building a presentation for potential financiers." : "I am delighted. I feel very confident that with your added experience and Peter's building experience and my management ability we can put together a very successful development." " (Exhibit A, par 11) 
Gresham said that there followed a meeting with the same parties at 8.00 am on November at which further aspects of the proposed deal were discussed as follows: "(Webster): "There are three of us in the deal. What about we split it three ways?" : "I agree." : "As we have been working on this project for a couple of years we want you to put in 50% of costs to date and 50% of costs into the future as a loan to the deal." " (Exhibit A, par 12) 
The costs to date were calculated at approximately $30,000. It was also proposed by Webster that time spent by the parties could be charged to the project and refunded from the financier. There followed discussion concerning a likely source of funds in which Gresham proposed an approach be made to the
Macquarie Bank Ltd (Macquarie Bank) of which he was a customer and who he understood to be "doing joint ventures on a 100% funded shared equity basis".
He mentioned the name of Angie Stricke (Stricke) as the person responsible for that funding facility and he offered to arrange a meeting with Stricke.
Gresham also mentioned the name of the principal of the finance broker known as Balmain Partners namely Michael Holm (Holm). Gresham also maintained that at this meeting it was arranged that S Webster would act as a solicitor for all parties. Gresham then evidenced a meeting that he said took place on 24
November 1994 with Webster and Holm at which the obtaining of funding facilities was further investigated and at which it was suggested that the venture needed to borrow approximately $11,300,000.

The next meeting which took place, according to the evidence of Gresham, was in the first week of December at which Webster, Punch and S Webster attended.
It was at this meeting that Gresham said the skeleton of the joint venture agreement was put together. That was reflected in the following conversation: "(S Webster): "There are three of you in this project. How are you going to structure it? Ken how to you want to hold your share?" : "I'll hold my share through Gresham Real Estate and my family company." (S Webster to Punch and Webster): "How are you guys going to hold your shares?
In your own name or by Redera?" : "We will do it through Redera." : "If that is the case Redera will have two votes and I will have one." : "O.K. We will change it so that Redera has one vote and you have one vote." (S Webster): "The best vehicle for the joint venture is a company. Think of a name and I will convert a shelf company." " (Exhibit A, par 17) 
The day of 16 December 1994 was an extremely busy one for the parties. At 9.00 am they met in the premises of Macquarie Bank with Stricke to discuss funding.
According to Gresham, Ocean Pacific was incorporated that day. That is incorrect. An option agreement was entered into by Ocean Pacific in respect of the Davidson property and at 8.30 pm in a local hotel attended by Gresham,
Punch, Webster and S Webster further details of the joint venture agreement were settled, as Gresham recalled it, in the following conversation: "(S Webster): "I will go ahead and put the joint venture agreement into writing in the next few days and incorporate the company." : "If I am giving a joint and several guarantee on a contingent liability of $13 million I want 50% of the venture." : "What about 40%?" 
To which Gresham said he agreed.
 (Gresham to S Webster): "Can we change the shareholding in Ocean Pacific to reflect the 40% profit share?" (S Webster): "It's too complicated. I'll leave the shares as they are and have
Hugh and Peter hold the balance of your shares in trust for you and I will prepare a trust deed for them to sign." " (Exhibit A, par 24) 
According to Gresham nothing was ever said to him that the agreement reached with Webster or Punch was replaced by the joint venture agreement.

Apart from some appointment notes, Gresham's evidence was unsupported by contemporaneous records of conversations and it was reasonably clear that in some respects his memory was seriously astray. In relation to the 11 August meeting with Webster and Punch when he claimed the possibility of obtaining an option on the Davidson property was discussed, it is quite clear from the evidence that this could not have taken place until sometime, probably, in October 1994. Punch has had no recollection of any discussions with Gresham prior to the submission of a development application and the first application in relation to the Campion property was not lodged until 5
October 1994. Webster's evidence in chief established, also, that it was not until 17 October 1994 that any approach was made to him concerning the
Davidson property. Webster accepts that he did have a conversation in October with Gresham concerning the possibility of obtaining an option over the
Davidson property. In his statement of evidence in reply Gresham accepts that he was in error. According to Webster's evidence his interest in the possibility of Gresham becoming involved in the development of the Campion and
Davidson properties followed receipt of a letter from Gresham to him in the following terms: "As you may have heard I have sold the balance of my interest in Gresham
Silver Strata Management.

I have enclosed my card and write to let you know what I am doing.

Gresham Property Services is: 
Investment Syndicating 
Project Consulting 
Developing 
Consulting in Property Portfolios 
Property Networking 
I would like to keep in touch.

Please contact me anytime, especially if you think there are opportunities which could be of interest, or if I can help you in your property endeavours." (Exhibit 1, Annexure 4) 
It is Webster's recollection that following that letter he raised the question of Gresham being involved in the development of the Campion and Davidson properties. According to Webster's version of the introduction of that subject, he said to Gresham: "Would you be interested in being involved in the Ocean Street redevelopment for the combined site. Redera could certainly use your strata knowledge but we cannot really continue with the combined site without a financial partner." 
According to Webster, Gresham expressed his interest in that proposal. Gresham denies any reference in any such conversation to Redera. I doubt if it is necessary to determine that conflict. If it was necessary to do so I would not be prepared to find that Redera was referred to. I have been left with the reasonably clear impression that until such time as the parties reached the point of endeavouring to work out how the proposed joint venture might be set up, no one of the three persons involved applied his mind to such niceties as whether a partnership was in contemplation or some other form of agreement or whether they would be entering into an agreement in their personal capacity or as controllers of corporations through which for several years they had conducted some, at least, of their business activities.

Consistent with the above finding, I have little doubt that, from time to time, the Redera Group may have been mentioned in discussions, as I gathered the impression that both Webster and Punch identified themselves with the
Redera Group and would not have been careful to make distinctions until it was necessary to reduce any arrangement to some formal structure, such as a joint venture agreement.

Another example of this type of conflicting evidence was seen in the versions of Gresham and Webster of the conversation that took place on 16 November 1994 when proportions of profits and costs were under discussion. According to
Webster, he did not propose splitting the profit three ways, rather, he said
Gresham made the following proposal: "There are three of us, how about splitting it three ways?" 
Webster asserts that he stated quite clearly that that was not the way the arrangement would work as he and Punch operated as Redera which led him to propose as follows: "Redera will have two thirds and you can have one third and you will need to contribute one third of the costs to date and one third of the costs in the future." 
Gresham denies such a reference and again I am not prepared to find that, at that stage, Webster and Gresham discussed corporate involvement in the arrangement under discussion.

Similarly, Webster denies that in the meeting of 8 November 1994 there was any reference to "a partnership" or to "a partner". I doubt that Gresham's recollection is so reliable such as would satisfy me that he expressed his interest "as a partner". He had no contemporaneous record of the conversation.
He offered no particular reason why he would have been careful to propose such a legal relationship and I do not think such an arrangement was present in his mind. If he did use the word "partner" or "partnership", I would regard its use as innocuous, having regard to the stage discussions had reached in
November 1994.

According to Webster, Gresham's agreement to pay 50 per cent of the costs took place at a meeting on 19 November 1994 at Gresham's office. This appears to have been accepted by Gresham.

The evidence of Webster established that there was a meeting with Gresham on the morning of 23 November 1994 and later that day there was a telephone conference call to Gresham from S Webster's office where Webster and Punch were in attendance. Webster's diary notes of that day reveal that the discussion turned to the establishment of a joint venture company, to the proposed shareholding of Redera M S and Gresham R E and to the question of voting rights. The then proposed equity in the project in favour of Gresham R
E was stated to be one third. Gresham R E was noted as being responsible for per cent of the costs. It is quite clear that Gresham was in error in his evidence in chief concerning the timing of this discussion and as to the circumstances in which it took place.

My strong impression of Gresham's evidence was that, while he had fixed in his mind a general sequence of events leading up to the joint venture agreement, his recollection was quite vague and, certainly, far less precise than his statement of evidence in chief would have suggested. This, in itself, would raise significant difficulties in any case of Gresham based upon a personal joint venture agreement intended to survive the joint venture agreement.

S Webster explained that nothing was done to draft the proposed joint venture agreement until 12 December 1994 as "there was some doubt whether the acquisition of the second site would proceed", referring to the Davidson property. This accords with the evidence of Webster that negotiations for the option over the Davidson property ran into difficulties when the proprietor negotiated for an increased option exercise price, a problem that was not resolved until Friday, 9 December 1994. On the following Monday, 12 December , he instructed S Webster to proceed with the joint venture agreement.
Webster's evidence is that he received the facsimile of that date at 11.22 am on 16 December 1994, whereupon he sent it by facsimile to Gresham R E. No reference to this had been made by Gresham in his statement of evidence in chief of the events of 16 December 1994 and in his statement of evidence in reply, he does not suggest that the evidence of Webster was unreliable in that respect. S Webster's evidence was that he did not meet Gresham prior to the afternoon of 16 December 1994 when they met in connection with the finalising of the Davidson property option. This is quite contrary to Gresham's evidence in chief that S Webster was present at the meeting with Webster and Punch in the first week of December. In cross-examination I think it became reasonably clear that Gresham was confused about this and that it was probably on 16
December that he first met S Webster. Nothing turns on the credibility of
Gresham over this matter and the other discrepancies in his recollection of events. What does flow from it is a very large question mark over the reliability of his recollection outside of a broad outline of some of the events that took place in the lead up to the joint venture agreement.

It was accepted by Gresham that he had received the draft joint venture agreement and there was introduced into evidence a copy of that draft with his handwritten notes on it. I doubt if Gresham had the faintest idea when he made those notations, other than from the fact that the facsimile bore the date 16
December 1994 and he assumed that he must have made those notes about that time, possibly in a telephone conference (see T7.1 - 8.27). Gresham was subjected to fairly lengthy cross-examination about the events of 16 December and I have to say , initially, at least, his evidence was most confusing.
However, I think he eventually accepted that he received the draft on 16
December 1994 and to the best of his recollection he had a telephone conference with S Webster in the presence of Webster when the notes were made.
He could not recall whether Punch was present at that stage (T15.41 - .57).
Even so, I doubt very much whether Gresham's recollection is correct.
Webster's evidence was that Gresham wanted some time to consider the draft and to have his solicitor advise him on it. Gresham denied that, although it appears clear that in discussions with Webster he had provided the name of a solicitor called Finkelstein. However, Gresham maintained that he had obtained no legal advice in relation to the matter other than from S Webster, suggesting that some of his handwritten notes on the draft had been made at the instance of S Webster. Nothing turns on that disputed matter. The evidence of Webster and S Webster make it fairly clear that Gresham is quite confused about the events of 16 December 1994. In my opinion, the sequence of events evidenced by Webster over the period between 16 December and 20 December 1994 is the most likely one.

According to Webster, it was not until 20 December 1994 that Gresham returned to the Redera Group's office and there discussed changes to the joint venture agreement as noted on the draft. This appears to be confirmed by a facsimile of 20 December 1994 which Webster forwarded to S Webster setting out the details of the required changes. That facsimile mirrored the notations of
Gresham on the draft joint venture agreement and reflected the final version of the joint venture agreement.

Gresham's version of the execution of the joint venture agreement in his evidence in chief was as follows: "26. My wife and I executed the Joint Venture Agreement on behalf of Gresham
Real Estate. The Agreement was executed at Redera's office at a meeting attended by my wife and I and Janey Compton and Hugh Webster and Peter Punch.

At this meeting Hugh Webster said to me words to the effect: "This is the Joint Venture Agreement prepared by Stephen. We can get him on the speaker phone if we have any questions." 
Hugh Webster then telephoned Stephen Webster on loudspeaker and we asked questions of Stephen Webster such as: "Do we have to execute every page of the agreement?" 
My wife said words to the effect: "What is the situation with the money that we have put in and that we are going to put in?" 
Hugh Webster said words to the effect: "The development approval will be through in 60 days. Then we get 100% financing and everyone gets their money back then." 
I said to Stephen Webster, the legal representative of all of the parties, immediately after the Joint Venture Agreement was executed words to the effect: "What do we do now? Do the documents have to be stamped?" 
Stephen Webster said to me words to the effect: "No, chuck it in your bottom draw (sic), and forget it."
As a result of Mr Stephen Webster saying this I did not read the document closely. I was given no indication by anyone that this agreement was in substitution for or collateral to the earlier agreement referred to in paragraphs 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and 24 above." (Exhibit A, pars 26 and 27) 
While it is clear that Gresham during the course of discussions prior to the execution of the joint venture agreement provided Webster with the name of a solicitor who had acted for him in property matters, I am prepared to accept that he received no legal advice prior to the execution of the joint venture agreement. While S Webster gave evidence that he did not act for the joint venture and that he was acting for Redera M S (T122.57 - 123.5) his role in the creation of the joint venture agreement was blurred, to say the least.
Quite clearly his contact was with his brother. However, if S Webster had clearly understood that Gresham had a solicitor acting for him in relation to the matter, one would have expected documents, such as the draft joint venture agreement, would have gone to Gresham's solicitor. I think the reality was that S Webster left it to Webster and Gresham to work out their commercial arrangement and he accepted the role of implementing that arrangement in the form of a joint venture agreement. He was not involved in the negotiations at a commercial level and for my part I see no great difficulty in the role he played, given the capacity of Gresham, Webster and Punch to arrange their own commercial affairs. Once those commercial aspects had been settled, the role left to S Webster was to put an appropriate commercial agreement in place and, he appears to have succeeded in doing so. I do not accept Gresham's statement that he did not read the joint venture agreement closely. I think he did.
Moreover, while nobody sat him down and said to him that that was the joint venture agreement between the parties and that there was no other agreement, I do not think any such exercise was warranted. In my opinion, Gresham, Webster and Punch had reached a commercial arrangement and its manner of implementation was embodied completely in the joint venture agreement. All of the matters that had been decided upon found their way into the joint venture agreement. In my opinion, any pre-joint venture agreement arrangement between the parties was completely discharged with the execution of the joint venture agreement. Perhaps, more to the point, I think the evidence of Gresham of the discussions which preceded the joint venture agreement reflected such a confused and vague recollection of events that, for that reason alone, I would not be prepared to find that a personal joint venture agreement of any kind existed prior to the joint venture agreement, let alone one which survived the joint venture agreement.

If more was needed, I think the conduct of all parties right up until the institution of these proceedings was quite inconsistent with the existence of a personal joint venture agreement which had somehow continued to operate after the execution of the joint venture agreement.

I have not found it necessary to consider separately the position of Punch during those discussions. As I have indicated his role was limited and spasmodic and, in the absence of some basis for treating Webster as the agent for Punch in reaching agreement with Gresham on some personal joint venture contract, the evidence in relation to Punch falls far short of an agreement of that kind. However, I think it is unnecessary to examine his position any more closely, having regard to the firm view that I have reached as to the absence of any personal joint venture agreement.

The joint venture project ran into considerable financial difficulty almost from the its inception. In happier financial times, once development approval was obtained for the project, Ocean Pacific would not have encountered any difficulty in obtaining sufficient finance to enable the project to proceed.
In fact the efforts of Ocean Pacific to obtain that finance proved to be quite a struggle from the outset.

During the period ending 9 May 1995, Gresham R E, pursuant to the joint venture agreement, contributed $70,000 to the joint venture project through
Ocean Pacific, matching the contribution of Redera M S. The anticipated early reimbursement of funds upon the establishment of a loan facility did not eventuate and it is clear that the joint venture project was under threat due to the limited resources of Ocean Pacific which was dependent upon contributions from its joint venture shareholders. As seen later in these reasons, Ocean Pacific's financial straits were not made any easier by the liquidity problems besetting the Redera Group. It had been necessary to extend the option over the Campion property on 19 January 1995 and again on 28 April
Ocean Pacific had until 16 June 1995 to exercise the option over the
Davidson property. It was over this period that discussions were initiated with George Couri (Couri) who had been introduced to Gresham, Webster and
Punch as a person of substantial financial means who could be interested in providing funds for the joint venture project. At this stage no financial institution had been found which was prepared to offer facilities to Ocean
Pacific on terms acceptable to it. Discussions involving Couri, Gresham,
Webster and Punch appear to have been protracted, culminating in substantial agreement in the course of discussions in June 1995. According to Gresham, that substantial agreement arose out of the following discussions: "(Webster): "Because Metway are only prepared to provide 80% finance we need someone to put in $3 million." : "I only want to have one partner and I want 50% of any deal." (Webster to Gresham): "The only way for the project to go ahead is if you drop out for Mr Couri." : "I am willing to proceed with the joint venture with Ocean Pacific and to fund it subject to me being able to obtain an option for Gresham's share in the deal. The option will be for me to buy Gresham out for $200,000 and to pay out his loan account of $70,000. Webster and Punch must agree to increase that share to 50% and I will proceed subject to some pre-conditions." (Webster and Punch to Gresham): "Please agree so that the venture can proceed." : "I will do it subject to receiving an option fee from Mr Couri of $25,000 and provided, of course, that if he doesn't exercise the option I retain my 40% share in the venture and get my loan repaid." (Webster and Punch to Gresham): "Of course. If Mr Couri does not go ahead you still own your shares and the company still owes you money." " (Exhibit A, pars 33-34) 
The parties are in dispute as to what conversations did take place. I am not prepared to accept the accuracy of Gresham's version for much the same reasons that I have expressed qualifications about the reliability of his memory of the events in the last quarter of 1994. Further, his version, concerning his position if the Couri interests did not proceed, smacks of reconstruction, having regard to aspects of the agreements that were subsequently entered into with the Couri interests and which are examined in some detail in the following reasons.

What is agreed between the parties was that the joint venture project was "at a critical point" by mid 1995, although they may have differed on the reasons for that unsatisfactory financial position. However, there does not appear to be any dispute as to the following evidence of Webster: "101. The option for the Second Site expired on 16 June 1995 and neither OPH,
RMS Redera or Redera Constructions had any funds to pay the 10% fee upon exercise of the options.
Gresham Real Estate had ceased to put in any further funds after 27 May which was at a point where its contribution reached $70,000. No lender had approved finance for the Project without having equity of $3-4 million.
OPH owed consultants $153,906.29 as at 22 June 1995 (I refer to document ).
Punch agreed to commit the property of a company of which he was a director and shareholder, Inkerman Downs Pty Limited, as security for the further funds required and RMS provided security to Inkerman Downs Pty
Limited." (Exhibit 1, pars 101 - 104) 
On 22 June 1995 the following legal steps occurred.

By deed dated 22 June 1995 Gresham R E and Redera M S entered into the termination of joint venture agreement upon the following terms: "2. TERMINATION OF JOINT VENTURE AGREEMENT .1 The parties hereto hereby agree and acknowledge that subject to the provisions of this Deed as and from the Commencement Date all the rights, entitlements, benefits, remedies, obligations and duties in respect of the
Agreement by which the parties whether jointly or severally would have otherwise been entitled or subject to are at an end and the Agreement is hereby terminated ab initio as if the Agreement had not been entered into and the Agreement shall be of no further force or effect.
BAR .1 This Deed upon being unconditional may be pleaded as a bar to any action commenced or to be commenced against any party to this Deed or their agents, contractors and employees or any one or more of them by any party and their respective agents, contractors and employees which have been or may be brought out of any act or omission, advice, business, conduct, dealing or transaction arising before the execution of this Deed including without limitation any of the matters, documents or transactions referred to in or contemplated by the recitals or definitions.
CONDITION PRECEDENT .1 The termination of the Agreement and the operation of this Deed is conditional upon and subject to the entering into by all parties of the new
Joint Venture Agreements.
RELEASE .1 Subject to the provisions of this Deed as and from the Commencement Date:- 
Redera and Gresham both jointly and severally by this document release and forever discharge and will procure each of their respective agents, contractors and employees to release and discharge the other party and their agents, contractors and employees (without any admission as to liability on their part) from all actions, suits, claims and demands, at law or in equity and/or arising under any statute which any one or more or all of them now have or could have, or would or might but for this release at any time or times after the execution of this document have or have had against the other, their agents, contractors and employers or any one or more of them by reason of or arising out of the Agreement or any provision thereof including but not limited to specifically Clauses 15 and 20.
 .2 The Release by the parties hereto at Clause 5.1(a) is absolute binding, irrevocable and unconditional in all circumstances and is not affected by anything which might otherwise effect it at law or in equity without occurring with or without the consent of any person.
 NO INTEREST 
Notwithstanding anything herein contained it is hereby agreed and acknowledged that neither Gresham nor Redera have any beneficial interest in any rights or assets of Ocean Pacific which it may have acquired upon the basis contemplated by the Agreement." (Cll 2-6, pp 857-8, Volume 3) 
The "Commencement Date" was defined as meaning "the date and the time that the conditions Precedent referred to in clause 4 are satisfied". The construction and operation of this agreement is in dispute, in particular as to what constitutes the conditions precedent, satisfaction of which had the effect of terminating the joint venture agreement. In that context I note that recital B of the termination of joint venture agreement was in the following terms: "(Redera MS and Gresham R E) have agreed to enter into a new and replacement joint venture arrangement with George Raymond Couri and parties associated with him to complete the (joint venture) Project and upon entering into those arrangements have agreed at the same time to terminate the (joint venture)
Agreement." (p 855, volume 3) 
Contemporaneously Redera M S executed a deed of dissolution of trust being that of the trust of the twenty "A" class shares in Ocean Pacific declared in favour of Gresham R E. By cl 2 it was provided as follows: "The parties hereto dissolve as and from the Commencement Date the Trust subsisting between them pursuant to deed of Declaration of Trust dated 22
December 1994." 
The commencement date was defined to mean "the date and the time of the entering into of the New Joint Venture Documents". Those documents in turn were defined as follows: " "New Joint Venture Documents" means:- 
Unitholders Agreement including all attachments and appendices between
Ocean Pacific (Holdings) Pty Limited. Barncaz Pty Limited, Redera Management
Services Pty Limited, Gresham Real Estate Pty Limited and Redera Pty Limited,
Peter Punch, Anthony Hugh Webster and George Raymond Couri and Inkerman Downs
Pty Limited; 
Declaration of Trust for the Ocean Pacific Unit Trust by Ocean Pacific
Pty Limited; 
Amendments to the Memorandum and Articles of Association of Ocean Pacific
Pty Limited pursuant to Extraordinary Members Resolution; 
All Directors' Resolutions of all companies which are parties; 
All documents required to be signed and executed pursuant to and at the same time as execution of the Unitholders Agreement or otherwise agreed." (Cl 1, pp 865-6, volume 3) 
At noon on 22 June 1995 there was a meeting of the directors of Ocean Pacific at which it was noted that the incorporation of Ocean Pacific had not occurred until 19 December 1994, some three days after the purported granting of an option to it over the Davidson property. It was resolved that the option be ratified. On the same date Ocean Pacific executed an undertaking in the following terms: "OCEAN PACIFIC (HOLDINGS) PTY LIMITED 
In consideration of settlement today hereby undertakes to:- within two (2) months of todays date duly stamp the Declaration of Trust establishing the Ocean Pacific Trust; within fourteen(14) days of todays date provide to Messrs Malleson Stephen
Jaques certified copies of duly convened meetings of Directors which passed resolutions resolving to enter into and affix the seal of the company to all contracts and arrangements entered into by the company to date; within fourteen (14) days of todays date provide to Messrs Malleson
Stephen Jaques duly completed sealed register of the company." (p 880, volume 3) 
On 22 June 1995 at 5.25 pm, meetings were held by the directors of Redera M S,
Ocean Pacific, Redera and Gresham R E in which resolutions were passed approving and authorising the execution of a unitholders agreement for the new joint venture project.

There was a further meeting of the directors of Ocean Pacific at 5.20 pm on 22
June 1995 at which it was resolved that Ocean Pacific act as trustee of the
Ocean Pacific unit trust (the joint venture trust): that it should execute a trust deed which was tabled at the meeting and, further, that five "A" Units in the joint venture trust be issued to Redera M S and five "B" units to
Gresham R E.

Accordingly, on that date certificate number 1 in the joint venture trust was issued to Redera M S in respect of five "A" units and certificate number 2 to
Gresham R E in respect of five "B" units. The joint venture trust was part of the mechanism agreed upon for the new joint venture. The joint venture trust kept a register of unitholders in accordance with the certificates issued to
Gresham R E and Redera M S. The deed tabled at the meeting of Ocean Pacific's directors at which it was resolved to constitute a trust in accordance with its terms, does not appear to have been executed by Ocean Pacific. I think it is extremely doubtful whether it ever came into existence. The form of trust approved by Ocean Pacific contained amongst its recitals the following: "The Settlor (as defined below) has paid the amount specified in Schedule 3 (the "initial settled amount") to the Trustee to hold subject to the terms contained in this deed." (p 922, volume 3) 
So far as I can ascertain no settlor was ever identified and no initial settled amount was paid to constitute the trust. Under the form of trust deed, the trust fund was defined to include that initial settled amount, the interest of Ocean Pacific under the option over the Davidson property and its interest under a contract for sale "dated 9 June 1995 between the Trustee and
John Geoffrey Glass and Judith Glass" together with all monies paid to the trustee for the issue of any units pursuant to the deed. The particular terms of the trust deed do not appear to have any particular relevance. In relation to the issue of units it provided that all units issued to Redera M S would be classified as "A" units; to Gresham R E or to any person nominated by Barncaz
Pty Ltd (Barncaz) pursuant to cl 14 of the unitholders agreement and to
Barncaz, as "B" units and all other units issued to Barncaz to be classified as "C" units. Cl 3.5 is something of a mystery in that it provides that units may only be issued in a manner such that the proportion of the units held by unitholders would be as follows: "The holders of A units - 25% the holders of B units - 25% the holders of C units - 50% or as otherwise provided in the Unitholders Agreement" (p 926, volume 3) 
This provision does not appear to accord with the issuing of the A and B units to Gresham R E and Redera M S on 22 June. The reference to Barncaz is to the corporate vehicle of Couri.

The unitholders agreement was executed on 22 June 1995. The parties to it were as set out in the definition contained in the deed of dissolution of trust set out above. The recitals were as follows: "A. Ocean Pacific or nominee has the right pursuant to Deed of Option dated 16
December 1994 to purchase the property known as 35 and 37 Ocean Street, Bondi.

B. RPL or nominee is entitled to exercise an option to purchase the properties known as 33 and 33A Ocean Street, Bondi pursuant to two Deeds of Option dated July 1994.

C. The Unitholders desire to procure that the Trustee develops the Property along the lines envisaged by this agreement and further desire that the units in the Trust be held by the Unitholders in accordance with the terms of this agreement." (p 885, volume 3) 
The unitholders agreement defined the extent of the parties' unitholding in the joint venture trust as follows: "Agreed Proportion means, in respect of a Unitholder, at the date of this agreement the proportion expressed as a percentage being: in the case of Barncaz - 50%; in the case of Redera - 25%; in the case of Gresham - 25%.

But if the redemption and issue of units contemplated by clause 14 occurs then the following percentages: in the case of Barncaz - 52.5%; in the case of Redera - 25%; in the case of the party nominated by Barncaz under clause 14 - 22.5%." (p 886, volume 3) 
The reference to Gresham is Gresham R E and to Redera is Redera M S. Cl 14 provided as follows: "14.1 In consideration of Barncaz paying a non-refundable fee of $25,000 to
Gresham on the date of this agreement, Gresham has agreed with the Trustee and
Barncaz that it is willing to accept redemption of its B Units in the Trust at any time up to and including 30 August 1995 upon receipt of $200,000 as the redemption price payable upon redemption of its B Units.
 .2 The Trustee and the Unitholders agree that Barncaz may nominate a party who wishes to subscribe for 225 B Units in the Trust. At the same time Barncaz may subscribe for 25 B Units in the Trust." (Cll 14.1 and 14.2, p 901, volume 3) 
Under cl 2, the unitholders agreed to procure Ocean Pacific as trustee to carry out the new joint venture project. The unitholders agreed to participate in the profit of the joint venture project in the proportions as quoted above.
It was a precondition of the unitholders agreement as follows: "Other than for clauses 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 5.1 - 5.6 and 6.1 - 6.2 which take effect from the date of this agreement, this agreement is conditional upon and shall only become effective upon the satisfaction of the following: the Trustee having entered into legally enforceable agreements for the sale of strata lots (with parties unrelated to Redera, Gresham or any directors or shareholders of Redera or Gresham and on a proper arm's length basis or as otherwise approved by the Board of Directors of the Trustee) to be created following completion of the Works where the total consideration payable under those agreements is not less than $6,000,000 or as agreed by all parties which agreements must also satisfy the requirements of the Financier; and the Trustee having received an offer to provide financial accommodation for the purposes of the Project from a financier introduced by Barncaz on terms reasonably acceptable to the Trustee and Barncaz; and 
Barncaz is satisfied, in its sole discretion, that the Profit projected in the Project Budget will be no less than $3,250,000; and ... that the results of the usual statutory enquiries in respect of the
Property to be conducted by the solicitors for the Trustee do not disclose any matter which may adversely affect the Project." (Cl 3.1, pp 889 - 890, volume 3) 
In the event that any of those conditions precedent were not satisfied it was provided as follows: "If any one or more of these conditions precedent are not satisfied by 5 pm on August 1995, Barncaz may at any time thereafter terminate this agreement by giving notice in writing to each of the other parties of such termination.
Upon service of any such notice, this agreement shall be at an end and no party shall have any further obligations or liabilities to any other." (Cl 3.2, p 890, volume 3) 
The reference to cll 3.3, 5.1 - 5.6 and 6.1 - 6.2 do not have any bearing on the operation of the condition precedent condition of the unitholders agreement. Cll 5.1 and 5.2 do have some relevance in the light of events that followed the execution of the unitholders agreement. They provided as follows: "5.1 It is agreed and acknowledged that each of Gresham and Redera have lent $70,000 to the Trustee to enable it to pay Pre-Commencement Expenses prior to the date of this agreement. No interest is payable on such loans.
 .2 The Unitholders agree that the Trustee will be incurring further Project
Expenses. Barncaz agrees to pay moneys owing by the Trustee in respect of
Project Expenses as and when they fall due for payment subject to clause 5.3.
All parties agree that the sum of $20,000 lent to the Trustee on 10 May 1995 by Lasovase Pty Limited is deemed part of the moneys provided by Barncaz under this section 5. No interest is payable on such loans by Barncaz." (p 891, volume 3) 
The reference to cl 5.3 concerns the provision of further contributions as follows: "Barncaz will pay such moneys owing by the Trustee subject to the following conditions: 
Barncaz approves in writing the incurring of each of the relevant obligations by the Trustee; the total of all moneys so paid by Barncaz to the Trustee under this clause does not exceed $140,000.

Once Barncaz has paid moneys to the maximum amount referred to in paragraph above, any further obligations of the Trustee must be satisfied by Redera and Barncaz severally in the proportions of 25:50, subject to each of Redera and Barncaz agreeing that such obligations be so incurred by the Trustee." (Cl 5.3, pp 891-2, volume 3) 
Cl 5.5 made provision for the reimbursement of Barncaz in the event that it exercised its rights under cl 3.2 to terminate the agreement as follows: "If the preconditions referred to in clause 3.1 are not satisfied by 5.00 pm, August 1995, and Barncaz exercises its right to terminate this agreement in accordance with clause 3.2, then each of the Trustee, Redera, the Redera
Guarantors and Inkerman jointly and severally agree to repay to Barncaz all moneys lent by Barncaz to the Trustee under clauses 5.2 and 5.3 and each, jointly and severally agree to indemnify Barncaz in respect of any failure by any of them to repay such loan." (Cl 5.5, p 892, volume 3) 
Cl 5.6 obliged Inkerman Pty Ltd (Inkerman), a corporate vehicle of Punch, to provide mortgage security over property in the district of Bourke to secure repayment of Barncaz's reimbursements under cl 5.5. Cll 6.1 and 6.2 related to the obligation of Barncaz to introduce a financier to Ocean Pacific to provide the required financial accommodation for the furtherance of the new joint venture project. Cl 6.5 imposed an express obligation on the parties to use their best endeavours to ensure the conditions precedent were satisfied.

It is common ground that the conditions precedent were not satisfied and that
Barncaz gave valid notice of termination of the unitholders agreement in accordance with cl 5.5 by notice dated 31 August 1995. It thereby became entitled to reimbursement of contributions it had made pursuant to cll 5.2 and .3. Barncaz had also paid a fee of $25,000 to Gresham R E pursuant to cl .1. however as provided by that clause, that fee was not refundable. At the time of its notice of termination Barncaz had not applied for units pursuant to cl 14.3 and Gresham R E had not redeemed its units pursuant to cl 14.1. The question has arisen whether in those events the joint venture agreement was brought to an end by cl 4 of the termination of joint venture agreement, the terms of which are repeated for convenience as follows: "The termination of the (joint venture Agreement) and the operation of this
Deed is conditional upon and subject to the entering into by all parties of the new Joint Venture Agreements." (p 1013, volume 3) 
As earlier stated there is no definition of "new Joint Venture Agreements".
The closest definition is that of "new Joint Venture Document" which included such documents as a declaration of trust, amendments to the memorandum and articles of association of Ocean Pacific, various directors resolutions and "all documents required to be signed and executed pursuant to the same time as execution of the Unitholders Agreement or as otherwise agreed". The case of
Redera M S is that cl 4 means what it says and that upon the parties entering into the new joint venture agreements that was the end of the joint venture agreement: that Gresham R E received its $25,000 and stood to receive a further $200,000. Gresham R E's position is that it equates "agreements" with "documents" such as are defined in the deed of dissolution of trust and, as a matter of construction, contends that extinguishment of the joint venture agreement entitlements only occurred upon satisfaction of the conditions precedent in the unitholders agreement. Evidence has been led on behalf of
Redera M S and Gresham R E to support their respective cases as to the circumstances in which Gresham R E agreed to accept the fee of $25,000.

In particular Webster gave evidence that S Webster said of the termination of joint venture agreement that: "The only way the new joint venture can proceed is if the previous agreements are dissolved" 
And further that: "When you sign the new joint venture agreements today this agreement that you're signing provides that each party release each other from any further claims in relation to the Project and each party acknowledges that they have no interest in the assets of Ocean Pacific" (Exhibit 1, pars 109 -110) 
Gresham on the other hand says that that advice was prefaced with the words "when Barncaz takes up the option".

However, in my opinion, there is no legitimate recourse to that evidence in aid of construction of the unitholders agreement or of the termination of joint venture agreement. It may well be the fact that Gresham did not realise that, in entering into the unitholders agreement, he ran the risk of losing all entitlements under the joint venture agreement and that he was replacing those entitlements with the receipt of $25,000 and the prospect of, in effect, being bought out by Barncaz for $200,000. There is no case raised by Gresham R
E as to mistake, or for rectification, or for any actionable misrepresentation by Redera M S, or by interests associated with it, I have reached the conclusion that cl 4 of the termination of joint venture agreement means what it says and that the new joint venture agreements were those contained in the unitholders agreement. I do not think it is correct to equate the term "new joint venture agreements" with "new joint venture documents", nor, in my opinion, is cl 4 of the termination of joint venture agreement open to the construction that entering into the new joint venture agreements was to be equated with entering into new joint venture agreements which were not subject to any unsatisfied conditions precedent.

I do not think the absence of an executed declaration of trust for the new joint venture assists Gresham R E. It is clear from the minutes of Ocean
Pacific of 22 June 1995 that it had resolved to enter into the new joint venture trust as trustee on the terms agreed and had issued units pursuant to those terms.

The defendants have raised defences in the nature of estoppel arising out of the conduct of Gresham and Gresham R E in the period after May 1995. In the period of August and September 1995 Webster and Punch contributed a further $75,000 by way of loans to Ocean Pacific in order to keep the development project of the Campion and Davidson properties alive. Although financial position appeared to have been strengthened by the support of Barncaz and
Couri, things were not running as smoothly as had been anticipated. Couri proved to be a difficult associate and did not provide the full extent of the funds agreed to be made available by way of loan under the unitholders agreement. By the end of July 1995, Barncaz had advanced $105,000 and applied a further $25,000 to the satisfaction of solicitors' expenses which could not be regarded reasonably as expenses of the new joint venture to which the agreed contribution of $140,000 was intended to be applied. That conduct of
Couri put unexpected financial pressure on Ocean Pacific which is reasonably captured in the minutes of the meeting of its directors of 1 August 1995 as set out below: " MINUTES OF DIRECTORS' MEETING 
Ocean Pacific (Holdings) Pty Ltd 
VENUE: Redera Group office 
DATE: 1 August 1995 
TIME: 8.30 am 
PRESENT: Hugh Webster, Peter Punch, Janie Compton
At an Extraordinary Meeting of Unit Holders yesterday, Barncaz stated that they had received a Letter of Demand from Mallesons.

It was further stated that the total amount owing was now $38,000 and not $25,000 as previously documented.

Neither the Letter of Demand nor the revised Invoice were tabled.

It should be noted that release of any payment to Mallesons has not been approved by the Committee.

It is unclear as to whether Barncaz has actually paid Mallesons in part or full.
Barncaz was requested by OPH to provide an amount of $17,000 as per Option extension agreement with Cropper Parkhill, payable by midnight 31 July 1995.

Barncaz stated that the $38,000 payable to Mallesons brought the total funds contributed by Barncaz to approximately $141,000. Barncaz requires documentation of an increase and extension of mortgage over Inkerman Downs Pty
Ltd prior to any further contribution of funds.

Webster O'Halloran has secured an extension of the Option payment until 3.00 pm today, 1 August 1995.
It should be well noted that Barncaz is currently withholding funds, previously agreed and approved for release, thereby seriously jeopardising procedure of the project, in favour of releasing an unapproved payment to a creditor whose revised invoice has never been sighted by the Committee.
The Directors resolved to make every effort to secure the necessary funds by 3 pm today:- 
Ken Gresham to be approached as a Shareholder in OPH to make equity contribution as per Agreement 
State Bank to be requested to extend overdraft facility for Redera
Constructions, possibly $10-20k over a 48 hour period 
Punch & Webster to investigate possibility of personal contributions
The Directors resolved to seek legal confirmation of the implications threatening Inkerman Downs Pty Ltd.
The Directors resolved to obtain confirmation from Ken Gresham today as to his previous offer of $1m worth of unit purchases in the project if necessary
The Directors resolved to release rental payments to Davidson Investments up to and including 31 July 1995.

Punch to contact Davidson to explain current situation and request leniency in
August rent payment for a week or two.
Formal application for funding has not been lodged by Barncaz Pty Ltd.
Meeting scheduled for 12.30p.m. today, 1 August 1995, at the offices of Balmain Partners, to discuss current options available to OPH 
MEETING CLOSED: 10.30 am 
NEXT MEETING: To be advised " (pp 1220 - 1221, volume 4) 
Webster has said of item 4(a) that that was a reference to an approach to
Gresham to contribute pursuant to the unitholders agreement. I do not think so. Contribution by unitholders was governed by cl 5 of the unitholders agreement and that did not contemplate further contributions by Gresham R E.
Cl 7A provided for loan funds to be advanced by unitholders, but that was not what was referred to in minute number 4(a) in speaking of an equity contribution. That was a reference to the liability to contribute under cl 15 of the joint venture agreement which, in my opinion, had been extinguished with the termination of joint venture agreement. Moreover, it had been made clear by mid July 1995 that Ocean Pacific could not anticipate any further support from Gresham or Gresham R E, a fact which was embodied in Gresham's resignation as a director of Ocean Pacific on 18 July 1995. According to his evidence that occurred in the following circumstances: "At a meeting on 18 July 1995 attended by Hugh Webster, Peter Punch, George
Couri, Janey Compton and me Mr Couri said words to the effect: "I have an outstanding account from Mallesons for $25,000. The agreements says that the deal pays Mallesons so I am going to pay it out of the initial $140,000 I was to lend to the Development." 
Hugh Webster said to Mr Couri words to the effect: "We calculated that the $140,000 that you were to lend was just sufficient to get the marketing program complete and thus fulfil the pre-conditions that you have set for financing. If you pay $25,000 to Mallesons where do we get the rest of the money from?" 
Mr Couri said words to the effect: "That is your problem chum." 
Hugh Webster turned to me and said words to the effect: "Are you going to put any more money in Ken? What about the $25,000 you got for the option payment." 
I said words to the effect: "I have already foregone a lot of dough for the deal to proceed. I don't intend being the financier to a deal that I won't be involved in when the option proceeds." 
Mr Couri said words to the effect: "I don't blame Ken for his attitude. You will just have to find the dough." 
At the time I understood Mr Couri's reference to "you" to be a reference to
Hugh Webster and Peter Punch.

Eventually I said to Hugh Webster and Peter Punch: "If you won't put in the money it seems to me that Ocean Pacific may not be able to pay its debts as they fall due. I am still a director. My understanding is that a director can be held responsible for debts of a company if he puts the company into debt and he knows there is a fair chance that people can't be paid. Why should I be responsible for debts when I stand to gain the least when the option goes ahead?" 
I then handwrote my resignation from (Ocean Pacific) and handed it to Hugh
Webster." (Exhibit A, par 41) 
In his statement of evidence in reply, Gresham gave a somewhat different version of the 18 July 1995 meeting which Webster described as an Ocean
Pacific Project Development Committee meeting. By all accounts it was an unpleasant occasion with tempers raised, particularly, over the conduct of
Couri in relation to Barncaz's obligations under the unitholders agreement. In
Gresham's statement of evidence in reply, he expressed the exchange that took place on his resignation as director of Ocean Pacific as follows: "Mr Couri said: "I have paid Mallesons $35,000 account and therefore, deducting that from the $160,000 that I was proposing to lend, that leaves you $125,000." 
Hugh Webster said: "That's not how it was meant to operate. Mallesons costs were to be a reimbursement paid by Ocean Pacific. $125,000 isn't enough to complete the deal." 
I said: "I now believe that George's refusal to support the deal puts the Ocean
Pacific's funding at risk and creates a directors liability leaving me no alternative but to resign as a director." 
Hugh Webster said: "Please don't do this, your input and involvement are vital to the deal." 
I said: "I will still attend the meetings and help where I can with advice but I cannot force George Couri to complete, and after all I still have $70K and my share of the deal to protect." " (Exhibit D, par 19) 
I am not satisfied that Gresham expressed his position in those terms, particularly when one has regard to his subsequent conduct.

A meeting took place on 31 July 1995 which included Webster, Couri, Holm and
Gresham. Webster attended the meeting in anticipation of collecting a cheque from Couri to enable the Campion option to be extended. It was at this meeting that Couri made it clear that the funds were not coming from his direction.
Webster then approached Gresham to provide some financial assistance. He was not seeking very much. But it was too much for Gresham, as appears from the following evidence of Webster: "I said to Gresham at the meeting on 31 July 1995 words to the effect:- "If we don't get the money by midnight tonight the Project is finished. Ken can you help here?" 
Gresham said words to the effect:- "I'll lend you $5,000 if you personally guarantee it." " (Exhibit 1, par 145) 
There was a further meeting on 1 August 1995 attended by Webster, Gresham,
Holm and Punch at Holm's premises at which Gresham was further pressed to assist Ocean Pacific in finding the necessary funds for the extension of the option over the Campion property. The evidence of Webster of that meeting was as follows: "146. .... I said to the parties present words to the effect:- "If we don't have money today the Project is finished."
I then said to Gresham:- "Will you help us out."
Gresham said words to the effect:- "I will lend you and Peter $5,000 if you personally guarantee it."
I then said words to the effect:- "What about the $25,000.00? You realise, if we don't have this the whole thing will go down."
Gresham said words to the effect:- "I am not prepared to put in any more money."
He then said words to the effect:- "I am prepared to lose my $70,000."
I then said words to the effect:- "if you don't put money in the Project will collapse." " (Exhibit 1, pars 146 - 152) 
In his statement of evidence in reply, Gresham expressed it somewhat differently but in substance I think it accords with the recollection of
Webster. Gresham's evidence was as follows: "I said: "George Couri should pay it - not me - it is part of the $160,000 he agreed to. If it helps you personally I can lend you $5,000." 
I also said: "I want George to live up to his obligation. Mallesons account is reimburseable but not a first call. If George paid the balance money to you there would be no proble (sic). Anyway until George renegs it is his obligation." 
Hugh Webster said: "If someone doesn't put in some money the option will run out and the deal collapses and we will all lose our money" 
I said: "If that happens we each lose $70,000 but it is still George Couri's call." "
 (Exhibit D, par 20) 
There is much to be said for Gresham's stand, as I understand the legal position of Gresham and Gresham R E. At that time Gresham R E was a shareholder in Ocean Pacific in whose accounts it stood as a creditor in the sum of $70,000. Neither Gresham nor Gresham R E had any joint project entitlements under any personal joint venture or under the joint venture agreement. In my opinion, the only reasonable basis upon which Gresham could have been approached for loan funds was through his interest in Gresham R E as a shareholder in Ocean Pacific. At the same time, he was entitled to look to
Redera M S and Barncaz under cl 5 of the unitholders agreement to make any further contributions towards the new joint venture project. I note, however, that the stand taken by Gresham is inconsistent, in my opinion, with his present case that there subsisted a personal joint venture agreement or, indeed, that there was any continuing obligation under cl 15 of the joint venture agreement.

During the month of August and thereafter it is reasonably clear that the burden of financially supporting the project was shouldered by Webster and
Punch. The following schedule identifies the various loan funds made available by them to Ocean Pacific between 14 August and 4 September 1995: "DATE LENDER AMOUNT .08.95 Hugh Webster $10,000 .08.95 Peter Punch 25,000 .08.95 Hugh Webster 10,000 .09.95 Hugh Webster 15,000 .09.95 Peter Punch 15,000" (Exhibit 3, par 3) 
In the face of Couri's obdurate stance towards further contributions to the new joint venture project and in the absence of Barncaz procuring the introduction of a financier pursuant to its obligations under cl 6 of the unitholders agreement, Punch and Webster remained active in keeping the development prospects alive by the provision of necessary loan funds to Ocean
Pacific and in pursuing the assistance of a financier to enable the development of the Campion and Davidson properties to proceed. In late July
Punch renewed interest on the part of Macquarie Bank in the project and on 25
July there was a meeting attended by Punch, Webster and David Lewis (Lewis) a representative of Macquarie Bank.

The meeting with Lewis led to the submission by Macquarie Bank of a memorandum of understanding (the memorandum) forwarded under cover of letter dated 8
August 1995 to Webster and Punch. I think from that memorandum can be extracted the substance of what had passed between Punch and Webster in their discussions with Macquarie Bank. It is noteworthy that the memorandum of understanding was expressed to be between Macquarie Bank and Redera. The project description in the memorandum outlined the fact that Redera had "taken control of the site at Bondi for the development of Ocean Pacific", by which name the project was called. Webster explained the circumstances in which
Redera, rather than Ocean Pacific, had submitted the proposal to Macquarie
Bank on the basis that the bank needed to be satisfied that the company had a "track record" and Redera had a history of other projects, notwithstanding the fact that Lewis was informed that Ocean Pacific was a company established specifically to run the project. The memorandum set out information provided by Redera which included a breakdown of actual and predicted costs totalling something in excess of $13,000,000. At that time the anticipated duration of the project was given as eighteen months. The method by which the financial requirements of the project development could be implemented was set out in s of the memorandum as follows: "
 * MBL undertakes its due diligence and prepares a submission to the credit committee for approval of MBL's equity commitment * Subject to credit committee approval and Redera's acceptance of MBL's offer to participate, MBL arranges, on a best endeavours basis, new equity funds and non-recourse debt * establishment of an entity (if necessary) which will be capitalised by way of equity and non-recourse debt and will own the land and carry out the Project * MBL provides development management services to the new entity * Redera provides project management services to the new entity * progressive investment of equity in this entity by MBL, Redera and the new equity investor(s) as required to pay Project expenses * drawdown by the new entity of non-recourse debt as required to pay Project expenses * the Project is sold, the non-recourse debt repaid and profits distributed * profit is initially distributed according to equity participation, if the profit exceeds a predetermined figure, profit in excess of this figure is split: new equity investor 50%, Redera 25% and MBL 25%." (p 1247, volume 4) 
S 6 provided for the division of fees and profit in the following way: "6.0 FEES AND PROFIT SHARE .1 Sponsor's Fee 
A fee of $1,200,000 ("the Sponsor's Fee") will be paid by the Holding Entity on the successful arrangement of all equity and debt funding.

Redera will receive 50% of the Sponsor's Fee.

MBL will receive 50% of the Sponsor's Fee.
 .2 Project Management Fee 
Redera will receive a total Project Management Fee of $250,000 to be paid monthly.
 .3 Development Management Fee 
MBL will receive a total Development Management Fee of $250,000 to be paid monthly.
 .4 Agency 
The development manager will appoint agents as appropriate however should MBL or Redera introduce a purchaser for the Project the introducing party will receive the agency fee outlined in the feasibility (Appendix A).
 .5 Profit Share 
The net profit generated from the sale of the Project will initially be distributed to Redera, MBL and the provider(s) of Other Participant Equity based on the equity interest held by each participant. If the profits exceed a predetermined figure, profits in excess of this figure will be split: new equity investor 50%, Redera 25% and MBL 25%." (p 1251, volume 4) 
S 9 provided for payment of a $10,000 commitment fee to be held in a suspense account by Macquarie Bank and which would be forfeited in the circumstances outlined in <case>.

The memorandum does not provide details of the terms upon which the proposed "new equity" would own the Campion and Davidson properties. It is not clear that the contemplated "progressive investment of equity in (the new) entity" to pay project expenses would include expenses incurred to date by Ocean
Pacific. One assumes that would be taken account of in the terms upon which the new entity acquired the Davidson and Campion properties.

It is reasonably clear that the first discussions with Lewis involved consideration of the sale of the property to the bank which I think can be inferred from the acknowledgment obtained from Couri on 2 August 1995 at a meeting which was attended by Punch, Webster, Holm and others. Couri acknowledged that he had no objection to the sale of the project by Ocean
Pacific on the understanding that the conditions precedent to the unitholders agreement had not been satisfied and upon the basis that he was repaid the funds lent to the new joint venture project.

It was the evidence of Webster that the memorandum was received on 8 August and that it was delivered or sent by a fax to Holm on 10 August 1995 and in turn given to Gresham on or about that date. It was also the evidence of
Webster that the memorandum was retained by Gresham for some days before
Gresham returned it. Gresham admits that he was shown a Macquarie Bank document described as a memorandum of understanding but that it was not the memorandum. It was his evidence that the memorandum of understanding which he sighted did not identify the parties to it and he further stated that he did not have the memorandum in his possession as stated by Webster. I am unable to completely resolve this conflict of evidence other than to observe that I would have expected the memorandum to have raised a number of questions in
Gresham's mind concerning Ocean Pacific's entitlements under its terms: even if one were to conclude that Gresham had all but given up hope of gaining any benefit from the redemption of units in Ocean Pacific under the unitholders agreement and regarded his interests as being restricted to those held through
Gresham R E as shareholder and creditor of Ocean Pacific. Nothing of that nature seems to have occurred.

In his statement of evidence in chief, Gresham had made no reference to the memorandum. In his affidavit of evidence in reply Gresham did not join issue with the fact that he had a memorandum in his possession in the manner evidenced by Webster and contented himself with his statement to Webster that any application to Macquarie Bank should be made by Barncaz as the "Barncaz agreement (was) still on foot".

It appears that the memorandum was signed on behalf of Redera sometime prior to 16 August 1995, the date of a letter from Macquarie Bank to Webster acknowledging the signed memorandum and requesting certain particulars including "details and evidence of all costs to date". That rather suggests that Redera was anticipating a reimbursement of expenses to date should
Macquarie Bank proceed with the proposal. The $10,000 commitment fee to
Macquarie Bank was provided by Webster by way of a loan to Redera on 14 August
It was the evidence of Webster that Gresham had been requested to contribute to the commitment fee but refused. According to Webster this exchange took place after Gresham returned the memorandum to him but before the submission of the memorandum to the bank. Webster attributed to Gresham a refusal in these terms: "I am not putting any money in. I am prepared to lose my $70,000. I will lend you $5,000 personally guaranteed. Good luck." 
Apart from the prospect of Gresham R E being repaid its loan funds by Ocean
Pacific it is very difficult to understand on what basis Gresham could be requested to make any contribution to a proposal which stood to benefit Redera to the exclusion of Ocean Pacific. For Gresham's part, he was given a number of opportunities in cross-examination to explain his refusal to make any further contributions other than by way of a personal loan to Webster, having regard to his contention that there subsisted joint venture agreement entitlements both under the personal joint venture and the joint venture agreement. In broad terms Gresham sought to justify his refusal to contribute on the basis that he had been provided with no considered plan for future expenditure and until such time as that was produced he considered that he should not be required to make any contribution. I do not accept that explanation. Gresham, in my view, had decided by that stage that enough was enough and he was not prepared to make any further contribution beyond the $70,000 advanced to Ocean Pacific by way of loans. I think that position was put beyond doubt by what followed.

On 5 September 1995 there was a meeting attended by Webster, Punch, Compton and Gresham to which Redera M S has attributed some significance. Prior to that meting there had been a development in Redera's dealings with Macquarie
Bank as appears from the bank's letter to Webster of 28 August 1995 in the following terms: "OCEAN PACIFIC 
As discussed, in light of the predicted increase in construction costs of the above project and the values attributed to the project by Herron Todd White we would like to confirm the following changes to the Memorandum of Understanding and hence the basis on which this Syndicated Equity Development ("SED") may proceed.

As agreed, an overview of the new structure is as follows: * Redera Pty Ltd ("Redera")/Ocean Pacific (Holdings) Pty Ltd ("OP") grants an option to a corporation, controlled by MBL and acting in the capacity of the trustee of a unit trust to be established, to assign its interest in the options to purchase all land for the development of Ocean Pacific; * MBL undertakes its due diligence and prepares a submission to the credit committee for approval of MBL's equity commitment; * MBL arranges, on a best endeavours basis, new equity funds and non-recourse debt; * the trustee company exercises its option for Redera/OP to assign its interest in the options to purchase all land for the development of Ocean Pacific; * the trust is established and is capitalised by way of equity and non-recourse debt; * the trustee company exercises its option to purchase all land for the development of Ocean Pacific; * MBL provides development management services to the new entity; * Redera provides project management services to the new entity; * progressive investment of equity in the trust by MBL and the other equity investor(s) as required to pay Project expenses; * drawdown by the trust of non-recourse debt is required to pay Project expenses; * project expenses include reimbursement to OP for applicable costs to date; * the Project is sold, the non-recourse debt repaid, equity redistributed and profits distributed; * profit is distributed in the following order of priority: * to the equity investors (including MBL) to a level that represents a 25% internal rate of return to those investors (MBL Internal rate of return excludes the sponsor's fee, development management fee and any other fees due to MBL); * the next $800,000 is distributed to Redera as a success fee; * distributed to the equity investors (90%) and Redera (10%).

To reiterate, the project feasibility still contains a project management fee to Redera of $250,000. Redera now receives no sponsor's fee, is not required to take an equity position in the development and therefore does not receive a profit share. Redera does receive a success fee of up to $800,000 after the equity participants have received the specified return.

Could you confirm that you wish MBL to proceed with the application on the basis outlined by signing the attached copy of this letter where indicated." (pp 1306-7, volume 4) 
What is of interest in that change in "overview" was the clarification, at least to my mind, of the way in which project expenses to date of the memorandum would be addressed and, in particular, that those expenses included "reimbursement to (Ocean Pacific) for applicable costs to date". It may be that by this stage Gresham had lowered his sights in relation to likely benefits to be derived from the project and was content to see a scheme put in place that would see Gresham R E repaid its loan. I think this may be inferred from the attendance of Gresham with Webster and Punch at a meeting with
Macquarie Bank on 21 August 1995.

To put the evidence of the meeting of 5 September 1995 in context, I think it is important to note the following evidence from the cross-examination of
Gresham: "Q. You don't, in your statement, do you, give any evidence in regard to the discussions that you had in August 1995 concerning the Macquarie Bank? 
A. I am sorry, could you say that again? 
Q. You don't, in your statement, include any evidence concerning the discussions you had with Hugh Webster in August 1995 concerning Macquarie Bank and the need to pay Macquarie Bank $10,000? 
A. No.

Q. But there was a conversation in August 1995 about that matter, wasn't there? 
A. No.

Q. You didn't take any part in the mechanics of the payment to Macquarie Bank, did you? 
A. No.

Q. And you, as I have suggested to you, that you had a conversation with Hugh
Webster about the need to pay $10,000 before that payment was actually made, and I think you have denied that? 
A. I do.

Q. You attended, did you not, a meeting at Macquarie Bank on 21 August 1995 with Mr Hugh Webster and Messrs Louis and Glass? 
A. Louis? Lewis.

Q. I am sorry, Lewis L-E-W-I-S, is it? 
A. Yes, I am sure it is.

Q. Messrs Lewis and Glass, did you not? 
A. I may have - yes, I did.

Q. And you knew at that stage that the $10,000 had been paid? 
A. At what stage? 
Q. 21 August 1995? 
A. Yes.

Q. And you don't refer to that in your statement either, do you? 
A. No.

Q. Is there any particular reason for that, that you don't refer to that meeting with the bank? 
A. Well, no particular reason, no." (T26.42 - 27.33) 
At the meeting of 5 September 1995 the evidence of Webster was that Gresham refused to make any further contribution to the project and expressed an interest in accepting $70,000 for payment of Gresham R E's shares in Ocean
Pacific, at the same time indicating interest in an offer of $45,000. Gresham, according to Webster, stated that he was not confident that Macquarie Bank would proceed with the project. This evidence was corroborated by Compton and by Punch.

Gresham's version of this meeting in his statement of evidence in chief was as follows: "In early September 1995 I met with Hugh Webster and Peter Punch and Hugh
Webster said words to the effect: "We have been negotiating with Macquarie Bank through their new Equity
Investment Division and things are looking really good. We have paid a $10,000 fee to them to get the deal together and understand if you don't want to put any more money in although all donations will be gratefully received. However if we put it together will you sell your share in the Ocean Pacific so we can proceed with it?" 
I said words to the effect: "Make me an offer." 
Hugh Webster said words to the effect: "Well, you are only owed $45,000 so that would be our offer." 
I said words to the effect: "My loan account is $70,000. The $25,000 I got from Couri was for an option purchased by him which has expired. It has nothing to do with my loan account." 
Peter Punch said a number of time words to the effect: "Would you take $45,000 and let us get on with the deal?" 
I said words to the effect: "Is that a formal offer?" 
Peter Punch said words to the effect: "Well we haven't got the money right now so you would have to wait until we finalise the deal with Macquarie." 
Hugh Webster said words to the effect: "The deal with Macquarie seems to be coming along. We are looking after your interest as a shareholder." 
I said words to the effect: "Keep me informed. If I can be of any help with the Bank let me know." " (Exhibit A, par 43) 
In cross-examination, Gresham was asked about the meeting of 5 September 1995, as appears from the following: "Q. In any event on 5 September I want to put to you there was a meeting that began at 9:30 in the morning for about half an hour at which Mr Hugh Webster was present and Mr Punch and yourself and Ms Compton? 
A. Whether Miss Compton was actually there for the whole of the time, or whether she popped in and out and made coffee, I don't know, she may very well have been there from time to time.

Q. She was taking notes, was she not? 
A. No.

Q. (Document 1338 volume 4 shown to witness). Do you recall at the meeting in early September, at the offices of Mr Hugh Webster and Mr Punch, a question was raised as to whether you would be paying any further funds towards the project? 
A. I am sorry, I was just reading this. I am sorry, could you repeat that? 
Q. Do you remember the meeting that we are discussing in early September 1995; the question was raised whether you would be contributing any further funds to the project? 
A. The question of the funding of the project was raised and, yes, myself included.

Q. And did you say, at the meeting in early September, that you were prepared to sell your shares? 
A. No, I didn't. What - I was asked whether I would be willing to sell my share.

Q. Did you say you would consider an offer of $45,000 for your shares? 
A. No. I was asked if I would consider an offer of $45,000.

Q. You said you would consider an offer of $45,000? 
A. No. I was asked if I would consider an offer of $45,000.

Q. What did you reply? 
A. Well, I said that I was owed $70,000 and I said "Are we negotiating?", basically, to which I was advised that we were not negotiating. I said - they asked me if I would take $45,000. I asked them if that was an offer. They said, "Well, we don't have the money at the moment to make any offer", so that's where it was left." (T34.39 - 35.27) 
Compton produced a file note of this meeting in the following terms: "

O.P.H. - Shareholders 
Meeting .9.95 not
KG stated that he will ^ be contributing any further funds to the project. Note
K G stated that he will relinquish his shares for an up-front payment of $70,000., being his contribution to date but Note stated that he would consider offers of $45k
K G is not convinced that Macq.
 will go ahead Note 
Begin: 9.30 am 
End: 10.00 am 
PRESENT: HW / PP / JC / KG." (p 1338, volume 4) 
Compton was cross-examined concerning the contents of this note. I think it is the only note, specifically, of a shareholders' meeting of Ocean Pacific and the only one of its kind not reduced to a more formal typewritten record. She explained that this was the result of instructions received from Webster. I have little doubt that the note is an accurate record of so much as it does record of the events of the meeting and, in particular, that Gresham had made it clear that Redera M S had seen the last of any contributions from Gresham R
E or from Gresham. I think it is also reasonably clear that Gresham had expressed a willingness to cut his losses and take the nearest exit from the project with the sale of Gresham R E's shareholding in Ocean Pacific, possibly for $45,000.

While I have no doubt, at all, about the authenticity of the record, I have a very strong impression that the meeting with Gresham was set up by Webster with the objective, in part, of obtaining a record of the very matters that are to be found in the notes of this meeting. In other words, I think Gresham played into the hands of Webster in providing evidence, that could be corroborated, of his attitude to the project. I draw this inference from the rather selective nature of the notes, its unique character amongst the records of the Redera Group and, most particularly, from the fact that the day of the meeting coincided with a meeting to be held later that day for the execution of option deeds under which Redera assigned its interest to Macquarie Bank in respect of the option over the Campion property and Ocean Pacific assigned its interest to the bank in respect of the Davidson property. In each case the consideration was $10.

In the event of Macquarie Bank determining not to exercise its rights under the option deeds, provision was made for the refund of the option interests to
Redera and Ocean Pacific respectively for the payment to each of $10. I am satisfied that Gresham had no inkling of the intention of Ocean Pacific and
Redera to assign those options in that way. The coincidence of the meetings, together with the selective nature of Compton's notes leave me in little doubt that the notes, while accurate, accurately record what Webster anticipated would be Gresham's stand in relation to the project.

Nevertheless, I do not think that undercurrent robs the evidence of proof to my satisfaction that Gresham had made an unqualified decision not to make further contributions to the project, even if provision of funds could have the effect of resurrecting prospects of satisfaction of Gresham R E's loan account with Ocean Pacific. Cross -examined on this aspect of the meeting of 5
September by counsel for Punch, Gresham denied having stated at the meeting that he would make no further contributions. His version was that he had stated that he "would contribute no further funds until a realistic plan was put together". I sought to ascertain from Gresham what he meant by this reference to a plan, but I have to say I was left with no clear understanding of what was in his mind in seeking to justify a refusal to make contributions to the project.

It is my view that Punch and Webster, provided with Gresham's clear statement that there would be no further contributions to the project satisfied themselves that, as directors of Ocean Pacific and Redera M S, they had no obligation to Gresham or Gresham R E, except in so far as Gresham R E was a shareholder and creditor of Ocean Pacific. I think this is borne out by
Webster's responses to some questions which I put to him as follows: "HIS HONOUR: Q. If there had been any payment of contributions to expenses by the Gresham interests in the period say June 1995 through to November 1995, would that have affected any of the decisions you made as to the nature of the arrangement entered into with Macquarie Bank? 
A. Most certainly.

Q. What difference would it have made? 
A. It would have meant that we would have been going in as Ocean Pacific to at least consolidate the debts and put the project across the line.

Q. And put the project - what were the last words you said? 
A. Put the project across the line.

Q. Do I understand that to mean that the benefit, any benefit, arising out of the transaction with Macquarie Bank, would be retained within Ocean Pacific? 
A. Yes." (T108.4 - .22) 
I accept that evidence. Its significance lies in the terms of the agreement reached with Macquarie Bank.

Notwithstanding the terms of the memorandum, as amended by letter of 28 August , which provided for application of funds for payment of project expenses to include reimbursement to Ocean Pacific for "applicable costs to date", monies made available by Macquarie Bank under that arrangement did not result in full reimbursement of those expenses. It is clear from the terms of
Macquarie Bank's letter to Webster of 4 October 1995 which was executed on behalf of Redera and Ocean Pacific as a form of acknowledgment, that there was considerable negotiation between Redera and Macquarie Bank over the quantum of those reimburseable expenses. What can be drawn from those negotiations is that Macquarie Bank was at pains to keep the reimburseable expenses within limits acceptable to it whereas Webster and Punch had to weigh up the effect that the quantum of reimburseable expenses might have on Macquarie Bank's attitude to the proposal under consideration. I note, for example, in
Macquarie Bank's letter of 4 October 1995, the stipulation that a shortfall of funds available to satisfy reimburseable expenses may have to be "deducted from the proposed management fee" payable to Redera.

I think this is borne out by the exchange that took place between Webster and
Macquarie Bank in November and December 1995. On 29 November 1995 as part of the process of negotiating the quantum of Ocean Pacific expenses to be reimbursed, Ocean Pacific submitted a cost summary to Macquarie Bank as at 15
November 1995 totalling approximately $574,000. That summary included the $140,000 advanced to Ocean Pacific by Gresham R E and Redera M S, each in the sum of $70,000. However, in the further letter from Macquarie Bank of 5
December 1995 that amount had been significantly reduced.

That letter, which was also formally acknowledged on behalf of Redera and
Ocean Pacific, recorded a number of matters affecting the agreement for reimbursement of expenses. Attached to that letter was a schedule which represented "the total and final amounts due by Macquarie Bank Ltd". It is sufficient to note that the sum total payable by Macquarie Bank had been reduced to approximately $438,000 which included provision for reimbursement for option fees in the sum of $100,750, an item identified as "vendor expense reimbursement" in the sum of $21,900 and solicitors costs of S Webster of $25,000. The sum of $438,000 was broken up into two categories totalling approximately, $191,000 payable directly by Macquarie Bank to various consultants and the sum of $247,147.94 which was paid to Ocean Pacific for distributions by it in accordance with that schedule. That payment according to Compton was received on 6 December 1995 and distributed in accordance with the directions of Webster and Punch. The upshot of that distribution was that while Punch received $40,000 and Webster $35,000, which reimbursed them for the monies advanced in August - September 1995, there was left unsatisfied the $140,000 loaned by Gresham R E and Redera M S to Ocean Pacific.

I think it is clear that in the negotiations with Macquarie Bank, a compromise was reached in which the loan entitlements of Gresham R E and Redera M S were sacrificed.

The project management agreement between Syndicated Asset Management Pty Ltd and Redera M S of 8 March 1996 appointed Redera M S as project manager for the development of the Campion and Davidson properties. The fee payable was made up of an initial fee of $225,000, less certain deductions and an `additional management fee' calculated in accordance with a formula for the determination of net profit. The agreement provided that Redera M S would be entitled to the first $800,000 available for distribution under that formula and 10 per cent of any "remaining balance".

If I am wrong in my construction of cl 4 of the termination of joint venture agreement then, in my opinion, Gresham's conduct at least from September 1995 should be treated as a repudiation of the joint venture agreement by Gresham R
E: particularly of its obligations under cl 15 of that agreement. In my opinion, Webster, Punch and Redera M S were entitled to treat the joint venture agreement as at an end, and entitled to pursue their own interests thereafter. Although it would have been open to Redera M S to have exercised its rights under the default provisions of the joint venture agreement, its failure to do so may be attributed to the fact that it regarded the joint venture agreement as spent. In my opinion, the conduct of Gresham R E in repudiating the joint venture agreement, assuming it survived the termination of joint venture agreement, precludes it from now reasserting entitlements under the joint venture agreement.

I have stated earlier in these reasons that the conduct of Gresham and Gresham
R E can be looked at as evidence of the absence of any subsisting joint venture agreement.

Involved in the marketing of the project was one Arnold Newhouse (Newhouse) the principal of A & S Properties Pty Ltd. On 1 September 1995 Newhouse wrote to Gresham in the following terms: "I understand that you have withdrawn your Directorship of the Ocean Pacific development in Ocean Street, Bondi.

Over a lengthy period you led me to believe that you were committed to the project and that you were involved with a proviso that the selling agents would produce a presales realization of $5 million. Subsequently, with George
Couri a target of $6 million was set and had to be accepted.

Our providing continued credit in advertising was predicated with your association with Ocean Pacific and despite delays in receiving reimbursements we continued to meet our end of activities. We were to receive 40% commission after exchange of contracts and subsequently were then led to believe that this would not be paid until we reached the new target.

I am shocked to learn you have withdrawn your involvement and financial commitment as at the very least I should have been made aware that my expenditure might be at risk. I continued, on good faith, to negotiate with lenders, assist valuers and generally attend to all your requests in the belief this would assist all parties.

I believe you have an obligation with all your associates to reimburse our costs to date and I would appreciate your arranging with them to make payment or at the very least discuss a program of payment with me. I await your urgent advice." (p 1510, volume 5) 
Included in exhibit 5 (the tender bundle) was a further letter from Newhouse to Gresham of 7 September 1995 which included the following statements: "I acknowledge receipt of your letter and refer to our telephone conversation but unfortunately you have not satisfactorily addressed your comments on the problems we face.

I was delighted to have been chosen as marketing Agents for Ocean Pacific and
I believe this choice was made on merit and we have now justified this confidence. What has transpired on advertising payments would not have been tolerated by any other Agent as no other Agent would have afforded you the advertising credit you enjoyed with us. This credit was confidence only with your association with Ocean Pacific as your fellow associates were unknowns to our company.

Whilst I supported your thoughts about selling your share in the project this did not mean our not being reimbursed basic and agreed advertising costs. Your selling your interest on the 22nd June does not absolve you from your financial obligations and this was never conveyed by you in our discussions.
You always intimated I would never be out of pocket.

I continued in good faith as you suggest accepting a loss of potential commission in the event the project did not proceed. However, advertising payment must be made and you like the others must arrange to make payment or discuss with me a programme and method of repayment..." (p 1511, volume 5) 
Gresham was closely cross-examined on this correspondence and, in particular, that aspect of the letter of 7 September which suggested that Gresham had responded to the letter of 1 September by relying on a sale of his interest under the agreement of 22 June 1995. When first questioned on that suggestion,
Gresham gave the following evidence: "IRELAND: Q. When you received Mr Newhouse's letter of 1 September 1995, page , did you respond to it? 
A. I may have sent him a short note to tell him to go away, yes.

Q. The thrust of it was he was saying "look, you have pulled out of this project" and he expected you to honour the payment arrangements with his organisation? 
A. He expected -- 
Q. That was the thrust of what he was saying in his letter, wasn't it? 
A. This was a letter that he sent to me that relates in no way to the conversation that he and I had had in which he rang me up and said, "Ken, you got me lumbered with these characters. It is your fault. What about paying the money that's owing to me?" I said to him that I had already contributed $70,000 to the project. I was still a shareholder in the project. I had been told that in due course I will be paid out and I, like he, was waiting for this to take place.

Q. That was the statement you made to Mr Newhouse around the end of
August/beginning of September 1995? 
A. That's correct.

HIS HONOUR: Q. What was the expectation about being paid out, the Couri? 
A. Mr Webster and Mr -- 
Q. Pardon me, the Couri termination had taken effect by then, had it not? 
A. Just -- 
Q. When was the expectation of it being paid out? 
A. Hugh Webster and Peter Punch or Hugh Webster specifically had told me that they were very hopeful of Macquarie buying out the deal and paying out all the old outstanding loans." (T31.31 - 32.11) 
I take that response to be a recognition by Gresham that his interest consisted of Gresham R E's shareholding and loan repayment entitlements in
Ocean Pacific and that his expectations from the dealings of Punch and Webster with Macquarie Bank, which he was not prepared to support financially, were that it could lead to satisfaction of Gresham R E's loan account with Ocean
Pacific.

When pressed upon the terms of Newhouse's letter of 7 September, Gresham gave the further following evidence: "Q. I want to show you another letter - this is 1511 - dated 7 September 1995 which you have discovered in these proceedings. You see there he says, "Dear
Ken, I acknowledge receipt of your letter." That seems to suggest you did write him a letter? 
A. It does.

Q. In response to his of 1 September, doesn't it? 
A. Well, I believe it was a very short and pointed letter of which I don't - I may have handwritten it - I don't have a copy.

Q. What he said now, in that letter of 7 September 1995, was "that you are selling your interest on 22 June does not absolve you from your financial obligations"; do you see that in the third paragraph? 
A. Yes.

Q. And I want to suggest to you that either in your letter that you wrote to
Mr Newhouse in response to his of 1 September, or in the telephone conversations to which he refers to, you told him that you had sold your interest on 22 June? 
A. Well, he may have interpreted the word "sold". I certainly didn't use that word. He knew very well what the deal was with Couri, because I had discussed it with him at the time, and he had advised me that he thought it was a reasonable thing to do, that was to sell my interest, my option to Couri.
 ................................

Q. And what you told Mr Newhouse, after 1 September 1995, I suggest, is that you had sold your interest in the project on 22 June 1995 and, hence, were not responsible for his expenses or claims? 
A. No. He was aware that I hadn't sold my interest on 22 June. He may very well have chosen to use that term in his letter. It was patently not the situation.
 (T32.45 - 33.15 and 33.29 - .35) 
Counsel for Webster returned to the subject when Gresham's letter of 4
September 1995 to Newhouse became available. This was the letter of Gresham in reply to Newhouse' letter of 1 September and it was the letter to which
Newhouse replied in his letter of 7 September 1995. That letter of Gresham of September opens with the following statement: "As I advised you at the time of doing so, I entered into an agreement with all contracting parties on 22 June 1995 to sell my interest in Ocean Pacific
Pty Ltd.

At that time I entered into an option arrangement with companies associated with George Couri.

You were one of the people whose advice I sought at the time and I am sure you recall advising me to "get out". " (Exhibit 5) 
While the remainder of the letter is somewhat equivocal, I regard the opening paragraphs and the general tenor of the letter as one in which Gresham saw the joint venture agreement as exhausted and leaving him and Gresham R E with an outside prospect of recouping disbursements advanced to Ocean Pacific in any deal that was left to Webster and Punch to arrange with Macquarie Bank. That accords with my findings that there was no subsisting personal joint venture agreement between Gresham, Webster and Punch and that after 22 June 1995 the joint venture agreement ceased to have any effect.

Accordingly I make the following orders:
Judgment for the second plaintiff against the fourth defendant in the sum of $70,000 together with interest thereon from 22 June 1995 to date of judgment pursuant to <case> of the [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/).
Judgment for the first, second and third defendants against the plaintiffs.
Plaintiffs are to pay the first, second and third defendants' costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
