

In the matter of Superannuation Auditors Pty Limited (ABN 53 150 804 103) [2014] NSWSC 73 (29 January 2014) 
Last Updated: 9 July 2014 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
In the matter of Superannuation Auditors Pty Limited (ABN 53 150 804 103)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Hearing Date(s): January 2014  
Decision Date: January 2014  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division - Corporations List  
Before: 
Brereton J  
Decision: 
Proceedings dismissed. Plaintiff pay defendant's costs assessed in the sum of $5,500  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - where order sought that costs be payable on an indemnity basis - where all costs in the nature of disbursements - unnecessary to resolve question. 
COSTS - where order sought that plaintiff's director be personally liable for costs - no sufficient basis for such order.  
JUDGMENT (EX TEMPORE)
HIS HONOUR: By originating process filed on 27 September 2013, the plaintiff Superannuation Auditors Pty Limited sought an order that a creditor's statutory demand dated 27 August 2013 that was served on it by the defendant Zero Costs Pty Limited be set aside pursuant to (Cth) [Corporations Act 2001](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/), [s 459G.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca2001172/s459g.html) On the first or second return date of that application, the defendant indicated that it sought to have the application summarily dismissed, and a number of subsequent directions hearings - on 23 October, 11 November and 18 November - pertained to the preparation of the interlocutory application, which I heard and dismissed with costs on 25 November 2013. The matter was then set down for final hearing of the originating process today. However, the plaintiff yesterday indicated that it would submit to an order dismissing its application with costs. The only matters that now require consideration are, first, whether those costs should be payable on an indemnity or ordinary basis; secondly, the quantification of those costs; and thirdly, whether the plaintiff's director, Mr Fishburn, should be ordered to bear those costs personally.
As to the first, given that I propose to make a lump sum order and that, because the defendant did not have a solicitor, the costs are all in the nature of disbursements, there is going to be no practical difference between an order on the indemnity basis and an order on the ordinary basis it is unnecessary to resolve the issues or to address the matters said to warrant an indemnity order.
As to the second, as I have said, the defendant did not retain a solicitor, although he did brief counsel on a direct access basis to appear at the various directions hearings, the interlocutory hearing and on the hearing. In my view, as I have made a costs order against the defendant in respect of the summary dismissal application, the costs to which the defendant is entitled do not include those associated with only the summary dismissal application. They do include the costs of obtaining a transcript of the hearing of the summary dismissal application, which was appropriately obtained in preparation for the final hearing; the costs of Mr Harkins procuring travel to Sydney to attend for cross-examination as required; and disbursements in the nature of photocopying and counsel's fees. I assess the defendant's recoverable costs in the sum of $5,500.
As to whether Mr Fishburn ought to be ordered to pay the costs personally, it seems to me that there is nothing out of the ordinary in this application in a winding-up proceeding so far as the liability of the director of the company in question is concerned. There is no sufficient basis for taking the extraordinary step of making an order against a non-party to the proceedings. 
Accordingly, the Court by consent orders that the proceedings be dismissed. The Court further orders that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs assessed in the sum of $5,500.
 * * * 
