

R K Hill versus P G Marsh and A P Crapp [1996] NSWSC 190 (12 June 1996) 
RODNEY KEITH HILL versus PETER GEORGE MARSH and ALFRED PHILLIP CRAPP 
NR 600013/95 
WEDNESDAY 12 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the plaintiff claims damages pursuant to the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) for injuries allegedly suffered by him as a result of a collision between a Holden panel van registered number SXP-686 driven by him and an Isuzu table top truck registered number TAK-510 owned by the first defendant and driven by the second defendant on Firth Heinz Road, Pillar Valley at about 7.30 am on Friday 22 April 1994.

The road is described as generally running north/south and on the day in question the plaintiff's vehicle was travelling north and the defendant's vehicle south. The road is a gravel road with table drains at each side and at the time was badly corrugated with marble-like stones coming to the surface.
For vehicles travelling south the road passes through a left hand turn, a straight stretch of about 150 to 200 metres which runs slightly downhill to a right hand turn which is described as being about 90 degrees and which is the corner out of which the plaintiff was coming. There is a camber from the middle of the road on the straight stretch but on the southern curve the camber is from the outside or eastern side of the road towards the inner or western side.

I had a view of the site and the matters observed have been taken into account as evidence in accordance with [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s54.html),
Evidence Act 1955. They are recorded in the transcript of 4 June 1996 and were drawn to the attention of counsel at the site during the course of the view.

The plaintiff said that as he travelled through the southern bend he was doing about 80 kilometres an hour. As he came out of the corner he slowed down and just as he was coming out of the corner there was a truck straddling the middle of the road and he steered hard into the table drain to his left. The rear of his car slid out slightly, but he corrected that to avoid having a head-on collision with the truck which was in the middle of the road, and then the truck driver must have hit the brakes as he had just come down the road sideways "and we had nowhere to go at all, we were in the table drain at the time and could not get over more." He said that although travelling at about kilometres an hour approaching the bend, he slowed down going into the bend to roughly 50 or 60 kilometres an hour. He said the truck came down the road sideways, he had nowhere to go, the front of the truck was pointing off into the paddock virtually at an angle of at least 45 degrees. He said the back of the truck ripped through the front guard of his vehicle and then smashed all the brake booster and the dash into him, and he did not really recall what happened after that as he got knocked out, but his vehicle hit a tree on his side of the road in the bush.

The following day at hospital he made a statement to the police in which he said, "I come around the corner and the arse end slid out. I straightened up and a truck coming the other way hit its brakes and the back came across hitting my windscreen and smashing it. I could not see anything and ran into a tree." 
The photos tendered, both of the truck and the panel van, indicated that the damage to the truck was too low for any part of the truck to have struck the windscreen of the panel van, but was consistent with it smashing through the front offside mud guard and along the side of the vehicle.

In cross-examination the plaintiff said that when the back of the truck hit the car all the steering got taken out so that he had no control of his vehicle, which is a different explanation for hitting the tree to being knocked out. According to a note on the ambulance report the plaintiff said that he slid in the gravel and clipped another car and came to rest against the tree, whilst the hospital records record him telling someone in the casualty ward that he was the driver in a motor vehicle accident and lost control on a loose gravel corner, that he swerved to avoid a head-on with a truck and ran off the road into a tree.

I realise that one must be careful attaching too much significance to versions given to ambulance officers or police or medical officers whilst in a state of shock, but it is difficult to reconcile these different versions and in all of them the plaintiff concedes that on at least one occasion the rear of his vehicle slid across the roadway for some distance.

Mr Bell, a passenger in the plaintiff's vehicle, said that they came into the corner at a normal speed although, if he remembered rightly, the plaintiff slowed down a bit to take the corner then, just as they were coming out of the corner, he saw the truck in the middle of the road coming directly, more or less, towards them. After an exclamatory expression the plaintiff tried to get even closer to the gutter on his side of the road and his car started to slide a bit because of the condition of the road. The plaintiff corrected that still maintaining his correct side of the road and then he saw the driver of the truck fighting with his steering wheel and the truck coming sideways straight towards them.

He said the panel van had nowhere to go; that it was completely on its correct side of the road and that the back end of the truck took up the whole of the road and hit the plaintiff's side. He looked at the plaintiff and saw he was knocked out at the steering wheel and they then went off the road up an embankment and had a head-on collision with the tree.

The second defendant, the driver of the truck, said that after coming out of the northern bend and approaching the southern bend along the straight stretch he was travelling about 50 to 60 kilometres an hour and about a third of the way along that straight stretch he noticed a vehicle travelling at great speed on the other side of the corner which he was approaching. He said he could see the vehicle out the front of a huge cloud of dust, that he immediately slowed down and veered to the left to see if the other vehicle was going to make it around the corner. To start with he veered into the table drain and drove there for approximately another 20 to 30 metres. The vehicle that he was watching then started to lose control, and at that stage he mounted the table drain, the other vehicle being about a third of the way into the corner when it started to lose control.

He said the rear end of the panel van veered to the right side of the road, but did not make it over the imaginary centre line at that time. The driver corrected that and when approximately two thirds of the way through the corner he lost control again in the same direction with the rear of the vehicle going over the imaginary centre line.

At this stage the second defendant had taken the front of his vehicle completely off the road and there was only about three feet at the rear of the tray protruding into the table drain, not into the actual roadway. He said the driver of the panel van then over-corrected this second slide and the front of that vehicle was heading towards the rear of his truck and they collided approximately three feet out from the table drain on his (the second defendant's) side of the road. He said that at the time of impact he was travelling approximately 15 kilometres an hour. He stopped his vehicle, jumped out to see where the other vehicle had ended up and found it parked against the tree completely off the other side of the road approximately 60 to 80 metres from where he had finished up.

He went to a house to get help, that being the house of Mr and Mrs Melagarkis and then he went and parked his truck.

He said that on the plaintiff's vehicle he observed a three inch tear from about eight inches behind the front guard through to the driver's door to the fuel tank cap approximately 12 inches behind the door, and the rear portion of this is shown on photographs of the plaintiff's vehicle. He said he looked down the road and saw his tail light had been broken and the glass from the tail light was still lying on the gravel approximately two feet out from the table drain on his side of the road 60 to 80 metres away from where a car was against the tree. At first he thought that the damage to his truck was to a small tractor ramp built on to the rear of it and he thought that only the tail light and a small piece of steel was bent on it, but closer inspection a couple of days later showed that the actual chassis rails of the truck was also bent from the collision, and the damage appeared to be about two feet from the rear of the vehicle.

In his statement to police he said that when he reached the bend in the road a vehicle coming in the other direction got "out of shape" around the bend and he headed bush and did not know that he had hit the truck until he came back to where the van went off the road. In cross-examination he agreed that it was not until the second time that the plaintiff's vehicle slid out that it crossed the imaginary centre line of the roadway. He said he left the road at an angle of about 30 degrees and applied his brakes but not suddenly. He denied that his vehicle was ever at any greater angle to the road than 30 degrees and when he came to rest the passenger side wheels of his vehicle were off the roadway and the driver side wheels were in the table drain. He finished up in the scrub at the side of the road except for the three feet at the rear of his vehicle.

In cross-examination he said he did not see the impact in his rear vision mirror and the following question and answer followed: "Q. You didn't see what happened to the panel van after it collided with your vehicle? 
A. Not while it was happening. There were two big skid marks from the point of impact to the tree afterwards." 
He said he did not point them out to police and when the police arrived, which was about almost an hour later, they were only partially there because other vehicles had driven over them in the meantime.

Mr Lloyd, the passenger in the defendant's vehicle, said as they were driving along the straight between the two bends he noticed a panel van coming in the opposite direction towards them sideways around the corner with two occupants in it. They were coming around the corner sideways and then the driver was trying to correct the vehicle. The vehicle swerved back around and was heading towards the tail end of their vehicle, as the second defendant was going off the road to try and stop the collision. They pulled up and came to a complete stop off the road over the table drain, got out of the vehicle and saw that the panel van had gone back onto its side of the road and ran into a tree. He said when the two vehicles passed the defendant's vehicle was nearly off the road and heading into the drain and so as far as he could see the panel van was on their side of the road. When asked what angle the truck was going off the road he said, "45 degrees, I would say, you know. Alf swung the wheel real quick because a car was coming back our way to get away from him." He denied that their vehicle was drifting sideways, and he said that was because "we weren't going real fast".

In cross-examination he said when he first saw the plaintiff's vehicle it was almost out of the bend with its back facing sideways. He did not recall seeing any skid marks or debris after the accident.

Constable Stenson, who attended the scene after the accident, said that he saw debris on the road about 100 metres from where the panel van was, behind the panel van, on the opposite side of the road about a metre and a half to two metres from the edge, and from memory it appeared to be glass but he could not be more specific. He made no note about the debris in his notebook and he did not recall seeing any skid marks.

He described taking statements from the second defendant at the scene and the plaintiff the following day in the hospital and he agreed that, although he did not specifically say so in his statement, when he interviewed the plaintiff in hospital the following day, the latter made it clear that he did not consider himself to be in the wrong because he was alleging that it was the truck that came on to the wrong side of the road.

Mr Cook gave evidence of seeing the plaintiff's vehicle travelling about 100 kilometres an hour some 2.7 to 3 kilometres before the accident.

As I have already said, I had a view and noted a number of matters recorded in the transcript and counsel were informed of my observations at the time. Most, if not all, of the matters observed can be seen in the photographs when examined closely although they were not so obvious until the view. I am conscious of the fact that there may have possibly been changes to the foliage on the trees in the meantime, but the general angle of the corner and the culverts would not have moved and car tracks, although obviously recent, probably indicate the common path of vehicles then as now.

The plaintiff and the second defendant have, therefore, given diametrically opposed versions as to the circumstances of the accident. The plaintiff claims essentially that the second defendant was straddling the centre of the road as he travelled on the straight stretch between the two curves and that when he saw the plaintiff coming out of the bottom curve he veered to his left and braked, thereby causing the tail of his vehicle to come over on to the north bound lane so that it took up most of all of that lane and collided with the offside front mud guard and offside of the plaintiff's vehicle forcing the latter off the side of the road and into the tree.

The second defendant, on the other hand, essentially claims that the plaintiff came out of the bottom curve too fast and lost control of his vehicle so that its rear slid to its right twice, the second time going over the imaginary centre line causing the second defendant, who was travelling on his correct side of the road, to veer off the south bound side of the road whilst braking and that the plaintiff over-corrected from the second slide so that the front of his vehicle came over the imaginary centre line and the offside front of it collided with the offside rear of the truck on the truck's correct side of the road.

Both parties were impressive witnesses who maintained their versions in cross- examination and, although the defendant was more articulate, the plaintiff was no less impressive and there was nothing in their demeanours which assisted me in any way in assessing their respective credibility. They each called their passengers who supported their respective versions in essential details and likewise maintained their respective versions, although the passengers were not as impressive witnesses as the parties.

For the plaintiff to succeed it is, of course, necessary for me to be persuaded that his version is more probable than that of the defendant and his senior counsel, Mr Murray QC, has pointed to a number of matters which he submits should have that effect. These include the following: the defendant says that as the plaintiff came out of the curve he initially slid out but not across the notional centre of the carriageway; the defendant's truck was at a point of time at an angle across the roadway; the defendant says about 30 degrees and his witness, Mr Lloyd, says about 45 degrees; the defendant agrees that before the collision he turned his wheel to the left and applied his brakes and Mr Lloyd described the turn as a sudden turn and said that the defendant had swung the wheel "real quick"; the defendant conceded to police he was travelling at about 50 to 60 kilometres an hour and as he was travelling slightly downhill it is consistent that his speed would have increased and that his rear could have slid out when he braked; when spoken to in hospital the next day the plaintiff protested to the police officer that he was not in the wrong because he was on his correct side of the road; when spoken to by police at the scene the defendant did not make any allegation of speed against the plaintiff nor claim that the plaintiff was on his incorrect side of the road.

A number of comments can be made about these submissions: 
The fact that the second defendant said the plaintiff did not cross the imaginary centre line when his rear first slid to the right impressed me as indicating that the defendant was endeavouring to be a fair and honest witness, and I note the plaintiff also said that he slid a bit although he only admitted one slide, not two as the second defendant claimed.

I consider the second defendant's estimate of the angle the truck went off the road of 30 degrees more likely to be correct than that of Mr Lloyd, 45 degrees. Mrs Melagarkis saw the truck where it stopped after the accident before it was moved and described it as "off the roadway over in the gutter facing the opposite way to the car". Having regard to the narrowness of the verge and closeness to the road of the trees in that area and the length of the truck, it seems to me that if it was at 45 degrees the rear would probably have been on to the road to a significant extent when Mrs Melagarkis saw it and that an angle of 30 degrees is, therefore, more likely.

Swinging the steering suddenly or quickly is consistent with becoming aware of the rear of the other vehicle sliding on to its incorrect side and does not necessarily indicate a turn of such magnitude as 45 degrees. Whatever speed the second defendant came through the northern curve it was not too fast to negotiate it without incident, and although there may have been a tendency to increase speed on the slightly downhill run between the two curves, which was it seems less than 200 metres, his speed would not have increased dramatically, and although if confronted with a vehicle behaving as he described the plaintiff's vehicle as behaving, one would expect him to brake as he turned off the road, I am not satisfied that that meant he had to, or did, brake so suddenly as to cause the rear of his vehicle to slide.

The fact that the plaintiff the following day made a self-serving assertion that he was not in the wrong and was on his correct side of the road is of little if any significance. What is of more significance is that neither to the ambulance officer nor the doctor in casualty did he claim the truck was on its incorrect side. Even his written version to Constable Stenson the following day makes no reference to the truck being on its incorrect side of the road before braking when the rear of the plaintiff's vehicle "slid out".

The defendant's claim that he "headed bush", meaning drove of the side of the road, is in its context consistent only with the plaintiff's vehicle coming on to his side of the road, otherwise there would have been no need to take such evasive action.

A number of other observations may be made. The damage to the offside rear of the truck and the gouge along the offside of the panel van appear to me to be consistent with a glancing-type collision as described by the defendant. I am not sure whether they are or are not consistent with the type of collision described by the plaintiff.

There is also the evidence of the glass on the road and the skid marks. The defendant said one of his tail lights was broken and he saw its debris on the gravel roadway about two feet in from the table drain and about 60 to 80 metres from where the panel van was against the tree. As I have already noted,
Constable Stenson said he saw debris on the road which was a metre and a half to two metres from the edge which just appeared to be glass, but he was not able to be more specific. He made no note of the debris in his notebook nor in his statement, but said he was able to do the accident report that same day although there is no evidence of whether a reference to the debris was included in his accident report, and it emerged in cross-examination that he did refer to "a little bit of debris" in his evidence in the Local Court, but his sentence was left unfinished there. Constable Stenson did not impress me as a particularly efficient police officer.

Although the evidence of this matter of the debris is not totally satisfactory, I do not consider that it can be ignored. The road is a comparatively minor country road and there does not seem to be any doubt that the defendant's tail light was broken, in which case there would have been debris from it somewhere on the road. It is not likely that at the same time there would be other glass debris on the road nearby from another collision, and I am satisfied that the debris Constable Stenson saw was the same as that from the tail light seen by the second defendant, and this places the point of impact clearly on the plaintiff's incorrect side of the road.

There is also evidence of skid marks which only emerged in cross-examination of the second defendant, as I have noted. He did not point the skid marks out to the police and said they were partially obscured by the traffic of other vehicles by the time police arrived and, as I have already noted, Constable
Stenson could not recall and had not made any note of any skid marks; and the second defendant had not given evidence of any skid marks in the Local Court, he said because he had not been asked. In the absence of any reason to disbelieve the second defendant on any other issue, it is difficult to see why he should not be believed on this issue.

In all the circumstances I am not satisfied that the plaintiff's version of events is more probable than the defendant's, and the debris from the defendant's tail light positively points in the other direction. Accordingly, it has not been shown that the defendant failed to take reasonable care and there must be a judgment for the defendant.

I therefore direct the entry of judgment for the defendant. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs of Thursday 30 May 1996 but otherwise order the plaintiff to pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings.
 * * * 
