

Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Francis Anthony Matich [1996] NSWSC 565 (25 November 1996) 
COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA -v- FRANCIS ANTHONY MATICH /95 
Monday, 25 November 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings the Commonwealth Bank of Australia (the bank) seeks judgment against Francis Anthony Matich (Matich) pursuant to a deed of guarantee dated 29 June 1992 (the guarantee) given by Matich to the bank to support the granting by the bank of increased facilities to Headway Helmet Pty Ltd (Headway) one of several corporations with which Matich was associated and in which he with his wife had a majority holding. The increased facility so approved by the bank totalled $2,683,332. 
In the overall commercial arrangement of the Headway group of corporations
Headway acted as trustee for the "The Headway Helmets Trust". The Headway group consisted of several corporations. These included Matich (Aust) Pty Ltd,
Matich (Oceania) Pty Ltd, Matich Holdings Pty Ltd, Frank Matich Racing Pty Ltd and Frank Matich Imports Pty Ltd. Matich controlled those corporations which over a period, dating back to 1966 in one case, had been parties to numerous transactions involving the giving of a charge over their respective undertakings. On several occasions, dating back, at least, to 1 September , Matich had provided a guarantee in support of one or other of these borrowings. In 1989 he and his wife took charges over the undertaking of
Matich (Aust) Pty Ltd, Matich Holdings Pty Ltd and Matich (Oceania) Pty Ltd.
In numerous instances Matich executed charges on behalf of one or other of the corporations in the Matich group as its director. Quite clearly Matich controlled the commercial operations in which the Matich group was involved.

So far as one can infer from the evidence he appears to have been a successful sportsman and businessman. I think this is, in part, testified to by the apparent ease with which he was able to raise equity capital which had the side effect of bringing into the group as directors and investors Rodney
Lester Minchin (Minchin) and Richard Arnold (Arnold). Arnold performed expert advice on such matters as capital formulation, submissions on behalf of
Headway to the international trade enhancement scheme, strategies for distribution of products in the United States, advice in relation to manufacturing and control systems and the organisation of the structure of the resources and of accounting and financial functions. Minchin held the title of finance director whose functions included liaising between Headway and its bankers. His other activities included liaising with Headway's debtors and creditors, assisting with sales to potential large purchasers of products, seeking to expand sales and identify new customers as well as overseeing the accounting staff, and attending meetings in respect of Headway's finances, production and sales.

Matich had recourse to the legal advice from time to time of Angus Begg (Begg) who had been his personal solicitor for several years as well as a corporate adviser to the Matich group.

Consistently with this level of skilled advice, Matich controlled the various facets of the group's operations. He was responsible for the hiring and firing of most of the staff and insisted on being the signatory to virtually all cheques drawn by the corporations. He was involved in all major purchases. I do not think there can be any room for doubt that Matich, at the time of the giving of the securities with which these proceedings are concerned, was a highly experienced and, I think, successful businessman who had as much familiarity as most business persons in such positions with the commercial intricacies of raising loan facilities supported by charges over corporate assets and with guarantees supporting those charges. I think the evidence disclosed that the manner in which the business operations were conducted involved referring proposed security documents to Begg for his comment and approval prior to execution. This much I think emerged from the evidence of
Minchin.

I do not understand there to be any real dispute as to the indebtedness of
Matich under the guarantee, subject to the issues raised by him in his defence and cross-claim against the bank under the [Contracts Review Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/) (the
Act). The evidence established that, as at 18 November 1996, there was owed to the bank the sum of $3,961,277.71. That evidence was not contested.

The amended cross-claim which is mirrored in the amended defence seeks relief under the Act and, in particular, Matich seeks a declaration that the guarantee is void as being unjust in the circumstances relating to the guarantee at the time it was made, within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the Act.

The basis upon which Matich alleges that the guarantee was so unjust do not require restatement in these reasons. It is sufficient to note that they pick up the considerations to which the Court may have regard in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s9.html) sub-pars (a)-(e) and (g)-(i) of the Act. The particulars of those allegations (the particulars) were as follows: " Particulars 
The guarantee was sent to the Company and given to the defendant with a number of other documents the plaintiff required executed without any indication that the defendant should obtain legal advice on the terms of the
Guarantee before executing it.

The defendant was not advised and was not aware that: pursuant to the terms of the Charge upon a breach the Bank would be entitled to appoint a receiver at a time of the Bank's choosing and without any obligation to have any regard to the damage to the business of the Company or any negotiations concerning the said business or its sale; any receiver appointed by the plaintiff over the assets of the Company would be the agents of the Company and not the plaintiff; any such receiver may not owe a duty of care to the defendants; any such receiver may sell the assets of the Company without consultation with the defendant or any other director of the Company and in ignorance of assistance which the defendant may be able to provide to realise the maximum price for such assets; any such receiver might without himself or the plaintiff incurring thereby any liability to the defendant sell the assets of the Company with such haste or otherwise in such a manner as to not realise the maximum price that may have been available for such assets; and that notwithstanding the sale of the company's assets for a price, below that which the defendant was able to achieve for such assets, the defendant's obligations under the Guarantee may be neither affected no reduced.
 the plaintiff would not owe the defendant a duty to ensure that any receiver appointed by the plaintiff would take all reasonable care to sell the assets of the company for no less than their market value and/or the best price that was reasonably obtainable; the plaintiff would not owe the defendant a duty to ensure that any receiver appointed by the plaintiff any receiver so appointed did not sell any of the said assets at other than the proper price; the plaintiff would not owe the defendant a duty to ensure that any receiver appointed by the plaintiff any receiver so appointed took reasonable steps open to him to enhance the price obtainable for the Business and
Assets; the plaintiff would not owe the defendant a duty to ensure that any receiver appointed by the plaintiff any so receiver so appointed took adequate control of the tangible and intangible property of the company; and/or; the plaintiff would not owe the defendant a duty to ensure that any receiver appointed by the plaintiff any receiver so appointed preserved and protected every item of property, including intangible property, belonging to the company.
 if the plaintiff breached any of its obligations to the Company that the defendant, as surety, I would have no legal rights against the plaintiff for that breach and if the Company was subsequently put into liquidation, it may not be able to pursue its rights against the plaintiff and consequently the defendant as surety, would be left with a debt which was not in any way diminished by any redress that the company may be entitled to bring against the plaintiff. " 
The evidence of Matich was brief. He alleged that had he been aware of the subject matter of the particulars he would not have given the guarantee and would have sought and obtained equity capital in lieu of borrowed funds. In that respect his cross-claim and defence is far from fanciful in that the evidence I think was unequivocal that, those funds would have been available by the raising of equity capital. He was cross-examined at some length to the effect that he was committed to the raising of finance with the bank and, had he been aware of the subject matter of the particulars, he still would have entered into the guarantee and not had recourse to equity capital.

During the course of his cross-examination Matich, I think, was quite frank in his acceptance of a number of propositions which went to his understanding of the nature and effect of the underlying transactions in which he was involved with the bank. For example, he well understood that if Headway failed to pay its indebtedness to the bank he was responsible to meet that payment under the guarantee. Further, it was appreciated by him that, in Headway's granting of security to the bank, the latter most likely would have the power to appoint a receiver under that security. In addition, he realised that, in the case of an event justifying the appointment of a receiver by the bank, the receiver would have powers involving disposition of the assets of Headway. This display of frankness was probably inescapable having regard to the involvement of Matich in transactions of the kind the subject of these proceedings over a period of many years during which he had the benefit of professional advice if he so wished.

Indeed, I think it is clear from the evidence of Minchin that, in relation to the increasing of facilities with the bank in mid 1992, Matich, Minchin and
Begg were closely involved. At that stage Begg was also a director of Headway.
I think the evidence of Minchin established that the relevant security documents when received by Headway were forwarded onto Begg for his consideration and that Matich was in frequent contact with Begg over the matter.

Minchin gave evidence that in November 1990, when Matich executed a deed of charge in favour of the bank and guarantees were given by Matich, Minchin and others, Begg "provided advice (as to) ... their legal implications". However, in cross-examination he accepted that whatever advice was given it did not include the subject matter of the particulars.

In my opinion, there are insurmountable problems in the case as presented by
Matich. In particular, he has made no attempt to show in what way he was in any respect prejudiced by his perceived injustice in the circumstances in which this guarantee was given. Accepting for the moment that he was unaware of the matters so particularised: accepting for the moment that had he been aware of those matters he would not have given the guarantee: assuming further that those matters justify a finding that the circumstances in which the guarantee was given rendered it unjust, it is very difficult to see on what basis any relief could be granted. I think it would be quite inappropriate on those premises alone simply to avoid the guarantee. Indeed as I understood the oral submissions on behalf of Matich the relief sought by way of avoidance of a guarantee was not put by any means near the forefront of the relief to which entitlement was claimed. To pose a rhetorical question, if Matich has not been in any way disadvantaged by the fact of having given a guarantee in the circumstances alleged by him, why should this Court consider "it just to do ... for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result ..." any of the matters set out in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html) of the Act? When that matter was put to counsel for Matich his response was that the relief sought in par (c) in the cross-claim namely: "an Order that, if the affidavit of assets and liabilities sworn by the defendant on 11 October 1996 is true and correct, any judgment obtained by the plaintiff in these proceedings be permanently stayed" was the appropriate relief to be granted rather than an order avoiding the guarantee. That statutory declaration disclosed that Matich was a man, for practical purposes without any financial resources. In relation to that relief (which was the subject of amendment pursuant to leave granted by me at the commencement of the hearing of these proceedings), I directed that evidence in relation to that issue would be deferred pending my determination of the remaining issues in the proceedings. This direction was given on the basis that if Matich was unsuccessful in establishing an entitlement to some relief there would be no point in protracted litigation concerning his financial affairs. However, it seems to me that reliance upon that form of relief is simply another way of expressing relief in the nature of avoidance of the guarantee. It poses the same problem of there being no apparent basis for granting such relief in the absence of evidence of any unjust consequence of the assumed injustice attaching to the guarantee and of evidence upon which the Court could exercise its discretion in considering it just to grant any relief.

Of significance are the observations of Samuels and Priestley JJA in S H Lock
Ltd -v- Kennedy [(1988) 12 NSWLR 482] which addressed the problem of the impediment to the granting of relief represented by the absence of evidence of detriment. Samuels JA expressed the difficulty in the following terms: "The contract was certainly unjust in the particular I have mentioned. But the injustice has imposed no actual detriment upon the respondent, nor has it produced any consequence against which the respondent requires relief." (at 486) 
Priestley JA at p 492 offered similar observations as follows: "Once a Court finds a contract unjust .... it is faced with a next and quite separate task, for which the Act provides less guidance: the relief the Court is empowered to give, is, if it considers it just to do so, to make appropriate orders `for the purpose of avoiding as far as practicable an unjust consequence or result.' As I understand [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cra1980201/s7.html), wide though the Court's powers are to find a contract unjust, the remedies it may grant in respect of such injustice are strictly limited to avoiding an unjust consequence or result of the unjust contract." 
I think those observations are apposite to this case.

I think this problem in the case of Matich is compounded by the nature of the particulars of the duties and functions of a receiver of which it is said
Matich was unaware. Of those particulars it is my view that some of them are of dubious validity as an unqualified statement of the duties of a receiver.
Further, the proposition that Matich's unawareness of the intricacies of the ambit of the express powers and duties of a receiver as set out in the particulars constitutes unjust circumstances is, in my opinion, bordering on the fanciful. The receiver was appointed by the bank pursuant to a power conferred by an equitable mortgage dated 9 August 1993. Moreover, prior to that date, the Corporations Law was amended by the insertion of <case> which provided as follows: "420A(1) (Reasonable Care Regarding Price On Sale) 
In exercising a power of sale in respect of property of a corporation, a controller must take all reasonable care to sell the property for: if, when it is sold it has a market value - not less than that market value; or otherwise - the best price that is reasonably obtainable, having regard to the circumstances existing when the property is sold." 
That amendment came into effect on 23 June 1993. Given the nature of the particulars relied upon by Matich concerning the powers and duties of a receiver, it is apparent that at the core of those matters is some implied concern that the undertaking of Headway would in some way be at risk when in the hands of the receiver. Although <case> could not have been in the contemplation of the parties at the time of the giving of the guarantee. In my opinion it would have afforded protection from most, if not all, of the matters of concern implicit in Matich's case, over the possible prejudice to
Headway's undertaking occasioned by the appointment of a receiver. While it does not cut across the evidence of Matich that he would not have entered into the transaction had he been aware of the then nature and function of the powers and duties of a receiver, it makes it extremely difficult to see how those suggested ingredients of injustice had any unjust consequence.

However, I am of the opinion that the case of Matich founders in the area of reliance. No case was sought to be made on the basis that the bank finance would have been available in the face of a refusal by Matich to provide a guarantee in any event. The evidence strongly supports the facts that the bank would have required a suitable guarantee. Arnold, Minchin and Begg were not willing to give guarantees being minority unit holders, or acting in non- executive roles. It was in those circumstances that Matich was called upon to give the guarantee. It came down to a case that Matich would have raised additional equity capital in the absence of funding from the bank. As to that
I am satisfied that the raising of further equity capital was a completely unacceptable alternative to Matich. Although his evidence is to the contrary,
I think that evidence is the product of the disastrous financial consequence which has befallen Matich following the appointment of the receiver. I think the reality is clearly established by the evidence that Matich was a very strong personality in the running of the Matich group. One can infer from his background and the description of the corporations that these were entities of his creation and in respect of which he took considerable pride in their growth.

The evidence of Minchin of the occasion when he raised with Matich the requirement of increased equity as a price for Minchin providing a personal guarantee demonstrates the point. I think it is clear from the evidence of
Minchin that by mid 1992 the need for further funds had reached a situation of some urgency. The raising of loan funds to satisfy this need was not a course that was a unanimous one within the ranks of Headway. In May of 1992 Minchin expressed to Matich his opposition to the creation of further debt and expressed the opinion that Headway should increase its capital requirements through equity raising. In this conversation with Matich he stated: "As I have often said, I would prefer that Headway raised more equity rather than debt, even though my share percentage would diminish. We are borrowing too much." 
This conversation arose in the context of Minchin being requested to give his guarantee to support the increased borrowing. Matich's reply I think is quite significant: "Well I can tell you that I am not going to agree to reduce my share ..." 
Matich then went on to discuss the question of guarantees. Later in June 1992
Matich's attitude to the giving of the guarantee was I think captured in his statement to Minchin that: "The Bank understands that I am the key man and the sole controlling influence at Headway and agrees to be the sole guarantor ...." 
He then went on to discuss other requirements of the bank as to insurance and the like. In my opinion, the mind of Matich was closed to diluting his equity further in the group as a cost of raising equity capital from outside sources.
There was no suggestion that such equity funding was available through
Matich's personal financial resources.

Accordingly I am of the opinion that the need for funds was such, that the requirements of the bank were such and the opposition of Matich to diluting his equity in the group was such that he made a conscious decision to obtain the needed additional funds of Headway through further borrowings upon terms which were the only reasonable commercial terms available to him and to
Headway and that in taking this course, he rejected the counselling of Minchin to avoid further borrowing.

An issue was raised in these proceedings as to the receipt by Matich of a letter dated 26 June 1992 from the bank to him addressed to 40 Hillcrest Road,
Mona Vale. That letter was in the following terms: "The document(s) described below are provided herewith for your signature.

Your present maximum liability to the Bank under the document(s) is $2,683,332 plus interest, costs, charges and expenses as provided in the document(s).

Prior to signing the document(s) you should satisfy yourself that you understand the full nature and effect of your liabilities to the Bank and obtain appropriate advice legal or otherwise, if you are at all uncertain of your position.

Your signature to the document(s) should be witnessed by an adult person who is not the borrower/debtor of a co-guarantor/mortgagor (if any) under the document(s).

Document(s) 
Guarantee by you in respect of the indebtedness to the Bank of Headway Helmets
Pty Limited 
Please also complete and return the enclosed Acknowledgment and consent regarding the Privacy Act." (Exhibit C, Volume 1, p 229) 
The evidence of Matich is that his home address was 40 Hillcrest Avenue and that this letter was never received by him. The evidence disclosed that in fact the letter went to Headway. It was a discovered document. Looking at it as favourably as one can from the viewpoint of Matich it is clear that the letter did go to Headway about the time of the date that it bears and that for one reason or another it escaped his attention. Although I do not find it necessary to make any finding in this regard I would be surprised if the letter did not in fact come to his attention but that his memory has failed him in that regard.

However, it is my view that the issues surrounding the bringing of this letter to the notice of Matich is of no particular significance. Were it necessary to make findings in relation to any obligations of the bank to give advice to
Matich or to suggest to him that he take advice in relation to the transactions then under consideration between Matich, Headway and the bank, I would prefer the view that, given the history of dealings between the bank and
Matich and the position occupied by Matich in the Matich group, there was little call for the bank to provide any advice to Matich concerning the subject security documents, including the suggestion that he seek independent legal advice. Certainly, in my opinion, the absence of any such advice in the circumstances of this case would not give rise to, or support, a finding of unjust circumstances surrounding the giving of the guarantee. I have been referred to authorities in the course of submissions in particular that of
Bosnjak -v- Farrow Mortgage Services Pty Ltd (Supreme Court of New South
Wales Court of Appeal, 29 June 1993, unreported); Beneficial Finance
Corporation Ltd -v- Karavas & Ors [(1991) 23 NSWLR 256] at 276 citing the observation of Meagher JA concerning the duty of a financier to provide a third party guarantor with commercial advice; Baltic Shipping
Company -v- Dillon [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1] as to the general policy of the law concerning the performance of contracts and West -v- AGC (Advances) Ltd [(1986) 5 NSWLR 610] at 620 as to the approach to the consideration of unjust circumstances under <case> of the
Act to which I think no further reference is required in these reasons.

Reference was also made on behalf of the bank to Covino -v- Bandag
Manufacturing Pty Ltd [(1983) 1 NSWLR 237] at 241 in support of the submission as to the appropriate procedure that should have been followed by Matich in pursuing the claimed relief by joining Headway in these proceedings and in turn having Headway bring an action for any perceived damage occasioned by the appointment of the receiver. I do not regard that matter as having any bearing on this case. It has been stated from the bar table and I am prepared to accept that a motion was brought in this Division with that procedural objective in mind. I have been invited to examine the court file and take account of the circumstances in which that relief was not obtained. I have not done so. In my opinion the matter is irrelevant.

It was also submitted on behalf of the bank that Matich is not entitled to relief by reason of the operation of <case> of the Act, it being conceded that such a finding would be contrary to Toscano -v- Holland [(1985) 1 NSWLR ]
and Australian Bank Limited -v- Stokes [(1985) 3 NSWLR 174.] I have not found it necessary to consider that question.

Accordingly I give judgment in favour of the plaintiff in the sum of $3,961,277.71 and order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the proceedings including the costs of his cross-claim which I order be dismissed.
 * * * 
