

Regina versus Ian Robert Coombe [1997] NSWSC 5 (17 January 1997) 
REGINA versus Ian Robert COOMBE /96 September 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, McINERNEY J 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - Provisional warrant issued in NSW under Service and Execution of Process Act 1901, <case>, for service in Tasmania - no obligation under either that Act or Justices Act 1903 to apprehend person against whom warrant issued "forthwith" - obligation is, once he has been apprehended, to take that person before a justice "forthwith" - that person is not detained until it is made plain to him that he is not free to leave if he chooses - The Queen versus Lavery [(1978) 19 SASR 515.] 
RESULT: Leave to appeal out of time refused 
A provisional warrant against the appellant was issued in New South Wales for service in Tasmania pursuant to ss 18 and 19 of the Service and Execution of Process Act 1901. Officers of the Tasmanian Police went to the appellant's home in Hobart and asked him to assist them with an inquiry. He was requested to accompany them to the office of the Criminal Investigation Branch at Hobart, and he agreed to do so. Although the appellant was not told so, he would have been arrested on the warrant if he had refused to accompany them. He was cautioned at the CIB, the nature of the allegations against him were put to him, and he was asked whether he wished to tell them his side of the story. Certain admissions were then made by the appellant. He was next arrested on the warrant.

One of the objections to the receipt into evidence of those admissions was that the police had acted unlawfully in questioning the appellant before arresting him, in breach of an asserted duty to arrest him "forthwith".

Held (per Hunt CJ at CL and McInerney J, Smart J dissenting): 
There is no reference in either the Justices Act 1903 or the Service and Execution of Process Act 1901 to apprehending the person against whom the warrant is issued "forthwith". Once apprehended, <case> of the latter Act requires that person to be brought "forthwith" before a justice. The police had not acted unlawfully.

An arrest occurs only when it is made plain by what is said and/or done by the police officer to the person in question that he is not free to leave if he chooses.

Smith versus The Queen <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 100] followed.

The appellant had not been apprehended (or detained) at the time when he made the admissions.

The conduct of the police officers in questioning the appellant before executing the warrant, and thus denying him the ability to corroborate his version of the interview, was nevertheless relevant to the discretion to exclude evidence when it would be unfair to use that evidence against him.
Relevant to the exercise of that discretion is the giving of a warning to the jury in accordance with McKinney versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468.] 
Regina versus R [(1989) 18 NSWLR 74] referred to.
 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: The appellant (Ian Robert Coombe) was charged in the Supreme Court with a number of sexual assaults, eight upon his stepdaughter (J) and four upon her cousin (T). The jury acquitted him of four of the charges in relation to J and two in relation to T (one by direction). In the result, the appellant was found guilty of two indecent assaults upon J (one when she was seven years old and the other when she was eleven or twelve years old), two charges of having sexual intercourse without consent with J (one when she was eight years old and the other when she was twelve years old), and two charges of having sexual assault without consent with T (one when she was between the ages of six and twelve years and the other when she was between the ages of six and thirteen years). In each case but one, the sexual intercourse was penile penetration of the girl's vagina; the remaining case was one of digital penetration. Badgery-Parker J imposed an effective total sentence of penal servitude for thirteen and a half years, consisting of an effective minimum term of nine years and an additional term of four and a half years.

The trial took place during August and September 1993, the sentences being imposed on 17 September. The appellant filed within time a Notice of Appeal against his conviction and sought leave to appeal against his sentence; but he filed a Notice of Abandonment the following March, whereupon his appeal was deemed to have been dismissed.[1] An order was made by this Court on 29 March that time in custody pending the disposal of the appeal was to count as part of the appellant's sentence. A further Notice of Appeal was filed on 12
July 1995 together with an application for leave to file it out of time. In order to grant such leave, it would be necessary to allow the appellant to go behind his abandonment, which the Court will permit where it is necessary in order to ensure that a miscarriage of justice does not go unremedied.[2]
Consideration must be given both to the circumstances in which the abandonment came about and the prospects of success which the appeal may have if granted; but, even if the explanation proffered for the abandonment is weak, that circumstance will not necessarily stand in the way of the grant of leave if it be seen that there would be a miscarriage of justice if leave were refused.[3] 
The evidence in support of the application for leave to appeal out of time was not disputed by the Crown. Prior to the original complaints being made by the two girls, the appellant had moved from New South Wales to Tasmania, where his family lived, and had separated from J's mother. Following his conviction, he made an application to serve his sentence in Tasmania so that he could maintain regular contact with his family there.[4] He was advised that his application could not be allowed whilst his appeal was pending, and that it could take twelve months to have his appeal heard.[5] He therefore abandoned his appeal with the expressed intention of reinstating it when the transfer was complete, an intention which is recorded in a contemporaneous note by his solicitor following a conversation with him shortly after the Notice of
Abandonment had been filed. As the solicitor advised him at the time, he was thereby making the prospects of appeal more difficult for himself, but the
Crown has very properly accepted in this case that the Court should now examine the grounds of appeal to see whether any miscarriage of justice did occur and grant appropriate relief in the event that it did.

It will be more convenient to review the evidence in the case so far as it is necessary to do so when dealing with the second of the two grounds of appeal argued, that the guilty verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory. It is necessary to deal initially with the first ground of appeal, that the judge erred by allowing evidence of admissions alleged to have been made by the appellant to Tasmanian police officers. The admissions played a very important part in the trial and are thus relevant to any consideration of the second ground of appeal.

The background to the evidence of these admissions, as disclosed during a voir dire examination which the judge conducted into its admissibility, was that a warrant was issued in New South Wales for the arrest of the appellant in Tasmania. The warrant was not in evidence before the judge (and it has not been in evidence before this Court), but the appeal has proceeded upon the basis that it was endorsed for execution in Tasmania in accordance with the
Service and Execution of Process Act 1901, <case>.[6] It was described in evidence as a "provisional" warrant, which was authorised by <case> of that
Act. The obligation imposed by such a warrant is an issue to which I will have to return. Det Sen Sgt Maxwell and Det I/C Const Thomas of the Tasmanian police, having received the warrant by facsimile from the NSW Police Service, went to the appellant's home in Hobart and asked him to assist them with an inquiry. He was requested to accompany them to the office of the Criminal
Investigation Branch at Hobart, and he agreed to do so. That is where the admissions were alleged to have been made. It was accepted by the police that, if the appellant had refused to accompany them, he would have been arrested, although he was not told so at that stage, or that a warrant had been issued for his arrest.

Objection was taken to that evidence upon four bases. It was asserted that the admissions (if made) had not been shown by the Crown to have been voluntary, and that they had been induced by an untrue representation by the police; the judge was in any event asked to exercise his discretion to exclude evidence of those admissions upon the alternative bases that its reception would be unfair to the appellant and that it had been unlawfully obtained.

According to the evidence of the police officers, the appellant was cautioned at the CIB, then questioned in relation to what was described to him as the allegation that "over a number of years [he] had sex and performed sexual acts with both girls on a regular basis". The appellant said that "they" had said things like that before, but he denied having had sex with the girls, responding "You've got to be joking, they are only kids". It was made clear later that the previous allegations had related to his own daughter, not to these two girls. He was then informed that statements and other documents had been forwarded from New South Wales, and that "the contents indicate that there is a substantial amount of evidence implicating you with these allegations". Again, the appellant denied touching the children. He was told: "These allegations and medical evidence suggest that you have been having sex normally, orally and anally with both girls from the ages of four or five.
What do you say about that?" (It was the reference to anal sex which is conceded by the Crown to have been untrue.) The appellant replied "No, definitely not oral or anal". He was asked "What about normal sex?", and he replied "No, no, not at all, they are only kids". He was told that the New South Wales police had nevertheless supplied sufficient evidence to a magistrate for him to issue a warrant for his arrest, and the appellant said "So, I am damned whatever I do, is that what you are saying?" The officer said: "Yes, you will be arrested and charged and have to return to New South Wales to answer these charges. However, at this stage we only have the girls' side of the story. This is your opportunity to give us your side if you wish. Do you want to tell us your side, Ian?" 
The appellant again denied having sex with the girls. This was the third time he had denied it and, more particularly, it was his second absolute denial since he had been told that "[t]hese allegations and medical evidence suggest that you have been having sex normally, orally and anally with both girls".[7] 
J's statement was then read to the appellant in its entirety, and he was told: "You can see, Ian, that [J] is quite explicit in her details and this is backed up by [T's] statement and vice versa." (It should be noted that there was no reference to anal intercourse in the statement which was read to the appellant.) He was cautioned again, and he said "It wasn't like that. That doesn't sound like a twelve year old talking to me". He was asked "What was it like?", and the appellant replied "It wasn't like that". He was asked "What was it like then? The girls claim it was up to two or three times a week over a number of years". The appellant replied "No, it wasn't that often, nowhere near". He was asked how many times, and the appellant replied "Five times with [J] and two with [T]". He was asked whether he was sure that that was all, and he said "Yes, at the most. It could have only been four or even three with [J]". The appellant was asked how long ago the acts had taken place, and he replied "[J] was only about ten or eleven, it was when we were living at Lakemba". He was then asked "What about [T]? She is about a year older I understand?" The appellant replied "Yes, that would be right, but I only did it with [T] twice, both times when [J] was there too".
He was asked "Was it only straight sex or, as the girls state, oral and anal?"
The appellant replied, "No, it was only straight".

The appellant then went on to explain that he had been having a hard time financially, and had started drinking heavily. He said that, when "half full of beer", he would go to bed and J and his natural daughter would sleep with him. He would take the younger girl to another room and then he would have "straight sex" with J. He agreed that he had actually inserted his penis into her vagina, but he denied ejaculating inside her. He said that J would cry "only a little" when he had sex with her. T, he said, stayed (in the house) a fair bit and that was when he had sex with her. The two girls were in bed together when he had sex with them. He said that he was "sloshed and just couldn't help himself". He denied that the two girls ever complained, but said that they would "just cry a bit". He had told them not to say anything, but he denied having ever threatened to assault them if they told anyone what had happened. He agreed that he had "sort of" forcibly held the girls when he was having sex. He accepted that the sexual acts which he had described had taken place as a result of forcing himself upon the girls.

The appellant was asked whether he was prepared to participate in a video recorded interview relating to the complaints, and he was cautioned that he did not have to do so. He declined to do so or to make a written statement or to sign the thirteen pages of notes which one of the officers had been taking of what had been said. He was then told: "That being the case, you will be arrested on this warrant and an application will be made before the court for you to be returned to Sydney to answer the charges." 
He was then arrested on the provisional warrant from New South Wales.

The appellant was next taken to Police Headquarters in Hobart, where he was introduced to another police officer (Acting Supt Prins, who had had no previous involvement in the matter) by these words: "This is Ian Robert Coombe, he has been interviewed in relation to several counts of rape and sexual assault. He will be charged by warrant. He has made admissions but has refused to sign our notes." 
Maxwell and Thomas left the room. The appellant agreed with Acting Supt Prins that he had heard and understood that introduction. Prins explained that he was from a different section, one which was independent of the CIB, and of a higher rank than the two police officers who had interviewed him. The appellant was asked whether he had any complaints as to the way in which he had been treated by any police officers, and he replied in the negative. He was again cautioned, and the notes taken of the interview with the other officers were read to him. He was asked whether they were correct, and he said "Yes, they are right".

All of what transpired before Acting Supt Prins was written down on a numbered and printed pro forma document, including the words used when the appellant was introduced and which I have quoted. This document was given to the appellant to read. He agreed with Prins that he had read it. He was asked to sign the document as an acknowledgment of its accuracy, and he did so. The document records that the interview with Prins took thirteen minutes.

The appellant gave evidence on the voir dire examination. He denied having been cautioned before he said anything in relation to the allegations which had been made. At the time, he had thought that he was compelled to answer questions, but he also said that he chose to answer questions because he wanted to, albeit because he felt an obligation to do so. He had been quite happy to answer the questions. He said that, when told of the suggestion that he had been having sex "normally, orally and anally" with both girls, he had said "No, definitely not", and he had asked for a solicitor. He was told that he could not have one. When he repeated his request he was told that he had been watching too much television. He continued, unsuccessfully, to ask for a solicitor. He said that he had said "No" when asked whether he wanted to tell his side of the story; he had not repeated his denial. J's statement had not been read out in full, only little bits of it. He did not believe that he had said "It wasn't like that". He denied having admitted to interfering sexually with either girl. He said that many of the questions recorded in the notes had not been asked. He had not seen any notes, and he did not believe that any notes had been taken. He also said that Det Sen Sgt Maxwell had started to yell at him in a very loud tone of voice "We know you did it, own up. We know you did it, come on". He had been scared by this. He agreed there had been a discussion of his financial and drinking problems.

The appellant said that he could not recall the words by which he was introduced to Acting Supt Prins, but he said he had been just introduced. No reference had been made to his having made admissions. He said that Prins had told him that they wanted him to sign a form to say that he had no complaints, and that he had not been knocked about whilst under interrogation. He had not thought to complain that he had been denied access to a solicitor. Nor did he believe at the time that Maxwell's behaviour in yelling at him had been improper. He thought that the document he was to sign related only to whether he had been hit. He said that he was not cautioned on this occasion either. He denied that anything was read out to him, and having read any document himself. He had not felt concerned to read the document which he had signed because it had already been explained to him by Prins. He had signed it without looking at it at all. He had not seen anyone filling it in before he did so. He could not say whether there was any writing on it at the time when he signed it. He had not been asked to sign it as an acknowledgment of its accuracy. He had been with Prins maybe five minutes at the most.

The version given by the appellant was denied when it was put to the police officers in cross-examination. They denied fabricating the documents or their evidence. Det I/C Const Thomas, who had told the appellant that the allegations and medical evidence suggested that he had been having sex "normally, orally and anally with both girls", was asked where there was such a reference in the medical evidence, and he identified the statement of Dr
Turner (the doctor who had examined J following her complaint against the appellant) which, although it states that an anal examination had revealed no abnormalities, goes on to say: "These findings are consistent with repeated penile penetration of the vagina and with anal penetration which had occurred many years previously." 
Upon the issue as to whether the Crown had established that the admissions had been made voluntarily, the appellant relied at the trial upon the absence of any caution, the refusal to permit him access to a solicitor and the conduct by Det Sen Sgt Maxwell of yelling accusations at him in such a tone of voice as to scare him. The judge correctly identified the issue in this case as being whether the statements had been made substantially in the exercise of a free choice to speak or to remain silent.[8] In the circumstances of the present case, the judge had to resolve the conflict between the evidence of the appellant asserting each of those matters and the evidence of the police officers which refuted them.[9] 
In resolving that conflict, the judge took into account all of the considerations upon which a jury is directed in accordance with McKinney v
The Queen,10 bearing in mind, however, the different burden of proof involved, but nevertheless giving a great deal of weight to the fact that, by reason of his situation, the appellant was unable to produce any corroboration of his version. In concluding that the evidence of the police officers should be preferred to that of the appellant, the judge took into account the undisputed evidence of the officers that the appellant had been given the opportunity to participate in a video recorded interview (which he thought would have been unlikely unless the appellant had in fact made significant admissions in the preceding interview), the fact that, as he had agreed in evidence, the appellant had continued to answer questions notwithstanding the alleged refusal to permit him access to a solicitor, and the unsatisfactory explanations given by the appellant for having signed the document as to what had transpired in the interview with Acting Supt Prins, who had indeed been independent. He concluded that the appellant's evidence was unreliable and failed to carry conviction because of its own inherent weakness. The judge rejected the evidence of the appellant that he had not been cautioned, that he had requested access to a solicitor and been refused, that he had not given the answers recorded by Maxwell when interviewed by Thomas and himself and those recorded by Prins when interviewed by himself in the absence of the others. The judge said that he was satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the admissions had been made by the appellant voluntarily.

On the appeal, those findings were criticised upon the bases: that the judge had failed to give proper weight to the advantages available to the police in giving evidence and those of an accused person with no previous experience in doing so, that his finding that the appellant had not requested access to a solicitor and been refused was an unreasonable assessment of the evidence, and that he was wrong to have found significance in the fact that the appellant had continued to answer questions after being refused access to a solicitor, he was wrong to have rejected the appellant's evidence of having signed the record of interview with Prins without reading it, and that he was wrong to have found that Prins was independent.

It needs to be stressed yet again that appeals to this Court from convictions in trials in the Supreme and District Courts are not by way of rehearing.[11]
The powers of the Court in relation to findings of fact made by a trial judge are those of a superior court to redress error. Error may be demonstrated if there is no evidence to support a particular finding, or if the evidence is all one way, or if the judge has misdirected himself or herself. But, unless error has first been established, this Court has no power to substitute its own findings for those of the trial judge, and it will do so only if the error has led to a miscarriage of justice.[12] Similarly, where there has been an exercise by the trial judge of a discretion, an appeal will be allowed by this
Court (as with any other appellate court) only where it has been established that the judge has erred in the proper exercise of that discretion. There is a strong presumption in favour of the correctness of the decision, but that presumption will be overcome where it is shown that the judge has acted on some wrong principle, or has given weight to extraneous or irrelevant matters, or has failed to give weight or sufficient weight to relevant considerations, or has made a mistake as to the facts. Even if the precise nature of the error may not be discoverable, it is sufficient that the result was so unreasonable or plainly unjust that the appellant court may infer that there has been a failure properly to exercise that discretion. If this Court is satisfied that there has been an injustice to one of the parties as a result of the judge's exercise of discretion, it is under a duty to review the order made.[13] It is upon that basis that I have considered the attack upon the judge's findings in the present case.

It is true that the inherent weakness of the appellant's evidence on the voir dire examination (upon which in part the judge relied in preferring the evidence of the police officers to that of the appellant) was related in large part to the issue as to whether he had made the admissions - an issue which the judge could not be asked to determine on the voir dire[14] - but the unsatisfactory nature of his evidence upon that issue (and in explanation for signing the document acknowledging that he had made admissions) was directly relevant to his credit as a witness when determining whether (despite his denial that he had made the admissions) he had done so voluntarily. The judge was entitled to take his conclusion as to the reliability of the appellant's evidence into account in general when making his choice between the two versions given. The fact that the appellant, as he had agreed in evidence, had continued to answer questions notwithstanding the alleged refusal to permit him access to a solicitor was also relevant to that issue. The appellant had himself said in evidence that he had chosen to answer the questions because he wanted to, albeit because he felt (so he alleged) an obligation to do so. Even if the qualification which he stated were to be accepted, it does not mean that his choice to do so was necessarily not voluntary in the relevant sense.[15] I see no basis upon which the judge's finding that the appellant had made the admissions voluntarily could be attacked on appeal.

Upon the issue as to whether they had been induced by an untrue representation, it was (as I have already said) conceded by the Crown to be untrue to say (as Const Thomas said to the appellant) that the allegations and the medical evidence in the possession of the Tasmanian police suggested that the appellant had been having sex with both girls anally as well as normally and orally. Section 410 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) which was then in force was a statutory extension of the common law doctrine concerning the exclusion of involuntary confessions.[16] It excluded from evidence any statement made by the accused if it had been induced by any untrue representation made to him by any person in authority; any statement made after such representation was deemed to have been induced thereby unless the contrary be shown. The section had long been interpreted as applying only to an untrue representation wilfully made by the police officer or other person in authority - that is, one which was known to the officer to be untrue and made with the object of inducing a confession.[17] 
At the time of the trial, the High Court had not decided Hawkins versus The
Queen,18 but it was correctly conceded on the appeal in the present case that the longstanding interpretation of <case> was not disturbed by that decision, although emphasis was given by the High Court to the issue being as to how the words used in the particular context and the circumstances in which the representation was made were understood by the person to whom it was made and the state of mind of the police officer as to the message which he intended to convey.[19] All of this was discussed in some detail in this
Court's decision in Regina versus Simmons,20 and it is unnecessary to repeat what was said there.

There was in fact nothing in the statement of either of the girls, or in the statements of those to whom they complained or gave a history, to support the suggestion of anal penetration, although both girls subsequently gave evidence of such penetration. The judge said in his judgment that Const Thomas conceded that he may have been mistaken in what he had said to the appellant, but he denied any intention to misrepresent the information which the Tasmanian police had in their possession. He said that he had understood the allegation of anal sex to have been an implication in the statements or possibly in the medical reports. He also said that he thought that it may have been an assumption made by him based upon what he had read in the medical reports.
When the passage from Dr Turner's report which I have quoted was drawn to his attention, he said that he had interpreted it as asserting that anal penetration had occurred many years previously, that he had tied that in with the reference by the girls to the events having taken place over a protracted period of time, a number of years, and that he had made the assumption (I think that he meant that he had drawn the inference) that the girls were asserting that the appellant had also anally penetrated them.

The judge commented that Dr Turner's report had been expressed in a somewhat infelicitous way. It certainly had. That a lay person reading it may conclude that there was evidence that there had been anal penetration, and then to infer that it had been the appellant who was alleged to have been guilty of it, is not difficult to understand. The judge found that the untrue representation had been unintended - that is, not wilful.

It was submitted on appeal that this was an unreasonable finding, and that the judge's reasoning is unconvincing. In the light of that statement in Dr
Turner's report, I do not agree. It was submitted that the judge erred by failing to apply the considerations which were laid down by the High Court in
Hawkins versus The Queen (which, as I have said, was decided after the trial in this case). It was, however, conceded that that decision did not alter the interpretation of <case> as it was previously understood, that the section related only to a wilful misrepresentation. It was nevertheless submitted that a trial judge is now required to consider also the underlying purpose of this section, which is to protect the individual who is induced to make a confession by an untrue representation made by a person in authority.[21] That submission is meaningless unless it is interpreted as referring - as the High
Court interpreted the section - as referring to a wilfully untrue representation. The judge found that it was unintended. The section had no application in those circumstances.

It was also submitted that the judge erred by failing to consider - as also required by the High Court's decision in Hawkins versus The Queen, decided after the trial in this case - the context in which the representation was made and the sense in which the accused person understood that representation.
The appellant gave no evidence as to any particular sense in which he understood what the police officer had said. A statement that a person had "been having sex ... anally" is hardly likely to have been understood - by someone unfamiliar with the absurdities of the definitions of sexual intercourse in [s
H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61h.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) (and its predecessor in <case>) - as meaning other than the penetration of one person's anus by another person's penis. No question arose of the appellant having understood the phrase in any other sense, or of the police officer's state of mind in relation to any such other sense.

I see no basis upon which the judge's finding that the untrue representation was unintended -that is, not wilful - could be attacked on appeal.

I turn now to the issue as to whether the judge should, in the exercise of his discretion, have excluded the evidence upon the alternative bases put to him that its reception would be unfair to the appellant and that it had been unlawfully obtained. As the judge recognized, the two areas of discretion may overlap and to some extent did so in the present case. It was also argued on appeal that, because the period during which it was alleged that the appellant admitted having sexual intercourse with the two girls (when J was "about ten or eleven") did not - even in general terms - cover two of the six counts upon which he was convicted (when J was, respectively, seven and eight years old), the prejudicial effect of evidence that he had made the admissions outweighed its probative value.[22] Leaving to one side the fact that, at the stage at which the evidence was allowed, the admissions related - at least in general terms - to some of the counts with which the appellant had been charged, the disparity does not in any event reduce the probative value to any substantial extent (if at all), and certainly not below any prejudicial effect which the evidence may have had. If the admissions were made, they were evidence of a "guilty passion" on the part of the appellant towards the two girls and - notwithstanding that they refer, in part, to a different period - they make more credible the evidence of the girls that the sexual activity took place upon the particular occasions which are the subject of all the charges upon which the appellant was convicted,[23] and they place the evidence of those offences into their true context and constitute part of the essential background against which the evidence of the girls and of the appellant necessarily fell to be evaluated.[24] 
Upon the issue of unfairness, the appellant must establish that its reception into evidence resulted in the trial being unfair to him,[25] in that the conduct of the police either affected the reliability of the evidence or led to a confession which would not otherwise have been made.[26] It is necessary to emphasize that the onus lay on the appellant to persuade the judge in relation to the matters upon which he relied to have the judge exclude evidence in the exercise of his discretion.[27] The argument at the trial was that, as the representation was in fact untrue, the appellant was "likely" to have been misled by it and, in consequence, have made admissions which he would not otherwise have made. (I pause to point out that the burden of proof on the appellant required him in such a case to establish not merely that it was likely, but rather that it was more likely than not, that he had been misled by it and thereby induced to make the admissions which he would not otherwise have made.) 
The judge recognized the appellant's difficulty - shared with all accused persons who both deny having made an admission and assert that they were unfairly induced to make it - of establishing that fact without having given express evidence upon the issue. He said, however, that the appellant's main difficulty lay in the fact that he was able to deny the representation that he was guilty of having oral as well as anal sex with the girls (the representation that oral sex, or fellatio, had been alleged was completely accurate), whereas his submission may have had some force if he had admitted both ordinary and oral sex whilst denying anal intercourse.

On appeal, it was submitted that the judge had overlooked the "possibility" that the appellant had been induced by the untrue representation to make a partial admission which involved a denial of what "might" have been perceived in the circumstances to be the more serious conduct. If such an argument had been put to the judge (and it is not clear whether it was), it is hardly surprising that he rejected it in the absence of any evidence from the appellant to support it.

In any event, even if I were (by reason of some as yet undemonstrated error by the judge) to consider for myself whether the evidence should have been excluded because the untrue representation nevertheless did induce the appellant to make admissions which he would not otherwise have made, I am by no means satisfied by the appellant that this untrue representation induced him to say anything.[28] In the absence of evidence from the appellant, it can only be by way of inference that such satisfaction could be achieved. Yet, as
I pointed out earlier when reciting the evidence, the appellant absolutely denied having any sex with the girls on three occasions before admitting to a limited number of occasions when he had had "ordinary" sex with them. Two of those absolute denials followed the making of the untrue representation. What appears to me from the evidence to have finally induced him to make the admissions which he did was the statement that the girls had claimed that he had been having sex with them two or three times a week over a number of years. There has been no suggestion that that representation was untrue. And, moreover, the admissions followed the reading of J's statement in its entirety, in which there was no reference to anal intercourse.

I reject the challenge to the judge's refusal to exclude the evidence of the admissions upon the basis that its reception would be unfair to him.

The last of the issues was that the evidence should have been excluded because it had been obtained when the appellant was unlawfully detained. The unlawful detention was initially identified as arising from the failure of the police officers to execute the warrant forthwith by arresting the appellant, when they would have been obliged to take him immediately before a justice, and instead merely inviting him to accompany them to the CIB where they interrogated him before arresting him pursuant to the warrant. It appears from the judgment which was delivered, however, that the argument then became one that the appellant was in fact detained at the time when he made the admissions.

There was no evidence as to the terms of the provisional warrant which had been issued. Det I/C Const Thomas agreed that it was his duty to arrest the appellant, but he disagreed that he was obliged to do so as soon as he found him. Det Sen Sgt Maxwell was not asked any questions concerning the arrest.
Supt Prins (as he had become by the time he gave evidence) said that, in his view, it was for the individual officers to make the decision whether the warrant was executed or not. He agreed that a lot of warrants commanded all constables to act in accordance with their tenor. Even so, he thought, that would not necessarily preclude the constable from asking any questions before executing the warrant. No question was asked directly of any of the officers as to whether the provisional warrant commanded the constables to arrest the person against whom it was issued "forthwith", although such an issue may perhaps have been implied by the question to which Const Thomas gave the answer which I have described.

The judge stated that he was prepared to assume that there was an obligation upon the police officers forthwith to arrest the appellant. Upon the basis of that assumption, he accepted that the appellant had been detained when interrogated and that he was so detained for the purpose of such interrogation, and thus unlawfully.[29] There was in this case no need for a reasonable time in order to decide whether to charge the appellant or to prefer that charge.[30] The judge also accepted that the consequences of such unlawful detention was to deprive the appellant of the opportunity in the presence of a witness to refuse the invitation to accompany the police to the
CIB (and thereby to precipitate his arrest), to decline to answer questions and to request access to a solicitor, and to place him in the situation of vulnerability described in McKinney versus The Queen.

For the purpose of considering whether considerations of public policy should lead to the evidence being excluded on the basis that it had been unlawfully obtained, the judge undertook the balancing exercise required in which the public interest in having those who commit criminal offences brought to justice and convicted on the one hand is weighed up against the public interest in protecting citizens against the unlawful conduct of the police on the other hand.[31] The considerations relevant to the exercise of this discretion are discussed in Bunning versus Cross by Stephen and Aickin JJ,[32] with whom Barwick CJ agreed.[33] Briefly, they are whether the unlawfulness was deliberate or reckless on the one hand or innocent on the other hand, whether the illegality has affected the cogency of the evidence (but only where the unlawfulness was not deliberate or reckless), whether the evidence might easily have been obtained without resort to illegality, the nature of the offence charged and the extent of the interference with personal liberty involved in the illegality.

Upon the basis of the assumption made that there was an obligation upon the police officers forthwith to arrest the appellant, the judge found that the illegality here was deliberate, but he took into account the seriousness of the offences with which the appellant had been charged, and he expressed his satisfaction that the cogency of the evidence (including its reliability) had not been in any way affected by the illegality. He also took into account (stressing that it was in no sense decisive) the fact that the admissions had been made voluntarily. He therefore declined to exclude the evidence upon the ground of public policy.

On appeal, objection was taken to the first and second of the factors which led the judge to that conclusion. As to the first of those, the seriousness of the offences with which the appellant had been charged, this Court has interpreted the judgment in Bunning versus Cross as meaning that the more serious the crime committed, the greater is the public interest in securing a conviction, and the more likely that a court's discretion will be exercised against excluding the evidence unlawfully obtained; the more significant the illegality involved, the greater is the public interest in protecting citizens against such conduct by the police, and the more likely that a court's discretion will be exercised in favour of excluding the evidence so obtained.[34] It was submitted that Bunning versus Cross, so far as it had said this, had been overruled by Foster versus The Queen.35 There is certainly no direct statement in Foster's Case to that effect, and I can find no indication in what was there stated from which an inference should be drawn that such was the intention of the majority. The judge made no error in taking the seriousness of the charges into account.

As to the second of those factors, the absence of any effect of the illegality upon the cogency of the evidence, there was some debate during the hearing of the appeal as to the particular cogency referred to in Bunning versus Cross - whether it was the cogency of the evidence of the police officers as to the admissions made or that of the evidence provided by the admissions themselves.
I am satisfied that it was the latter to which Bunning versus Cross referred, and that the issue is whether the reliability of the admissions themselves has been affected by the illegality. The objection taken on appeal, however, was more fundamental than that. Accepting as correct the judge's finding that the reliability of that evidence had not been affected by the illegality with which he was concerned, it seems that his attention was unfortunately not drawn to what was said by Stephen and Aickin JJ in Bunning versus Cross:36 " ... cogency should, generally, be allowed to play no part in the exercise of discretion where the illegality involved in procuring it is intentional or reckless. To this there will no doubt be exceptions: for example where the evidence is both vital to conviction and is of a perishable or evanescent nature, so that if there be any delay in securing it, it will have ceased to exist." 
The example given of an exception to the proposition could not usually apply to evidence of admissions made whilst in unlawful detention. It does not do so here. Nor was any other exception suggested by the Crown which could be applicable in the present case. I am therefore satisfied that, once the judge had found (upon the basis of the assumption which he made) that the illegality was deliberate, he took an irrelevant consideration into account when declining to exercise his discretion to exclude this evidence on the ground of public policy.

The submission was also made on appeal (but not at the trial) that the decision of the High Court in Foster versus The Queen necessarily required the evidence to be excluded in the circumstances of this case. Prior to Foster v
The Queen, it had been laid down in many cases that, where the evidence is voluntary (as the judge held that the admissions were here), where its prejudicial effect in the relevant sense does not outweigh its probative value (as I have held here), and where its admission into evidence would not result in an unfair trial for the accused (as the judge held here), it is only in a "very exceptional" case that the evidence would be excluded in the public interest.[37] In Foster's Case, the majority of the High Court said: " ... it could scarcely be thought that unlawful arrest and detention in custody by police for the sole purpose of interrogation does not, in this country, constitute exceptional circumstances."[38] 
That was, of course, said in a case in which it was also found that the reception of the admissions made during that interrogation was unfair to the accused[39] and that there had not been any intention on the part of the police (or any evidence) to charge the accused until he made the admissions,[40] and in which, in the end, the majority did not find it necessary to determine whether the evidence should have been excluded on public policy grounds.[41] Nevertheless, they thought it appropriate to indicate that it should have been so excluded,[42] and the statement which I have quoted - in view of the strength with which it was expressed - is difficult to dismiss as a mere obiter dictum. It is expressed without reference to any question of unfairness or deliberate illegality, and, on its face, it appears to have been intended by the majority as a statement of universal application - although, in the only other decision of the High Court in which it appears that Foster's Case has been considered, it was not cited as authority for that proposition.[43] Whether or not that is to be its ultimate effect is unnecessary to determine in the present case, as this was not a case where the unlawful detention was for the sole purpose of interrogation. I do not accept the submission that the decision in Foster v
The Queen necessarily required the evidence to be excluded in the circumstances of this case.

Error in the exercise of the judge's discretion has nevertheless been demonstrated, and it now becomes the duty of this Court to determine for itself whether the evidence of the admissions made by the appellant should have been excluded upon the basis that it had been unlawfully obtained.
Normally, such an exercise of discretion would proceed upon the basis of the findings of fact made by the trial judge, unless (in accordance with the approach earlier stated) any of those findings of fact was itself the subject of a successful attack in this Court. In the present case, however, the judge first made an assumption that there was an obligation upon the police officers forthwith to arrest the appellant, and it was only upon the basis of that assumption that he made the findings of fact which I have described. That assumption was vital to all of the findings of fact which followed. As I have already pointed out, there was no evidence before the judge as to whether that was their obligation, and nothing further has been placed before this Court either at the hearing of the appeal or with the further submissions made subsequently by leave. The onus lay on the appellant to supply the evidence upon which the judge was being asked to exercise this particular discretion,[44] and in those circumstances I am not prepared to make the same assumption where, as I shall point out, I believe it to have been unfounded.

A warrant issued pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s29.html) of the Justices Act is required to order the police constable(s) to which it is directed to apprehend the person against whom it is issued, but its legal effect when it is to be executed outside New South Wales is to be found only in the Service and Execution of Process Act applying at the time. There is nothing in that Act which imposes an obligation upon the constables to whom a provisional warrant is directed "forthwith" to arrest the person against whom it is issued. Section 18 provides that the warrant is "sufficient authority" to execute it outside NSW, to apprehend that person and to bring him or her before a justice. Section 18 of that Act appears to extend the authority to apprehend, but not any obligation imposed by the Justices Act to do so, to the officers executing the warrant outside the State in which it was issued, but it is unnecessary in this case to decide whether or not that is so. That is because there is no reference in either the Justices Act or the
Service and Execution of Process Act to apprehending the person against whom the warrant is issued "forthwith".

Section 19A of the Service and Execution of Process Act, which permits the issue of a provisional warrant, provides that, once that person has been apprehended pursuant to such a warrant, he or she is to be brought "forthwith" before a justice. The adverb "forthwith" is clearly applied to bringing that person before the justice, and not to the apprehension. That appears to me to be a sensible distinction. Whereas compliance with an obligation to bring the person before a justice forthwith can be judged against an identifiable event (the apprehension), there appears to be no such identifiable event against which compliance with an obligation to apprehend the person forthwith can be judged. Is there a non-compliance if, through pressure of work, the police make no attempt for some days to find the person against whom the warrant is issued? What is to happen if there is an unsuccessful dispute as to that person's identity? What if it appears either inappropriate or inhumane to do so as soon as the police officer is satisfied that the particular person is the person against whom the warrant was issued? He may be undergoing a surgical procedure (when it would be inappropriate) or he may be in the process of taking his wife to hospital for the imminent birth of their child (when it would be inhumane). An obligation to apprehend "forthwith" is unworkable. I do not accept that it exists.

There was a further, alternative, argument put on appeal, that the appellant was nevertheless apprehended from the time when he accompanied the Tasmanian police officers to the Hobart CIB. The ordinary English meaning of the word "apprehend" is to arrest, and it is obviously used in both statutes in that sense. An arrest occurs when it is made plain by what is said and/or done by the police officer to the person in question that he is not free to leave if he chooses.[45] I agree with what was said by King J in The Queen v
Lavery:46 "A suspect may, voluntarily and without constraint, accede to a police officer's request to accompany him and, if he does so, there is of course no interference with his liberty. This is so even if he goes reluctantly out of respect for authority or fear that a refusal will be construed as an indication of guilt or some other similar motive. The suspect's liberty is not under restraint simply because the police officer would or might arrest him if he were to exercise his right to depart or to refuse to accompany the police officer. If, however, the circumstances are such as to convey, notwithstanding the use of words of invitation or request, that the suspect has no real choice, his freedom is under restraint and he cannot be regarded as accompanying the police officer voluntarily. If such a situation comes into existence, and the police officer does not wish to make an arrest, it is incumbent upon him to make it clear by words or actions that the suspect is free to refuse the invitation and is free to depart." 
There is nothing in the evidence in the present case to suggest that the appellant thought that he had no choice but to accompany the police officers or thereafter to remain with them before the warrant was in fact executed. He specifically said in evidence that he had felt under no compulsion to go with the police officers; the argument at the trial was that the police had deceived the appellant by not making it clear that he would be arrested if he attempted to leave. The judge found that the appellant had made the admissions voluntarily.

There was an attempt to argue that the appellant had nevertheless been "detained", and unlawfully so, from early in the interview, but I see no difference in the circumstances of this case between apprehension and detention. The appellant has not satisfied me that he was unlawfully detained when he made the admissions. Indeed, I am positively satisfied that he was not. No occasion therefore arose for the exercise of the discretion to exclude the evidence upon public policy grounds.

I should add that the judge also considered whether the failure of the police officers to execute the warrant forthwith by arresting the appellant, thus leading to the situation where he was unable to corroborate his version of the interview which then took place, made it unfair to allow the evidence of those admissions to be used against him. He concluded that the circumstances in which the appellant was asserting that the admissions were made would be before the jury in any event as matters going to the reliability of those admissions and that a warning to the jury in accordance with McKinney versus The
Queen[47] would do much to mitigate the suggested unfairness of allowing the evidence.[48] It was submitted on appeal that the discretion to exclude the evidence had to be exercised without regard to whatever warnings might be given to the jury in relation to the evidence. It was not explained why. Nor do I accept that it should be so. This Court has held that, in identification cases, the discretion to exclude the evidence upon the basis that its prejudicial effect outweighs its probative value can be exercised according to whether or not the quality of the evidence falls short of the point where its frailty cannot be cured by an appropriate direction or caution to the jury.[49] I see no valid distinction between the two different discretions so far as taking the effect of a jury warning into account.

No error has been shown in the judge's refusal to exclude the evidence upon that basis. He had, of course, considered these matters in the light of his findings that the appellant was also at that time under unlawful detention.
Even if this Court were to consider these matters for itself, I would come to the same conclusion, not only for the reasons which the Judge gave but also upon the basis (as the undisputed evidence showed) that the appellant had been given the opportunity to participate in a video recorded interview and had declined to do so.

I would accordingly reject the appellant's first ground of appeal. This leads me then to the appellant's second ground of appeal, that the guilty verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory. The ultimate question which must be answered by this Court in relation to such a ground is whether - notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain that verdict - this Court thinks that, upon the whole of the evidence, it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty.[50] 
The Crown case was that, at the time when the appellant married, his wife already had a daughter (J) from a previous relationship. J was one of the complainants. The other complainant was her cousin (T), who was about a year older than J. A daughter (K) was later born to the appellant and his wife. The appellant and his wife at first lived with her parents, the grandparents of both complainants. Thereafter, they lived in a series of rented premises in
Sydney. A son was born but died within a few months. Another son was born later. The appellant's wife was a nurse, and she was employed on a casual basis which involved working both day and night and on the weekends. In early , the family moved to Tasmania, but the appellant's wife and the children returned to Sydney in May of that year and the appellant himself returned at the end of the year when they again lived in a series of rented premises. In
September 1989, the appellant returned to Tasmania in order to seek employment, the intention being that the others would join him when he had obtained such employment. In May 1990, the appellant informed his wife that he wanted a divorce. His wife asked him to reconsider, but the appellant remained adamant. Cohabitation was never resumed, and the marriage was dissolved later that year.

It was the Crown case that there was a long history of sexual assaults by the appellant upon both complainants too numerous to expect the girls to remember.
The offences charged were not intended to be considered as isolated events.
The counts asserted such assaults from 1982 until 1989, and they related to those particular incidents as to which the girls were able to give sufficient detail as to enable an approximate identification of the date, place and circumstances of those incidents. The trial proceeded upon the basis that, except in relation to one count, it was essential for the Crown to establish that the act charged occurred at the place specified and at the time (or during the time) specified in the charge, and the jury were directed that, if they had not been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt in relation to any particular count, they were bound to find the appellant not guilty of that charge even though it may have appeared to them that an identical act had occurred at some other place or at some other time. The jury were given a very helpful document in which the matters which it was essential for the Crown to establish were set out, together with appropriate definitions. An extract follows: "Count 5 - That at Myee Street, Lakemba - in about August 1984 - the accused and [J] were packing in preparation for the move to Canterbury when the accused laid her on the floor and had sexual intercourse by placing his penis in her vagina.

Count 6 - That at Canterbury - between 1 November 1984 and 30 April 1986 - the accused joined [J] and [T] in the shower, made [J] take off her swimming costume, and had sexual intercourse by placing his penis in her vagina.

Count 7 - That at Wiley Park - between 1 April 1989 and 30 September 1989 - the accused touched [J] on the backside and on the vagina while she was dressing." 
The jury were also directed that they could not convict the appellant of any charge unless they accepted the girls as witnesses of truth and substantially the detail of their evidence in relation to each offence.

In his remarks on sentence, the judge expressed the view that there was nothing in the pattern of the jury's verdicts of guilty and not guilty to give rise to any concern that they had compromised the matter or any conclusion that the verdicts were inconsistent.[51] He thought that it was clearly the position that the jury had accepted the substance of the evidence of the two girls but had acquitted only where, in the evidence relating to a particular count, there was a problem concerning a date or place of something sufficient to leave a reasonable doubt about the detail of the particular charge. The views of the trial judge as to such matters are of considerable assistance on appeal, but this Court must of course come to its own independent view about the safety of the verdicts and thus of the credit of the Crown witnesses.

The view expressed by the judge is in general born out by the evidence. The appellant was found not guilty of the offences charged in Counts 1, 2, 3 and 6 (relating to J) and 9 and 11 (relating to T), the last by direction. In relation to the first three counts, J gave evidence that the events occurred at Belfield, and within a very short time either side of her fifth birthday.
Her mother, however, gave evidence that by that time the family had left
Belfield to live in Dulwich Hill. The judge directed the jury that, given the particulars specified in the indictment, they may think that it was impossible to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant committed the offences at the time and place specified. He also directed the jury that, although the conflict may cause them to doubt J's honesty, it need not necessarily cause them to do so.

In relation to the sixth count, the principal issue taken was with J's allegation that sexual intercourse had taken place with her lying on the floor of the shower at Canterbury, when undisputed evidence called on behalf of the appellant demonstrated that the dimensions of the shower recess at the time were such as to have made it impossible for the appellant to be on top of J on the floor. J also alleged that T was present at the time. Although T gave evidence in general terms of being present when the appellant had sexual intercourse with J, including sexual intercourse in the bathroom, she was not asked any questions (by either party) concerning this incident. The acquittal, however, would appear to have related more to the problem arising as to the particular premises where (and thus the time when) the offence occurred rather than the absence of corroboration by T.

In relation to the ninth count (which related to T), the indictment originally specified Belfield as the place where the offence occurred, but T gave evidence that there had been no sexual assaults upon her at that address. The
Crown was permitted to amend the charge to allege that the offence occurred at
Sydney generally, but by then the jury were entitled to assume from the fact that Belfield had been specified in the indictment that T's memory as to when or where the offence had occurred was unreliable.

In relation to the eleventh count, T gave evidence that the sexual intercourse took place at Lakemba in about 1982 or 1983. The evidence was that the appellant and the family did not live at Lakemba before December 1983 at the earliest. The judge directed the jury to find the appellant not guilty of this offence. Again, the judge directed the jury that this reflected upon the reliability of the evidence of T, but not necessarily upon her honesty as a witness.

This was not, in my view, a case where the jury have found the appellant guilty only of those counts where the evidence of the girls was corroborated or otherwise supported in some way, when the inference could be drawn that they were not prepared to convict on that evidence alone. There is often a problem with the reliability of the evidence of child witnesses, and in particular where their evidence relates to events which are alleged to have taken place many years earlier. That is not to say that allowances for such unreliability should be made by the jury at the trial in determining whether the offences were committed, for the onus on the Crown remains one to persuade the jury of the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, and evidence which is unreliable remains so whether given by an adult or a child. But the existence of the problem is relevant in determining whether a demonstrated unreliability of a child's evidence in relation to one matter should lead to a conclusion that the child's evidence in relation to other matters is dishonest.[52] 
I agree with the view expressed by the trial judge, who had the benefit of seeing the girls give their evidence, that the jury's verdicts do not indicate any particular view as to their honesty. There were nevertheless other matters raised which could be regarded as casting a doubt upon their honesty and which have to be considered afresh.

J gave evidence in relation to the events giving rise to a charge upon which the appellant was found guilty (Count 7), and claimed that shortly after the offence had taken place she had suffered a series of epileptic fits and had been taken to hospitable where she remained for two days. (She had a history of epilepsy.) No evidence was led by the Crown as to any such hospital admission, and the judge directed the jury that they were entitled to have some qualms about the reliability of her evidence in those circumstances. As the date of that offence was specified somewhat imprecisely as being between 1
April and 30 September 1989, the judge commented that it was rather unsatisfactory that the Crown had not sought to fix the date more precisely by reference to such hospital admission if it had occurred. The comment as to the unsatisfactory nature of the imprecision in the Crown case was clearly justified, but the qualms which the jury were invited to have in relation to
J's evidence of having suffered epileptic fits related to what it was open to them (in the light of her history of epilepsy) to regard as only a peripheral matter, rather than to her evidence that sexual intercourse had taken place.[53] There were also some inconsistencies between the evidence of the two girls and the statements which they gave to the police, particularly the absence from those statements of the anal penetration which they alleged in their evidence.

There was also evidence of a motive to be untruthful on the part of J. She became aware in June or July 1990 that the appellant had refused to pay maintenance for her because she was not his natural daughter. She conceded that she was hurt by this decision. She took an overdose of her epilepsy medication, although she claimed at the time that it was because she was having trouble at school. In July of that year, the appellant said, he received a reverse charge telephone call from J in which, he alleged, she said to him "We're going to get you, you bastard". J denied having made the call, and her mother claimed that she had made a call to the appellant at that time.[54] The circumstances in which she came to give this evidence were such as to warrant the judge's comment to the jury that they may think that J's mother had told lies. J first complained of sexual assault by the appellant to a friend at school in August of that year, following a movie which they had seen the previous evening about sexual abuse. In September, J told her grandmother of the appellant's conduct, following a television programme concerning child sexual abuse. She was medically examined shortly thereafter and she made a statement to the police.

An issue was raised at the trial in relation to the appellant's character, which the Crown sought to meet by leading evidence from J and from her mother of discreditable conduct by the appellant over the years. The judge commented to the jury that they may very well consider that evidence to have been grossly and deliberately exaggerated, if not completely untrue.

Specific complaints were made on appeal concerning the safety of the evidence in support of those counts where convictions resulted. Those complaints were directed to the jury's failure to have a reasonable doubt as to the appellant's guilt as a result of inconsistencies between the evidence given by the girls and their statements and within their evidence itself, evidence which was led on his behalf contradicting peripheral matters in the evidence of the girls, the delay in making complaint (particularly by T, who did not live in the household), the absence of corroboration of detail where it would be expected to have been available, and the opportunity for collusion between the two girls.

If this had been all then, in the light of the sworn evidence of the appellant denying the allegations, the case may well have been one where, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury in seeing and hearing the evidence given by the girls, this Court would have thought that their evidence lacked the credibility which is required for a satisfaction beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. But this was not all.

First, there is the medical evidence. On examination, J was found to have scarring to the entry to her vagina, right through the tissue of the hymen.
Such a finding is abnormal in a person who has not experienced sexual intercourse and penile penetration, because the scarring was at the base of the vaginal ring where a penis would be pushed during sexual intercourse. It was consistent with more than one such penetration. T was examined by a different doctor. She was found to have significant abnormalities of her hymen, in that it was totally disrupted through its full thickness in a number of places towards the base (in much the same area as were the scars seen in
J). The doctor said that it demonstrated some form of penetration, but she could not say that it was penile penetration. The penetration had occurred on either one or more occasions. The coincidence that both girls had injuries to their hymens at least consistent with penile penetration on one or more occasions was significant.

Secondly, there were the admissions made by the appellant to the police. As I said earlier, the fact that those admissions did not - even in general terms - cover the period during which two of the six offences of which he was convicted were alleged to have been committed does not reduce their probative value to any substantial extent (if at all). They were evidence of a "guilty passion" on the part of the appellant towards the girls, and they make more credible the evidence of the girls that the sexual activity took place upon the particular occasions which are the subject of all the charges upon which he was convicted, and they place the evidence of those offences into their true context and constitute part of the essential background against which the evidence of the two girls and the appellant must be evaluated.[55] I agree with the trial judge that the evidence of the appellant denying that he made these admissions was unreliable and fails to carry conviction because of its own inherent weakness. So much is clear from the transcript alone, and in particular from the appellant's signature on the document which acknowledges that he had made admissions. I also agree with the judge that, in the circumstances of this case, the undisputed evidence that the appellant was offered the opportunity to participate in a video recorded interview supports the conclusion that he had in fact made admissions.

Coupled with the injuries to both girls' hymens, these admissions satisfy me that the jury's verdicts should not be disturbed. I am not persuaded that it was not open to the jury (in the relevant sense of that term) to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. Having made my own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of all of the evidence, I experience for myself no reasonable doubt based upon the quality of the evidence as to the safety of the verdicts of guilty which the jury gave; nor do I see any basis upon which the jury ought to have experienced such a doubt for themselves. The matters to which attention has been drawn do not lead me to the conclusion that there is any significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted.[56] 
I am not satisfied that there is any miscarriage of justice to be remedied in relation to the conviction. Indeed, I am positively satisfied that there was not and that, had the present appeal against conviction been filed within time, it would necessarily have been dismissed. Accordingly, I propose that the application for leave to appeal against conviction out of time be refused.

The appellant also applied for leave to seek out of time leave to appeal against the sentence imposed. No submissions were made in support of the challenge to the sentence. The counts on which the appellant was found guilty consisted of two indecent assaults upon J - one of lying on the girl when she was asleep and touching her breasts and vagina, the other of fondling her buttocks and genital area - two charges of having sexual intercourse with J without her consent by way of penile penetration and two charges of having sexual intercourse with T without her consent - one by way of penile penetration and one of digital penetration.

The judge described the offences as serious. They certainly were. Nor could they be considered to be six isolated incidents. The judge accepted that the appellant was generally of good character. But, whether or not the appellant was of good character, he deserved little (if any) leniency because the incidents were indeed part of a series of offences.[57] Both children were in a vulnerable position, in that they were under his authority, and severe custodial sentences were called for. The judge took into account the principle of totality, but he was careful to reflect in that total only the criminality involved in the six particular offences of which the appellant had been convicted. Because this was the first time the appellant had been given a custodial sentence, because he would almost certainly have to serve his sentence on protection, and because there was a degree of accumulation involved in the sentencing process, the judge found that there were special circumstances within the meaning of [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) which warranted a variation in the statutory ratio between the minimum and additional terms.

The effective total sentence of penal servitude for thirteen and a half years, consisting of an effective minimum term of nine years and an additional term of four and a half years, is certainly a severe one, but it was one well within the judge's wide sentencing discretion. I see no basis other than the length of the sentence upon which leave would have been granted to appeal, but
I am satisfied that the appeal would necessarily then have been dismissed.
There was thus no miscarriage of justice to be remedied. Accordingly, I propose that the application for leave to seek out of time leave to appeal against the sentence imposed be refused.
 [Section (3)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s18.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) now provides that time served pending the hearing of an appeal is to count as part of the sentence imposed unless this Court orders otherwise. I do not propose any such order.

PROPOSED ORDERS
Leave to appeal against conviction out of time is refused.
Leave to seek out of time leave to appeal against sentence is also refused.

SMART J: The facts and circumstances are set out in the judgment of Hunt CJ at CL. I agree with Hunt CJ at CL that if there has been a miscarriage of justice the applicant should be granted leave to appeal despite his Notice of Abandonment of his appeal and the lapse of time and the appeal allowed.

The discussion of Hunt CJ at CL reveals that there were considerable weaknesses in the evidence of the two children and their mother. The safety of any verdict depends in large measure upon the admissibility of some statements allegedly made to the police.

Admissibility of Statements Allegedly Made to Police 
The court is hampered by having neither the warrant issued for the applicant's arrest nor any provisional warrant. It is necessary to piece together what probably happened.

At the time the police first spoke to the applicant about 10.45 am on 5
February 1991 a NSW Magistrate had issued a warrant for the applicant's arrest on charges of sexual intercourse without consent and indecent assault.
Apparently, a Magistrate or Justice in Tasmania had issued a provisional warrant for the applicant's arrest.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s21.html) of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) provides that an information may be laid before a Justice in any case where any person has committed or is suspected to have committed an indictable offence in New South Wales. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s22.html) provides that where it is intended that a warrant in the first instance shall be issued the information must be laid in writing and the matter thereof substantiated by the oath of the informant or a witness. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s23.html) provides that where the information is so substantiated the Justice may issue his warrant in the first instance for the apprehension of the person sought.
 [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s29.html) relevantly requires every warrant for the apprehension of any person to be under the hand and seal of the Justice issuing it, be directed to the senior officer of police of the district or place where it is to be executed or generally to all police constables in New South Wales, to name or otherwise describe the person whose appearance is required, to state shortly the matter of the information and order the police constable to apprehend the person whose appearance is required and cause him to be brought before a Justice to answer to the information. The warrant continues in force until executed and it may be executed by apprehending the person against whom it is directed at any place in New South Wales. Naturally, there is no reference to what is to happen when the warrant is executed outside New South Wales and in another
State.

Section 18 of the Service and Execution of Process Act 1901-1974 (Cth) provides that where a Justice has in accordance with the law of a State issued a warrant for the apprehension of a person, a Justice who has power to issue such warrants for the apprehension of persons under the law of another State, being a State in which the person is supposed to be, may, on being satisfied that the warrant was issued by a Justice (after proof on oath of the signature of the person by whom the warrant was issued) make an endorsement on the warrant in or to the effect of the form in the Second Schedule to the Act.
Section 18(2) provides that a warrant so endorsed is sufficient authority to all constables in that other State to execute the warrant in that other State, to apprehend the person against whom the warrant was issued and to bring that person before a Justice.

Section 18(3) provides that, subject to s.18, the Justice before whom the person is brought may by warrant order the person to be returned to the issuing state in the custody of a nominated person. Section 18(6) sets out the circumstances in which the magistrate may order the discharge of the person.

Section 19A provides that a Justice who is empowered under s.18(1), subject to being satisfied as to the matters specified in that sub-section, to endorse a warrant for the apprehension of a person may, if the warrant is not produced to him or he requires further information or proof before endorsing the warrant, issue a provisional warrant for the apprehension of the person upon such information and under such circumstances as, in his opinion, justify the issue of a provisional warrant and the provisional warrant may be executed according to its tenor. Section 19A(1) proceeds upon the basis that a Justice in the first State has issued a warrant. It may not have been received in the second State or the Justice in the second State may need further proof or information.

Section 19A(2) provides that where a person is apprehended in pursuance of a provisional warrant he shall be brought forthwith before a Justice.

Before a warrant is issued an information verified by oath and containing the charges must have been laid against the accused. He is apprehended so he can be brought before a Court to answer the charges preferred against him.

Many of the cases dealing with police interrogations and the bringing of an accused before a Justice arise out of the police exercising their common law or statutory powers of arrest. Williams v. The Queen <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 278] re-affirms that a person who is arrested may be detained only for the purpose of bringing him before a Justice to be dealt with according to law and not merely for the purpose of questioning that person. There must be a charge (305). At 306 Wilson and Dawson JJ pointed out that the point at which an arrested person is brought before a Justice upon a charge is the point at which the machinery of the law leading to trial is put into operation and from which the judicial process commences and purely ministerial functions cease.
Thus any delay in bringing a person under arrest before a Justice is to defeat the true purpose of that arrest. Delay is not permitted merely for the purpose of further investigation.

The judge found that the applicant had worked night shift the previous night and that after being woken by his mother he came out to meet the police officers. The judge continued: "It was common ground that the constable did not then inform the accused of the existence of the warrant nor place him under arrest but merely informed him in general terms of the subject matter of police enquiries and requested that the accused accompany the officers to CIB office in Hobart. The accused went voluntarily, but it is clear (and Detective Thomas confirmed) that had he refused to do so, the warrant would at once have been executed and the accused arrested." 
Detective Thomas gave the following version of subsequent events. Upon arrival at the CIB offices Detective Thomas stated that he said that they were making enquiries into a number of complaints of sexual assault and rape committed upon two named girls and that it was alleged that over a number of years he had sex and performed sexual acts with both girls on a regular basis. The applicant was then cautioned. Upon the applicant's denial of these allegations the detective said that they had copies of statements and other documentation which had been forwarded from New South Wales and that the contents indicated that there was a substantial amount of evidence implicating him (the applicant) with these allegations. After further denials of sexual impropriety by the applicant Detective Thomas said "The point is, Ian, that the detectives have supplied sufficient evidence to a Magistrate for him to issue a warrant for your arrest." The applicant allegedly replied "So I am damned whatever I do, is that what you are saying?" Detective Thomas replied: "Yes, you will be arrested and charged and have to return to New South Wales to answer those charges. However at this stage we only have the girls' side of the story. This is your opportunity to give us your side if you wish." Do you want to tell us your side, Ian?" 
The applicant said "No, I didn't have sex with them." The statement of one girl was read in its entirety to the applicant. Det Thomas pointed out that that girl was quite explicit in her details and that this was backed up by the statement of the other girl. A further caution was administered. The applicant disputed the account given by the girls. According to the police he admitted up to 5 acts of intercourse with one girl (and possibly only 3 or 4 such acts) and 2 acts of intercourse with the other girl. Under further questioning details were supplied by the applicant as to what happened on these occasions.

Handwritten notes were made by Det Sgt Maxwell of what was allegedly said. The applicant declined to participate in a video interview. There was evidence from the police that the availability of video interviewing facilities in
Hobart was very limited and that they were only used for the more serious offences and when there were admissions or some other matter which it would be useful to record. They were not used at the initial stages of police questioning.

The applicant declined to make a written statement or to sign the 13 pages of notes taken by the police of what had been said. He was told that he would be arrested on the warrant and that an application would be made before the court for him to be returned to Sydney to answer the charges. He was then arrested on the provisional warrant.

The applicant was next taken from the CIB premises at Sandy Bay to police headquarters in the centre of Hobart where he was introduced to Acting
Superintendent Prins who was unassociated with the investigation.

The arresting police stated that the applicant had made admissions but refused to sign the police notes. Amongst other matters, A/Supt Prins read the police notes to the applicant who agreed that they were right. He was handed a document recording what had taken place at the interview with A/Supt Prins, agreed that he had read it and signed it as correct.

I have been troubled by the police neither arresting the applicant at his home nor telling the applicant at his home of the existence of the warrant and that he was going to be arrested. What took place appears to have been a stratagem designed to enable the police to question the applicant at length before becoming subject to a duty to bring him before a Justice forthwith. This is curious when a sworn information has been laid.

Once a warrant issues the police generally do not have a discretion whether to arrest a person. There may be an exceptional case where, on attending to arrest a person upon a particular charge, they are told or shown something which makes it very apparent that the person should not be arrested. There might be overwhelming evidence that the person could not have committed the offence charged and no risk of the person not being available later. In such circumstances the police officer may think it prudent to advise his superiors so the position can be checked. The officer is not declining to arrest, but postponing any arrest while checking that he is to go ahead.

A police officer executing the warrant does have a measure of discretion as to the time at which he will execute a warrant. The officer may have more pressing duties. There may be particular personal circumstances affecting the person which may make it inappropriate to arrest a person at a particular time. He may be attending to urgent medical needs of himself or his family or some third person. He may be attending a funeral. He may be addressing a public meeting or competing in some public event. There may be no question of a person disappearing. Much depends on the circumstances and police officers are expected to use discretion.

It is a different situation where police have a warrant but abstain from arresting a person so that they can question him. It did not matter what the applicant said, he had to be, and was, arrested. I do not think that the discretion which the police have as to the time at which they execute a warrant and arrest the person named in it extends to delaying executing it while they question the person in an attempt to obtain admissions. If the applicant had known of the existence of the warrant and its effect he may have declined to accompany the police voluntarily. He may have arranged for a solicitor to be present or he may have had his mother do so. There are also other steps he may have taken to ensure that he was not alone with the police.
This was not a case where there was any sufficient reason for the police not to execute the warrant when they spoke to the applicant at his parents' home at which he was living.

In my opinion what happened was impermissible. The judge regarded the course taken by the police as unlawful but for reasons a little different from those which I would favour. If my view be correct the question remains was the judge in error in exercising his discretion to admit the statements allegedly made to the police.

At a relatively early stage of the police interview after the police had told the applicant that there was a substantial amount of evidence implicating him in the sexual assault allegations and he had denied any involvement for the second time the police commented that the NSW Police had supplied sufficient evidence to a magistrate for him to issue a warrant for his arrest. The appellant replied "So I am damned whatever I do..." and the police replied in the affirmative. It was explained that he would be arrested and charged and have to return to New South Wales to answer the charges. Put in that way the applicant's position was stark.

Subsequently, on being pressed by the questions of the investigating police, the applicant allegedly made the admissions earlier mentioned. The judge found that the admissions were made. The evidence of A/Supt Prins made it hard to reach any other conclusion. The judge thought, on good grounds, that the applicant's explanation of how he came to sign the form before A/Supt Prins lacked substance.

The admissions were cogent and without them the Crown case on these serious offences would have probably failed.

The judge found that the illegality which he assumed was deliberate. The judge was influenced by the gravity of the offences and the cogency of the admissions which he held to have been made.

Stephen and Aickin JJ pointed out in Bunning v. Cross <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54] at 79 the special importance of the illegality involved in procuring the evidence being intentional or reckless and that cogency should generally be allowed to play no part in the exercise of the discretion to admit or reject the evidence in such circumstances.

In my opinion the impermissible, illegal and deliberate stratagem adopted in this case by the police is a dominant consideration and, notwithstanding, the other factors requires the exclusion of the admissions. Without those admissions the verdicts are unsafe and unsatisfactory. The flawed evidence of the mother and the girls and their obvious untruthfulness gave rise to a reasonable doubt.

There is one further matter on which I comment. The statement by the police that there was medical evidence to support an allegation that the accused was having sex normally, orally and anally with both girls from the ages of four and five was potent. The suggestions of sex orally and anally seemed repugnant to the applicant and to produce a major re-action. The police certainly intended to make this statement and there was a possible basis for it in Dr
Turner's report. Part of the report was capable of being misunderstood. There was no medical evidence to support "sex orally" or "sex anally." 
In Hawkins v. The Queen <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 440] at 446 the High Court referred to the authority which supported the prevailing interpretation that the words "untrue representation" in s.410(1)(a) mean a representation which is wilfully untrue, as being of long standing. They pointed out that the purpose of the provision was not to inhibit serious misconduct on the part of persons in authority but "to protect the individual who is induced to make a confession by an untrue representation made by a person in authority." 
I accept that persons in authority may make mistakes or be misled and as a result may make untrue representations. It is essential that any person to whom such untrue representations are made should be protected against wilfully untrue representations.

I am bound by the long standing authority. However, given that the purpose of the provision is to protect the individual who is induced to make a confession by an untrue representation, it is not easy to follow, except on pragmatic grounds, why important untrue representations deliberately but innocently made which induce a confession should not result in the exclusion of the confession.

The appeal should be allowed and the convictions quashed.
 
McINERNEY J: I agree with the orders proposed by Hunt CJ at CL, for the reasons he has expressed.
 [1] [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r 27.
 <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 431] at 437.
 [3] Regina versus Bell [(1987) 8 NSWLR 311] at -315; Regina versus Cartwright [(1989) 17 NSWLR 243] at 246.
 [4] This is permitted by the [Prisoners (Interstate Transfer) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/pta1982359/).
 [5] I do not know whether the first part of that advice is accurate, but the second part clearly was not. Appeals against conviction are presently being given hearing dates within two to three months of the filing of grounds of appeal. Any further delay which may exist relates only to the filing of the grounds of appeal.
 [6] That Act has since been repealed and replaced by the (Cwth) [Service and
Execution of Process Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/saeopa1992325/).
 [7] The first of those denials is, of course, a matter of interpretation, depending as it does upon the expression "not at all" meaning "not any sex at all," but it was not - so far as I can see - ever suggested that it should be interpreted in any other way.
 [8] McDermott versus The King [(1948) 76 CLR 501] at 511;
The King versus Lee <case>; [(1950) 82 CLR 133] at 146-147; McPherson versus The Queen <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 512] at 519; Foster versus The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 507] at 515, 519, because the burden on the Crown to establish that the statements had been made voluntarily is only on the balance of probabilities: Wendo versus The Queen <case>; [(1963) 109 CLR 559] at 572-573; MacPherson versus The Queen (at 519, 532).
  <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468] at -476.
 [11] I leave out of account here appeals from summary trials: cf [Criminal
Appeal Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), [ss
AA](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5aa.html)-[5AD](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5ad.html).
 [12] The authorities for these propositions are collected in Regina v
Simmons [(1995) 79 A Crim R 31] at
There have been at least two decisions of this Court since which have revisited the issue: Regina versus Kurtic [(1996) 85 A Crim R 57] at -60; Regina versus Nicolae Ion (CCA, 6 September 1996, in the course of being reported) at 6-8.
 [13] The authorities for these propositions are collected in Regina v
Alexandroaia [(1995) 81 A Crim R 286] at .
 [14] MacPherson versus The Queen (at 520).
 [15] Regina versus Azar [(1991) 56 A Crim R 414] at -420.
 <case>; <case>; [(1895) 16 LR 149] at 154; Regina versus Connors [(1990) 20 NSWLR 438] at -449; Hawkins versus The Queen <case>; <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 440.] [19] (at 446-447).
 [(1995) 79 A Crim R 31] at -34, 40-43.
 [21] This purpose is stated in Hawkins versus The Queen at 446-447.
 [22] Rex versus Christie [[1914] AC 545] at 559, 564;
Phillips versus The Queen <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 45] at 51; Regina versus Masters [(1992) 26 NSWLR 450] at 479.
 [23] Rex versus Ball [[1911] AC 47] at 71; Regina versus Beserick <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] at 610 (see also at 602-603, 605); Regina versus Beserick (at ).
 [25] McDermott versus The King (at 506-507, 513-515); The King versus Lee (at -151); MacPherson versus The Queen (at 519-520); Cleland versus The Queen <case>; [(1982) 151 CLR 1] at 9, 18-19, 31, 33-34; Foster versus The Queen (at -7).
 <case>; [(1989) 63 ALJR 139] at 140-142, 147 (cf 140); Foster versus The queen (at 8-10, -14, 19-20).
 [27] The King versus Lee (at 152-153); Wendo versus The Queen (at 565);
MacPherson versus The Queen (at 518-520); Cleland versus The Queen (at 19).
 [28] I emphasize that I am at this stage considering the exercise of the discretion to exclude, not the application of <case> of the [Crimes
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/).
 <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 278] at 293-296, 303, 308.
 [30] cf Ibid (at 298, 312).
 <case>; [(1970) 126 CLR 321] at 334-335; Bunning versus Cross <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54] at 74-75; Regina versus Edelsten [(1990) 21 NSWLR 542] at -556; Foster versus The Queen (at 7).
 [32] (at 78-80).
 [33] (at 65).
 [34] Regina versus Edelsten (at 558-559).
  <case>; <case>; [(1980) 31 ALR 257] at 317; Cleland versus The Queen (at 9, 34-34); Regina v
Steven John Walsh (CCA, 18 October 1990, unreported) per Gleeson CJ (at 10) and Samuels JA (at 15); Regina versus Zorad [(1990) 19 NSWLR 91] at 99.
 [38] (at 6).
 [39] (at 7-8).
 <case>; [(1995) 184 CLR 19.] [44] Such an onus remains on the accused under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s138.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) in relation to the evidence upon which the judge is being asked to exercise the discretion to exclude the evidence, even though (once the misconduct has been established) the Crown now bears the onus of persuading the trial judge that the evidence should nevertheless be admitted. This was made clear by the Law
Reform Commission: ALRC 26, vol 1, par 964.
 <case>; [(1957) 97 CLR 100] at 129; Regina versus O'Donoghue [(1988) 34 A Crim R ] at 401; Van der Meer versus The Queen <case>; [(1988) 82 ALR 10] at 18-19, 34.
 [(1978) 19 SASR 515] at 516-517.
 <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468] at 476.
 [48] This was a reference to the nature of the warning required by McKinney v The Queen. No such warning would otherwise have been required in the circumstances of the present case.
 [49] Regina versus R [(1989) 18 NSWLR 74] at 79-80;
Regina versus Tugaga [(1994) 74 A Crim R 190] at ; Regina versus Constantine Carusi (CCA, 17 January 1997, unreported) at 4.
See also Scott versus The Queen [[1989] AC 1242] at 1259.
 [50] M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] at -495; Regina versus McKnoulty [(1995) 77 A Crim R 333] at -339.
 <case>; [(1996) 141 ALR 70] at 82-85.
 [52] The coalescence in the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) of the issues of the reliability and the honesty of a witness's evidence - see the definition of "credibility" in the Dictionary of the Act - should not be permitted to blur the very real distinction which the common law drew between the two issues: cf Regina versus Heuston [(1995) 81 A Crim R 387] at .
 [53] cf Regina versus Dellapatrona (19993) [31 NSWLR 123] at 141.
 [54] The receipt of a reverse charge call by the appellant was not in dispute.
 [55] The relevant authorities were referred to in footnotes 23 and 24.
 [56] I have here adopted the various phrases used in M versus The Queen (at ).
 [57] Regina versus L (CCA, 3 July 1985, unreported) at 5-6; Regina versus Jeffrey
Colin Bamford (CCA, 23 July 1991, unreported) at 3,5.
 * * * 
