

Blayney Abattoirs P/L and Ors versus State of NSW and Anor [1996] NSWSC 278 (18
July 1996) 
Blayney Abattoirs Pty. Limited & Ors. v. State of New South Wales &
Anor /96; ALD 30106/95 July 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
Powell JA, Beazley JA, Waddell AJA 
CATCHWORDS: Administrative Law - Workers compensation - Compulsory insurance - Insurance premiums - Governor may fix - On recommendation of WorkCover Authority - Whether recommendation made - Whether order valid [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) [s.168](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s168.html) 
Administrative Law - WorkCover Authority - General Manager and Board of
Directors in exercise of their functions subject to control and direction of
Minister - Workers compensation - Compulsory insurance - Insurance premiums -
Recommendation to Governor - Whether recommendation a function subject to control and direction.

WorkCover Administration Act 1989 ss.9,12 
Administrative Law - WorkCover Authority - Delegation of functions - To an authorised person - General Manager an authorised person - Workers compensation - Compulsory insurance - Insurance premiums - Recommendation to
Governor - Whether recommendation a function - Whether delegated to General
Manager.

WorkCover Administration Act 1989 ss. 6,7,8,11,12.

Workers Compensation - Compulsory insurance - Insurance premiums - Governor may fix - On recommendation of WorkCover Authority - Whether recommendation validly made - Whether order validly made.
 [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) [ss.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s155.html),[168](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s168.html) 
WorkCover Administration Act 1989 ss 6-9, 12.

Ex Tempore/Reserved: Reserved 
Allowed/Dismissed: Dismissed 
JUDGMENT 
POWELL JA: The principal question for determination on this appeal from a Judgment delivered by Dunford J on 18 March 1996 when sitting in the Administrative Law Division is whether, as the Appellants contend, the Insurance Premiums Order (1995-96) (the "IPO"), which is said to have been made by the Governor in Council pursuant to the provisions of [s.168(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s168.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the "1987 Act") and published in the Government Gazette No. 73 of 16 June 1995, was invalid and of no effect. Although the primary basis on which the Appellant sopught to support this submission was that "the recommendation" upon which the Governor in Council purported to act was itself not validly made, that submission itself was sought to be supported upon a variety of grounds of which, for present purposes, the following appear to be more important: - the making of such a recommendation was not "a function" of the WorkCover
Authority ("the Authority") and, thus, was not a matter in respect of which the General Manager or Board of Directors of the Authority was subject to the control and direction of the Minister; even if the making of such a recommendation was such "a function" of the
Authority, the direction which the relevant Minister - the Honourable the
Attorney-General - in fact gave - that is a direction as to fixing a premium rate involving an average increase of 2.5% - was not a direction as to the making of a recommendation of the kind which the Authority was required to, or should, make under s.168(1) of the 1987 Act; notwithstanding which the Board treated the Minister's direction as if it had no alternative but to pass a resolution echoing the Minister's direction; alternatively, if the making of a recommendation is to be regarded as subject to the control and direction of the Minister, and if the direction is to be interpreted as a direction to make a recommendation embodying the average increase of 2.5%, the Authority failed to give effect, or valid effect, to the Minister's direction; neither the "circulatory resolution" of the Board of Authority of 9 June , nor the "confirmatory resolution" of the Board of the Authority on 13
June 1995 - the former of which was, in any event, held by Dunford J to be invalid for failure to observe the procedural rules of the Authority - was in substance, or in form, a recommendation to the Governor, and each was null and void and beyond power, and incapable of ratification or confirmation by the
Board; even if the resolution of 13 June 1995 could be treated as being in substance or in form a recommendation to the Governor, it was not, so the submission ran, a recommendation as to the manner in which a premium payable by an employer for a policy of insurance should be calculated and, thus, was not a recommendation of the type required by s.168(1) of the 1987 Act; it was not open to Dunford J, so the submission ran, to do as his Honour did in his Judgment, that is, to flesh out the resolution by incorporating into it the content of previous decisions of the Authority or the results of actions taken by the Authority's officers; the General Manager of the Authority had no authority, as such, either, to make the submission to the Minister - to which submission I will later return - dated 9 June 1995 and still less to make any valid recommendation on behalf of the Authority because he was not "the Authority" for the purposes of making a recommendation to the Governor under s.168(1) and he was not, in any event, purporting to make a recommendation to the Governor by virtue of his own office, but was communicating to the Minister the effect, as he saw it, of the purported resolution of the Board of 9 June 1995; the General Manager's unauthorised submission of 9 June 1995 was not adopted by a resolution of the Board and thus was not capable of providing a valid foundation for the Order attached to it,which was not, in any event, forwarded to the Governor in Council; the Board's resolution of 13 June 1995 which did not refer to the General Manager's submission of 9 June 1995 was ineffective to give the General Manager's submission of 9 June 1995 or anything in it, the status of a valid recommendation under s.168(1); the Board's resolution of 13 June 1995 was not a valid confirmatory resolution amounting to a recommendation by the Authority for the purposes of s.168(1) because the purported resolution of 9 June 1995 which it purported to confirm was invalid for the reasons expressed above.

The various submissions which I have set out above do not represent the totality of the submissions which, with greater or lesser enthusiasm, counsel for the Appellants sought to advance on the hearing of this appeal; however, they do provide a representative sample.

I confess that whenever, whether as a trial Judge or an appellate Judge, I have, in the past, encountered submissions which, as do those which I have set out above, reflect what I might call "the Gatling gun approach" I have, more often than not, succumbed to a mood of black despair - one is not to know whether such submissions are the result of a sudden rush of blood to the head, or of a perfervid imagination, on the part of counsel, or whether they merely reflect counsel's lack of confidence in any of his submissions and of his
Micawber-like belief that, if all the submissions are advanced, there is a possibility that one might strike home. Be all that as it may, it will be necessary, later, to return to consider these various submissions.

Not content to defend the Judgment below upon the grounds recorded by Dunford
J in his Judgment, the Executive and the Authority filed a Notice of
Contention in which they sought to support the Judgment below upon the following, further, grounds: - the Court should have also (sic) in its discretion, refused relief because of the technical nature of the breaches alleged and because of the intervention of third party interests; sub-section 8(2) of the WorkCover Act itself gave the General Manager of the Authority, authority to recommend to the Governor adoption of the final form of the IPO; alternatively to 2, the ministerial directive of 8 June 1995 authorised the General Manager of the Authority to recommend to the Governor adoption to the final form of the IPO.

Whether it will be necessary to return to consider the validity, or otherwise, of these grounds will depend upon the view which one takes of the various grounds which the Appellants have sought to raise in support of their appeal.

Although, in the normal course, it would be appropriate now to record, in their appropriate chronological sequence, the particular facts which give rise to the questions which were debated before Dunford J, and which have been debated on the hearing of this appeal, the fact that, in the course of their submissions, counsel for the Appellants have sought to lay stress upon what has been described as the "legislative history" of some of the statutory provisions which call for consideration, suggests to me that it might be convenient to include in any narrative of the relevant facts, those facts which deal with the "legislative history".

If, as I propose to do, I adopt that course, then one commences one's narrative on 1 July 1926 upon which day the provisions of the Workers
Compensation Act 1926 ("the principal Act") came into operation. That Act made important and extensive changes in the pre-existing law. For present purposes it is to be noted that that Act introduced compulsory insurance of liability for the payment of workers compensation; provided for the licensing of insurers to carry on workers compensation insurance business on a competitive basis; and constituted a specialised tribunal, the Workers Compensation
Commission ("the Commission"), for the hearing and determining of workers compensation matters; and, in substance (s.41), conferred upon the Commission control over its own finances.

The Workers Compensation Act and Workmens Compensation (Broken Hill) Act
Act 1942 amended the provisions of the Workers Compensation Act so as (inter alia) to extend the range of circumstances in which an employer could be liable to pay workers compensation to his employees, and, as a correlative, to provide (s.5) that any policy of insurance against liability being maintained at the commencement of the Act should be deemed to insure the employer against any additional liability to which he might become liable during the currency of the policy under any of the amendments made by the amending Act. Section 5 also provided: - "The employer shall be liable to pay to the insurer additional premium in respect of such additional liability at rates fixed by the Governor upon the recommendation of the Commission and published in the Gazette.
 
Any investigation or inquiry which the Commission may deem desirable for the purpose of collecting data upon which to found such recommendation shall be deemed to be an investigation or inquiry under the Workers Compensation Act 1926-1941." 
After the coming into force of the provisions of the 1942 amending Act, Perdriau J, the then Chairman of the Commission, on the application of the majority of the insurers then licensed to carry on the business of workers compensation insurance in New South Wales, carried out an inquiry and investigation pursuant to the provisions of s.5 of the amending Act. For present purposes it is not necessary to consider in any detail the report which Perdriau J presented to the relevant Minister in May 1943, it being sufficient, for present purposes, to record that, among the recommendations made by the Chairman, was a recommendation for the adoption of a scheme to control workers compensation insurance premium rates along the lines of the English scheme, the English Assurance Companies Act 1909 as amended. 
The Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act 1945 introduced into the principal
Act Section 30A. That section provided for there to be a committee called "the
Insurance Premiums Committee" ("the Committee"), which Committee should have, and might exercise and perform, "the powers, authorities, duties and functions conferred and imposed on (it) by (that) section", and which Committee should consist of three members, the Chairman for the time being of the Commission virtute officii, one member appointed by the Government to represent the interest of licensed insurers, and one member appointed by the Governor on the nomination of the Minister.

Section 30(A)(21)(a) provided that it should be the duty of the Committee to prepare and to present to the Governor within 6 months after the commencement of the amending Act a scheme which should provide for the fixing and adjustment, from time to time, of the rates of premium payable in respect of policies of insurance referred to in s.18 in the Act. Sub-section 21(b) provided that any such scheme might provide for the alteration by the
Committee of certain aspects of the scheme; sub-section 21(c) provided that any such scheme might be revoked or amended from time to time by a subsequent scheme prepared by the Committee and presented to the Governor; while sub- section 21(d) provided that any scheme prepared by the Committee and presented to the Governor should be published in the Gazette and take effect from the date of the publication or from a later date to be specified in the scheme.

The first such scheme appears to have been prepared before, and presented to the Governor on, 25 June 1945, following which it was published in the
Supplement to the Government Gazette on 29 June 1945. The scheme provided, inter alia, for insurance premium rates to be fixed at a maximum set out in the schedule to the scheme, such fixed rates being described as "tariff rates". The schedule provided for an extended number of classifications of employment, there being some 537 general classifications, some 13 or so classifications in the "mining schedule" and some 11 classifications in the "vessels schedule". The scheme also provided that the tariff rates - which were expressed as an amount for each [sterling]100.0.0 of wages paid - might be adjusted and new classifications of employment added from time to time by the Committee by way of amendment to schedule 1 of the scheme.

Only because it provides an explanation for some of the vagaries of the numbering of the varying provisions of the principal Act, I record that the
Workers Compensation (Insurance) Act 1973 inserted after s.30A of the principal Act a new section s.30AA providing for further powers of the
Committee, those powers being directed towards the provisions which might from time to time be included in any scheme.

The Workers Compensation (Further Amendment) Act 1975 further amended the principal Act in a number of respects. So far as might be thought relevant to the present case, they were: - the membership of the Committee was increased from 3 to 5, the additional members to be one who was to be appointed by the Governor to represent the interests of employers and the other who was to be appointed by the Governor to represent the interests of workers;
Section 30A was amended (inter alia) by deleting therefrom sub-s. 21 (see p. 8 (above)); there was then inserted a new section, s.30AB, the terms of which in substance - but not completely - reflected the terms of the previous s.30A(21).

The [Compensation Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/) and the [Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/wca1984335/), cognate
Acts which were assented to on the same day, 28 June 1984, effected substantial changes to the manner in which, prior thereto, the provisions of the principal Act had operated and been applied.

The [Compensation Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/) provided for the establishment of the Compensation Court which, by [s.15(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/s15.html), was to have the jurisdiction vested in it by that Act or under any other Act.
The [Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/wca1984335/) omitted the provisions of [Part
IV](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/wca1984335/index.html#p4) of the principal Act which provisions had (inter alia) provided for the establishment of the Commission and the jurisdiction of the Commission, but inserted in Part VII of the principal Act a new section, section 53G, which section, in substance, conferred upon the Compensation Court the jurisdiction formerly held by the Commission pursuant to the provisions of s.36 of the principal Act.

Although the provisions of s.41 of the principal Act had, in effect, conferred on the Commission control of its own finances, [s.39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/s39.html) of the [Compensation Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/), coupled with the provisions of [ss.
](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/s31.html)-[40](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/cca1984225/s40.html) of the principal Act, which were substituted for the former ss. 31-40, and the amendments to ss. 41 and 42 of the principal Act, which were made by the [Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/wca1984335/) conferred on the State Compensation Board, which was constituted by the provisions of s.31 of the principal Act, the function of (inter alia) raising the funds necessary for the operation of the Compensation Court, which funds, so it would seem, were to be remitted to or under the control of, the relevant
Minister.

The State Compensation Board, which was constituted as the result of the amendments made to the principal Act by the [Workers Compensation (Amendment)
Act 1984](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/wca1984335/), was, pursuant to the provisions of s.31(2) of the principal Act as amended, deemed to be a statutory body representing the Crown, and was made (except in relation to the content of any report or recommendation by it to the Minister) subject to the control and direction of the Minister in the exercise of its functions. The legislature's purpose in constituting the State Compensation
Board appears to have been to divide the functions formerly carried on by the
Commission, the judicial functions of the Commission being vested in the
Compensation Court, and what might be called the administrative functions of the Commission, as, for example, the licensing of insurers, authorising employers to be self insurers, administering the Uninsured Liability Scheme, and the like, being vested in the State Compensation Board.

It should be noted that although the [Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/wca1984335/) amended the provisions of s.30A of the principal Act so as to provide, first, that the
Committee should consist of 6 members, and, second, that 5 of those 6 members should be members of the State Compensation Board, it did not otherwise significantly amend the provisions of s.30A; in particular, it did not provide that the Committee was subject to the direction of the Minister.

The Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act 1985 (inter alia) amended the principal Act by omitting s.30AB and by substituting therefor a new s.30AB reading as follows: - "Calculation of premiums 
AB. (1) The governor may, by an order made on the recommendation of the Insurance Premiums Committee and published in the Gazette, fix the manner in which the premium payable by an employer (or a person who proposes to become an employer) for a policy of insurance or indemnity shall be calculated, whether by reference only to annual rates or otherwise.
 an order under this section shall - take effect on and from the date of its publication in the Gazette or a later date specified in the order; and apply to and in respect of policies of insurance or indemnity which are to be or have been issued or renewed so as to take effect while the order is in force.
 
An order under this section may - apply generally or be limited in its application by reference to specified exceptions or factors; apply differently according to different factors of a specified kind; or authorise any matter or thing to be from time to time determined, applied or regulated by any specified person or body, or may do any combination of those things.
 
The regulations may make provision for or with respect to excepting policies of insurance or indemnity of a specified class from orders under this section." 
The [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) ("the new Act") repealed the principal Act in its entirety. Although the new Act effected substantial changes in the scheme which had operated under the provisions of the principal Act, it should be noted that this was not so in relation to the former Committee and the former State Compensation Board, the new Act making provision (Part 7 Division 2) for there to be an Insurance Premiums Committee to be constituted in the same manner as had been the former Insurance Premiums Committee (s.165) and for the publication of insurance premiums orders in the same manner, and having the same effect, as had been provided under the former s.30AB (s.168) and, as well, for there to be a State Compensation Board - to be a statutory body representing the Crown and (except in relation to the contents of a report or recommendation made by it to the Minister) to be subject to the control and direction of the Minister in the exercise of its functions, which functions, if not identical with, were substantially similar to, the functions of the State Compensation Board under the principal Act.

The Workers Compensation (Amendment) Act 1988 amended the new Act in a number of respects of which for present purposes it is only necessary to note: - that s.165 was amended so as to provide that the Insurance Premiums
Committee should be comprised of 8 members, of whom 7 should be the directors of the Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Authority of New South Wales which was to replace the State Compensation Board which was to be abolished and the eighth being a public servant appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Minister; and, as I have just indicated, by abolishing the State Compensation Board and by establishing the Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Authority of New
South Wales which was to take its place.

The amendments to Division 1 of Part 9 of the new Act included the substitution for the previous ss. 248-253 inclusive of the following provisions: - "Division 1 - [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of Authority and Board of Directors [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of Authority . (1) There is constituted by this Act a corporation with the corporate name of the Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Authority of New South Wales.
 
The Authority is, for the purposes of any Act, a statutory body representing the Crown.
 [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of Board of Directors . (1) There shall be a Board of Directors of the Authority.
 
The Board shall consist of - the General Manager of the Authority; and part-time directors, being persons appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Minister.
 
The persons recommended by the Minister must have such managerial, commercial or other qualifications or experience as the Minister considers necessary to enable the Board to exercise its functions.
 
Schedule 3 has effect with respect to the directors and procedure of the Board.
 
Board to determine policies of Authority . (1) The Board has the function of determining the policies of the Authority.
 in exercising that function, the Board shall ensure that the activities of the Authority are carried out properly and efficiently.
 
The Board has such other functions as are conferred or imposed on it by or under this or any other Act.
 
Executive officers of Authority . (1) The Governor may appoint a General Manager, and 2 Deputy general Managers, of the Authority.
 
Schedule 4 has effect with respect to the General Manager and Deputy General Managers.
 
Functions of executive officers . (1) The affairs of the Authority shall be managed and controlled by the General Manager of the Authority in accordance with the policies of the Board.
 
Any act, matter or thing done in the name of, or on behalf of, the Authority by the General Manager shall be taken to have been done by the Authority.
 
A Deputy General Manager of the Authority has, subject to any relevant directions given by the Board, such responsibilities in connection with the affairs of the Authority as the General Manager from time to time determines.
 
The General Manager and Deputy General Managers have such other functions as are conferred or imposed on them by or under this or any other Act.
 
Ministerial control . The General Manager of the Authority and the Board are, in the exercise of their respective functions, subject to the control and direction of the Minister." 
The WorkCover Administration Act 1989 and the WorkCover Legislation (Amendment) Act 1989 amended the scheme for the operation of the new Act which had been set up only the previous year, first, by providing for the establishment of the WorkCover Authority of New South Wales, which was (inter alia) to take over the functions previously exercised by the Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Authority, and, second, by repealing ss. 165-167 inclusive of the new Act, which sections provided for the establishment and constitution of the Insurance Premiums Committee, and by amending s.168 of the new Act so as to provide for the making of insurance premiums orders on the recommendation of the WorkCover Authority instead of the Insurance Premiums Committee.

For present purposes, the relevant provisions of the WorkCover Administration
Act 1989 are as follows: - "3. (2) In this Act: a reference to a function includes a reference to a power, authority and duty; and a reference to the exercise of a function includes, where the function is a duty, a reference to the performance of the duty.
 
PART 2 - THE WORKCOVER AUTHORITY OF NEW 
SOUTH WALES 
Division 1 - [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of Authority [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) of Authority . (1) There is constituted by this Act a corporation with the corporate name of the WorkCover Authority of New South Wales.
 
The Authority is, for the purposes of any Act, a statutory body representing the Crown.
 
Division 2 - Management of Authority 
Board of Directors . (1) There shall be a Board of Directors of the Authority.
 
The Board is to consist of 7 directors, being the General Manager of the Authority; and part-time directors appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Minister.
 
The persons recommended for appointment by the Minister must have such managerial, commercial or other qualifications or experience as the Minister considers necessary to enable the Board to exercise its functions.
 ..........
 
Board of Directors to determine policies of Authority . (1) The Board of Directors has the function of determining the policies of the Authority.
 
In exercising that function, the Board must, as far as practicable, ensure that the activities of the Authority are carried out properly and efficiently.
 
General Manager . (1) The Governor may appoint a General Manager of the Authority.
 ..........
 
General Manager to manage affairs of Authority . (1) The affairs of the Authority are to be managed and controlled by the General Manager of the Authority in accordance with the policies of the Board of Directors.
 
Any act, matter or thing done in the name of, or on behalf of, the Authority by the General Manager is to be taken to have been done by the Authority.
 
Ministerial control . The General Manager of the Authority and the Board of Directors are, in the exercise of their respective functions, subject to the control and direction of the Minister.
 ..........
 
Delegation of functions.
 . (1) The Authority may delegate to an authorised person any of the functions of the Authority, other than this power of delegation.
 
A delegate may sub-delegate to an authorised person any function delegated by the Authority if the delegate is authorised in writing to do so by the Authority.
 
In this section, `authorised person' means: an officer of the Authority; a person of a class prescribed by the regulations or of a class approved by the Board of Directors.
 
Division 3 - Functions of Authority 
General Functions.
 . (1) The Authority has such functions as are conferred or imposed on it by or under: this Act; or the workers compensation legislation; ..........
 
In exercising its functions, the Authority must: ..........
 ensure the financial viability and efficient operation of the workers compensation insurance arrangements; and ..........
 
SCHEDULE 1 - PROVISIONS RELATING TO DIRECTORS AND PROCEDURE OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE AUTHORITY ..........
 
General procedure . The procedure for the calling of meetings of the Board and for the conduct of business at those meeting is, subject to this Act and the regulations, to be determined by the Board.
 ..........
 
Transaction of business outside meetings or by telephone etc.
 . (1) The Board may, if it thinks fit, transact any of its business by the circulation of papers among all the directors of the Board for the time being, and a resolution in writing approved in writing by a majority of those directors is to be taken to be a decision of the Board.
 
The Board may, if it thinks fit, transact any of its business at a meeting at which directors (or some directors) participate by telephone, closed-circuit television or other means, but only if any director who speaks on a matter before the meeting can be heard by the other directors.
 
For the purposes of: the approval of a resolution under subclause (1); or a meeting held in accordance with subclause (2), the Chairperson and each director have the same voting rights as they have at an ordinary meeting of the Board.
 
A resolution approved under subclause (1) is, subject to the regulations, to be recorded in the minutes of the meetings of the Board.
 
Papers may be circulated among directors for the proposes of subclause (1) by facsimile or other transmission of the information in the papers concerned." 
Section 168 of the new Act, as amended by the WorkCover Legislation (Amendment) Act 1989, is as follows: - "Insurance premiums orders (1) The Governor may by an order made on the recommendation of the Authority and published in the Gazette, fix the manner in which the premium payable by an employer (or a person who proposes to become an employer) for a policy of insurance shall be calculated, whether by reference only to annual rates or otherwise.
 
An insurance premiums order shall: take effect on and from the date of its publication in the Gazette or a later date specified in the order; and apply to and in respect of policies of insurance which are to be or have been issued or renewed so as to take effect while the order is in force.
 
An insurance premiums order may: apply generally or be limited in its application by reference to specified exceptions or factors; apply differently according to different factors of a specified kind; or authorise any matter or thing to be from time to time determined, applied or regulated by any specific person or body.
 or may do any combination of those things.
 
Without limiting the generality of subsection (3), an insurance premiums order may provide for the payment of increased premiums by employers who (under any specified or class of contract of employment, industrial agreement, award or other arrangement) are or may become liable to make payments to workers or their dependants in respect of injuries or deaths (including payments as a supplement or an alternative to the periodic or lump sum payments of compensation under this Act).
 
The following policies of insurance are exempt from insurance premiums orders; * * * * * * * * * policies of insurance deemed to be held by an employer under section 158 in respect of trainees; policies of insurance of any class exempted by the regulations from orders under this section.
 * * * * * * * * *" 
What I have recorded above - which is far more extensive than the material upon which the Appellants sought to rely for the purpose - as best as I have been able to ascertain it, constitutes what might be called the legislative history of the legislation insofar as it is relevant to the present appeal. The manner in which the Appellants seek to rely upon that legislative history, and its effect in the present appeal, are matters which should be left for the time being. 
Although it is not clear that this was so, such material as is before the
Court would suggest that it is at least likely that, at least since 1987, when the new Act came into force, the rates for workers compensation insurance premiums have been reviewed on an annual basis and a fresh insurance premium order published in each year during the month of June - policies of insurance in respect of liability to pay workers compensation traditionally being renewed as and from 4 p.m. on the 30 June in each year. But even if that be not so, such material as there is before the Court would suggest that it is more likely than not that, at least from the time when the WorkCover Authority was constituted, and the power to make recommendations as to the making of insurance premium orders was conferred on it, the WorkCover Authority has reviewed insurance premium rates and recommended the making of fresh insurance premium orders on an annual basis.

The process which is gone through prior to the making of a recommendation for the making of a fresh insurance premium order appears to be a lengthy one extending over the better part of 6 months (see Appeal Book p.45).

It would seem (see Appeal Book pp. 2-3) that, prior to December 1993, the
WorkCover Authority had established two sub-committees, a Premium Sub-
Committee and a Benefit Sub-Committee for the purpose of making recommendations as to actions which should, or might, be taken by the
Authority in relation to one or other of its various functions. However, at the meeting of the Board of Directors of the Authority held on 13 December , the Board, on the recommendation of the General Manager (Mr. I. Ramsay) resolved to establish a Premiums and Benefits Sub-Committee to consider premium rates, scheme valuations and benefit proposals, such new sub-committee to comprise all members of the Board and such new sub-committee to take over the work of the former two sub-committees.

Thereafter, on 22 June 1994, his Excellency the then Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council, and on the recommendation of the WorkCover
Authority, made an order (Appeal Book pp. 4-44) fixing the manner in which the premium payable by an employer for a policy of insurance was to be calculated, that order to commence at 4 p.m. on 30 June 1994 and to apply to and in respect of all policies of insurance issued or renewed so as to take effect on or after 4 p.m. on 30 June 1994 and before 4 p.m. on 30 June 1995, with the proviso that, if, before the latter time, no fresh insurance premium order had been made, the order would apply to and in respect of policies taking effect on or after that latter time pending the making of a fresh insurance premiums order.

Although the manner of calculation of any relevant premium set out in the order was comparatively short - it provided for the application of one or other of two formulae - the meaning to be attributed to certain phrases in the formulae and the values to be allotted to various elements in the formulae were to be ascertained by reference to a number of detailed Schedules to the order - such Schedules dealing with (inter alia) the basic tariff premium, experience premium, and the like - and by reference to an extensive table -
Table A - which classified various types of business, or industrial, activity and provided for the basic rate of premium payable in respect of each type of business, or industrial, activity - in most cases, the basic rate was to be calculated by reference to a reasonable estimate of the monetary value of all wages payable to workers by the relevant employer in respect of the relevant period of insurance, while in other cases, other methods of fixing premium were adopted - thus, the basic rates of premium in relation to professional football clubs was determined by a fixed sum per capita per game, a similar approach being applied in respect of boxing and wrestling contests, while the premiums in relation to the drivers of taxi cabs or hire cars were to be calculated at the rate of a fixed sum per shift.

Such material as is before the Court on this appeal would suggest that, although the values to be attributed to various elements in the formulae set out in the order and the supporting Schedules and although the basic tariff rates set out in Table A might vary a little from time to time, the form of the order as I have described it was one which remained in substance the same as from that time when such orders commenced to be made.

The "Premium Rating Timetable - 1995" (Appeal Book p.45) which appears to have been prepared for the Authority by a Mr. McInnes, the Manager, Premiums
Actuarial and Statistics, of the Authority, dealt in some detail with the various steps to be taken by the staff of the Authority, the Premiums and
Benefits Committee and the Board prior to the submission to the Executive
Council of the Authority's recommendations for the year 1995-1996. Among those steps was a meeting of the Premium and Benefits Committee which was scheduled for 1 March 1995. The minutes that meeting (Appeal Book pp.48-49) record (inter alia) the following: - "1. RESULTS OF DECEMBER QUARTERLY PERFORMANCE MONITORING 
John Walsh briefed the Committee on the results of the December quarter monitoring.
 
The Committee noted that, overall, there is a 20% increase in total payments over the previous year, with section 66 payments increasing by 40%.
 ..........
 . PREMIUM SCHEME OPTIONS 1995/96 
Rod McInnes and John Walsh briefed the Committee on options for the 1995 policy renewal year, on the basis of a probable situation at 30 June 1995 of a low level of accumulated reserved (sic) and a net cost of claims in excess of recent average premium rate.
 
The Committee asked management to further investigate options for a premium rate increase to equate the average rate with current claims costs, one part way between the current 1.8% and current claims costs and one reflecting no change. The committee also sought further work on the options amending the premium formula and specifically the large claim limit (of $100,000) and the `S" formula." 
A second meeting of the Premiums and Benefits Committee was scheduled for 29 March 1996. At that meeting, the Committee having considered a number of "options" available to lower the costs of the "Scheme" proceeded to consider "premium rate scenarios". The minutes of that meeting (Appeal Book pp. 51-54) record (inter alia) the following: - "Premium Rate Scenarios 
The Committee considered the various premium rate options outlined in Coopers & Lybrand's paper. `Options for WorkCover Tariff Premium Rates'. The Committee asked that further analysis be done in relation to options 1a, 1b and 3a for the next meeting. These options would target premium rates of 2.2, 2.4 and 2.2 (with a fixed 25% across the board increase) respectively.
 
Options for Experience Premiums 
The Committee indicated its preferred option is option ii) ie increase the large claim limit to $150,000 and increase the constant in the dominator of the credibility formula to 180,000.
 
Further consideration will e given to all these matters at the final meeting of the Premium & Benefits Committee meeting schedule for Thursday, 27 April 1995, at 3.00 p.m. in the Board Room level 11." 
Agenda Item 5 for the meeting of the Premium and Benefits Committee which was held on 27 April 1995 was - "Premiums rates for 1995/96 
Overall average rate 
Industry tariff rates 
Premium formula constants `F' factors." 
In relation to that agenda item, Mr. McInnes had prepared a submission (Appeal Book pp. 60-62) which was in the following terms: - "BACKGROUND 
WorkCover has targeted a average premium rate of 1.8% for the past four years. Claims cost have increased substantially and net Scheme costs are now 2.62% for 1994/95 and are projected to increase to 2.78% for 1995/96. All reserve funds previously allocated to provide premium rate stability have now been utilised.
 
CURRENT POSITION . Overall Premium Rates and Tariff Rates 
At its last meeting the Committee asked management to further develop three scenarios.
 .2% average incorporating movement between pools reflecting latest experience.
 .4% average incorporating movement between pools reflecting latest experience.
 .2% average with no movement between pools.
 
These scenarios are detailed in Coopers and Lybrands Executive Summary Report (see Agenda item 2) - pages 21 to 25 and Appendix C (which nets out the individual tariff premium rates for each scenario).
 
A premium rate of 2.2% or 2.4% will not be sufficient to fully fund projected Scheme costs for 1995/96 of 2.78%. The shortfall will amount to a projected loss of $300M or $200M respectively. Hence the projected financial position of the Scheme at 30/6/96 would be negative $235M (using 2.2%) and negative $135M (2.4%), compared to the 30/6/95 projection of $65M. (All figures based on central estimate and excluding ICF and IGF liabilities).
 
The scenarios incorporating movements between pools have the advantage of maintaining user pays principles of adjusting an industry's rate up or down if warranted by the industry's claims experience. The disadvantage is that those industries which move up a pool rate will face a substantial increase: approximately 50% (2.2% average) and 65% (2.4% average). The third scenario involving an across the board 25% increase avoids this problem but introduces anomalies and subsidies which may take some years to correct (as further premium rate increases will almost certainly be required).
 
The premium rates can be readily adjusted within these scenarios to any average rate selected by the Committee.
 . Experience Premiums 
Coopers and Lybrand have examined the impact of the proposed change to the average and other factors on the various components of the experience premium calculation and other formula constants. The results of their analysis is detailed in their Executive Summary Report (see agenda item 2) - pages 25 to 29.
 
COMMENT 
Coopers and Lybrand has also completed analysis of the overall impact of the three scenarios on individual employers given certain situations (copy attached). This analysis indicates that in most cases the impact of the rate increases will be mitigated by their experiences (assuming their experience is stable). It also indicates that in worst case situations employers will face increases substantially greater than the average. These cases will be exceptional but they will occur.
 
In relation to the hindsight `F' factors for 1994/95. Coopers have proposed `F' factors which will result in an average of a 1.8% premium rate for 1994/95. The current rate being achieved is 1.87%. If adopted these factors would result in significant return premiums to larger employers. In the current circumstances this is not considered appropriate.
 
It is therefore recommended that the `F' factor be set about current rates and be aligned with the proposed initial factors of 1995/96. Assuming a 2.2% average, these are: -- 
F1 3.1 
F2 1.8 
F3 1.7 
RECOMMENDATION 
That Committee select an overall average rate of 1995/96 approve individual tariff premium rates for the relevant average.
 determine `F' factors and premium calculation constants." 
The minutes of the meeting of the Premium and Benefits Committee (Appeal Book pp. 56-58) held on 27 April 1995 record (inter alia) the following: - "5. Premium Rates for 1995/96 
The Committee considered the recommendations contained in the submission received from the Manager, Premium Actuarial and Statistics.
 
IT WAS RESOLVED that the Committee adopt the following recommendations: i) An overall average premium rate of 2.2% for 1995/96 incorporating movement between pools reflecting latest experience (ie option 1).
 iii) `F' factors remaining unchanged from current factors.
 iv) A $150,000 large claim limit.
 v) The new experience adjusted premiums being calculated using the new credibility formula, in which the constant in the denominator is 180000.
 vi) The maximum increase which an employer would be subject to being limited to 100%.
 vii) The limit for the two times rules being increased from $75,000 to $100,000.
 
The Committee in adopting an average premium rate of 2.2% for 1995/96 noted that this would not be sufficient to fully fund Scheme liabilities for 1995/96 but that for the purpose of providing premium stability to NSW employees considered that 2.2% represented an appropriate balance between these objectives.
 
The Committee also considered that if strategies to address the increase in the Scheme costs were not successfully implemented further premium rate increases would need to be considered." 
The Board of the WorkCover Authority met on 8 May 1995. The minutes of the meeting of the Board (Appeal Book pp.63-65) record (inter alia) the following: - "4. PROPOSED PREMIUM SCHEME FOR POLICY YEAR 1995/96 
The Board considered the Premium and Benefits Committee's proposed Premium Scheme for policy year 1995/6 
IT WAS RESOLVED that the Board approve: i) The adoption of the valuation and liability projections from Coopers and Lybrand's report while noting the review of their work completed by Tillinghast.
 ii) The retention of a claims provision based on the Coopers and Lybrand central estimate of liability and the release of the prudential margin.
 iii) The removal of the liability provision for the Insurance Contribution Fund and the Insurers Guarantee Fund and for these funds to be funded as envisaged by the legislation, through a regular levy on premiums.
 iv) The implementation of an Insurance Premiums Scheme for policy year 1995/96 with an overall average premium rate of 2.2. per cent as summarised in attachment C accompanying the submission.
 v) The introduction of structural changes to the tariff classifications as recommended by the Premiums and Benefits Committee.
 vi) The changes to Dust Diseases Levy rates and ICF levy rates as proposed by the Premiums and Benefits Committee." 
It would seem that,following the meeting of the Board of the WorkCover Authority, a submission to the Minister was prepared. That submission (Appeal Book pp. 68-72), which bears the signatures of the General Manager, of Mr. McInnes and of a Mr. Marsh, the Manager, Insurance and Fund Management Division, and which appears to have been forwarded to the Minister on 10 May 1995 contained (inter alia) the following: - "The key features of the proposed Premium Scheme for 1995/96 and the financial position of the WorkCover Scheme as at 30 June 1995 are: * The allocation of a fully funded claims provision of $3540m at 30 June 1995 based on the actuaries' central estimate of liability. This provision (unlike last year's) will not include an allowance for a prudential margin or Insurance Contribution Fund and Insurers Guarantee Fund liabilities. This represents a substantial increase in liabilities at 30 June 1994 of $2,570m (on an equivalent basis). The Scheme is projected to have net assets of $55m at 30 June 1995 which will be retained as contingency reserves.
 * Scheme costs have increased substantially: current costs for the 1994/95 year are projected at 2.62 per cent of wages and are projected to further increase to 2.78 per cent for 1996/96.
 * The structure of the proposed Premium Scheme for 1995/96 remains essentially unchanged.
 * The proposed average target premium rate of 2.2 per cent of wages represents an average increase of 23 per cent over the current average of 1.8 per cent.
 * The preposed average rate of 2.2 per cent is significantly less than projected Scheme costs for 1995/96 of 2.78 per cent. This equates to a shortfall of approximately $300m. Hence by 30 June 1996 the Scheme might be expected to have a deficit of $235m.
 * Individual industry rates were revised based on the most recent claims experience data. Of the 106 industry classifications, 15 (with deteriorating experience) will fact increased of approximately 50 per cent, 77 (with static experience) will have an average increase of approximately 23 per cent and 14 (with improving experience) will have no significant change.
 * As a result of industry reviews, new rates or rating structures were introduced for a small number of industries." ..........
 "WorkCover is liaising with Parliamentary Counsel to draft the Insurance Premiums Order and related amendments to Regulations to implement the proposed Scheme. It is expected that the Exco will be available for the Minister's signature in the week ending 2 June 1995. It is imperative that the Order be executed prior to 30 June 1994 and preferable that it is considerably sooner to allow insurers time to implement the necessary changes to their systems. WorkCover has targeted the Order for gazettal on 9 June 1995." ..........
 "RECOMMENDATION 
That the Minister: 
Note the current financial position of the WorkCover Scheme.
 
Approve in principle the proposed Premium Scheme for 1995/96 and the drafting of the Insurance Premiums Order and related Regulations to implement the proposed premium scheme for the Minister's final approval.
 
Advise the Premier (and Cabinet) of the proposed Premium Scheme for 1995/96, the current financial position of the WorkCover Scheme and proposed cost containment strategies." 
The submission bears the following note, apparently made by the Minister on 12 May 1995: "I agree, but I think an option should be put forward (as informally discussed) to put a ceiling on increases on those industries which, having regard to injury records/experience, are likely to face a particularly large increase in premiums. Could this be further explored." 
It would appear (see Appeal Book p.139) that, notwithstanding the views of the Board of the WorkCover Authority, Treasury was of the view that, instead of an average premium rate of 2.2%, an average premium rate of 2.5% should be adopted for the year 1995/96.

The matter appears to have been considered by Cabinet at its meeting on 5 June , at which time Cabinet approved an average premium rate for 1995/96 of .5% of wages with retention of current user pays principles (Appeal Book p.140).

On the following day, (see Appeal Book p.155) the Parliamentary Counsel, to whom there had earlier been submitted a draft Insurance Premiums Order and form of Regulation intended to give effect to the decision of the Board of the
WorkCover Authority of 8 May 1995, signed a formal opinion to the effect that the draft Order and Regulation might legally be made.

On 8 June 1995, the Minister forwarded to the General Manager of the WorkCover
Authority - in the letter described as the "Managing Director" - a letter which omitting formal parts was in the following terms (Appeal Book p.148): - "I, Jeff William Shaw, Attorney General and Minister for Industrial Relations, with responsibility for the administration of the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) and WorkCover Administration Act 1989 and in accordance with my powers under Section 9 of the WorkCover Administration Act, hereby direct the General Manager of the WorkCover Authority and the Board of Director (sic) of the WorkCover Authority to resolve that the premium rate for 1995/96 shall be an average premium of 2.5% of wages with the normal experience premium arrangements to apply." 
On 8 June 1995, a Mr. Knight, who appears to have been a legal officer in the Legislation and Advisings Branch of the WorkCover Authority, wrote to the Parliamentary Counsel as follows (Appeal Book p.246): - "Re: [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) - Insurance Premiums Order (1995-96) 
Attached is a revised Table A to the Order, based on the Cabinet determined premium rate announced yesterday afternoon (ie: average of 2.5% of wages, rather than 2.2%). Kindly amend the Order supplied on 6 June, and contract either Paul Knight when available for pick up." 
The "revised Table A to the Order" was a copy of the Table A to the Order which had been supplied on 6 June, with a number of handwritten amendments to the "basic rates of premium" appearing in the earlier Table.

On 9 June 1995, there was prepared, and forwarded to all members of the Board save one who was then in New Zealand - a form of Memorandum (Appeal Book p.143) and a form of proposed Resolution of the Board (Appeal Book p.142) the latter of which was in the following terms: - "PROPOSED RESOLUTION OF THE BOARD 
The Board resolved, at the May Board Meeting, to recommend to the Minister that the average premium rate for 1995/96 be 2.2% of wages with the normal experience premium arrangements to apply.
 
The Board noted that a direction has now been received from the Minister that the average premium rate for 1995/96 be 2.5% of wages.
 
Directors reviewed the correspondence and advice from the Authority to the Minister immediately prior to tis Ministerial direction; in their view, this adequately addressed the concerns of Treasury, and this was subsequently supported by a further opinion from Coopers and Lybrand and Phillips Fox. In the light of this additional advice from our actuaries and legal advisers, the Directors re-affirmed their opinion that 2.2% would be an appropriate average premium rate for 1995/96.
 
However, noting the direction from the Minister, the Board now resolves that the average premium rate for the next financial year will be 2.5%" 
It would appear that the Chairman of the Board, the General Manager and three of the four Directors who were in Australia, agreed orally to the proposed Resolution, but that the remaining Director who was in Australia, although sent a copy of the Memorandum and proposed Resolution was unable to be contacted on the day.

Also on 9 June 1995, there was prepared, and submitted to the Minister, a further submission, signed by the General Manager and the Manager, Insurance and Fund Management of the WorkCover Authority, which form of submission omitting formal parts was in the following terms (Appeal Book pp.150-151): - "BACKGROUND 
Reference is made to the Authority's previous submission on 10 May 1995 (tab E) to the Cabinet Minute of 5 June 1995 and the decision to increase Workers Compensation premiums to an average of 2.5%. Following the Minister's direction regarding the Premiums increase, a majority of the Board to-day resolved that the average Premium rate for 1995-96 be 2.5%. Copy of Minister's Direction and Board resolution attached. The Authority now recommends that the Governor be advised that an Order (see attached) be made fixing the manner in which premiums will be payable in the next financial year. The following documents have been prepared (with opinion of Parliamentary Counsel attached): . Proposed Insurance Premiums Order (1994-95) 
The proposed Order will cover workers compensation policies issued or renewed from 4.00 pm on 30 June 1995. The Order sets an overall average in premiums of 2.5 per cent of wages. Employers will be required to pay an additional $350M in premium for the financial year 1995-1996. The average increase will be 40%. For some employers in industries with a deteriorating claims record the average increase will be 70%.
 . Proposed determination of experience adjustment factors under Insurance Premiums Order (1994-95) 
A proposed Executive Council Minute recommending the Governor determine the `hindsight' F-factors (for final experience adjustment assessments under the 1994-95 Premiums Order) has also been prepared.
 . Proposed regulations to amend Workers Compensation regulations 
Also tied in with the Premiums Order package are minor changes to the Workers Compensation (Insurance Premiums) Regulation and the Workers Compensation (General) Regulation.
 
These relate to: - * an increase of the `Large Claim' limit from $100,000 to $150,000. This `Claim' limit is a cap on the amount that may be assessed as the `cost of claims' which is issued to determine the `experience component' of the insurance premium. A bad claims history will lead to an increase in the premium.
 * exclusion from the definition of `costs of claims' and `excess' premium provisions any claim under Section 11 - Recess Claims being those claims for injury received while a worker was temporarily absent from his or her employer's premises e.g. leaving the premises to buy lunch.
 * making the Insurance Contribution Fund contribution `Nil', as previously approved, for the financial year beginning 1 July 1995. Contributions to this fund are obtained from imposing a levy on Premium Income. This fund was established in 1974 to cover the liability of former insurers licensed under the previous Act for unanticipated increases in benefits following the introduction of `indexation' of benefits payable under the Scheme.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
It is recommended that the Minister sign the attached proposed - a) Insurance Premiums Order (1995-96) and related Executive Council Minute; b) Executive Council Minute recommending determination of 1994-95 hindsight adjustment "F" factors and related notification for gazettal; c) Regulations and related Executive Council Minutes; and d) Certificate included in the Executive Council Minute that the relevant provisions of the [Subordinate Legislation Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sla1989250/) have been complied with in relation to the proposed amending regulation." 
As chance would have it, a regular meeting of the Board of the WorkCover Authority was scheduled for 13 June 1995. The minutes of that meeting (Appeal Book pp. 208-209) record (inter alia) the following: - "1.2 Matters arising from the Minutes 
Item 4: Proposed Premium Scheme for Policy Year 1995/96 
The Chairperson referred to the Board decision at its meeting of 10 May 1995 which had set an overall premium rate of 2.2 per cent. He made reference to the Board's circulatory resolution of 9 June 1995 which a majority of directors had agreed to a revised premium rate of 2.5 per cent. Mr. Venning and Dr. Bryan indicated that they also agreed with the Board's resolution. Mr. Costa indicated that he could not affirm the decision regarding the premium rate of 2.2% as he had not been present at the Board meeting of 10 May 1995 at which the original decision had been made, but supported the remainder of the resolution.
 
IT WAS RESOLVED that the Board confirm its decision of 9 June 1995 to set a revised premium rate of 2.5%." 
Meantime, arrangements had been made for the proposed Insurance Premiums Order and the amendments to the Regulations to be placed on the agenda for the meeting of the Executive Council to be held on 14 June 1995. That having been done there was prepared and signed by the Minister, a Minute Paper (Appeal Book p.267) which omitting formal parts was in the following terms: - "I RECOMMEND for the approval of the Governor and the Executive Council that, on the recommendation of the WorkCover Authority, the insurance Premiums Order (1995-96) be made under the [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), to fix the manner in which premiums payable by employers are to be calculated for workers compensation insurance policies issued or renewed at or after 4.00 p.m. on 30 June 1995, as set out in the attached Schedule." 
In addition, there had been prepared and signed by the Minister a further Minute Paper recommending the manner in which certain elements in the formula used for the purpose of calculating "the experience premium" for workers compensation insurance policies be determined (Appeal Book p.301) and a further Minute Paper (Appeal Book p.305) recommending approval of amendments to the Workers Compensation (General) Regulation and the Workers Compensation (Insurance Premiums) Regulation to give effect to the "Premiums Order Package" which was said to have been adopted by the WorkCover Authority.

Each of the matters the subject of the several Executive Council minutes to which I have referred was approved by the Executive Council at its meeting of June 1995.

The Insurance Premiums Order (1995-96), the notification of determination under the Insurance Premiums Order (1994-95) and the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) -
Regulation amending the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (General)
Regulation 1987 and the Workers Compensation (Insurance Premiums) Regulation were all published in a Special Supplement of the Government Gazette on June 1995.

The material which is before the Court does not disclose when - save that it must have been at some time in 1995 - these proceedings were commenced. In their Further Amended Summons, which bears date 29 February 1996, and which appears to have been filed in Court on 5 March 1996 - which seems to have been during the course of submissions on the hearing - the Appellants sought the following (inter alia) relief: - "1. A declaration that the direction of the Attorney General and Minister for Industrial Relations, made on or about 8 June, 1995, to the WorkCover Authority of New South Wales to resolve that the premium rate for 1995/96 should be an average of 2.5% of wages with the normal experience premium arrangement to apply was ultra vires the WorkCover Authority Act 1989.
 . A declaration that the resolution of the Board of Directors of the WorkCover Authority of New South Wales made on or about 9 June, 1995 that the average premium rate for the next financial year would be 2.5% of wages was ultra vires such Authority.
 . A declaration that the said resolution of the Board of Directors of the WorkCover Authority of New South Wales was not made by a quorum of 4 members of the said Board at a valid meeting of the Board held with a person presiding at a valid meeting of the said Board and was ultra vires such Board.
 . A declaration that the resolution of the Board of Directors of the WorkCover Authority of New South Wales of 13 June, 1995 that the Board confirm its decision of 9 June, 1995 to set a revised premium rate of 2.5% was ultra vires the said Authority.
 . A declaration that neither of the said resolutions of 9 and 13 June 1995 of the Authority was a recommendation to the Governor as to fixing the manner in which the premium payable by an employer (or a person who proposes to become an employer) for a policy of insurance shall be calculated, whether by reference only to annual rates or otherwise within the meaning of [s.168(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s168.html) of the [Workers' Compensation Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/).
 . A declaration that the order of the Governor of New South Wales (entitled [Workers Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) - Insurance Premiums Order (1995-96) and published in Government Gazette No. 783 of 16 June, 1955) made on or about 14 June, 1995 was made without there being a valid recommendation to that effect by the WorkCover Authority, as required by [s.168(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s168.html) of the [Workers' Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/), and is invalid.
 ..........." 
The Appellants' case as summarised by Dunford J in the Judgment which he was to deliver on 18 March 1996 was as follows: - "On behalf of the plaintiffs it was submitted that the Minister and the Governor each acted on an invalid resolution of the Board which, or if it had been validly passed (sic), did not amount to a recommendation; and even if it be construed as a recommendation, was not a recommendation as to the manner of fixing premiums under the Act. A number of the points taken overlapped with each other, but can be summarised under five general headings as follows: - . The Governor did not, as required by s.168(1), act on a recommendation o the Authority but on a resolution which was dictated by the Minister in circumstances where the Minister was not authorised to give any direction.
 . If the Minister did have power to give a direction, the direction he gave was invalid.
 . There was no valid resolution of the Board as to what was to be recommended to the Governor.
 . Alternatively, any resolution which the Board did pass was not a resolution as to the manner in which premiums were to be fixed, but only as to the premium rate increase.
 . The final form of the IPO was settled by the General Manager and not by the Board." 
Dunford J dealt with those submissions in the following way: - having regard to the provisions of s.168 of the new Act and of s.9 of the
WorkCover Administration Act, it was open to the Minister to give to the Board of the Authority, and to the General Manager, a direction as to the bases upon which a proposed scheme for the fixing of insurance premiums was to be formulated (he referred to Bosnjak's Bus Service Pty. Limited v.
Commissioner for Motor Transport 1); contrary to the Appellants' submission that the Minister's direction did not constitute a direction to the Board to make a recommendation to the
Governor as to the manner in which premiums should be fixed, but merely directed the Board to resolve that the premium rate for 1995/96 should be an average premium of 2.5% of wages with the normal experience premium arrangements to apply, the Minister's direction - despite the infelicity of the language in which it was couched - should be construed as a direction to make a recommendation which would have the effect of resulting in an average premium of 2.5% of wages, the proposed scheme the subject to the submission to the Minister on 10 May 1995 otherwise remaining unchanged (his Honour referred to R. v. Monopolies and Mergers Commission, ex parte Argyll Group Plc 2); although - because the provisions of Schedule 1 cl. 14(1) of the WorkCover
Administration Act was not complied with - the proposed resolution of 9 June (see p. 18 (above)) was not effective as a resolution of the Board of the
WorkCover Authority, the General Manager's action in forwarding to the
Minister on 9 June 1995 the submission, draft Insurance Premiums Order and supporting documents to which I have earlier (see pp. 31-33 (above)) referred, coupled with the resolution of the Board passed on 13 June 1995, constituted a valid recommendation, the otherwise unauthorised act of the General Manager having been ratified by the Board of the WorkCover Authority (reference was made to Attorney-General v. Wylde 3; Reconstruction Forestry Mining
Energy Union; ex parte W. J. Deane & Sons Pty. Limited 4; given what had previously occurred, the effect of what happened on 9 and June 1995 was that the WorkCover Authority (by its Board) recommended to the Governor that the manner of fixing premiums in 1995/96 should be the same as in the 1994/95 IPO, subject only to the changes formulated in the May resolution, and the further adjustments necessary to increase the average premium rate to 2.5% of wages; although a decision to increase the average premium rate from 2.2% to 2.5% of wages constituted a change of policy, the working out of the details of that policy decision by recalculating the rates in Table A was not a policy matter, but was one which could be done, as it was, by the General Manager and staff of the WorkCover Authority; that being so, the amended form of the draft
Insurance Premiums Order and supporting documents did not need to be considered, or formally approved, by the Board of the WorkCover Authority.

His Honour accordingly dismissed the proceedings and ordered the Appellants to pay the Respondent's costs of the proceedings.

On 26 March 1996, there was filed on behalf of the Appellants a Notice of
Appeal seeking, in addition to an order that the appeal be upheld, a declaration that the Workers Compensation Premiums Order (1995-96) was and is invalid, inoperative and of no effect, and an order restraining the WorkCover
Authority from taking action in reliance upon the order. Since, in the Notice of Appeal, some 32 grounds of appeal - a number of which included sub-grounds - were taken, the more important of which grounds I have summarised at the commencement of this Judgment, I see no useful purpose being served by my further burdening this Judgment by setting out those grounds in extenso.

When the appeal came on for hearing, Mr. R.J. Ellicott QC appeared with Mr. M.
Cockburn for the Appellants, while Mr. K. Mason QC S-G appeared with Mr. F.L.
Wright QC for the Respondents.

At the conclusion of counsel's submissions, the Court reserved its decision.

Although the transcript taken on the hearing of the appeal does not clearly record it to have occurred (Transcript pp. 16-17; see also pp. 42-43), during the course of the Appellants' submission in chief, Mr. Ellicott provided to the Court two Tables, those Tables, as I understood it, being intended to demonstrate the percentage increase in the basic tariff rate for each of what were described as "pools", in one case, between the basic tariff rates for each pool in the 1994/95 Insurance Premiums Order, and in the 1995/96
Insurance Premiums Order; and, in the other case, between, what would have been the basic tariff rate if the scheme adopted in principle in May 1995 had been incorporated in the 1995/96 Insurance Premiums Order and, the basic tariff rates in fact incorporated in the 1995/96 Insurance Premiums Order.
There being no agreement between the parties as to the various figures incorporated in those Tables, the Tables were not treated as evidence by were treated only as an aide memoir (see Transcript p.17) a situation which was not later changed during the hearing of the appeal. However, following the conclusion of the submissions, the Appellants' solicitors wrote to each of the members of the Bench seeking, first, to correct what was said to be an error in the heading of one of the Tables handed up, and, in addition, to make further submissions in relation to the subject matter of the Tables which had been handed in and the discussion which had taken place in relation to those tables during the course of the appeal. At the time, the Appellants' solicitors advised the members of the Court that the Respondents' solicitors did not consent to the further submissions being forwarded to the Court as they, in fact, were.

For my part I am not prepared to receive the additional submissions, nor to place any weight upon, either, the Tables which were tendered on the hearing of the appeal, or the amended Tables which were forwarded with the additional submissions. As will be apparent from what I have earlier written, the Tables which were tendered on the hearing of the appeal never acquired a higher status than that of an aide memoir in support of a submission which, at the time, was being advanced on behalf of the Appellants - in particular, it never acquired the status of evidence on the hearing of the appeal. There are, however, other reasons which lead me to that view. While it would appear (see
Appeal Book pp. 114-117) that, for some purposes associated with the fixing of premium rates, the many business and industry callings set out in Table A are assigned to one or other of a number of "pools" - apparently 18 in number - each of which has its own basic tariff rate - despite the fact that in Table A to the Insurance Premium Orders, some hundred or more "Rate Nos." are set out - I have not the slightest idea of the discrimina by which, at any particular time, any business or industry calling - in the broadest sense - is assigned to any particular pool, or the discrimina by which any such business or industry calling is transferred from one pool to another, whether the relevant basic premium rate is greater or lesser. Thus, I am quite unable to comprehend how "Financial Institutions" and "Photography/developing" came to be placed in
Pool 1 with the lowest basic tariff rate of 0.25% of wages, or how it came about that "Broadcasting & T.V." came to be the only calling placed in
Pool 4 with a basic tariff rate of 0.55% of wages, or how it came about that "Publishing" and "Ministers of Religion" came to be place in Pool 5 with a basic tariff rate of 0.65%, that is about two and a half times the basic premium rate for Pool 1 and about 20% more than the basic premium rate for
Pool 4. If, as seems now to be the case, the Appellants seek to make some point of all this then, in my view, it is far too late - an appropriate evidentiary base should have been laid, and appropriate submissions should have been advanced, long before this stage had been reached.

I turn, then, to consider the various arguments which were advanced on the hearing of the appeal.

At the forefront of the Appellants' arguments is the submission that it is a condition precedent to the valid exercise by the Governor in Council of the power to make an Insurance Premiums Order that the WorkCover Authority should first validly have made a recommendation that an Insurance Premiums Order of the type contemplated by s.168 of the new Act be made. Although not referred to in the course of counsel's submissions, the basis for that submission may be found in the Judgment of Willes J. in North Stafford Steel, Iron and Coal
Co. (Burslem) Limited v. Ward 5 where his Lordship [6] refers to "the ordinary rule, that if authority is given expressly, though by affirmative words, upon a defined condition, the expression of that condition excludes the doing of the act authorised under other circumstances than those defined." (see also Anthony Hordern & Sons Limited & Ors. v. Amalgamated
Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia 7; The King v. Wallis; ex parte Employers Association of Wool Selling Brokers & Ors. 8; see also
Leon Fink Holdings Pty. Limited v. Australian Film Commission 9;
Saraswati v. The Queen 10; David Grant & Co. Pty. Limited v. Westpac
Banking Corporation 11). Although otherwise denying the relevance to the present case of this principle, the Respondents, as I understood their submissions, did not dispute that the making of a recommendation - whatever was involved in that concept - was a condition precedent to the exercise by the Governor in Council of the power to make an Insurance Premiums Order.

I proceed, then, to consider the particular questions which I have set out at the commencement of this Judgment (see pp. 1-4 (above)).
I must say that I found the Appellants' submissions, first, that the making of a recommendation under s.168 of the new Act was not a "function" of the WorkCover Authority, and, second, that that being so, it was not open to the Minister to give to the WorkCover Authority a direction as to the form which any recommendation might take, to be singularly difficult to follow, if only because it seemed to pay little, if any, regard to the terms of the
WorkCover Administration Act. However, as best as I could make it out, the submissions involved the following steps: - the legislature had set up the WorkCover Authority to give expert advice, and it was the Authority's advice which was required before the Governor in
Council could make a valid order; the Governor in Council, in the ordinary course, acts on the advice of
Ministers; the legislature did not intend that the Minister could override the view of the Authority and thereby render its involvement in the process nugatory; the legislative history provides support for that submission since the predecessor bodies set up to make recommendations were not subject to the direction of the Minister; further, since the recommendation of the Authority was to form the basis of any Insurance Premiums Order which was made, the making of the recommendation was essentially legislative in character, it following, so the submission ran, that it was inherently incapable of being subject to a direction by the Minister.

I am unable to accept these submissions, which submissions, in my view: fail to give any weight to the provisions of the WorkCover Administration
Act; and are, in any event, not supported by the recent legislative history.

Quite apart from the fact that, in my view, the making of a recommendation under s.168 of the new Act would, as a matter of ordinary English usage, constitute "a function" of the WorkCover Authority - for a "function" is a form of activity or mode of action by which an office holder or institution fulfil his, her or its appointed purpose - the provisions of the WorkCover
Administration Act, in my view, make it clear that this is so. Thus, the provisions of s.3(2)(a) and of s.12(1)(b) of the Act, in my view, make it clear that any power, authority or duty conferred upon, or imposed upon, the
WorkCover Authority by the new Act is to be regarded as a function of the
Authority. Although expressed in indirect terms, s.168 of the new Act, in my view, confers upon the WorkCover Authority a power, or authority, as and when it might be thought appropriate, to make recommendations to the Governor in
Council for the making of Insurance Premium Orders. Section 12(2)(c) of the
WorkCover Administration Act would, in my view, impose on the Authority a duty to make recommendations pursuant to the provisions of s.168 of the new Act whenever the making of such a recommendation was called for in order that the financial liability and efficient operation of the Workers Compensation
Insurance arrangement might be ensured.

If, therefore, the making of a recommendation under s.168 of the new Act is to be regarded as a function of the Authority, then, unless the Appellants' submission based upon the legislative history is to be accepted, it must follow that, when the Authority comes to consider making such a recommendation, it is subject to the direction of the Minister.

While I accept that, in cases in which the provisions of a statute are ambiguous, it is often useful to trace the history of the legislation, or of the relevant part in it, it seems to me that, in a case in which the meaning of the statute, or of the relevant part of it, is clear, arguments based on the history of the legislation have no place. As will be apparent from what I have earlier written, it is, in my view, clear that the language of the
WorkCover Administration Act, when operating in conjunction with the provisions of the new Act, subjects the WorkCover Authority to the direction of the Minister when it is considering whether or not to make a recommendation under s.168 of the new Act; it following, in my view, that the history of the legislation is irrelevant to this question.

But even if that view be not sound, it seems to me that the history of the legislation provides no support for the submission now sought to be advanced.

It is true that, as between 1945 and 1989, the power and duty (until 1985) to make schemes fixing maximum rates of insurance premiums, or to make recommendations to the Governor in Council for the making of Insurance
Premiums Orders, was vested in the Insurance Premiums Committee, which, at least in terms, was independent of the Government, and, at least in terms, was not subject to the direction of the relevant Minister - although it is to be noted that, as from 1984, the greater majority of the members of the Insurance
Premiums Committee were members of, first, the State Compensation Board, and thereafter, of the Workers Compensation and Rehabilitation Authority, each of which was a statutory body representing the Crown and each of which in the exercise of its functions was subject to the control and direction of the
Minister. It is, however, clear that, in 1989, the legislature determined that that position should no longer continue, and that the powers and authorities formerly exercised by the Insurance Premiums Committee, originally under s.30A, and then under s.30AB, of the principal Act, and thereafter under the provisions of s.168 of the new Act, should be vested in the WorkCover
Authority which was constituted a statutory body representing the Crown, the
Board of Directors and the General Manager of which were in the exercise of their respective functions to be subject to the control and direction of the
Minister.

Finally, under this heading, it was said that the power or authority conferred on the WorkCover Authority by s.168 of the new Act was legislative in character and, thus, no capable of being subject to direction by the Minister.
While I am prepared to accept that, between 1945 and the coming into force of the amendment to the principal Act effected by the Workers Compensation
Act 1985, the power or authority exercised by the Insurance
Premiums Committee was legislative in nature - for it was the Committee which, from time to time, determined upon the relevant scheme, which scheme, when published in the Gazette, had the effect in law of promulgating a general rule - a fact which, no doubt, explains why it was that the Committee was not made subject to the direction of the Minister, I find it impossible to see how, as from that time, the actions of, first, the Insurance Premiums Committee, and, later, the WorkCover Authority, when recommending the making of a fresh
Insurance Premiums Order, can have that character, since it is not until that recommendation be adopted by the Governor in Council, and a relevant order made and published in the Gazette, that a fresh general rule is, in law, substituted for a previous general rule.

It follows from what I have earlier written that this first ground of attack fails in its entirety.
the question which then arises is whether, contrary to the Appellants' submissions, it was open to the Minister - albeit at the behest of Cabinet - to "direct the General Manager of the WorkCover Authority and the Board of
Director(s) of the WorkCover Authority to resolve that the premium rate for /96 shall be an average premium of 2.55% of wages with the normal experience premium arrangements to apply".

Although the Appellants advanced the submission to which I have just referred, neither in their written submissions nor in the oral submissions of their counsel was any attempt made to expound the basis upon which the submission was made. Although - since the subject matter of the direction appears to me to be one of policy, and, thus, a question for the Board (WorkCover
Administration Act s.6(1)) - I do not consider that it was open to the
Minister to give any direction binding upon the General Manager, it seems to me that, there being no relevant limitation upon the power of the Minister to give a direction to the Board (cf. Bosnjaks Bus Service Pty. Limited v.
Commissioner for Government Transport 12) it was open to the Minister to give a direction to the Board that the Insurance Premiums Order which was to be recommended to the Governor in Council should be one which sought more fully to approach the goal of being fully funded and which, for that purpose, should seek to produce a gross premium income averaging 2.5% of all wages paid.

Against the possibility that the Appellants intended to submit, not that the
Minister had no power to give direction as to policy, but that the Minister had no power to give a direction as to the adoption of an average premium rate, it is not without point to observe that the Appellants made no challenge to the validity of the Insurance Premiums Order (1994/95) in respect of which "the target rate" was 1.8% of wages and would not have challenged an Insurance
Premiums Order based upon the submission to the Minister on 10 May 1995 notwithstanding that it proposed an "average target premium rate of 2.2% of wages".

In my view this submission fails.
since no independent submission to the effect of that which I have set out above was made, I proceed upon the basis that what was intended by the submission was that, even if - which it was not - the "circulatory resolution" of the Board of 9 June 1995 was passed, neither it, nor the "confirmatory resolution" of 13 June 1995, constituted a recommendation to the Governor in
Council to make an Insurance Premiums Order embodying the average increase to .5% of wages and otherwise in accordance with the Minister's direction.
since the Appellants have not sought to place any reliance upon "the circulatory resolution" of 9 June 1995, it can be put to one side. The submission that the resolution of 13 June 1995 "was null and void and beyond power and incapable of ratification or confirmation by the Board" is, if I may be permitted to say so, quite incomprehensible, if only because it was a resolution of the Board - perhaps what was intended was that the resolution did not, in terms, amount to a recommendation to the Governor in Council for the making of an Insurance Premiums Order, in which event, whatever may otherwise have been its effect in law, it did not provide a sufficient basis for the making of Insurance Premiums Order (1995/96).
 ,6. the questions which then arise are whether, as the Appellants would have it, the resolution of the Board of 13 June 1995 did no more than deal with one subject matter, that is, the average premium rate, so that, even if it were treated as being in substance a recommendation to the Governor in Council, it was not a recommendation as to the manner in which a premium payable by an employer for a policy of insurance should be calculated, or whether, as
Dunford J thought appropriate, the resolution could be "fleshed out" by incorporating into it the content of the previous decisions of the Authority for the results of actions taken by the Authority's officers.

What I have earlier recorded (see pp. 27-30 (above)) will make it abundantly clear that, prior to 8 June 1995, when the Minister gave the direction which ultimately has led to these proceedings, the Authority had formulated a policy, based on a target rate of 2.2% of wages, to form the basis of the
Insurance Premiums Order to be recommended to the Governor in Council in June, that, in pursuance of the policy then adopted, there had been prepared and submitted to Parliamentary Counsel for his approval, and for the giving of the appropriate statutory certificate, a detailed form of the proposed Insurance
Premiums Order and the Regulation and notifications intended to accompany it and to give effect to the "package" which it was proposed should be submitted to the Governor in Council, and that the Parliamentary Counsel had signed a formal opinion to the effect that the draft order and the regulation might lawfully be made. It is against this background that the direction given by the Minister and the subsequent actions taken by the Board of the Authority and its officers are to be viewed.
 "Good public administration" so Sir John Donaldson MR (as his Lordship then was) said in R. v. Monopolies and Mergers Commission ex parte Argyll Group
Plc 13 is concerned with substance rather than form". A similar view was expressed shortly thereafter by the Full Court of the Federal Court (Sheppard,
Morling and Gummow JJ) in Forsyth v. Rodda 14, in which case their Honours said [15]: - "In the course of exercising the jurisdiction it has in applications for judicial review and in appeals from the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, this court in numerous judgments has emphasised that it is the substance of matters which will be looked at and that the form of language used by members of the administration and by tribunals will not be studied or sifted in a way that is destructive of the administrative process. The court takes a broad and constructive view of decisions and allows for the fact that language used in reasons may have been better expressed or may reveal gaps in a chain of reasoning which need to be filled." 
Such views, in my opinion, are appropriate to be applied when a court is faced with the problems such as that which is now under consideration.

It seems to me, with respect, that the true effect to be given to resolution of the Board of 13 June 1995 is that it be regarded as a determination by the
Board that the Insurance Premiums Order to be recommended to the Governor in
Council be in the form of that which had earlier been submitted to and been approved by the Parliamentary Counsel, save only for those amendments necessary to be made to Table A to give effect to an increase in the target rate from 2.2% to 2.5% of wages, and that, together with the form of Insurance
Premiums Order as so amended, there be submitted to the Governor in Council the form of proposed Regulation and other documents which had been drafted for the purpose of giving effect to "the package" which the Board had resolved upon at its meeting in May 1995.

I therefore conclude that these two submissions in their turn should be rejected.
The same process of reasoning as I have just recorded would lead one to conclude that, if the "circulatory resolution" of 9 June 1995 had been passed at a properly constituted meeting of the Board of the Authority, that resolution, in all the circumstances, ought to have been regarded as a resolution having the same effect as that which I have ascribed to the resolution of the Board of the Authority on 13 June 1995. In that event, the
General Manager of the Authority, as the one upon whom is imposed the duty to manage and control the affairs the Authority, would, in my view, have been justified, and, indeed, obliged, himself to take, or to ensure that there were taken, whatever steps - whether they be of a clerical, or other, nature - which might need to be taken in order to ensure that the resolution of the
Board of the Authority were put into effect. Those steps, in the present case, would have included ensuring that Table A in the form of the Insurance
Premiums Order which had earlier been approved was amended in such a way as to give effect to the resolution of the Board to change the average rate of premium from 2.2% to 2.5% of wages, the preparation of a submission for the
Minister and the forwarding to the Minister of that submission together with the form of the proposed interim Insurance Premiums Order regulation and other documents intended to give effect to the scheme which had been adopted by the
Board of the Authority at its meeting on 8 May 1995 as amended by what, in the event supposed, would have been the resolution of the Board of the Authority on 9 June 1995. In the event supposed, therefore, the actions of the General
Manager in preparing or, having prepared, and forwarding to the Minister, the further submission and accompanying documents to which I have earlier referred (see pp. 31-33 (above)) could only have been regarded as having been done on behalf of the Authority and, thus, (WorkCover Administration Act s.8(2)) as having been done by the Authority itself.

I therefore conclude that this submission has not been made out.
 ,9. Even if the provisions of s.8(2) of the WorkCover Administration Act not be regarded as, of themselves, validating the General Manager's action in preparing or having prepared, and forwarded to the Minister, the further submission and the accompanying documents to which I have earlier referred, the resolution of the Board of the Authority passed on 13 June 1995 to "confirm its decision of 9 June 1995" in my view had the effect, first, of ratifying that earlier "decision", and, second, of ratifying the actions which the General Manager took in reliance upon that earlier "decision". If this be so - and counsel for the Appellants did not appear (see Transcript p.26) to deny the possibility of ratification in a case such as this - then, the ratification having occurred prior to the matter being considered at the meeting of the Executive Council (see Reconstruction Forestry Mining Energy
Union; ex parte W.J. Deane & Sons Pty. Limited & Ors. 16) the
Executive Council is to be regarded as having had before it a valid recommendation of the type contemplated by s.168 of the new Act.

I would therefore reject these two submissions as well.

It follows that, the Appellants having failed to make good any of their challenges to the Judgment of Dunford J, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

Although what I have earlier written is sufficient to dispose of this appeal,
I should add that, even if I had been of a different view, I would have been disposed, as a matter of discretion, to refuse the relief sought. The reasons for my doing so may be shortly stated. They are: - if Insurance Premiums Order (1995/96) were to be regarded as null and void and of no effect, the premium payable by employers for workers compensation insurance for the financial year 1995/96 would be that provided for in
Insurance Premiums Order (1994/95); such material as is before the Court (Appeal Book vol. 1 pp.66-68) would indicate that, as at 30 June 1995: - the number of current policies was 297,889; that the estimated wage base was $48 billion.
 that the amount of premium payable in respect of policies was $937 million; upon the basis of those figures, and upon the basis that the premiums on policies issued in, or renewed for the financial year 1995-1996 were calculated on the basis of Insurance Premiums Order (1995/96) the amount of those premiums would be of the order of $1.2 billion, that is $263 million more than if they had been calculated in accordance with Insurance Premiums
Order (1994/95); it would be apparent that, even if it be feasible, the difficulties in repaying to each policy holder the amount of any excess premium would be considerable; even if it were feasible to repay excess premiums, the material which is before the court would indicate that there would be a significant short-fall in funding the scheme, which short-fall would need to be recouped in the future.
in that event, this whole exercise would be rendered purposeless.
 
WADDELL AJA: I have had the advantage of considering the Judgments prepared by Powell JA and Beazley JA. I agree generally with their reasons. I agree that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a decision of Dunford J sitting in the Administrative Law Division of this Court, in which his Honour held that the Insurance Premiums Order (1995-96) (the IPO), made by the Governor in Council pursuant to [s 168(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s168.html) of the [Workers' Compensation Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) (the WC Act) was valid. Two core issues were raised on the appeal. First, whether the WorkCover Authority of New South Wales (the Authority) had made a recommendation to the Governor as required by and within the meaning of <case> as a pre-condition to the making of the IPO. Secondly, if so, and as an anterior issue, whether the Minister had power to give a direction as to the recommendation or part of the recommendation which was made by the Authority. The other issues raised on the appeal were subsidiary aspects of these two core issues.

It is convenient in the first instance to consider the relevant legislation.

The WC Act 
Section 168(1) provides: "The Governor may, by an order made on the recommendation of the Authority and published in the Gazette, fix the manner in which the premium payable by an employer (or a person who proposes to become an employer) for a policy of insurance shall be calculated, whether by reference only to annual rates or otherwise." 
Section 3 provides that "Authority" means the "WorkCover Authority" constituted under the WorkCover Administration Act 1989 (the
Administration Act).

The Administration Act 
The Authority is constituted as a corporation, with the corporate name, "the
WorkCover Authority of New South Wales": <case>. It is a statutory body representing the Crown: <case>. The Authority has a Board of Directors (the
Board), consisting of a General Manager and 6 part-time directors appointed by the Governor on the recommendation of the Minister: ss 5(1) and (2).

The functions of the Authority are specified in ss 6, 12 and 13. Sections 6 and 12 provide, relevantly: "6. (1) The Board of Directors has the function of determining the policies of the Authority.
 ...
The Authority has such functions as are conferred or imposed on it by or under: this Act; or the workers compensation legislation; or the occupational health and safety legislation; or any other legislation.
 
In exercising its functions, the Authority must: promote the prevention of injuries and diseases at the workplace and the development of healthy and safe workplaces; and ensure the efficient, effective and equitable rehabilitation and compensation of persons injured at work; and ensure the financial viability and efficient operation of the workers compensation insurance arrangements; and ensure the co-ordination of the administration of occupational health and safety, rehabilitation and workers compensation arrangements." 
Section 13 specifies a number of miscellaneous functions of the Authority.
None are relevant to the issues in this case.

Section 3(2) provides: "In this Act: a reference to a function includes a reference to a power, authority and duty; and a reference to the exercise of a function includes, where the function is a duty, a reference to the performance of the duty." 
An identical section appears in the WC Act: see s3(2).

Section 8 provides: "8. (1) The affairs of the Authority are to be managed and controlled by the
General Manager of the Authority in accordance with the policies of the Board of Directors.
 
Any act, matter or thing done in the name of, or on behalf of, the
Authority by the General Manager is to be taken to have been done by the
Authority." 
Section 9 provides for Ministerial control in the following terms: "The General Manager of the Authority and the Board of Directors are, in the exercise of their respective functions, subject to the control and direction of the Minister." 
Section 11 contains a power of delegation. It provides, relevantly: "(1) The Authority may delegate to an authorised person any of the functions of the Authority, other than this power of delegation." " 
History of making of the IPO 
On 9 December 1993, the Board resolved to establish a Premiums and Benefits
Sub-Committee (the Premiums Sub-Committee), comprising all Board members, to consider premium rates, scheme valuations and benefit proposals for insurance policies governed by the provisions of the WC Act. The Premiums Sub-
Committee's deliberations formed the basis of any recommendation the Authority might make under <case>. It is apparent that the making of Insurance Premium
Orders under <case> was intended to be an annual event. This intention finds expression in clause 1(2) of Schedule 2 of the 1994-95 IPO which provided: "If, before 4 p.m. on 30 June 1995, an insurance premiums order has not been made in respect of policies of insurance taking effect on or after that time, this Order applies to and in respect of those policies pending the making of such an order." 
For the purposes of preparing its recommendation for the making of the -1996 IPO, the Premiums Sub-Committee had in place a timetable for the completion of the various tasks which were relevant to its deliberations. The
Sub-Committee itself met on 1 March, 29 March and 27 April 1995. At this last meeting, the Premiums Sub-Committee resolved that it would recommend: "i) An overall average premium rate of 2.2% for 1995/96 incorporating movement between pools reflecting latest experience (ie option 1).
 iii) `F' factors remaining unchanged from current factors.
 iv) A $150,000 large claim limit.
 v) The new experience adjusted premiums being calculated using the new credibility formula, in which the constant in the denominator is 180000.
 vi) The maximum increase which an employer would be subject to being limited to 100%.
 vii) the limit for the two times rule being increased from $75,000 to $100,000." 
The reference to option 1 in para (i) of the resolution was a reference to the first of three options which had been investigated by the Premium Actuarial and Statistics section of the Authority's staff upon the request of the
Premium Sub-Committee at its 29 March 1995 meeting. The options were based on the following average premiums: "(i) 2.2% average incorporating movement between pools reflecting latest experience.
 .4% average incorporating movement between pools reflecting latest experience.
 .2% average with no movement between pools." 
The "F" factors referred to in paragraph (iii) operate as a multiplier on an employer's claims experience in the premium formula to adjust current claims costs up to an ultimate cost.

The Minutes of the meeting of 27 April 1995 further recorded: 
The Committee in adopting an average premium rate of 2.2% for 1995/96 noted that this would not be sufficient to fully fund Scheme liabilities for 1995/96 but that for the purpose of providing premium stability to NSW employers considered that 2.2% represented an appropriate balance between these objectives.
 
The Committee also considered that if strategies to address the increase in the Scheme costs were not successfully implemented further premium rate increases would need to be considered." 
On 1 May 1995, the Manager, Premium Actuarials and Statistics section advised the Legal Officer, Legislation and Advising Branch that the Premiums Sub-
Committee had finalised its recommendations on the Premium Scheme for /1996, and that its recommendations would be submitted to the Board on 8
May 1995 and subsequently to the Minister. At the meeting on 8 May 1995, the
Board resolved to approve: "iv) The implementation of an Insurance Premiums Scheme for policy year /96 with an overall average premium rate of 2.2 per cent as summarised in
Attachment C accompanying the submission." 
Attachment C was part of a detailed submission to the Board, the purpose of which was to provide the Board with the Premiums Sub-Committee's proposed premium scheme for policy year 1995/6. It set out the Individual Pool Rates based on an overall target Average Premium Rate of 2.2%, the "F" factors, the
S formula and the large claim limit. I have already referred to the F factors.
The S formula is the experience adjustment factor for the employer, determined in accordance with a formula specified in the IPO.

On 10 May 1995, a submission was made to the Minister proposing an average premium rate of 2.2%. That submission was signed by the Manager, Premiums
Actuarial and Statistics, the Manager, Insurance & Fund Management
Divisions and the General Manager. The submission noted that the key features of the 1995/6 scheme and the financial position of the WorkCover Scheme as at June 1995 were, relevantly, as follows: ". Scheme costs have increased substantially: current costs for the /95 year are projected at 2.62 per cent of wages and are projected to further increase to 2.78 per cent for 1995/96.
 . The structure of the proposed Premium Scheme for 1995/96 remains essentially unchanged.
 . The proposed average target premium rate of 2.2 per cent of wages represents an average increase of 23 per cent over the current average of 1.8 per cent.
 . The proposed average rate of 2.2 per cent is significantly less than projected Scheme costs for 1995/96 of 2.78 per cent. This equates to a shortfall of approximately $300m. Hence by 30 June 1996 the Scheme might be expected to have a deficit of $235m.
 . Individual industry rates were revised based on the most recent claims experience data. Of the 106 industry classifications, 15 (with deteriorating experience) will face increases of approximately 50 per cent, 77 (with static experience) will have an average increase of approximately 23 per cent and 14 (with improving experience) will have no significant change." 
The submission also referred to cost containment measures which were said to be in the final stages of development. Attached to the submission was a copy of the Board submission, the Premiums Sub-Committee's Final Report and the
Actuaries' Executive Summary Report - Financial Progress of the WorkCover
Scheme to 31 December 1994.

The Premiums Sub-Committee's Final Report was a detailed document which dealt with, amongst other things, Average Premium Rates, Tariff Premiums, Experience
Premiums and Tariff Classification Reviews. In relation to the Experience
Premiums, the report addressed the "F" factors in detail. In particular, it noted that the actuaries had calculated the "F" factors required to achieve the proposed premium target of 2.2%. It noted that these factors were slightly lower than the then current "F" factors, and recommended that they be maintained at current levels. In addition, the Committee recommended an increase in the large claim limit, an increase in one factor in the "S" formula and an overriding limit of 100% on the increase in the premium rate payable from year to year.

The formal recommendation made in the submission was that the Minister: 
Note the current financial position of the WorkCover Scheme.
 
Approve in principle the proposed Premium Scheme for 1995/96 and the drafting of the Insurance Premiums Order and related Regulations to implement the proposed premium scheme for the Minister's final approval.
 
Advise the Premier (and Cabinet) of the proposed Premium Scheme for /96, the current financial position of the WorkCover Scheme and proposed cost containment strategies." 
On 12 May 1995, the Minister made the following note on the submission: "I agree, but I think an option should be put forward (as informally discussed) to put a ceiling on increases on those industries which, having regard to injury records/experience, are likely to face a particularly large increase in premiums. Could this be further explored." 
In a Ministerial Briefing Note dated 10 May 1995, signed by the Manager,
Insurance and Fund Management and the General Manager, an average premium rate of 2.2% was recommended and two options were outlined as to how the overall increase to 2.2% would be achieved. The bases for WorkCover's recommended option were also set out. The Briefing Note went on to state: "The Board concluded that the user pays principles of assessing premium rates and premiums based on the claims experience of the industry and employer were fundamental to the Scheme and were critical to continuing to provide the right incentives to industry and employers. Any form of cross-subsidy between industries would severely undermine these principles and incentives to employers. For these reasons the Board has endorsed Option A. Attached is a full list of the proposed industry rates for 1995/96." 
Option A involved incorporating movement between pools based on latest data claims experience. This meant that where analysis indicated that the performance of an industry had deteriorated, that industry would be moved up a pool and face a combined premium increase of approximately 50%. The reverse would apply in the case of industries with improving experience.

In a further submission to the Minister dated 22 May 1995, signed by the
Manager, Premium, Actuarial and Statistics; the Manager, Insurance and Fund
Management Division and the General Manager, a draft cabinet minute was enclosed which included the proposed increased premium rates to an average of .2% for 1995/96. However, at a cabinet meeting on 5 June 1995, Cabinet approved an average premium rate for 1995/96 of 2.5% of wages with retention of current "user pays" principles.

On 8 June 1995, the Minister wrote to the Managing Director in the following terms: "I, Jeff William Shaw, Attorney General and Minister for Industrial
Relations, with responsibility for the administration of the [Workers
Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) and
WorkCover Administration Act 1989 and in accordance with my powers under
Section 9 of the WorkCover Administration Act, hereby direct the General
Manager of the WorkCover Authority and the Board of Director (sic) of the
WorkCover Authority to resolve that the premium rate for 1995/96 shall be an average premium of 2.5% of wages with the normal experience premium arrangements to apply." 
On 9 June 1995, the Chairperson of the Board of the Authority, under cover of a memorandum of the same date, circulated to all members of the Board a proposed resolution to give effect to the Ministerial direction. The memorandum to Board members stated: "The Board resolved, at the May Board Meeting, to recommend to the Minister that the average premium rate for 1995/96 be 2.2% of wages with the normal experience premium arrangements to apply.
 
The Board noted that a direction has now been received from the Minister that the average premium rate for 1995/96 be 2.5% of wages.
 
Directors reviewed the correspondence and advice from the Authority to the
Minister immediately prior to this Ministerial direction; in their view, this adequately addressed the concerns of Treasury, and this was subsequently supported by a further opinion from Coopers and Lybrand and Phillips Fox. In the light of this additional advice from our actuaries and legal advisers, the
Directors re-affirmed their opinion that 2.2% would be an appropriate average premium rate for 1995/96.
 
However, noting the direction from the Minister, the Board now resolves that the average premium rate for the next financial year will be 2.5%." 
As 5 members only of the Board signed the resolution, it was invalid on procedural grounds, a matter about which there is no dispute.

In a submission to the Minister of the same date, the Authority recommended that "the Governor be advised that an Order...be made fixing the manner in which premiums will be payable in the next financial year". The proposed IPO was attached. The submission was signed by the Manager, Policy, Legal &
Conciliation, the Manager, Insurance & Fund Management and the General
Manager.

On 13 June 1995 the Board met and ratified its resolution of 9 June 1995 to set a revised premium rate of 2.5%. There was no dispute that the Board had authority to ratify its previous invalid resolution.

The IPO was subsequently made and published in the Government Gazette No. 73 on 16 June 1995.

Validity of Minister's Direction 
The appellant submitted that the Minister had no power to give the direction contained in his letter of 8 June 1995 and which was adopted by the Board. The appellant relied upon the following contentions in support of this submission: the making of a recommendation under <case> was not a function for the purposes of <case> of the Administration Act; an order, to be valid under <case>, had to be based on the recommendation of the Authority and not on the direction of the Minister.

Was the Recommendation a "function" of the Authority 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the making of a recommendation under <case> of the WC Act was not a function under <case> of the Administration
Act. Rather, it was a statutory precondition to the making of a valid order by the Governor. The essence of this submission was that a recommendation for the purposes of <case> was legislative in nature and not administrative. It was contended that the Minister had no power to give a direction under <case> of the
Administration Act in respect of a legislative act.

Counsel for the respondent submitted that the making of a recommendation was administrative in nature, but that its characterisation as legislative or administrative was immaterial for the purposes of the WC Act or the
Administration Act.

It is generally said that the starting point for the determination of whether a provision or rule is of a legislative or administrative nature is to ask whether the provision or rule is of general application, in which case it is likely to be legislative, or whether it prescribes the application of a general rule to a particular circumstance, in which case it is likely to be administrative: see Committee on Ministers' Powers 1932 (the Donoughmore
Committee). This general rule is expressed by De Smith, Judicial Review of
Administrative Action, 4th ed at 71 in these terms: "[A] distinction often made between legislative and administrative acts is that between the general and the particular. A legislative act is the creation and promulgation of a general rule of conduct without reference to particular cases; an administrative act cannot be exactly defined, but it includes the adoption of a policy, the making and issue of a specific direction, and the application of a general rule to a particular case in accordance with the requirements of policy or expediency or administrative practice." 
This distinction is well recognised: see J.W. Hampton Jr & Co versus United
States <case>; [(1928) 276 US 394] at 407 and has been applied in Australia: see Commonwealth v
Grunseit <case>; [(1943) 67 CLR 58] at 66 per Williams J (at first instance) and by Latham CJ at (on appeal). It was again referred to by Williams J in Arthur Yates and Co
Pty Ltd versus The Vegetable Seeds Committee & Ors <case>; [(1946) 72 CLR 37] at 54. The general rule has been subject to criticism and is usually only taken as the starting point for determining whether an Act is legislative or administrative in character: see Queensland Medical Laboratory & Ors versus Blewett & Ors <case>; [(1988) 84 ALR 615] at 633-4; Delegated Legislation: Professor Pearce (1977);
The Concept of a Legal System: Professor Raz (1980). It is well recognised that legislative, executive and judicial functions often overlap: see Arthur
Yates & Co Pty Ltd versus The Vegetable Seed Company and Ors; Queensland
Medical Laboratory & Ors versus Blewett & Ors; Evans versus Friemann &
Ors [(1981) 34 ALR 428] at 433; Minister for Industry and Commerce versus Tooheys
Limited <case>; [(1982) 60 FLR 325] at 331. This overlap, in itself, is the cause of much of the difficulty in the characterisation of functions as legislative or administrative, as is demonstrated here.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that one of the factors which pointed to a characterisation of the recommendation as legislative was that <case> of the
Administration Act provides a power of delegation in respect of a function. It was inconceivable, according to the submission, that the function of making a recommendation under <case> of the WC Act could be delegated to the General
Manager under that section. There is merit in this submission. However, the making of a recommendation under <case> includes a consideration of the rates and percentages which are to be specified in the Order. That consideration involves, amongst other matters, considerations of policy. Such matters are more typically administrative than legislative, and in my opinion, the policy aspects of the recommendation are such a fundamental part of what the
Authority is required to consider in making the recommendation that they give to the recommendation an administrative character.

Strictly, however, it is not necessary to classify the making of a recommendation for the purposes of <case> as administrative or legislative. The question is whether the making of a recommendation is "a function" of the
Authority. A function, for the purposes of both the Administration Act and the
WC Act includes a "power, authority and duty": see <case> of each Act. There is no express function prescribed by the Administration Act which provides for the making of a recommendation under <case> of the WC Act. However, upon their proper construction, the combined effect of ss 3(2) of both Acts, <case>(b) of the Administration Act and <case> of the WC Act, is that the Authority has the power to make a recommendation under <case> and the making of that recommendation is a precondition to the Governor's exercise of the legislative power conferred by the section. The making of a recommendation, howsoever characterised, thereby falls within the meaning of "function" in both Acts.

Is a recommendation made pursuant to a direction of the Minister, a valid recommendation for the purposes of <case>? 
It was submitted that the intention of <case> was that any Order made under it be based upon the independent and expert advice of the Authority. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the IPO was made by the Governor in purported reliance on a recommendation by the Authority, based upon a resolution purportedly passed by the Board of Directors of the Authority on 9 June 1995 which was ratified by the Board on 13 June 1995. It was submitted that neither the recommendation nor the resolution amounted to the making of a recommendation for the purposes of <case>. Counsel contended that the resolutions did not represent the view of the Authority. Rather they were passed by the Authority on a direction given by the Minister to the General
Manager and to the Board on 8 June 1995.

The question of the effect of a Ministerial direction upon the validity of an act of a governmental authority performed in compliance with such direction was considered by Hope J in Bosnjak's Bus Service Pty Limited versus Commissioner for Motor Transport [(1970) 92 WN 1003.]
The relevant power of the Minister to direct the actions of the Commissioner for Motor Transport was contained in <case> of the Transport (Division of
Functions) Amendment Act 1952, which provided: "In the exercise and performance of the powers, authorities, duties and functions conferred and imposed upon The Director of Transport and Highways by or under this or any other Act such Director shall be subject to the direction and control of the Minister." 
Section 157(1) of the Transport Act, 1930 conferred the power to alter transport routes on the Commissioner. The question arose whether the Minister was, by <case>, entitled to direct and control the Commissioner in the exercise of the powers, authorities, duties and functions conferred upon him by <case> of the Transport Act. Hope J, in answering this question affirmatively, stated at 1014: "...the provision does not simply substitute the Minister for Commissioner; it does not provide, and does not mean, that where a statute refers to "the
Commissioner"...one must read "the Minister". The powers, authorities, duties and functions are still to be exercised and performed by the Commissioner, but in that exercise and performance he is subject to the direction and control of the Minister. In many cases, there is no problem in applying this provision, even in relation to the exercise of discretion. The effect of the provision conferring a discretion upon the Commissioner, when read with the provision conferring control and direction upon the Minister, is to make the discretion one which the Commissioner may exercise as he thinks fit, but which he must exercise in a particular way if so directed by the Minister....However, the provision subjecting the Commissioner to the direction and control of the
Minister does not have the effect of removing from a statutory provision any qualification or condition precedent to the exercise of a power by the
Commissioner, and the power of the Minister to direct and control may have to be limited by the very nature of that qualification or condition." 
This passage, with which I respectfully agree, applies here. Assuming therefore that the direction given by the Minister on 8 June 1995 was a direction which could be made under <case> of the Administration Act, the appellant's submission must fail.

Nature of the direction which may be given under <case> of the Administration
Act 
Counsel for the appellant next submitted that if the Minister did have the power to give a direction, the only direction which the Minister could give under the section was as to the exercise of the function of making a recommendation under <case>. The recommendation which the Authority had the function to make was in relation to fixing "the manner in which the premium payable by an employer...for a policy of insurance shall be calculated...".
In the present case, the Minister only gave a direction as to the fixing of the average premium rate, which is one component only of the formula used to fix the premium.

To determine whether this submission is correct, it is necessary to appreciate the nature and extent of the direction which the Minister may make under <case> of the Administration Act insofar as it relates to the making of a recommendation under <case>. That in turn involves a consideration of what is encompassed in the recommendation which may be made under <case>.

An Order made under the section, which must be made on the recommendation of the Authority, is one which fixes the manner in which the relevant premium shall be calculated. There was no issue that the IPO satisfied the requirements of <case> save only for the question whether there was a valid recommendation of the Authority. The average premium was one component of the manner in which the premium was to be calculated. When the Authority submitted the proposed IPO to the Minister the average premium rate specified was 2.2%.
The only item with which the Minister had disagreement after the Cabinet meeting, was that rate.

It would have been a valid exercise of the Minister's power of direction under s 9 for him to have directed the Authority to make a recommendation to the
Governor for the purposes of <case> in the terms of the draft IPO submitted to him, excepting that the average premium rate be fixed at 2.5% rather than 2.2% as the Authority had suggested. Such a direction would have been in respect of the making of a recommendation fixing the manner in which the premium payable was calculated.

However, the Minister did not do that. The only express direction he gave was in respect of the average premium increase. He gave that direction in the context of having had submitted to him the whole of the draft IPO. In so doing, he must be taken to have implicitly accepted all other aspects of the
IPO. It would be extraordinary if the effective operation of <case> depended upon whether the Minister stated expressly what was clearly implicit in his direction. In my opinion, for such an interpretation to be correct, clear words would need to be found in the section to that effect. There is nothing, however, in the language of <case> or in its context which requires such a narrow interpretation. It follows that the word "functions" as it appears in <case> refers to the separate aspects of any particular function just as it does to the performance of the function as a whole.

Was the recommendation a recommendation "fixing the manner" of calculation of premium 
It was next submitted that the recommendation was not a recommendation fixing the manner in which a premium payable shall be calculated as required by s (1).

It was submitted that in making a recommendation, the Authority is required to take a multitude of factors into account, including the various formulae; components of the formulae upon which different aspects of the premium are calculated, such as the "S" formula and the "F" factors; how the average premium rate was to be adjusted between various pools; whether the "user pays" principle should be adhered to or whether the rate should be applied across the full range of premiums. It was submitted that none of these factors were considered in the context of a 2.5% average premium rate as opposed to .2%. It was further submitted that the application of the 2.5% rate could result in a scheme materially different from the one originally approved. The consideration and determination of such matters was, therefore, according to the submission, essential to the making of a valid recommendation.

This submission fails to take into account the history of the Board's decision making, to which I have referred earlier. During the course of those deliberations, the Board gave consideration to the matters which should be included in its recommendation. Those matters included the appropriate "F" factors, the "S" formula and the average rate of premium. In considering the average rate of premium, the Board, at its 29 April 1995 meeting, had considered various options to which I have referred earlier. Having concluded its review of those matters, the Board, through the General Manager, presented the IPO for approval. At the same time, the Minister was provided with the various reports which had been before the Board at the time of its deliberations and was advised of the Board's resolutions. The Minister did not comment upon any issue other than the average premium rate. It was that matter which became the subject of direction. On 13 June, the Board validly resolved to act upon the Minister's direction as to that matter. Having regard to what went before, it was not necessary to again resolve what it had earlier resolved on 8 May as to the other aspects of its recommendation. Accordingly,
I reject the challenge to the validity of the IPO on this ground also.

Authority of the General Manager 
The validity of the Board's recommendation was subject to a further challenge. It was submitted that for a recommendation to be valid, it must be made by the Board. In other words, the recommendation which is made to the
Governor "must have the seal of approval of the Board". It could not be made by the General Manager as he was not the Authority for the purposes of making a recommendation under <case> and had no power to make a recommendation to the
Governor in his own right. Related to this submission was the further submission that the whole document which became the IPO made by the Governor under the section had to be subject of the Board's recommendation. Thus, as the proposed IPO had never been seen by the Board, the General Manager's recommendation was not valid.

I have already set out the terms of <case>. Counsel for the respondent submitted that <case> was a separate and independent source of authority in the General
Manager. Therefore, even if the entire document which became the IPO was never put to the Board (assuming that this had not been done) the General Manager's recommendation was, by force of <case>, "taken to have been done by the
Authority". I agree with this submission. There is nothing in the express terms of <case> and <case> (2) which makes <case> dependent upon, or confined to, the authority reposed in the General Manager under <case>. Indeed, the language of the section, and in particular, the words in subsection 2 "[a]ny act, matter or thing done in the name of, or on behalf of, the Authority" (emphasis added) point to the opposite conclusion. It follows that <case> confers statutory validity upon the acts of the General Manager, even if those acts were done in excess of the authority conferred by <case>. Accordingly, the General Manager's recommendation of the draft IPO was a valid recommendation for the purposes of <case> of the WC Act.

Counsel for the respondent also submitted that the General Manager acted pursuant to the authority of the Board's resolution of 8 May, which settled the issues of policy for the purposes of making a recommendation under <case>, as well as his own <case> authority. It was submitted that to the extent that the General Manager could not exceed Board authority on a matter of policy, the General Manager's anticipation of that authority in respect of the average premium increase on 9 June was ratified by the Board's resolution on 13 June.
As I have determined that the recommendation was a valid recommendation for the purposes of <case>, it is not necessary to decide this question. However, I should state that I consider this submission to be correct and further consider that that is the manner in which the General Manager operated in the present case, as is clearly borne out by the history of the Board's deliberations.

Having regard to my conclusion in respect of the proper construction of s (2), and the further submission to which I have just referred, it is not necessary to deal with the other bases upon which the respondent defended the validity of the recommendation in so far as the authority of the General
Manager was in issue.
 
That leaves for consideration the final submission, namely that the General
Manager was not purporting to make a recommendation to the Governor by virtue of his own office, but was communicating to the Minister the effect, as he saw it, of the 9 June resolution of the Board, which was not a valid resolution, nor was it a recommendation as to the manner in which the premium payable by an employer should be calculated. It is necessary, in considering this submission, to revisit the history of the matter. The Premiums Sub-Committee met on 1 and 29 March 1995. The minutes of those meetings disclose that the following matters were considered: "Wages and Premium Projections"; "Premium
Scheme Options 1995/6"; "Premium Scheme Scenarios", "Premium Rate Scenarios" and "Options for Experience Premiums". The Board met on 29 April 1995 and according to the minutes considered "Premium Rates for 1995/6". At its meeting on 8 May 1995, the Board considered the "Premiums Sub Committee proposed scheme for Policy Year 1995/96" and resolved to implement the scheme.

The 9 June memorandum to the Board members referred to the Board's earlier deliberations including its 8 May 1995 resolution. No suggestion was made that that resolution, had it been approved in full, was not a resolution in respect of the making of a recommendation within <case>. The only matter in issue thereafter was the average premium increase. The resolution recorded in the 9
June memorandum was only in respect of the average premium increase. However, the terms of the memorandum made it clear that the Board intended to deal with that aspect of its recommendation as a variation to its 8 May resolution. It was not necessary, therefore, to restate or resolve again the uncontested aspects of that resolution. The combined effect of the 8 May and 9 June resolutions (had the latter resolution been valid) would have been to make a recommendation as to fixing the manner in which premiums payable by an employer were to be calculated. On 13 June, the Board ratified its 9 June resolution. That ratification must be construed in the light of what occurred on 9 June. The effect of the 8 May resolution and the 9 June resolution, as ratified by the 13 June resolution, was that there was a valid recommendation within <case>. Accordingly, this submission must be rejected.

Conclusion 
In my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 [(1970) 92 WN 1003], 1014 per Hope J (as he then was) [1986] 1 WLR 763, 774 per Sir John Donaldson MR (as he then was) (1946) 47 SR 99, 109  <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 539], 545  <case>; <case>; [(1949) 78 CLR 529] [(1979) 141 CLR 672]; 678  <case>; [(1990-1991) 172 CLR 1], 23-4  <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 778], 783-784 supra at 1014-1015 supra at 774  <case>; <case>; [(1994) 181 CLR 539] * * * 
