

Mitchell Anthony Galvin versus Dean Richard Lannon [1997] NSWSC 676 (31
December 1997) 
MITCHELL ANTHONY GALVIN v. DEAN RICHARD LANNON /90 
TUESDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
DUNFORD, J 
JUDGMENT 
DUNFORD, J: In these proceedings the plaintiff claims damages pursuant to the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) for personal injuries suffered by him on 19 July 1989 when the motor cycle he was riding was struck at an intersection by a utility motor vehicle driven by the defendant which failed to give way when required to do so. Liability has been admitted and the matter has proceeded for assessment of damages only.

The plaintiff was born on 5 May 1959 and accordingly was aged almost 30 at the time of the accident, and is 37 now. He was educated to Year 10 following which he completed an apprenticeship as a motor mechanic and stayed in that occupation for a further two years. He was then accepted for the Police
Service, attended training at the Police Academy and on 26 June 1981 was appointed a Probationary Constable and posted to Waverley Police Station where he stayed until the end of 1985. He was transferred to Wellington until
September/October 1988 and then joined the staff at the Police Academy at
Goulburn. By this time had experience in general duties and had done training with the Tactical Response Group and later with the Special Weapons Operations
Squad as a reserve. In those days promotion in the Force was by seniority and examination and by the time he was appointed to the Police Academy the plaintiff was a Constable First Class.

The impact of the accident was apparently quite severe and the plaintiff has no recollection of the accident itself, and apart from a vague memory of being in Goulburn Hospital, no recollection of events until about a week later when he recalls being in the Royal Canberra Hospital in considerable pain.

As a result of the accident the plaintiff suffered a transverse fracture of the mid shaft of the right femur, a comminuted supracondylar fracture of the left femur with intra-articular extension involving the left knee, an undisplaced fracture of the left upper tibia, an undisplaced fracture of the styloid process of the left distal radius, along with concussion, temporary loss of consciousness, multiple contusions and abrasions. He recovered without complication from the concussion, contusions and abrasions, apart from occasional slight memory loss. The fracture of the left tibia was treated conservatively with bed rest and elevation and the fracture of the left wrist was treated by cast immobilisation. The plaintiff described the wrist as causing no difficulty from about six weeks after the removal of the cast.

The upper leg injuries on the other hand have been and are a continuing disaster. He was, on the day of the accident, transferred from Goulburn (where the accident occurred) to the Royal Canberra Hospital where he came under the care of Dr. Gillespie, orthopaedic surgeon. On the evening of the accident (19
July 1989) the left and right femoral fractures were treated by open reduction and internal fixation, the left femoral fracture being internally fixed with interfragmentary screws and a 95 degree femoral blade plate, and the right femoral fracture by internal fixation with a G-K intramedullary nail. The plaintiff was returned to Goulburn Base Hospital on 22 August 1989 for continuing physiotherapy and post-operative care and continued as an inpatient until 15 September 1989, at which time he was confined to a wheelchair which continued for a few months. He then continued as an outpatient receiving daily physiotherapy, two sessions a day for approximately five to six months. During this time he used a Constant Passive Movement machine twice daily for an hour each time which was extremely painful and left him exhausted at the end of the day. He returned to work in April 1990 on a part-time basis, by which time he was walking with the aid of a walking stick which he found very difficult. The work consisted of desk duties and working at a computer console for a period of four hours a day which left him exhausted with his legs aching, following which he attended the hospital in the afternoon for further physiotherapy which also caused severe pain.

Unfortunately, both the fractures united in unsatisfactory positions. The right femoral fracture united with about 30 degrees of fixed external rotation deformity and on 27 September 1990, Dr. Gillespie removed the G-K nail, performed an osteotomy and derotated the femur 30 degrees. A new nail was inserted and was fixed at the top with one screw and at the knee with two screws. On that occasion he was in hospital for about a week and the leg was extremely painful. He was mobile only on crutches which he found very uncomfortable and caused back ache, and it also strained the muscles in the neck causing him neck aches.

The left femoral fracture had united with a significant amount of varus angulation producing an unsatisfactory "bow leg" deformity and, when the right leg became sufficiently strong to take weight, the plaintiff was re-admitted to hospital, and on 26 June 1991, Dr. Gillespie performed a corrective valgus- extension supracondylar femoral osteotomy just above the knee joint with internal fixation with a 95 degree lag screw. At the same time the top screw in the K nail was removed from the right femur. In the immediate post- operative period there was a partial displacement of some of the internal hardware in the left femur and this osteotomy required repeat internal fixation which took place on 12 July 1991, when the fracture was further protected by cast immobilisation from the ankle to the groin. Following the
July operation, he was kept in hospital for about a week and was in a lot of pain. On 9 August 1991, the plaster cast was removed and replaced with a fibreglass plaster but about three weeks after the surgery, it again became very sore and on 9 August 1991 he was admitted to Prince of Wales Hospital where his condition was diagnosed as infected left knee osteotomy. The infection was treated with an intravenous drip and later antibiotics. The fibreglass cast was replaced and secured by a bandage and he was discharged on August 1991. Following this he was on crutches for about five months which he again found difficult with strain on his neck, back, arms and right leg.
The fibreglass cast had been removed and the crutches discarded by the time he returned to work in December 1991 at Waverley Police Station as assistant to the exhibits clerk. This was essentially a desk job with some walking around and carrying reasonably light items. He initially started four hours a day three days a week which made him quite tired, and then the rehabilitation unit suggested he try five days a week, but he was unable to cope with this and it was again reduced to three days a week. This continued for about six to seven months. By that stage he had noticed that he left leg was shorter by a couple of centimetres. Consequent irregular gait caused his back to ache and this has continued.

Then on 17 June 1992, Dr. Gillespie removed all hardware from both legs. On this occasion the plaintiff was in hospital for about five days during which time his legs were extremely painful and sore. He was discharged on crutches bearing weight on the right leg, but after a few days he was able to bear weight on both legs without crutches, although his legs were still painful, particularly the left leg. He continued to be conscious of problems, particularly in the left knee. In respect of this period (late 1992) Dr.
Gillespie reported (13 January 1993):- "The current situation is that Mr. Galvin has been left with some significant restriction of motion and loss of strength in his lower limbs, principally on the left. There is weakness of the left thigh musculature and significant loss of motion in the left knee. At the moment, the knee moves from 0 degrees to 85 degrees of flexion which is approximately 40 degrees to 50 degrees short of full range of movement. There is mild stiffness around the right hip and right knee as well, though there is no limitation in motion in this limb." 
The plaintiff then came under the care of Dr. Michael Johnson, orthopaedic surgeon, to whom he was referred in August 1992. Clinical examination confirmed the restricted range of movement, with crepitus in his left knee, and an arthroscopy was carried out on 4 November 1992 which disclosed grade four chrondromalacia patellae with raw bone exposed. Six incisions were made around the knee, some adhesions were cut away and the knee joint was manipulated. By 18 January 1993 the knee could only be flexed to 95 degrees.
The plaintiff described the pain as excruciating for a couple of weeks. He was again on crutches for that period. He never returned to work and was discharged from the Police Service medically unfit, effective from 1 July
The left knee and thigh continued to be quite painful.

The sorry saga continued when on 11 April 1993, the plaintiff stumbled whilst walking from the back lane into the backyard at his home and felt his left femur snap in half. He was taken by ambulance to Prince of Wales Hospital where he came under the care of Dr. Craig Waller who has continued as his treating orthopaedic surgeon since that time. X-rays of the left femur disclosed an oblique fracture passing directly through a pre-existing old screw hole. Dr. Waller performed an internal fixation and bone grafting of this fracture with a 95 degree condylar screw plate device. The fixation was very rigid, the bone around the fracture site was roughened up and petalised, and a bone graft was added around the fracture site, the donor site being the left anterior iliac crest. He was again in hospital for about a week during which time he was in considerable pain and very sore. He was discharged on crutches and continued so for approximately a further eight weeks and it was some time before he could place any weight on his left leg. The added weight on the right leg caused it to become sore and aching.

Examination by Dr. Waller on 22 November 1994 revealed that the plaintiff walked with a left sided limp, he had considerable wasting of the left quadriceps muscle, his fixation plate on the lateral aspect of the left distal femur was palpable although not unduly sensitive to palpation, he only had a degree range of movement in the left knee and the fracture site x-rays showed that the fracture site appeared to be completely united and bony gaps previously present were filling in very well.

However, the plaintiff says that at present the bottom of the plate hooks out a little, and where it hooks out the skin catches on it all the time. He can feel it under his skin and it causes irritation on the inside. He can also feel the point of the screw on the inside of the knee. Dr. Waller has told him that he will eventually need surgery to remove the screws, he wishes to have that done and was to see Dr. Waller on 19 November last for that matter to be considered. Moreover, he continues to suffer pain along the left thigh where it has been cut open and where the plate is. His legs are also very much disfigured and such disfigurement causes him embarrassment so that he does not wear shorts except at home and no longer goes to the beach. I have inspected the disfigurement. It is quite marked on both upper legs but particularly on the left and the plaintiff's embarrassment in exposing these areas is understandable and justified. The scarring is depicted in a number of the photos in Exhibit C.

The plaintiff says that he was initially optimistic of making a full recovery but gradually realised this was not to be so, at least by the time of the refracture in April 1993 and this realisation caused him to be depressed and angry. He is not as happy now as previously, but short tempered and cynical.
He claims the accident was part of the reason for his subsequent divorce from his wife and he has been unable to continue previous pursuits of water skiing, squash, swimming and body surfing. He is, however, able to drive an automatic car for up to two hours, do the shopping, mow the lawn, dig the garden, dance, play golf and go to the movies, although I would expect that there are limitations on his lawn mowing, digging the garden and playing golf over lengthy periods.

I accept the plaintiff's description of his pain, restrictions and physical disabilities. Indeed he was not challenged on these matters, but only in relation to his co-operation with vocational rehabilitation services.

Medical opinion is generally unanimous that the plaintiff has been left with major permanent disabilities, and that the only improvement possible will be the removal of the hardware from his right femur. Dr. Bracken found well marked osteoarthritic changes in the left knee and indications of early osteoarthritic changes in the right knee as did Dr. Ellis, whilst all the doctors who considered the matter either found evidence of present osteoarthritic changes in the left knee or considered such development likely, and Dr. Patrick also considered it likely in the right knee. Most of them regarded a total left knee replacement as inevitable and a number considered a right knee replacement also likely some years in the future. Dr. Ellis and Dr.
Bracken also considered that in the short term the plaintiff will also require a patella ligament lengthening or arthroscopic debridement of the left knee (quadricep plasty) so as to postpone as far as possible the total left knee replacement. The need for such procedures was not really questioned by any of the defendant's medical experts. I am, accordingly, satisfied that these procedures will be necessary in the future and besides being allowed the estimated cost of such procedures the plaintiff's non-economic loss includes the pain involved as the conditions deteriorate prior to the surgery, the inconvenience and the trauma of the surgery and the pain and restrictions that will follow the surgery in the short term.

In respect of non-economic loss I assess the plaintiff's loss at 60% of a most extreme case, and accordingly allow $148,200 in this regard.

Out of pocket expenses to date are agreed upon at $62,366, and in respect of the future the claim is for the cost of further surgery. Based on the report of Dr. Ellis dated 19 April 1995, the annexures thereto and the other medical evidence to which I have referred, I am satisfied that I should allow the cost of surgery for the removal of the metal implants and the quadriceps plasty without any allowance for deferral. The evidence suggests that the first left knee replacement should if possible be postponed for 15 to 20 years and a second one would be required 20 to 25 years after the first. Taking a mean through these figures I will allow the first left knee replacement cost to be deferred for 17 years, the second one for 22 years after that, and the right knee replacement for 28 years from the present. In respect of all procedures except the removal of the metal implants and the quadriceps plasty I consider a further allowance of five percent should be allowed for vicissitudes that might arise such as the plaintiff's premature death or loss of legs etc. by reason of an earlier accident or disease. These figures may therefore be calculated as follows:- 
Removal of metal implants $4,622 
Quadriceps plasty 9,622 
First left knee replacement: $53,671 deferred for 17 years ($23,400) less five percent for vicissitudes 22,231 
Second left knee replacement: $53,671 deferred for 39 years ($7,997) less five percent for vicissitudes 7,597 
Right knee replacement: $53,671 deferred for 28 years ($13,686) less five percent for vicissitudes 13,002 $57,074  
Economic loss 
As previously noted, the plaintiff was almost 30 at the time of the accident and is now 37. He was retired from the Police Service medically unfit on 1
July 1993 with the rank of Senior Constable (fifth year) and apart from some short term casual part-time work with the Speedy Linen Service to which I will shortly refer, he has not worked since. Mr. Bradbury, formerly an Inspector in the New South Wales Police Service and the plaintiff's superior officer at the
Goulburn Training Academy at the time of his accident, gave evidence concerning the plaintiff's prospects of promotion in the Police Service. He explained that whereas promotion had formerly been by seniority subject to examination, since about 1988 it has been based on merit, a major component in the assessment of which is the recommendation of superior officers. Mr.
Bradbury had a very high opinion of the plaintiff, his competency and prospects of promotion and went so far as to suggest that he could have become an Inspector within five years from his then rank of Senior Constable. He said he would have recommended him for promotion to Sergeant and his experience was that his recommendations were invariably acted upon.

A set of calculations has been prepared by Furzor Crestani Services which purports to calculate the potential earnings of the plaintiff if he had not been injured, had remained in the Police Service until the retiring age of 60 and had been promoted over the years. These are prepared on two bases: scenario A and scenario B as described therein and both scenarios take the plaintiff eventually to the rank of Superintendent, although I hasten to add that neither of them have him promoted to the rank of Inspector within five years which, although possible in the light of Mr. Bradbury's evidence, I regard as not likely. Indeed, the two scenarios have him promoted to the rank of Inspector in 2006 and 2008 respectively. In the light of the evidence, I regard it as likely that he would have reached the rank of Inspector in due course but the rank of Superintendant, although possible, I would regard as not quite so probable. For this reason I consider it appropriate to adopt scenario B as a reasonable assessment of what the plaintiff could reasonably expect to be his potential earning capacity if he had not been injured, although I observe in passing that ultimately there is only a difference of $20,000 overall in the totals of the two scenarios.

More difficult and more vigorously in dispute is the extent of the plaintiff's residual earning capacity. All the doctors who have expressed an opinion on this subject have expressed it in terms to the effect that the plaintiff is not fit for anything involving prolonged sitting, standing, walking, squatting, climbing, running or heavy lifting, but have described him as capable only of light manual or clerical activities of a sedentary nature. Dr.
Patrick, for the plaintiff, considered he was probably unemployable as far as working reliably and consistently full-time, fit for casual or part-time light work not involving lifting, bending or stooping and with the ability to rest as needed and Dr. McEwin, highly qualified in rehabilitation medicine, whose report was tendered on behalf of the defendant, in June 1994 expressed the view that he could work 20 hours a week in an office job or similar which allowed him to sit for most of the time. Dr. Athanasiou (Psychologist and vocational guidance consultant) suggested a number of jobs he could do and considered his prospects reasonable because of his demonstrated experience and job stability, and because he had some skills which could be transferred to other employment situations, but said he could expect a delay of over a year in obtaining his first post-accident work and Dr P. Langeluddecke also expressed the view that his ability to utilise his potential for sedentary and clerical work and to cope with full-time employment were likely to be compromised by physical discomfort from his leg injuries and its detrimental effects on his concentration, mentation and mood state.

A lot of time was spent in addresses considering the plaintiff's alleged failure to mitigate his loss and reference was made to [s.39](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s39.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) and
Brogan v. McGeary (Court of Appeal, unreported 7 April 1995); and it was submitted that, from at least the beginning of 1994, the plaintiff had a capacity to earn which he did not use and that he failed to avail himself of opportunities of rehabilitation retraining and vocational assistance.

Mr. Orme (Citipsych) in his report of 25 June 1995, suggested that the plaintiff wished to have his claim settled prior to any form of work or vocational planning. When this was put to the plaintiff, he denied it and said he wished to complete his surgery before looking for work. Although his answer appeared at the time unconvincing, I note that he gave a similar answer to Dr.
Athanasiou as long ago as November 1994; and in view of the fact that he had the refracture in 1993 and still has considerable hardware in his right femur which has to be removed, and he can expect to undergo a quadricep plasty in the not too distant future, I can see some justification for this approach; and consider that it plays a substantial, though not necessarily complete, part in his failure to do more in obtaining alternative employment in the meantime. He was recently examined for a third time by Dr. Bodel on behalf of the defendant, but that doctor's latest report has not been tendered; nor was any report forthcoming from Dr. Wilcox who examined him in 5 June 1996 on behalf of the defendant nor from the Vocational Capacity Centre to whom he was also referred by the defendant and who carried out physical assessments of him only recently. The plaintiff relies on the failure of the defendant to tender reports from these doctors relative to these examinations as justifying an inference that such reports would not have assisted the defendant's case:
Jones v. Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298], and I accept such inference.

The plaintiff himself said that he intends to seek work for up to four or five hours a day where he can stand and sit. So far he has only looked for such work in the papers and will continue to do that. He did, last year, work for a few weeks for the Speedy Linen Service collecting and delivery laundry. This was a part-time job driving a manual vehicle but he found he was unable to continue because the operation of a clutch aggravated his left knee. Having regard to the refracture in April 1993 and the period necessary to recover from that surgery, a period of retraining plus the delay that could be anticipated in finding his first job as per Dr. Athanasiou's report, and bearing in mind that the process of selecting one from a number of applicants is on each occasion an all or nothing affair, in which the applicant with diminished capacity may each time be wholly unsuccessful: Wade v. Allsop [(1976) 50 ALJR 643] at 647. it is probably true that, even if he had used greater efforts, which I believe he could have done to co-operate with the vocational and rehabilitation people, he probably would not have been able to obtain work before now, at which time it would be appropriate to defer starting work until he has his immediate surgical problems out of the way.

Accordingly, I regard him as totally incapacitated for work from the date of his retrenchment from the Police Service until approximately the end of this year, say 31 December 1997. As from that date I believe he is capable of work of a semi- sedentary nature without prolonged sitting or standing for up to 25 to 30 hours a week and I am satisfied that if he undertakes proper rehabilitation procedures and co-operates with the appropriate organisations he will be able to find such work. There is no direct evidence before me of what he could earn in such capacity but doing some rather rough calculations based on the figures in Dr. Athanasiou's report, I assess that he could probably earning something in the vicinity of $300 per week on a part-time basis doing work within his capacity.

I therefore allow loss of wages to date as set out in the expert's report ($100,778) but some allowance must be made for the plaintiff's earnings from the Speedy Linen Service, as to which amount there is no evidence, so I round off the amount of loss of earnings to date to $100,000.

As to loss of future earning capacity I accept scenario B in the expert's report as to the amount of the loss to age 60 if he were totally incapacitated. ($503,751), but find he has a partial earning capacity of approximately $300 per week which capitalised at 5% p.a. for 22 years deferred for one year (i.e. to age 60 commencing in a year's time) amounts to $201,034.
The difference between that amount and $503,751 is $302,717, which when reduced by 15% for vicissitudes amounts to $257,309.

Some allowance must also be for the fact that the plaintiff's loss of earning capacity will be total during and following the various knee replacements, but these are years in the future and so only a minor adjustment is necessary.
Accordingly for loss of future earning capacity I allow $260,000.

The plaintiff also claims for the future loss of Long Service Leave and
Superannuation entitlements he would have had if he had remained in the Police
Service, and calculations in respect of these items have been included in the expert's report (Exhibit B). However, as I have found his future loss of earning capacity to be only partial and not total, it appears appropriate to likewise allow only part of the amounts claimed in respect of these items, and
I allow for loss of Long Service Leave entitlements $6,500, and for loss of
Superannuation Entitlements $12,000. There is also a claim for interest, but it has been agreed that this should be deferred until my findings on some of the other items are known.

Apart from interest, the plaintiff's damages may be summarised as follows:- 
Non-economic loss $148,200 
Out of Pockets to date 62,366 
Future Out of Pockets 57,074 
Loss of Earnings to Date 100,000 
Loss of Future Earning Capacity 260,000 
Loss of Long Service Leave entitlements 6,500 
Loss of Superannuation entitlements 12,000 $646,140 * * * 
