

Rabelais Pty. Limited versus Cameron and Ors. No.3168 of 1991 Damages [1995]
NSWSC 35 (8 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
HODGSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY #DATE 31:7:1995 #ADD 8:9:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff:   Mr. P. O'Loughlin 
Instructed by:         Greaves Wannan and Williams, Sydney st and 2nd Defendants did not appear.
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
HODGSON J:  On 8th February 1993, I gave judgment on the question of liability in this matter. There was an appeal from that judgment which was ultimately dismissed, and it is now necessary for me to decide what damages are payable by the first defendants to the plaintiff.
As appears from the earlier judgment, the contract for the sale of the subject property from the plaintiff to the first defendants was due for completion on 30th July 1990, and this was extended by agreement to 30th
October 1990. The contract was terminated for non-compliance with a notice to complete on 13th December 1990. The property was re-sold, and the re-sale was completed on 28th June 1991. The deposit under the original contract was paid to the plaintiff on rd December 1993, together with interest which had accrued on it.
The plaintiff has provided a schedule showing the calculation of damages claimed by the plaintiff, and it is convenient to deal with this matter by reference to that schedule. The plaintiff's schedule is annexed to this judgment.
The first category of damages claimed is described as costs, advertising expenses and sundries. Items under par.(a) of that heading (being the advertising expenses on the sale to the first defendants) are not payable since they do not arise from the breach of contract; and, as indicated on the schedule, they are not in fact claimed.
There are included under this heading certain legal costs, being those items referred to in pars.(c), (d) and (f). There is some material before me which give support to the view that these are reasonable. In the circumstances of this case, I think it is appropriate to include costs in those figures in the damages, but to reserve leave to the first defendants to require that those costs be taxed or assessed. I would allow that right to be exercised within six weeks of service of the order upon the first defendants.
The other item that needs some consideration is item (h) which includes certain air fares and other fares incurred by the plaintiffs in preparing for the case. Mr. O'Loughlin for the plaintiff has not been able to find any authority for the inclusion of those items in damages; but he submits that it is foreseeable that a breach of contract will cause the innocent party to make a claim and, if that claim is not met without legal proceedings, will necessitate the innocent party to incur expenses in the legal proceedings which will not merely include an amount which the innocent party has to pay solicitors, but also fares for travelling to and from legal advisers and to and from the place where the case is ultimately heard.
Insofar as these items include fares for obtaining necessary legal advice, other than legal advice in connection with the proceedings, there seems no reason to treat them any differently from the legal advices themselves.
Insofar as they relate to legal advice and attendances for the proceedings themselves, it is clear that the costs of the legal advice and the legal attendances themselves would not be included as part of the damages, but rather would be included in the costs order which is ultimately made. I am inclined to think that, without authority, it would not be appropriate for me to include the travelling expenses in connection with legal services for the hearing as part of the actual damages, when the costs of those legal services themselves would not be included in the damages, but would be dealt with as costs of the proceedings.
For that reason, I would exclude so much of item (h) as concerns fares incurred in connection with legal representation for the proceedings themselves.
Turning to the next heading, which is interest paid to financiers, that is calculated from the date of termination, namely 13th December 1990. It seems to me that, if the contract had been completed on the postponed agreed date, the balance of the purchase money received then would have been applied in relation to these loans; so that this item should be calculated not from 13th
December 1990, but from 30th October 1990.
One other question which arises in relation to item 2 is whether there was any tax saving by reason of the actual payment of that interest. It appears that there was not, because the plaintiff was not earning any income in the relevant tax year. Before finalising the judgment figure, I think there should be some evidence put on to that effect.
The next item in respect of which a claim is made is the interest pursuant to a special condition of the contract, which provided for interest pending completion. The only question that arises in relation to this item is whether this should be net of tax, because, had that money been received, there would have been tax payable on it. Mr. O'Loughlin says that it may well be that because of accumulated losses, the plaintiff would not have been liable for any tax. Again, I think I should be provided with evidence, relevantly the most up-to-date financial figures or tax returns of the plaintiff, to confirm that no tax would have been payable on that interest.
The same comment applies to par.4(a), which is claimed in respect of interest that would have been payable under the vendor finance mortgage.
As regards item 4(b), it seems to me that what would have been received on completion was not merely 50% of the purchase price, namely $692,772.50, but in addition to that, the deposit of $138,554.50.
However, as noted under heading 2, most of that would have been used in discharging the three loans referred to under that item.
Accordingly, the interest claimed under 4(b) should only be interest on the difference between 60% of the purchase price and the total amount of those three loans, which would be a much smaller sum.
Turning to item 5, assuming the interest figures under item 3 and 4(a) remain the same because no tax was payable, in my opinion the calculations on item 5 are correct except for one matter.
Under item 5(b)(ii), credit is given for the deposit of $138,554.50. In my opinion, credit should be given there also for the interest which accumulated on that sum before it was paid over on rd December 1993. In addition, that interest should be deducted from the interest which is claimed. In other words, the first adjustment that I have referred to only affects the capital base on which a certain interest calculation is made. The actual interest which the plaintiffs received on that deposit should also be deducted from the total amount of the interest component of the judgment.
The other matter that has been debated concerns the possible liability of the plaintiff for capital gains tax under Pt.IIIA of the [Income Tax Assessment
Act 1936](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/). It is put for the plaintiff, on the basis of the discussion in
Provan v. HCL Real Estate Limited [(1992) 24 ATR 238], that the plaintiff has a potential liability for capital gains tax arising out of its judgment in this case. Mr. O'Loughlin referred me also to the case of Tuite v. Excelby [25 ATR ] which, in general terms, supported the decision of Rolfe, J. in Provan. He also referred me to Carborundum Realty Pty. Ltd. v. RAIA
Archicentre Pty. Ltd.
[(1993) Aust.Torts Rep. 81-229.] In that case, in the Supreme Court of Victoria,
Justice Harper considered that Pt.IIIA of the [Income Tax Assessment Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/) was not intended to apply to transactions which did not involve the passing consideration, and which accordingly in his view, did not result in a gain.
That case was criticised by an article in the Law Society Journal, 8th July , by Michael Inglis.
 .
In my opinion, the damages provided for in a judgment such as this could perhaps be regarded as consideration on disposal of an asset within Pt.IIIA of the Act, the relevantasset being the cause of action. However, it seems to me that any capital gain for the purposes of that Part would have to be calculated by deducting, from the amount of the damages, the cost base, being relevantly, in my opinion, the nett asset lost by the plaintiff as part of the production of the cause of action.
In this case, as in most cases, I think the whole of the capital component of the damages would reflect the nett value of whatever asset the plaintiff has lost in producing the cause of action; so that the cost base would be no less than the capital component of the damages awarded.
Insofar as there are interest components under s.94 of the Supreme Court Rules, those amounts could well be caught by the capital gains provisions. I am inclined to think that those amounts would, in any event, be assessable income under the [Income Tax Assessment Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/itaa1936240/). Insofar as they were assessable income, it seems to me there is no loss caused by the first defendants, except possibly insofar as the whole of the assessable income has to be paid in one income period, rather than paid over a number of years in respect of which lower marginal rates might apply.
If and insofar as there is income tax or capital gains tax loss caused in this general way, it seems to me that it would be recoverable as an item of damages. It is apparent from what I have said, however, that it would not be possible for me to make any assessment of that loss. It is desirable that all aspects of damages be disposed of in one hearing, but because there is the possibility of substantial loss, I would be prepared in this case to reserve leave to the plaintiff to apply for additional damages referable to income tax or capital gains tax considerations.
At the outset of the hearing today, Mr.
O'Loughlin advised me that one of the first defendants had been made bankrupt. That probably means that, unless and until leave to proceed is obtained, judgment can only be entered against the other of the first defendants. It would be desirable if that aspect could be clarified before short minutes are brought in, so that on that occasion, if there is to be judgment against the bankrupt party as well, that could be provided for.
I stand the matter over to 9.30am on Thursday 17th August 1995 for short minutes.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/35.html  
