

Regina versus Cynthia Therese Edwards [1998] NSWSC 1000 (8 February 1998) 
REGINA versus Cynthia Therese EDWARDS /96 
Tuesday 17 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, JAMES J, IRELAND J 
JUDGMENT 
SENTENCING - MANSLAUGHTER - EFFECT OF SENTENCE ON THIRD PERSON - CROWN
APPEAL 
The respondent pleaded guilty to manslaughter. She was sentenced to penal servitude for three years to be served by way of periodic detention. The sentencing judge said she would have sentenced the respondent to full time custody but for the circumstance that a person for whom the respondent was caring, a patient in an institution, would suffer from her absence. The Crown appealed - HELD - The sentencing judge had failed correctly to state or apply the principles relating to the circumstances in which hardship to a third party may mitigate a sentence.

Reg versus Wirth [(1976) 14 SASR 291]; R v
Boyle [(1987) 34 ACrimR 202]; R versus T [(1989) 47 ACrimR 29]; R versus Adami <case>; [(1989) 42 ACrimR 88]; R versus MacDonald, CCA, unreported, 12 December 1995 applied.
 The facts of the case did not warrant its being treated as "wholly exceptional".
 The respondent should be resentenced to a period of full time custody.

O R D E R S Crown appeal allowed.
 Sentence imposed by Simpson J quashed.
 In lieu thereof respondent sentenced to penal servitude for three years, involving a minimum term of 18 months and an additional term of 18 months.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: This is a Crown Appeal against a sentence imposed by Simpson J in the Supreme Court.

The respondent pleaded guilty of the manslaughter of Warwick John Cotten. She was sentenced by Simpson J to penal servitude for three years, and it was ordered that the sentence be served by way of periodic detention.

The practical effect of such an order, having regard to the way in which the relevant legislation is administered, was explained in R versus Hallacoglu [(1992) 63 A Crim R 287.] In the usual case, a prisoner whose sentence is to be served by way of periodic detention will be in custody, at weekends, for about one-third of the term of the sentence, and will perform work in the nature of community service at weekends during the remainder of the term. (For a more detailed explanation of the scheme see 63 A Crim R at 293).

Simpson J, in her remarks on sentence, said that she would not even have contemplated imposing a sentence involving less than a term of full time custody had it not been for one particular feature of the case. It is the manner in which her Honour dealt with that feature which has given rise to the present appeal. Before coming to that matter, however, it is convenient to make some brief observations about other aspects of the case, which are not in dispute.

The respondent, who is aged 48, and the victim, a middle-aged man, had formed a relationship, and were living together. The victim, however, was married, and continued to maintain his relationship with his wife. As a result, it was not uncommon for him to be absent from the respondent's home for days at a time.

According to the report of a psychiatrist, Dr Knutzelius, the relationship between the respondent and the victim was "stormy". The respondent said that she felt humiliated when the victim returned to his wife.

The report of Dr Knutzelius states: "Cynthia Edwards' background is one characterised by neglect and physical and emotional abuse as a child. Such a background has left her ill equipped to deal with the stresses of everyday relationships and life in general. However, despite this, she has managed to care for her 3 children adequately, to maintain a relationship over 14 years and to support herself (and her family after her husband left). Nevertheless, her relationships have been stormy and at times her alcohol intake has been excessive. Her relationship with her partner (the victim) was likewise stormy. Though there is no doubt she was very attached to him at the time of his death." 
On 13 March 1994, the victim died as a result of stab wounds inflicted on him by the respondent. It is impossible to know precisely what happened, because the evidence of the respondent, which Simpson J accepted, was that all she could remember was that an argument broke out between the two of them and a fight ensued. The respondent said that she was suffering from amnesia and had no recollection of the stabbing. However, the evidence showed that, following the stabbing, the respondent called an ambulance. She told the ambulance operator that she had stabbed her husband. When the ambulance officer arrived he saw the victim lying face down on the floor in the lounge room of the respondent's home. Around the top half of his face was a large pool of blood.
He was already dead. The respondent had a substantial amount of blood in her hair and on her body. A post-mortem examination showed two stab wounds to the victim; a large wound to the chest, and another large wound to the face.

Simpson J accepted, as she was entitled to, that the respondent was sincerely contrite. She also pointed out that the respondent had no relevant criminal history. On the other hand, her Honour observed that the objective seriousness of the actions of the respondent called for a substantial sentence.

The basis of the plea of guilty to manslaughter was that the death of the victim resulted from the respondent's unlawful and dangerous act in stabbing the victim; the respondent's conduct was deliberate, but was not done with intent to kill, or cause grievous bodily harm, or with reckless indifference to life.

Simpson J examined closely the subjective features of the case. The Crown makes no criticism of this aspect of her reasoning, except for the one matter already mentioned. Ultimately, her Honour said that she was intending to take "a most unusual course, one which would otherwise not be warranted, nor even contemplated".

The course to which her Honour was referring was the order that the sentence of penal servitude was to be served by way of periodic detention.

The reason, and the only reason, why her Honour took that course related to what she described as "the circumstances of (a man named) Keith." 
The information which came before Simpson J as to the circumstances of Keith, which was relatively limited in extent, emerged from some evidence which appears to have been called primarily to establish the good character of the respondent. Having regard to the importance attached to that evidence by
Simpson J, I shall set out the whole of the evidence.

Counsel appearing for the respondent called as a witness Mrs Patterson, who was the manager of an institution for the intellectually handicapped and the psychiatrically disabled. At the time of the sentence proceedings, the respondent had been a paid carer at that institution for about three years. In effect, Mrs Patterson was her employer. She was asked to describe the nature of the work being done by the respondent. She said that the respondent worked fifteen paid hours per week but that she put in extra, unpaid work, and that she did her work very well without complaining. She was a loyal and committed employee.

The presently relevant evidence of Mrs Patterson was as follows: "Q. Has the work she has been doing been of the same nature throughout? 
A. It has, yes.
 
Q. In general terms what is that? 
A. She is a personal carer to Keith (surname), she takes him out 15 hours a week to social groups, shopping, movies, things like that, and includes him in her family life so takes him home and introduces him to the family. So he has an adopted family there as well.
 
Q. If we can refer to this person by his first name of Keith? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. He is a resident at the lodge? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Has he been there for some time? 
A. About 15 years that I know of.
 
Q. How long is it that you have been the manager there? 
A. Eight years.
 
Q. When you first came there, did you fairly quickly discover any particular features of managing this person? 
A. Keith had a lot of problems. He had been discharged from three nursing homes because he was too aggressive, didn't get on with any of the other residents and when he got, his claim came through he had funds to get his own personal carer.
 
Q. Did he have some injury claim before the court from which he got some money? 
A. That's right.
 
Q. What age is he roughly? 
A. He is about 61.
 
Q. What is the nature of his disability? 
A. He has brain damage and a stroke, so he has ability problems so he is very aggressive, very abusive. So not a nice character.
 
Q. Is he physically violent? 
A. Yes, he can be.
 
Q. Has he been violent to some people? 
A. Yes, just they are a bit more mobile than him so they can keep out of his way.
 
Q. Are there any particular precautions taken because of the fear that he might be violent, in terms of things kept out of his way? 
A. Yes, he is not allowed things like a walking stick or stroller because he has used that and hit people. He has a plastic cup so yes, he can be quite violent.
 
Q. Is it correct Mrs Edwards has taken care of that person in the way you have described? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Since about a year before the death of Mr Cotten? 
A. That's right, yes.
 
Q. Has anybody else taken care of him for anything like period? 
A. Six months before that was a girl lasted six months but with the break
Cindy had, I think he had three or four different carers in the space of a few months. Nobody would do it, they would start and leave, they wouldn't have anything to do with him.
 
Q. Did any of them didn't even last a day? 
A. Yes, that's right, to the corner of the street and then come back.
 
Q. In terms of residents who present difficulties in management, where would he be on the scale? 
A. He would be on the worst. He is the most violent in the house, he has been banned from the centres, he is not allowed to go to them without a carer, he has to have a carer.
 ...................................................................................
 
Q. And the work you have described with the resident, Keith, has continued right up to the present, has it? 
A. Right up to the present, yes.
 
Q. With a break just in the last few days because of this matter? 
A. Yes, but still dropped in on Friday to make sure everything was all right.
 
Q. In terms of her commitment to that work, what do you say about it? 
A. Oh, very loyal. She has done everything above what she was supposed to do, well above what she was supposed to do, very kind hearted.
 
Q. In general terms, putting aside the particular difficulties of this person Keith, is it difficult to get people to do that sort of work? 
A. Yes, a lot of people don't really know what it is like and the reality is totally different from the theory. Being there is totally different.
 
Q. Before she took up the involvement with him some three years ago now, what was his daily life like? 
A. Oh, just around the house, not doing much, watching TV, he didn't have any social outings at all. We tried them all and he got banned from them.
 
Q. When you say he got banned, do you mean particular places he was taken to he played up and so wasn't allowed to come back? 
A. That's correct.
 
Q. Since Mrs Edwards has been involved with him, has he been able to go out to various places? 
A. Yes, oh, yes, every day nearly he has been going out and his behaviour was a lot better. Even with Cindy his behaviour was a lot better with other carers as well.
 
Q. Does he seem to appreciate her? 
A. Yes." 
The above evidence showed that the man referred to as Keith, who is aged 61, has been a long term inmate at the institution at which the respondent was employed. He had been there for many years before the respondent came to work there. He was difficult to care for, and dangerous, but the respondent had more success in handling him than others before her. Some of his previous carers had lasted only a short time although, within Mrs Patterson's knowledge, (which did not extend over the whole of the term of Keith's time at the institution), one carer had lasted six months. The principal benefit which
Keith obtained from the respondent's care was that it enabled him to get out of the institution from time to time, rather than spend the whole of his time sitting around watching television. The respondent took him out nearly every day.

The evidence did not establish that the respondent was the only person capable of caring for Keith. He had been in the institution for many years before the respondent began to care for him.

The findings of Simpson J in relation to the above evidence were as follows.
Having said the respondent's crime called for a substantial period of full time imprisonment, her Honour want on to say: "But there is one extraordinary feature of this case. Prior to the offence, and continuing since then, the prisoner has had some part time employment of a kind which denotes a contribution to the community significantly greater than is recognised by its financial rewards. For something over fifteen hours per week she works as a "personal carer" to a sixty-one year old brain damaged resident of a group home for intellectually handicapped and psychiatrically disabled. The particular person, who I shall refer to as Keith, for whom she cares is especially difficult. His aggressiveness had caused him to be discharged from three nursing homes, and to be banned from many of the recreational centres which otherwise cater to individuals in his predicament.
His violence and aggression have resulted in his not being permitted such basic items as a walking stick or stroller, or even a china teacup.
 
The prisoner has had considerable success in dealing with this unfortunate and has clearly been instrumental in making a vast improvement to his life.
Prior to her involvement, one carer had lasted six months but, generally speaking, his carers have given in to his violent and difficult nature within a very short space of time, some of them in less than a day. The prisoner is paid for fifteen hours per week to care for him, but usually spends well in excess of that time, the balance being unremunerated.
 
Evidence to this effect was given by Ms Lillian Patterson, the manager of the lodge at which Keith resides. I found her a most impressive witness. I am satisfied from her evidence that to impose a sentence on the prisoner of full time custody would be to inflict unwonted punishment upon one of the more unfortunate members of this community. It is apparent from Ms Patterson's evidence that it would be extremely unlikely that anybody could be found, at least in the short term, who could replace the prisoner in caring for this man." 
The Crown has not sought to challenge the inference drawn by her Honour in the last sentence in the above passage. It is pointed out, however, that the finding is qualified by the words "at least in the short term". Her Honour found that, for a period of time which was described as "the short term",
Keith would be deprived of the benefit of the care which he received from the respondent, if the respondent were sentenced to a term of full time imprisonment. The nature of the advantages which Keith received from such care has been described above.

There is nothing unusual about a situation in which the sentencing of an offender to a term of imprisonment would impose hardship upon some other person. Indeed, as senior counsel for the respondent acknowledged in argument, it may be taken that sending a person to prison will more often than not cause hardship, sometimes serious hardship, and sometimes extreme hardship, to another person. It requires no imagination to understand why this is so.
Sentencing judges and magistrates are routinely obliged, in the course of their duties, to sentence offenders who may be breadwinners of families, carers, paid or unpaid, of the disabled, parents of children, protectors of persons who are weak or vulnerable, employers upon whom workers depend for their livelihood, and many others, in a variety of circumstances bound to result in hardship to third parties if such an offender is sentenced to a term of full time imprisonment.

Whilst so called floodgates arguments are often, and rightly, met with judicial scepticism, the practical consequences of an argument that a sentencing judge or magistrate should deal leniently with an offender because of the effect which punishment of the offender will have upon some third party are such that the courts have approached this subject with caution.

Before turning to the authorities, it is convenient to complete the reference to the manner in which Simpson J dealt with the subject. Her Honour referred to decisions relating to hardship to a prisoner's family, and noted that it had been held that, to be material, the hardship must be so extreme as to lead a court to conclude that a sense of mercy or of affronted common sense imperatively demands that such hardship be taken into account.

Her Honour then went on to say: "Where the sufferer from the imprisonment is not a member of the family of the person undergoing imprisonment, it seems to me that the option for mercy is perhaps more readily available. Whether that is so or not, I am satisfied that the circumstances of Keith warrant the taking of a most unusual course, one which would otherwise not be warranted, nor even contemplated." 
Referring to two decisions of single judges, she said that the circumstances of the present case were "wholly exceptional" and for that reason, she was satisfied that it was proper to specify that the sentence to be imposed upon the respondent should be served by way of periodic detention.

Although her Honour did not commit herself to the view expressed in the first sentence in the passage quoted above, her observation is, perhaps, revealing.
It suggests that her Honour understood the reference in the authorities to the need for circumstances which are "wholly exceptional" to be references to the kind, rather than the degree, of hardship involved.

It is not easy to understand how, as a matter of logic, or even as a matter of simple mercy, hardship to a member of an offender's family would have a lesser claim upon a court's attention than hardship to a person for whom the respondent was a paid carer. Would the result in the present case have been different if Keith had been the respondent's brother, and the respondent had been caring for him out of natural love and affection? 
Her Honour did not say exactly what it was about the present case that made it "wholly exceptional". However, in so far as she considered it to be an exceptional case because the person affected by the hardship was not a member of the offender's family, then that cannot be justified as a relevant basis of exception.

The real difficulty about a case such as the present, and many other cases in which imprisonment of an offender causes hardship to a third party, is to identify a ground upon which they can properly and relevantly be regarded as exceptional; regrettably, causing hardship to third parties by the imprisonment of an offender is only too common. Furthermore, as the Crown pointed out, if the hardship to Keith were to be compared with the hardship that is commonly suffered by the spouse or children of a person sent to prison, it cannot fairly be characterised as exceptional in degree.

Justice will not be seen to be administered even-handedly if exceptions are made in cases which are not truly exceptional.

The most frequently cited Australian judgment on this subject is that of Wells
J in Reg versus Wirth [(1976) 14 SASR 291] at 295 -
His Honour said: "The argument thus presented to us raises the following question: When (if ever), and to what extent (if at all), should the hardship caused, directly or indirectly, by a proposed sentence of imprisonment, to the family of, or to others closely associated with, the offender be taken into account by the
Court in mitigation of that sentence? ..............................................................................
 
Hardship to spouse, family, and friends, is the tragic, but inevitable, consequence of almost every conviction and penalty recorded in a Criminal
Court. ........ It seems to me that courts would often do less than their clear duty - especially where the element of retribution, deterrence, or protection of society is the predominant consideration - if they allowed themselves to be much influenced by the hardship that prison sentences, which from all other points of view were justified, would be likely to cause to those near and dear to prisoners.
 
But it has been often remarked that the strength of our law lies in the willingness of judges, when applying a principle, not to carry it past the point where a sense of mercy or of affronted common sense imperatively demands that they should draw back. So it is proper that I should here add that, in my opinion, hardship likely to be caused by a sentence of imprisonment under consideration ought to be taken into account where the circumstances are highly exceptional, where it would be, in effect, inhuman to refuse to do so.
...... For example, if it were demonstrated to the satisfaction of the court that to send a man to prison would, without much doubt, drive his wife to suicide, it would be a steely-hearted judge who did not, however illogically, at least try to meet the situation by suitably framed orders as to penalty.
But further than that, in my judgment, courts should not go." 
That judgment has been cited with approval, and followed, in the Courts of
Criminal Appeal in other Australian States (e.g. R versus Boyle [(1987) 34 A Crim
R 202]; R versus T [(1989) 47 A Crim R 29]; R v Adami <case>; [(1989) 42 A Crim R 88).] It is in accordance with the approach taken in England (see Thomas, Principles of Sentencing, 2nd Edition page 211).

In some Australian jurisdictions there is legislation directing sentencing judicial officers as to matters they are to take into account. For example, s16A(2) of the Commonwealth [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) directs the court to take into account, where relevant, the probable effect that a sentence or order under consideration would have on any of the offender's family or dependants. (The limitation to family and dependants is noteworthy having regard to some observations of Simpson J mentioned earlier). In the case of Adami (above), however, the South Australian Court of Criminal
Appeal remarked on the requirement of relevance (the court was there dealing with similar South Australian legislation), and observed that the legislation did not alter the common law principles. (See also R versus Sinclair [(1990) 51
A Crim R 418] at 430; R versus Butns [(1994) 71 A Crim R 450).]
There is no such legislation applicable in the present case.

As was noted earlier, the judgment of Simpson J does not disclose any basis upon which the present case could be characterised as "highly exceptional", except the legally irrelevant consideration that Keith was not a member of the respondent's family, which seems to have been regarded by Simpson J as strengthening the respondent's claim to have hardship to Keith taken into account in her favour. Additionally, an examination of the nature and extent of the hardship to Keith that would be involved in sentencing the respondent to a term of full-time imprisonment shows that it is not of such a nature or degree as would properly bring into play the considerations referred to by
Wells J.

The respondent was being sentenced for unlawful homicide. In R versus MacDonald (Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported, 12 December 1995) this Court (Gleeson
CJ, Kirby P and Hunt CJ at CL) said: "Manslaughter involves the felonious taking of human life. This may involve a wide variety of circumstances, calling for a wide variety of penal consequences. Even so, unlawful homicide, whatever form it takes, has always been recognised by the law as a most serious crime. The protection of human life and personal safety is a primary objective of the system of criminal justice. The value which the community places upon human life is reflected in its expectations of that system.
 ..............................................................................
 
Sometimes, ....... the personal qualities of a victim of unlawful homicide will serve to focus attention upon this important aspect of sentencing law.
This is not because the punishment for homicide varies according to the personal qualities and characteristics of the victim. Rather, the qualities of a particular victim may serve as a useful reminder of the quality of human life itself, and of all that is involved in taking it away." 
The objective seriousness of the crime for which the respondent was being sentenced, and the importance of even-handed administration of criminal justice, meant that Simpson J was in error in permitting the consequence to a third party to deflect her from imposing the sentence of full-time imprisonment, which she plainly indicated she would otherwise have imposed.
Furthermore, the sentence imposed was manifestly inadequate. The Crown has made good its challenge to the sentence.

There is no sufficient discretionary reason why the court should decline to intervene. However, considerations of double jeopardy mean that the court, in re-sentencing the respondent, should impose a sentence less than that which the court might think should have been imposed in the first instance.

It has been submitted on behalf of the respondent, that, if the court should intervene, the case should be recognised as involving special circumstances relevant to the relationship between minimum and additional terms. I would accept that submission. The respondent's prospects of rehabilitation are such that she should serve, under supervision, a longer than usual part of her sentence in the community.

An appropriate sentence for this court to impose would be a sentence of penal servitude for three years involving a minimum term of eighteen months, and an additional term of eighteen months.

According to the particulars before us, the respondent was taken into custody on 9 August 1996, having been sentenced by Simpson J on 2 August 1996. Both of those days were Fridays, and it is apparent that 9 August 1996 was the date on which the respondent commenced to serve what is sometimes called weekend detention. I would propose that the sentence of this court should date from 9
August 1996. That will give the respondent the benefit of the period between then and the date of this judgment when she was serving only part-time custody. That, however, is not inappropriate in the circumstances.

I propose that the court should make the following orders.

The Crown appeal should be allowed. The sentence imposed by Simpson J should be quashed. In lieu thereof the respondent should be sentenced to penal servitude for a term of three years, commencing on 9 August 1996. That term should be made up of a minimum term of eighteen months, commencing on 9 August , and ending on 8 February 1998, and an additional term of eighteen months. On that basis the respondent will be released to parole on 8 February .
 
JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice.
 
IRELAND J: I have read in draft form the judgment of the Chief Justice.
I agree with the orders proposed and the reasons therefor.
 * * * 
