

Stephenson versus State Bank of NSW Ltd [1996] NSWSC 109 (7 May 1996) 
STEPHENSON versus STATE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES LIMITED /96; ED 3526/95 May 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, MAHONEY P, SHELLER JA 
CATCHWORDS: CONVEYANCING - where property damaged before completion - abatement of purchase price - s66M [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) - insurance - meaning of "just and equitable" 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
On 29 January 1994, the respondent sold a house to the appellant at auction.
The agreed completion date was 15 March 1994. On 11 April 1994 the respondent served the appellant with a notice to complete on or before 28 April 1994.
However, the house was substantially damaged by fire on 20 April 1994. The respondent's insurance provided for restoration of the damaged part of the property.

The appellant did not rescind the contract under [s
L](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66l.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) (the
Act). Accordingly, the respondent began proceedings seeking declarations, inter alia, that the just and equitable reduction of the purchase price that ought to be made pursuant to [s66M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html) of the Act was $100,000 or such other amount as the Court determined.

Bryson J assessed that the reduction of the purchase price ought to be in an amount of $101,000, being the difference between the sale price and an amount offered for the property in an option agreement of 30 March 1995. His Honour felt that the full cost of reinstatement was beyond the range of what would be just and equitable in the circumstances, since it would bring a windfall advantage to the appellant. This was due to the fact that the property was extremely dilapidated and in need of extensive repairs in any event.

The appellant claimed that the amount failed to take into account the necessary expenditure required to make the dwelling house habitable, and that he was entitled to the cost of reinstatement.

HELD: . Abatement of the purchase price of a property pursant to [s66M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html) must take account of the fact that the subject matter of the contract has been damaged and that the purchaser would take title to property the condition of which is different from its condition as at the date of the contract.
 (Per Sheller JA) The starting point for determining a just and equitable reduction of the purchase price is to calculate the cost of restoration of the dwelling house to its condition prior to damage.
The existence of insurance over the land, and the nature of the vendor's rights under the policy of insurance, may, in some circumstances, be relevant to what is just and equitable in a given case.

Shadlow versus Skiadopolous (1987) 4 BPR 9259 considered.
The purpose of Division 7 of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) is to extend protection to uninsured purchasers in the event of damage to or destruction of the property. Its objective is to make an adjustment to the purchase price to take account of the damage to the subject matter of the contract, which is just and equitable as between vendor and purchaser.
 (Per Sheller JA) A just and equitable amount of reduction would compensate the purchaser for the cost of restoring the building to its condition at the date of the contract.
Indemnity for the cost of restoring fire damage would not constitute a windfall advantage in this case. The element of windfall lay, not in reducing the purchase price to allow for the cost of reinstatement, but in failing to deduct the cost of betterment where the property was seriously in need of repair in any event.
Where a purchaser intends to live in the damaged dwelling house but is obliged to effect major repairs in any event, the primary measure of abatement should be the cost of reinstatement, less an appropriate betterment allowance.

ORDERS . Appeal allowed;
Set aside the declarations and orders made by Bryson J on 31 January, 6
February and 14 February 1996;
Remit the proceedings to the Equity Division for re-hearing;
The costs of the hearing before Bryson J to be in the discretion of the
Judge re-hearing the proceedings;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) is so qualified.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: The facts of the case, and the reasoning of Bryson J at first instance, are summarised in the judgment of Sheller JA, and it is unnecessary for me to repeat them.

The case gives rise to a question concerning the application of [s66M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/).

The problem addressed by Div 7 of [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/index.html#p4) of the [Conveyancing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) is the passing of risk between vendor and purchaser of real estate. Under the common law, risk passed to the purchaser at the time of contract. If a dwelling house upon the subject land were damaged or destroyed by fire between contract and completion, that would not ordinarily affect the obligation of the purchaser to complete, nor would it entitle the purchaser to a reduction of the purchase price. However, some purchasers were not aware of that, and failed to protect themselves by taking out an appropriate contract of insurance. The legislature decided to intervene.
 [Section
K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66k.html) reverses the common law principle, and provides that the risk in respect of damage to land shall not pass to the purchaser until the completion of the sale, or until an earlier time stipulated by the parties to the contract.

The legal consequences of damage to land after the making of a contract for sale now depend, in part, upon whether the damage is substantial. Where land is substantially damaged after the making of the contract, then the purchaser may elect to rescind the contract within a specified time [(s66L).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66l.html) 
Where land is damaged after the making of a contract but the damage was not substantial, or where, even though the damage was substantial, the purchaser does not rescind, then [s66M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html) applies.
 [Section
M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html) is in the following terms: "66M (1) Where land is damaged after the making of a contract for the sale of the land and before the risk in respect of the damage passes to the purchaser, the purchase price shall be reduced on completion of the sale by such amount as is just and equitable in the circumstances.
 
Subsection (1) applies whether or not the land concerned is substantially damaged.

Subsection (1) does not apply where the damage was caused by a wilful or negligent act or omission on the part of the purchaser.

If the purchase price is not reduced on completion of the sale of land as required by subsection (1), the amount by which the purchase price should have been reduced may be recovered by the purchaser from the vendor as a debt." [Section
N](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66n.html) provides that a court may refuse to make an order for specific performance against a vendor, in the case of land that has been substantially damaged after the making of the contract, if it would be unjust or inequitable to require the vendor to complete.

In the case of the sale of a dwelling house, the above provisions take effect notwithstanding any stipulation to the contrary.

The present is a case where the land was substantially damaged after the making of the contract, and the purchaser did not rescind.

There is nothing in the above provisions which refers to the subject of insurance. The provisions represent a conscious departure by the legislature from the scheme, adopted in some other jurisdictions, of making the vendor's insurance contract available for the benefit of the purchaser.

In any given case, a vendor may or may not be insured, and the rights of a vendor against an insurer will vary from case to case. The existence of insurance over the land, and the nature of the vendor's rights under the policy of insurance, may, in some circumstances, be relevant to what is just and equitable in a given case (Shadlow versus Skiadopoulos (1987) 4 BPR 9259).
However, in the ordinary case, what is just and equitable as between the vendor and the purchaser will not be controlled by the insurance arrangements that have been made by the vendor. To make that a matter of controlling importance would defeat the intention of the legislature, which set out to depart from the legislative scheme that has been adopted elsewhere.

The primary provision, in [s66K](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66k.html), that the risk in respect of damage to land does not pass to the purchaser upon the making of the contract for sale, is elaborated by the remaining provisions in Div 7.

When one comes to [s66M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html), the problem being addressed is that a purchaser, who is not at risk, but who has not exercised a right to rescind, is bound by a contract of sale to purchase land which was damaged after the purchase price was agreed. [Section
M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html) provides that, in such a situation, the purchase price is to be reduced. In the language of the report of the Law Reform Commission, there is to be an abatement of the purchase price.

Individual cases will demonstrate particular features bearing upon what is just and equitable. However, in an ordinary case, such as the present, the objective is to make an adjustment to the purchase price, to take account of the damage to the subject matter of the contract, which is just and equitable as between vendor and purchaser.

The primary object of the adjustment is to take account of the fact that the subject matter of the contract has been damaged, and the purchaser will, on completion, take title to property the condition of which is different from its condition at the time the parties agreed upon a price. That ordinarily means that the property is worth less than the amount the purchaser agreed to pay for it. That, however, is not always necessarily so. In a given case, for example, a purchaser of land on which there is a dwelling house might intend to demolish the dwelling house and redevelop the land. In such a case the purchaser may be no worse off as a result of damage to the dwelling house, and in some cases could even be better off.

In the ordinary case, where land on which there is a dwelling house is purchased, and the purchaser intends to occupy the dwelling house, there will be some relationship between the reduction in value of the subject matter of the contract of sale and the cost of repairing the damage. Again, it will commonly be both reasonable and necessary to repair the damage. Complications may arise in situations where it is either unnecessary or unreasonable to repair the damage, but that is not this case.

When a question arises as to the cost of repairing minor damage to a dwelling house, there may be little room for argument as to what is an appropriate allowance to be made. On the other hand, where substantial repairs are involved, there may be more difficulty in determining an appropriate allowance. If what is envisaged is reinstatement, then a further question may arise as to whether the appropriate basis of adjustment of the purchase price is the full cost of reinstatement, or whether some allowance should be made for betterment in order to give a true reflex of the damage that has been suffered to the property.

In this case the dwelling house on the subject property, in its condition at the time of the contract of sale, and before the fire, was extremely dilapidated, and stood in need of substantial repair. It was proper to infer that the purchaser intended to live in the dwelling house, but he was going to have to effect major repairs in any event. The result of allowing the purchaser, by way of abatement to the purchase price, the full cost of reinstatement was, Bryson J held, to confer a large and unmeritorious windfall on the purchaser. This was especially so in the light of the substantial disparity between the amount of the abatement claimed by the purchaser and the amount of the difference between the contract price and the price which Mr and
Mrs Kneeves were prepared to pay for the subject property in its damaged condition.

In one respect that conclusion was rather hard on the purchaser. The purchaser was not buying the land for resale. He was intending to occupy the dwelling house. It will often be the case that reinstatement of a fire damaged dwelling will put the owner of the dwelling in a better position than he or she was in before the fire. The element of windfall lay, not in allowing the purchaser an adjustment on the basis of the cost of reinstatement, but in failing to make a deduction from that cost to take account of the betterment, in circumstances where the condition of the dwelling at the time of contract necessitated substantial repair in any event.

As was noted above, there will usually be a relationship (although not necessarily an equivalence) between the cost of reinstating a fire damaged dwelling, less a betterment allowance, on the one hand, and the diminution in the market value of the property as a consequence of the fire, on the other hand. That relationship may be disturbed by a variety of factors. However, in a case such as the present, where the purchaser intended to occupy the dwelling house, but needed to carry out substantial repairs in any event, the primary measure of abatement should be the cost of reinstatement, less an appropriate betterment allowance. Whether this would turn out to be substantially different from the reduction in the market value of the property as a result of the fire is not clear. The matter was not approached on this basis at first instance.

The appeal should be allowed and the matter remitted to the Equity Division for the calculation of the appropriate adjustment to purchase on that basis. I agree with the orders which Sheller JA has proposed.
 
MAHONEY P: I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice.
 
SHELLER JA: 
INTRODUCTION 
This is an appeal from decisions of Bryson J of 31 January, 6 February and 14 February 1996. On 29 January 1994 the respondent, State Bank of New South Wales Limited (State Bank), sold a property known as Karamea Farm on Pitt Town Road, Pitt Town at auction to the appellant, Mark Lloyd Stephenson, for $626,000. Completion did not take place on the agreed date, 15 March 1994. On 11 April 1994 State Bank served a notice to complete on the appellant requiring completion on 28 April 1994 and in this respect making time of the essence. On 20 April 1994 fire extensively damaged the dwelling house on the property. 
PASSING OF RISK TO THE PURCHASER [Section
M](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66m.html) of the [Conveyancing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) (the
Act), which is headed "Abatement of purchase price where land damaged", provides that where land is damaged after the making of a contract for the sale of the land and before the risk in respect of the damage passes to the purchaser, the purchase price shall be reduced on completion of the sale by such amount as is just and equitable in the circumstances. The subsection applies whether or not the land concerned is "substantially damaged"; subs . [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s66.html) M is in [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/index.html#p4) "Sales and other transactions" Division 7 "Passing of risk between vendor and purchaser" of the Act. Division 7 was added to the Act by the Conveyancing (Passing of Risk) Amendment Act 1986 following a recommendation in a report of the New South Wales Law Reform Commission of March 1984 (LRC 40), and came into force on 24 April 1986.

Section 66K (1) provides that the risk in respect of damage to land, which is defined by s66J (1) to include buildings and other fixtures, shall not pass to the purchaser under a contract for the sale of land until, relevantly to this case, the completion of the sale. The subsection changed what Dixon J in
Fletcher versus Manton <case>; [(1940) 64 CLR 37] at 48 called "the well established rule of equity that, when a valid contract for the sale of land is made and the vendor in the event makes a good title, then, as from the date of the contract, the purchaser is to be considered the owner of the land and, by consequence, must suffer whatever loss or detriment may after that time fortuitously befall the property or be placed by the law upon the person filling the character of owner." The consequence assumes there is no fault on either side; see Stonham,
Vendor and Purchaser, 1964, at 591; Voumard, The Sale of Land in Victoria, 4th ed, at 114-5. The purchaser benefits if the property improves in value.

Section 66 O (2) provides that Division 7 has effect in the case of the sale of a dwelling house, notwithstanding any stipulation to the contrary, or in any other case, subject to any stipulation to the contrary. Section 66L (1) provides that where land is "substantially damaged" after the making of a contract for the sale of land and before the risk in respect of the damage passes to the purchaser, the purchaser may rescind the contract by notice in writing served on the vendor before the completion of the sale and, relevantly to this case, within twenty-eight days after the purchaser first became aware of the damage. On 18 May 1994 the period for rescission lapsed without any notice having been served on the vendor pursuant to s66L.

PROCEEDINGS AND ORDERS 
On 11 September 1995 State Bank began these proceedings by summons for a declaration that the amount of the reduction in the purchase price of the land, the subject of the agreement for sale, that was just and equitable in all the circumstances was $100,000 or such other amount as the Court determined. In addition State Bank sought the following declarations: "2. A declaration that in all the circumstances the purchase price to be paid by the Defendant to the Plaintiff upon completion of the Agreement is $526,000.
A declaration that the Plaintiff being ready, willing and able to complete the Agreement, is entitled to serve a notice to complete requiring the
Defendant to complete the Agreement on a date at least 14 clear days after service of the notice and making time of the essence in that regard.
A declaration that in the event that the Defendant does not complete in accordance with any notice served in accordance with declaration 3 the
Plaintiff is entitled to terminate the Agreement by notice to the Defendant and forfeit unto itself absolutely the deposit of $62,600 under the
Agreement." 
On 31 January 1996 Bryson J made a declaration that the amount by which the purchase price ought to be reduced on completion of the sale pursuant to s66M was $101,000. On 6 February 1996 he ordered the appellant to pay State
Bank's costs of the proceedings up to and including the order made on 31
January 1996 and on 16 February 1996 declared that State Bank was on 5
February 1996 entitled to serve a notice to complete requiring the appellant to complete the agreement on a date at least fourteen clear days after service of the notice and making time of the essence in that regard. He ordered the appellant to pay State Bank's costs of further proceedings on 6 and 14
February 1996. On 19 February 1996 Meagher JA restrained State Bank from relying upon the notice to complete dated 5 February 1996 "to 28 March 1996 without prejudice to the validity of the notice to complete already issued."
The appeal was expedited. On 21 March 1996 this Court heard argument and reserved its decision. On the appellant's application and the continuance of his undertaking for damages, the operation of the injunction was extended until the expiration of 24 hours following the delivery of this Court's decision.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND 
Much of the land sold was low lying near the Hawkesbury River and Pitt Town
Lagoon. Its area was about 95 hectares divided into three lots. Most of it was zoned Environment Protection (Scenic) 7d (1), the rest Rural 1 (c). All was affected by the Hawkesbury City Council policy restricting development because of the likelihood of flooding. The dwelling which was damaged by fire was on lot 3 and was a heritage item in the Hawkesbury Local Environment Plan 1989 and Amendment No 8. There were some rural buildings of small value and significance. The only significant recent rural use was grazing and training quarter horses.

Bryson J found that when the property was sold the dwelling was "in a very marked state of disrepair, to the point where it was barely habitable". The oldest parts were probably constructed between 1820 and 1840 principally of brickwork rendered with plaster. The joinery was probably largely Australian red cedar. When first constructed the building consisted of a lower and upper storey. At various times it was extended, renovated or altered. Before the fire it had a two storey timber verandah along the front or north face and timber extensions on each floor creating several rooms. Internally there was an upper and lower flat with kitchens, bathrooms and laundry. The building had an iron roof. Bryson J accepted the evidence of Edwin Rex Thompson, who with his wife lived there from January 1992 until about 12 April 1994, about its state before the fire. His Honour found that, as Mr Thompson described it, it was in a very bad state of repair and basically not fit to be lived in although made tolerable for habitation, for a period, as a result of considerable repair work which Mr and Mrs Thompson had done. The property was attractive to them because if offered the opportunity for grazing and training quarter horses. However the Thompsons did in fact inhabit it. To do so they adopted various expedients such as propping up the verandah, jacking up the sink to make it drain and dealing with the lavatory when it backed up. Bryson
J said: "Except for unusually tolerant and resourceful occupants, or for squatters, the property had passed the point where it provided an acceptable standard of comfort, convenience and safety as a dwelling." Because the building was a heritage item it was necessary to obtain development consent before undertaking any renovation work.

The appellant did not give evidence and Bryson J made no finding as to his purpose in purchasing the property. There was nothing to suggest that he purchased it as an investment for re-sale or development. Council policy restricting development because of likely flooding and the building's heritage significance suggest that the property did not present an attractive re-sale or development prospect. The State Bank tendered as part of its evidence a letter the appellant wrote to his solicitor on 27 April 1994, a week after the fire, saying: "The destruction of the house obviously impacts on the value of the property.
Accordingly, my financiers have advised that they will now have to re-assess the value of the security before they can proceed with the settlement.

Additionally, my family had intended moving into the house immediately after settlement, especially as the bank is attempting to secure possession of the property I currently reside in at Riverstone.

The destruction of this Pitt Town house has therefore created problems for my family and myself. I am obviously anxious to determine, from the bank, where this matter currently rests.

I would appreciate if you could secure an immediate response from the bank so that I am in a position to deal with the matter in the course of today." 
Everything points to the appellant having purchased the property with the intention that he and his family should occupy the building as a dwelling house.

THE EFFECT OF DIVISION 7 
Bryson J held, with respect I think correctly, that Division 7 does not go beyond changing the point of time at which risk in respect of damage to land passes to the purchaser under a contract for its sale, to impose on the vendor new conditions about the continuing condition or state of repair of the property conveyed with consequential damages for breach. Nor did this contract contain such a condition or provide any warranty by the appellant that the property would remain in the condition and state of repair in which it was when the contract was made. In the words of the Law Reform Commission (LRC 40 at 13) the law was amended "in order to protect the uninsured purchaser", particularly the purchaser not legally qualified and without the services of a solicitor, who might not obtain any benefit under the vendor's insurance over the property; see the Second Reading Speech, Hansard, 20 March 1986, at 1350.
Ironically [s50](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/s50.html) of the [Insurance Contracts Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ica1984220/) (Cth), which perforce of [s6](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iola1986291/s6.html) of the [Insurance (Application of Laws) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/iola1986291/) applies to contracts of insurance entered into in the course of State insurance and which was assented to on 25 June 1984 and came into operation on January 1986, provides that where the risk in respect of loss or damage to a building, which the purchaser had a right to occupy or use in consequence of the purchase of property, has passed to the purchaser, the purchaser is insured under any contract of general insurance to which the vendor is a party, so far as it provides insurance cover in respect of loss or damage to the building during the period between the day on which the risk passes and, relevantly, completion. Effectively s66K (1) denied the appellant this benefit under the Commonwealth Act, as the Law Reform Commission recognised; LRC 40 at -58. The Commission rejected the reform adopted in other jurisdictions of giving the purchaser a right to gain access to the vendor's insurance.

INSURANCE 
At the date of the fire, State Bank was insured by GIO Australia Limited under an industrial special risks insurance policy, pursuant to which the insurer agreed, in the event of any damage happening to this property, to indemnify
State Bank "in accordance with the applicable Basis of Settlement". Relevantly the Basis of Settlement was: "On buildings ........: the cost of reinstatement, replacement or repair in accordance with the provisions of the Reinstatement and Replacement ........... (memorandum) ........

Provided that if the Insured elects to claim the indemnity value of any damaged property, the Insurer will pay to the Insured the value of such property at the time of the happening of the damage or at its ....... option reinstate, replace or repair such property or any part thereof ......." 
The Reinstatement "or" Replacement memorandum provided that the basis upon which the amount payable was to be calculated should be the cost of reinstatement of the damaged property insured at the time of its reinstatement subject to the Provisions which followed and the Terms Conditions and Limits or Sub-Limits of Liability of the Policy. Relevantly "reinstatement" meant, where property was damaged: "the repair of the damage and the restoration of the damaged portion of the property to a condition substantially the same as, but not better or more extensive than, its condition when new." No allowance was to be made in respect of "new for old". The insured was entitled to have the damaged part of the property restored to a condition substantially the same as its condition when new. Provision (i) required the work of restoring to be commenced and carried out with reasonable despatch, failing which the insurer should not be liable to make any payment greater than the indemnity value of the damaged property at the time of the happening of the damage.
Provision (iv) was as follows: "No payment beyond the amount which would have been payable under this Policy if this memorandum had not been incorporated herein shall be made until a sum equal to the cost of reinstatement shall have been actually incurred; provided that where the Insured reinstates or replaces any lost or destroyed property at a cost which is less than the cost of reinstatement (as defined) but greater than the value of such property at the time of the happening of its loss or destruction, then the cost so incurred shall be deemed to be the cost of reinstatement." 
There is nothing in the evidence which would lead to any conclusion but that the insurer was obliged under the policy to meet any claim by State Bank for the reinstatement or restoration of the damaged portion of the building to a condition substantially the same as its condition when new. It is not necessary to consider precisely what that meant in this appeal.

COST OF REINSTATEMENT 
The evidence of Mr Tropman, an architect, was that the cost of carrying out the repairs necessary to reinstate the property after the fire to the condition it was in immediately before the fire was $342,500. Both before Bryson J and in its amended notice of appeal the appellant contended that this estimated cost represented a just and equitable reduction in accordance with s66M (1). Alternatively the appellant contended that this amount, less $16,950 which Mr Smith, a quantity surveyor, estimated to be the cost of rectifying the disrepair in April 1994 before the fire which Mr Thompson described, namely $325,550, was the appropriate deduction under the subsection. Neither Mr Tropman's nor Mr Smith's estimate made any allowance by way of deduction on account of new for old. Bryson J regarded a reduction of $342,500 as grossly excessive to what the test in s66M (1) required. His Honour said: "It would not be just and equitable for me to require the vendor to accept $283,500 for a property which the purchaser could then re-sell, damaged as it was, for a sum in the order of $525,000, without carrying out any repairs." 
DIMINUTION IN VALUE 
Bryson J adopted the amount of $525,000 "as the present value of the property". It was the amount for which George Leonard Kneeves and his wife,
Marcia Beryl Kneeves, offered to purchase the property from State Bank in an option agreement dated 30 March 1995 between State Bank and the Kneeves whereunder, if the Stephenson contract was terminated or rescinded within one year from the date of the instrument, either party, within times stipulated, might require the other to enter into a contract for the sale of the property on the terms of a copy contract attached to the instrument. Bryson J regarded the agreed auction price of $626,000 as "a good test of value" of the property before the fire and consequently concluded that the difference between the two, $101,000, was the appropriate amount of the deduction in purchase price to be made under s66M (1).

In making these valuations his Honour was assisted by the evidence of Kenneth
Feltham, a real estate valuer, who accepted the auction price and the option price as the best indication of the property's value before the fire and after it had been damaged. Bryson J accepted Mr Feltham's evidence that there were no other useful comparable sales. However, Mr Feltham's opinion was that just and equitable compensation which should be allowed under the subsection as at February 1995 was $100,000. Bryson J did not accept this rounded off figure but preferred the actual difference of $101,000.

The appellant challenged both figures, the first because it was the product of a mortgagee sale, the second because it was not the product of a concluded agreement and therefore not evidence of value.

Pivotal to Bryson J's choice of $101,000 as the just and equitable amount of the reduction of the purchase price in the circumstances were the following matters:
State Bank had no contractual or other obligation to carry out reinstatement for the benefit of the appellant, or to incur large sums in doing so, or to run the risk, again to the benefit of the appellant, of whatever might be the outcome of making a claim against its insurer after incurring the cost of reinstatement. The trouble, risk and financial burden which this would impose on the vendor were beyond the range of what it would be just and equitable to require in the circumstances. Further they would be all together disproportionate to the diminution in value of the property which had been occasioned by the damage by fire.
If the works Mr Tropman contemplated were carried out, the appellant would receive, and State Bank would be obliged to pay for, a dwelling in a far better condition than the dwelling was in at the time of the contract of sale and up to the time of the fire. Instead of a dwelling in a seriously deteriorated state on the margin of habitability, the appellant would receive a house with much of its fabric restored to new condition. There was no occasion in justice and equity to require State Bank to risk large sums to bring about a fortuitous advantage of that kind which led to the appellant receiving the cost of reinstatement to new condition in apposition to the dilapidated condition of the dwelling when the appellant agreed to buy it. If
State Bank had actually received a sum in respect of its insurance, that might be a matter to be taken into account; Shadlow versus Skiadopolous (1987) 4 BPR .
The existence of insurance for the benefit of either vendor or purchaser would rarely be of much significance for an adjustment under Division 7 unless some concrete advantage had been obtained as in Shadlow versus Skiadopolous. The appellant who had not proved whether or not he had any insurance rights, was in no position to obtain advantages from insurance rights "doubtfully attributed to the vendor".
Section 66M did not authorise an order requiring the vendor to go through the elaborate course which would have to be followed before there was an entitlement to insurance moneys on a reinstatement basis.
The need to undertake extensive works on the dwelling under unusual controls relating to its heritage character existed and should have been contemplated by the parties when the contract was entered into and the property, even in its deteriorated state, was worth much more than the price would be if reduced as the appellant contended. In short the restoration would bring the appellant an enormous and unmerited windfall advantage in a situation where State Bank was not in any way at fault.

AGREED REDUCTION 
In the course of his reasons Bryson J noted that in August and September 1994 the parties appeared to have agreed on a reduction in price of $140,000. His
Honour said: "Although neither party asked me to do so I have given consideration to whether I should order a reduction in the purchase price of $140,000, with or without some further adjustment of interest. In favour of adopting that figure is the apparent readiness of both parties, at one time, to adopt it, although not on exactly the same conditions, and the apparent availability of that sum from the insurer. Adverse to adopting it are the absence of support for it from either party, the arbitrary nature of the figure which was not supported by any reasoned basis related to evidence, and the fact that it is, on the vendor's case an overcompensation and on the purchaser's case an undercompensation. I would wish to come to a conclusion relating in a reasoned way to the evidence before me, and to avoid compromise. I have decided not to adopt the figure of $140,000." 
CONCLUSION 
Mr McDougall QC, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that the existence of the insurance policy was not a relevant consideration in determining the extent of the reduction in accordance with s66M (1), although the absence of insurance or a limit on the amount payable under it or the unenforceability of a contract of insurance might be considerations if the vendor invoked the provisions of s66N to have the Court refuse specific performance. That section provides that the Court may, if it thinks that it would be unjust or inequitable to require the vendor to complete the sale of land that is substantially damaged after the making of the contract for the sale of the land and before the risk in respect of the damage passes to the purchaser: refuse to enforce against the vendor specific performance of the contract; order the repayment of any money paid by the purchaser under the contract; and make such other orders as the Court considers appropriate in the circumstances.

One reason why Bryson J refused to abate the purchase price to take account of the cost of restoration was that the effect of so doing would be that State
Bank would be required to accept $283,500 for the property and the appellant could then re-sell it, damaged as it was, for $525,000, without carrying out any repairs and hence would enjoy a considerable windfall advantage. That must be so. However looked at from the appellant's point of view, if he wished to live in the dwelling house he had bought, he would on one view of the evidence, be required to expend over $300,000, in addition to the reduced purchase price of $525,000 and the cost of restoring the dilapidations Mr
Thompson described, to make the building habitable. There does not seem to be anything particularly just or equitable about this, bearing in mind that the purpose of the legislative reform was to protect the uninsured purchaser.

In interpreting Division 7 the Court is required to prefer a construction that would promote the purpose or object underlying the Division to a construction that would not promote that purpose or object; [s33](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/s33.html) of the [Interpretation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ia1987191/). Quite clearly the protection intended was protection against the consequence of damage to or destruction of the property and in that regard the purchaser most commonly unprotected would be the purchaser of a dwelling house who bought it intending to live in it. Moreover the sort of protection such a purchaser lacked by being uninsured was protection against the cost of restoring the dwelling house to the condition it was in when the purchaser agreed to buy it.
State Bank's policy of insurance provided just such protection and, as it happened, more. Compensation to the extent of the diminution in value of the property was unlikely to be adequate. The purchaser would be compelled to sell and then devote time looking for a comparable bargain which might not be available on the market. I do not agree that indemnity for the cost of restoring fire damage amounts to a windfall in this case any more than it would to any other householder whose house is damaged or destroyed. As it happens this policy was tailored to provide only for the cost incurred in restoration. If State Bank undertakes restoration of the building no adjustment may be required. If it does not, prima facie the adjustment should reflect the cost to the appellant of restoration.

Section 66L (1) provides that where the land is substantially damaged after the making of the contract but before the risk passes to the purchaser, the purchaser may rescind. But the purchaser has no such right if the land is damaged but not substantially damaged. Fire damage to a small area of a house may not be substantial and may not result in any diminution of value of the building as a whole but result in restoration costs which the purchaser cannot afford. If the vendor has in place a policy whereunder the insurer would be bound to meet this cost, it is scarcely just and equitable to say that there should be no reduction in the purchaser price since the house can be sold for same the price as the purchaser agreed to pay for it and therefore the purchaser is adequately protected. In this way Division 7 would work to the advantage, not of the uninsured purchaser who wants to live in the house, but the vendor and the vendor's insurer. It may be argued that the purchaser could have insured to cover the loss; Davjoyda Estates Pty Limited versus National
Insurance Co of New Zealand Limited [(1967) 69 SR 381] at 407. The Law Reform Commission assumed that the purchaser had before completion an insurable interest even though the risk had not passed (LRC 40 at 28). But the protection intended was for the uninsured purchaser. That the purchaser could have insured for indemnity against the cost of restoration is beside the point.

In my opinion the starting point, in determining a just and equitable reduction of the purchase price in a contract for the sale of a dwelling house which the purchaser has purchased intending to live in it, is to determine the cost of restoring the building or the damaged part of it to the state it was in before the fire. There is the risk, as Bryson J pointed out, that the purchaser may pay the reduced price and then sell at a profit but that, to my mind, does not mean that as a matter of principle the reduction of the purchase price of dwelling houses is limited to an amount reflecting diminution in value. The effect of the Act was to deprive the purchaser of the insurance benefit conferred by the Commonwealth legislation. The intention of the Act was to provide the purchaser with a benefit at least as valuable, but, if it was just and equitable, available even if the vendor was not insured.
This was the reason why the Law Reform Commission took a route different to that taken by other jurisdictions which gave the purchaser access to the vendor's insurance; LRC 40 at 58.

However it remains to determine whether a reduction equal to the amount needed to restore to the condition before the fire is just and equitable in all the circumstances. The words "just" and "equitable" like their antonyms "unjust" and "inequitable" are not infrequently found in the statutes as the legislative guide by which the Court must act. One of the grounds for winding up a company is a prominent example. See also [s5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1946404/); s20 of the De Facto Relationships Act 1984. The determination of what is just and equitable in the circumstances is not a matter of unfettered individual opinion, nor does it involve a discretion of an arbitrary kind; see
Cominos versus Cominos <case>; [(1972) 127 CLR 588] at 599. As Kitto J observed in The Queen versus The Commonwealth
Industrial Court; ex parte the Amalgamated Engineering Union, Australian
Section <case>; [(1960) 103 CLR 368] at 383, the criteria are of a nature with which Courts are familiar. In Talga versus MBC International Limited <case>; [(1976) 133 CLR 622] at 634 Stephen, Mason and Jacobs JJ dealing with the issue raised for the Court by the [Banking Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/ba197472/) of whether it was just and equitable that a transaction should be treated as valid, said: "The court will have before it an existing transaction replete with all its surrounding facts and circumstances and in their light will determine what is just and equitable. In doing so it will certainly be exercising a wide discretion that this is a commonplace of the curial process; the court will be bound to act judicially, exercising its discretion by reference only to such considerations affecting the transaction as, on an examination of the legislation, may be seen to be material to the decision which it is called on to make. Irrelevant matters, matters such as the plaintiffs instanced in the course of argument, which have no rational connection with the policy of the regulations but would be expressive only of the personal predilections of the
Court, cannot be allowed by it to play any part in its decision." 
Since the purpose of Division 7 is to protect uninsured purchasers it seems to me inevitable that the existence or otherwise of insurance is something to be taken into account in determining what amount of reduction is just and equitable in the circumstances. The only evidence of insurance is of the vendor's insurance which on its face provided indemnity to the vendor for the cost of restoration without making any allowance in respect of new for old.
State Bank brought the proceedings primarily for a declaration that the amount of reduction was the diminution in value of the property. I do not think it made a case for reduction to be so calculated. In my opinion it was not for the Court to speculate or assume that there may be difficulties in compelling the insurer to meet its obligations under the contract of insurance. With this insured and this insurer I would assume the opposite. If it turned out that the vendor had no cover that may have been a ground for adjusting the amount of the reduction. But that is not the present case. Furthermore, as Mr
McDougall pointed out, there remains a question in some cases, though not I would have thought in this, whether s66N can be called in aid by the vendor.

The only evidence about the cost of restoration of the building both before and after the fire made no allowance in respect of new for old. It is, I think, arguable that an insured purchaser would, like the vendor, obtain insurance which indemnified the purchaser without making such allowance, but that is not necessarily so. The amount of reduction which would usually be just and equitable would take account of that allowance primarily because it is the vendor, and not its insurer, if there is one, which bears the reduction in purchase price. The reduction so calculated compensates the purchaser for the cost of restoring the damaged part of the building to the condition it was in at the time the contract for sale was made. However the material before this Court does not enable it to substitute for the $101,000 Bryson J chose, an amount of reduction so calculated. This being so the case must be remitted to the Equity Division to determine the reduction which was just and equitable in the circumstances.

ORDERS 
I propose the following orders;
Appeal allowed;
Set aside the declarations and orders made by Bryson J on 31 January, 6
February and 14 February 1996;
Remit the proceedings to the Equity Division for re-hearing;
The costs of the hearing before Bryson J to be in the discretion of the
Judge re-hearing the proceedings;
The respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have a certificate under the [Suitors Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/) is so qualified.
 * * * 
