

Hodgins versus Cantrill and Ors Matter No 12102/92 [1997] NSWSC 449 (1 October )

Hodgins versus Cantrill & Ors /92 October 1997 
Grove, Michael J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /92 - GLEN ANTHONY HODGINS versus PHILIP CANTRILL & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff was born on 29 December 1966. On 21 February 1981 he was a passenger in a motor car which was involved in a collision with another.
He suffered injuries of which the most significant resulted in the total loss of the sight of his right eye. The car in which he was riding was being driven by his mother and she and other family members in the car were also injured.
On 24 February 1981 instructions were given to the firm comprising the second to fourth defendants to act as solicitors in claims for damages. Instructions were probably originally received by a Mr Carlsund but in due course the conduct of the matter on behalf of the plaintiff was assumed by a Mr Davidson after he became employed by the firm in July 1984. The liability of the second, third and fourth defendants is alleged to be a vicarious liability for the actions of Mr Davidson and it will engender brevity to refer compendiously to his actions as actions of the second defendant.

On 4 December 1984 Mr Davidson sent a brief to the first defendant who was a practising barrister seeking advice on evidence, advice on quantum and generally in respect of the plaintiff's claim. On 28 February 1985 the first defendant provided written advice together with the draft of a statement of claim for commencement of proceedings in the Cessnock District Court.
Commencement in that court was suggested in the accompanying advice. The first defendant also made suggestions about steps to be taken concerning proof of an economic loss ingredient in the claim and an estimate was given that if the matter came to be litigated the plaintiff could expect to receive by way of general damages between $40,000 and $45,000.

The statement of claim issued. On 17 September 1985 the first defendant attended a pre-trial conference held at Cessnock Court house. He conferred with the plaintiff. A solicitor for the Government Insurance Office (the compulsory third party insurer of the defendant in the action) made an offer of $55,000 inclusive of costs and disbursements. Any offer made in the course of these proceedings was on that same inclusive basis. The offer was rejected but in the course of negotiations liability to pay damages to the plaintiff was admitted.

On 24 September 1985 the first defendant sent an advice on evidence. He confirmed an earlier discussion with the second defendant (on 11 September ) when he expressed the view that on the material available at the time "the maximum figure which the plaintiff could expect to receive was $55,000 and the minimum $35,000." He recapitulated the conference with the plaintiff (now approaching 19 years of age) and what he recounted was not descriptive of a good rapport between them. He commented upon the plaintiff's stated expectations of large damages and pointed to the absence of positive evidence of the plaintiff's earning ability and consequently any diminution of it from his uninjured potential. His advice concluded (I ignore a postscript): "If he can present at court specific evidence of attempts undertaken positively to shift his goals to more realistic areas and to achieve those goals without success, then he may have a quantifiable claim for economic loss. Without such efforts, he is wasting his and the court's time. I await your further instructions and enclose a memo of my fees to date." 
I am satisfied that this advice was understood as referring to the plaintiff's unwillingness to consider training in any area other than that of the trade of fitter or similar.

On 28 February 1986 the second defendant wrote to the first defendant enclosing reports and copy letters relating to unsuccessful job applications.
The letter discussed some matters relevant to economic loss and noted that the action was listed for callover on 2 April 1986 and was expected to have high priority in the list of matters for hearing and the letter concluded "it may be that, at this stage, the matter is not ready to proceed." 
On 12 March 1986 the second defendant attended a conference with the first defendant. A file note dated 19 March 1986 records seven tasks typical of advice given by counsel to a solicitor in such circumstances. There is no notation concerning any exchange between them about likely readiness for trial at the forthcoming May sittings in Cessnock. There is a conflict about the essence of this conference. The first defendant asserts that he specifically advised that the action was not ready to settle or to proceed. The second defendant asserts that he was merely given the specified tasks noted down and that there was a mutual understanding that, if these were done, the action would remain on course for settlement or hearing at the sittings. It is unsurprising that their recollections differ. It was more than six years after this conference that the current action was brought and there is no indication in the evidence that either of them was required to try and remember detail about this conference until after this action was started. I consider both recollections as related to me are sincere and the divergence between them is explicable by examining what happened after the conference from each point of view.

I look at the position of counsel first. The action was not in fact ready for immediate hearing and that is why he gave the list of tasks to the solicitor.
Shortly thereafter he received a letter from the second defendant dated 7
April 1986 adverting to some of the things in the list and conveying a provisional view of the plaintiff himself concerning a lower figure than he had previously canvassed. The sum now mentioned was $100,000 "in his hand".
The next contact was limited to communicating the inability of the first defendant to be in Cessnock for a pre-trial conference scheduled for 17 April
The first defendant recalls that the consultation on 12 March ranged over about ten matters which were approaching hearing and he recalls that he advised appropriate settlement figures for all of these at that conference except in the plaintiff's action. His recollection is assisted by a paradox that he was later informed that it was this action which was settled but that none of those upon which he had apparently advised final assessments had been resolved.

I turn to the position of the solicitor. His file note is consistent with his continuing preparation for hearing. Significantly there is no note that counsel advised that the action could not be made ready for completion either by settlement or trial in accordance with the schedule. There was no suggestion from counsel that the action should not advance either in response to the letter of 7 April or when there was a telephone conversation about the first defendant's inability to be in Cessnock on 17 April.

I consider the probability is that both have honestly sought to retrieve from their memories but they have necessarily reconstructed. It is likely that the first defendant did express the opinion that the action was not ready and his own encounter thereafter leads him to believe that that was an unaltered situation whereas the second defendant's impression is that his application to the allotted tasks rationally confirms the situation being that, whilst the action may not have been hearing at 12 March (otherwise the chores would not need to be done), it was expected to be ready.

It is easy to recognize that these impressions would be likely to transcend into different memories as to the course of events because they were not completely ad idem with each other at the time. The consequence is that, objectively, they are both correct in part but the outcome of this litigation will not depend upon my finding a preference for one or the other in entirety.

After the relevant conference the next two events were the dispatch of the letter of 7 April and the communication shortly thereafter that the first defendant could not attend the scheduled pre-trial conference in Cessnock.

Mr Davidson attended at Cessnock Court house on 17 April. He relayed offers between his client (now aged 19) and the solicitor for the GIO. The action was settled for $85,000 and terms of settlement including consent judgment were filed in the Registry on that day. After costs, disbursements and payment of out of pocket expenses the plaintiff received just over $76,000 as the benefit of his action.

The present action claims that the defendants are liable to the plaintiff in damages for breach of duty owed to him to give competent legal advice on the value of his claim, the settlement figure of which was below that at which competent legal advice would have assessed it.

It is convenient first to look at the events of 17 April 1986. Those present were Mr Davidson, the plaintiff and his mother and what happened is described in these extracts from Mr Davidson's evidence in chief: "Q. Can you remember the course of events that day? 
A. I do. I was negotiating with a representative from the GIO whom I held a number of unlitigated matters with, whose name escapes me. We had a quite short discussion about the matter and he conveyed an offer of $65,000 in response of an offer I had given him of $125,000, inclusive.

I then went out and spoke to Mr & Mrs (sic) Hodgins and his mother and advised them of the offer of $65,000. That was a very brief conversation. We agreed it wasn't enough money. They had instructed me, prior to the settlement conference, that Mr Hodgins wanted $100,000 in his hand. So, I went back and put an offer to the GIO of $115,000, inclusive, and received a counter offer of $85,000 inclusive.

I went back out and spoke to Mr Hodgins and his mother and they were still not happy with that amount. So, I went back in and spoke with the GIO to get them to increase the offer and their automatic response, without any detailed discussions, said that it was a final offer and the GIO representative said words to the effect of; it is for today only, otherwise it will be withdrawn.

So, I then went back out and spoke to Mr Hodgins and his mother again and we had a very long conversation, essentially about the offer firstly, that it was a final offer, and that the figure - what it would include and what he would get out of it, and I advised him that he would get about $76,000, because I worked out the costs and expenses.

There was then a long discussion about - I should say, neither Mrs Hodgins or
Glen Hodgins was particularly enraptured about the offer of $85,000. They wanted to know what would happen in the future if they didn't accept it. I said that there were - we then had a discussion about why we couldn't run the case in the forthcoming sittings, because that was one option. We spoke about that and essentially my view was that to obtain the type of compensation that he was seeking, which was an amount of $300,000 or $400,000, we had insufficient evidence and that we would have to obtain further evidence if we were to tempt to obtain that type of verdict in that vicinity." ..............................

A. To the best of my recollection, Mr Hodgins asked me if he did not accept the offer, what will happen from there. I said to him that we couldn't run his case in the forthcoming sittings because we didn't have sufficient evidence to support his claim for economic loss.

He questioned me about that and said to me, `Why can't we?' And was insistent that that could be something that could happen. I said to him words to the effect, `If we run your case on the evidence we have at the moment, and Mr
Cantrill is correct, you will get less than the amount that has been offered.
If he is not correct, then you will get more', or, `may get more', I think." 
The plaintiff's version was somewhat abbreviated: "Q. All right. And where did you met with Mr Davidson on that occasion? 
A. Cessnock Court House.

Q. Did you have any discussions with him about the case? 
A. Well, I seen that he came out with an offer of $65,000 and we said that wasn't enough and I wanted $100,000 clear of expenses. He said he'd go and see what he could do and went and he came back with eight-five and said that was the last offer. And I said, `If we go to court, could I get more'; and he said, `If we go to court you mightn't get much more. You could get less, and it could be another year away'. " 
Mrs Hodgins also gave evidence but as she said at one point her memory of events was "all jumbled up". Given the elapse of time that is not surprising.

The first defendant was of course not present at Cessnock on 17 April 1986. He had sought to be released from any requirement to attend in order to enable acceptance of a brief in a criminal trial which was expected to overrun the dates of scheduled pre-trial conferences in civil causes.

By 17 April however opinions had been expressed by the first defendant that the expected range of general damages might be between $40,000 and $45,000 and that the plaintiff might expect to receive between $55,000 and a minimum of $35,000. Enveloped within these figures were notions concerning the necessity for the plaintiff, if he wished to improve on those figures, to call specific evidence to sustain a claim for a significant element of economic loss.

Addressing instructions that the plaintiff had been told in connection with the offer of $85,000 that "if you do go to court it wouldn't be much more and you could end up with less" a witness, Mr Coombs QC opined: "I do not believe that competent counsel or solicitor experienced in the field would have given that advice, nor was it reasonable in the circumstances to give that advice in 1986." 
His opinion on that matter was not challenged by cross examination. His instructions as to the advice tendered to the plaintiff are sufficiently coordinate with the terms of the advice given as related by both the plaintiff and the second defendant as above recounted.

The first defendant gave this evidence in chief: "Q. Having had the opportunity of reflecting upon your advices as to quantum in Mr Hodgins' case, what do you now say about the propriety or otherwise of the figure that you mentioned? 
A. I didn't want to come here to defend the indefensible. I think it was wrong." 
Error is not invariably the result of negligence but I am satisfied that the advice given by the first defendant did not meet the standard of skill expected of an ordinary skilled person holding himself out to be a barrister practising in the relevant field. It is important to emphasize that this action is founded in negligence and it is not my jurisdiction simply to determine "error" in a sense analogous to an appellate court re-assessing inadequate damages.

Although there is a broad range between the extremities of the figures in their advices, the four experts called by the parties Messrs Coombs QC,
Hickey, Mockler and Barnes all concluded that the figure which the plaintiff accepted was not even close to a reasonable expectation of verdict and therefore distant from a reasonable settlement figure. I am conscious that Mr
Barnes used the expression "very bottom or lower of the probable range of verdicts" but his suggested figures show that the figure of settlement was in fact lower than the lowest of his range.

I am satisfied that a reasonably skilful person holding himself out to be a solicitor in practice in the relevant field would not have tendered the advice to the plaintiff which was given on 17 April 1986.

A threshold question is whether the defendants are immune from action because their liability is asserted to arise out of the conduct of litigation on behalf of the plaintiff. In MacRae versus Stevens CA unreported 18 October 1996 the scope of the advocate's immunity was critically examined and I need not recapitulate what can be read there. In the widely endorsed language of
McCarthy P in Rees versus Sinclair [1974 1 NZLR 180] the particular work - that is advising on a realistic assessment of quantum - could not be said to be so intimately connected with the conduct of the cause in court that it can fairly be said to be of preliminary decision affecting the way that case is to be conducted when it comes to a hearing. What was being contemplated and advised upon was a disposal of the litigation without coming to a hearing. The circumstances do include some collateral activity to the conduct of a case in court. Advice on settlement is separable from that activity and I find distinct contrast with those in Keefe versus Marks [1989 16
NSWLR 713] to which reference was made on behalf of the defendants. More applicable are the observations of Lord Diplock in Saif Ali versus Sydney Mitchell & Co [1980 AC 198:] "My Lords, it seems to me that to require a court of co-ordinate jurisdiction to try the question whether another court reached a wrong decision and, if so, to inquire into the causes of its doing so, is calculated to bring the administration of justice into disrepute. Parliament indeed itself stepped in to prevent a similar abuse of the system of justice by convicted criminals in bringing civil actions for libel against those who described them as having been guilty of the crimes of which they had been convicted: see Civil Evidence
Act 1968, section 13. A consequence of the decision of this House in Rondel v
Worsley [1969] 1 A.C. 191 was to prevent its happening in actions for negligence against barristers.

A similar objection, it may be mentioned, would not apply in cases where an action has been dismissed or judgment entered without a contested hearing, and there is no possibility of restoring the action and proceeding to a trial. If the dismissal or the entry of judgment was a consequence of the negligence of the legal advisers of a party to the action, a claim in negligence against the legal advisers at fault does not involve any allegation that the order of the court which dismissed the action or entered judgment was wrong." 
It was submitted on behalf of the first defendant that the concession that his figures were wrong amounted only to an error of judgment and not to negligence. He was of course consulted for the very purpose of obtaining his judgment as to quantum amongst other things and no reasonably skilled person in his position would have advised as he did. It was further put that there was no causal connection between the advisings by the first defendant and the damage suffered by the plaintiff. The willingness of the plaintiff to accept the sum offered was sourced in the receipt of professional advice. That advice was given in breach of duty of care and I am satisfied that it materially contributed to causing the plaintiff to accept the offer made on 17 April. It is true that the first defendant was not present to respond to the exigencies of the particular day but that does not relieve him from liability arising as a consequence of his negligent advice which he ought to have appreciated would have a continuing effect unless he countermanded or amended it. He chose to remain inactive.

On 17 April 1986 the second defendant was holding himself out as skilled and competent to offer advice on settlement to the plaintiff. Mr Davidson was less than forthright in his evidence about his disagreement with the opinion as to quantum which had been expressed by the first defendant and I apprehend this may have resulted from a consciousness of an intended contention that his duty as a solicitor was discharged by acting on counsel's advice. However as at 17
April Mr Davidson knew or ought to have known that he should not rely upon the figures which had been previously communicated to him. He made these responses in part of his cross examination: "Q. Putting it bluntly, you thought Cantrill's views on quantum were wrong? 
A. No, I don't agree with that.

Q. Clearly if you came to the view that the case was worth $100,000 or more, that was significantly at odds with Mr Cantrill's advice? 
A. That is correct.

Q. And if your view was right Mr Cantrill's is clearly wrong? 
A. Mr Cantrill was what I then considered a senior counsel - or senior/junior counsel with certainly a lot more experience than myself in these matters. I deferred to his advice but it was quite clear by the time of the settlement conference in April that we were receiving on that day offers in excess of his advice.

Q. That reinforced your view that Mr Cantrill's advice was wrong? 
A. On that day that may be right but again, I am saying, today what I said to the client if the matter had progressed to hearing his advice to me had been that the award would be in the order of $55,000 and that is certainly something that I conveyed to Mr Hodgins and his mother." 
As I have mentioned I find it was breach by the second defendant of a duty of care in the circumstances to seek instructions of the plaintiff to accept the inadequate offer of $85,000. I do not consider that the second defendant can escape liability on the basis that competent counsel was properly briefed and his advice was relied upon. Such a protection is integrally dependent upon reliance and I would hold that it cannot be said that Mr Davidson was relying upon advice which he appreciated to be wrong. It would simply amount to a different articulation of negligence to rely upon and convey to the client appreciated incorrect advice. I am also satisfied that in analogy to the first defendant and obviously more proximately on the day in question the second defendant's negligent advising was causative of loss to the plaintiff.

The position of the second defendant required that his proper part and role in the litigation needed to be fulfilled and if the case was to be settled there and then he knew that it was his immediate advice upon which the plaintiff had to rely. He could not abdicate from his responsibility by purporting to rely blindly and with no mind of his own on counsel's previously expressed views on which, it was apparent to him, some question was raised. cf Davy-Chiesman v
Davy-Chiesman [1984 1 All ER 321.] 
Before turning from the topic of negligence of the second defendant I record that I reject the submission that the plaintiff has simply had a change of mind. He was sui juris and gave instructions to settle but it was flawed advice which led him so to do. The plaintiff's evidence was that if he had been told by his legal adviser that $85,000 (or $100,000) was insufficient to settle his case he would have gone to Court. His testimony was not challenged: cf Ellis versus Wallsend District Hospital [1989 17 NSWLR 553]; O'Brien v
Wheeler CA unreported 23 May 1997.

The plaintiff is entitled to succeed against all defendants. Their respective contributions to the damage will need to be assessed in order to determine the cross claim by the second to fourth defendants against the first defendant.
Before adverting to the cross claim, I turn to the issue of damages.

It was contended by the plaintiff that it should be postulated that proper advice on 17 April 1986 was to reject the offer of $85,000 and pursue the action (in the absence of increase in the offer) to hearing which, given the list probabilities, would be about twelve months later. Of course, the action may not have been reached even then and may have been transferred to another venue or to this Court but whilst the tort liability of all defendants was complete upon the happening of the damage by entry of final judgment in the inadequate amount of $85,000, damages should be assessed with reference to the amount appropriately to be awarded if the action had been heard and determined in the ordinary course: Johnson versus Perez <case>; [1988 166 CLR 351.] On the probabilities it may be taken to be determined in
April 1987. Included in the assessment must be an account taken of matters foreseeable at the time of tort (April 1986): Nikolaou versus Papasavas Phillips & Co <case>; [1988 166 CLR 394] but, contrary to the submission by the second defendant, this will not include a likelihood that the plaintiff might have settled the case as he did even if properly advised. Counsel for the second defendant pointed to concessions in evidence by the plaintiff that he was unemployed, impatient for finality, tired of poverty and keen to purchase a motor car at the relevant time. I do not find that those factors demonstrate that he would have been likely to act contrary to advice and as mentioned already his evidence that he would have gone to court if so advised was not specifically challenged. I accept that evidence. This is not a case where negligence has caused the loss of opportunity to litigate and an assessment needs to be made of the chances of success in the proposed litigation. Liability was admitted and the comparison (and necessary judgment) lies between the amount of the consent judgment and what would have appropriately been awarded if the action had proceeded in ordinary course to determination.

I turn to assessment of the latter. In support of the submission that the second defendant being of only two years experience not be "criticized" for relying upon the advice of counsel (although on 17 April 1986 he proffered his own judgment even if backgrounded by counsel's opinions) it was put that the assessments of the plaintiff's experts (Messrs Coombs, QC, Hickey and Mockler) were "inconsistent". Obviously their opinions were different but they were unanimous in their conclusions that $85,000 was below the range of any figure which could be derived from competent advice.

It was expressly stated by senior counsel for the plaintiff that, in the event that I came to the question of assessment of the proper figure to be determined in the ordinary course of the action, his client's consent to my doing so by direct application of any knowledge and expertise I might possess along the lines adopted, for example at first instance in Scott & Ors v
Echegary 1991 Aust Torts R 69,129 was not offered and that I should do so by evaluation of the expert evidence. I confirm that I will do so but that does not mean that I am limited to deciding a preference for any particular expert or experts and being then obliged uncritically to apply that opinion or those opinions in every detail without reservation, cf Laws versus Collins Exposed
Aggregates CA unreported 24 March 1997.

My task involves use of the evidence of experts for the purpose of assessing what would have been the amount appropriately awarded when the action would have ordinarily been determined. I have indicated that I take this to be at the sittings in April 1987. As frequent reference will be made to the various ingredients of estimates made by them it will be convenient and without intended offence to use surnames only.

General Damages. These were suggested by Coombs to lie in the range of $80,000 to $100,000; by Hickey at $110,000; by Mockler $75,000 and by Barnes to be in the range of $50,000 to $60,000 for the loss of the sight of the eye together with $10,000 for other non special damage. Using these opinions, as I shall in respect of all ingredients, as guides, I have come to the conclusion that the appropriate award in April 1987 would have been $80,000.

Had the matter been then heard, interest would have been awarded in respect of that part of the damage which had accrued up to the date of hearing. The decision in MBP (SA) Pty Limited versus Gogic <case>; [1991 CLR 657](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=1991%20171%20CLR%20657 "View LawCiteRecord" ) was at that time in the future and a court in 1987 would have awarded interest reflecting rates which had emerged during a period of notable inflation. I consider that at the time a judge would have specified half the estimate of general damages as representing loss to the time of assessment and used a rate of 7 percent which would be derived from an appropriate average rate over the period of 14 percent but halved in order to allow for the notional gradual accrual of damage. The period from the tort to the assessment in April 1987 was six years and interest at 7 percent on $40,000 would be $14,400 and that amount would have been included in the damages.

As would be apparent from the foregoing the estimate of an ingredient of damage for the plaintiff of economic loss was not at any trial going to be a matter of simple arithmetic. On the basis of approach by Coombs there would be an element of past economic loss of $15,000 to the date of tort together with approximately a further $5,000 if the assessment is to be made at a point one year later; Hickey's approach produced a figure of $36,464; Mockler approached the question of economic loss on a globalized basis and his accumulated figure is $100,000 (after taking into account the material in his supplementary letter) but that figure represents an estimate of both past and future economic loss and Barnes approached the matter also on a globalized basis and suggested a figure of $30,000. Coombs addressed the question of future economic loss with an observation that a projected loss of as little as $75 per week over a working life of the plaintiff to common retirement age would capitalize on the authorized discount rates to $92,000. Hickey arrived at a capitalized sum of $120,000 but increased his estimate significantly upon being supplied with some statistical material concerning average weekly earnings. He finally postulated a figure of some $253,000. No doubt a court hypothetically hearing the matter in 1987 would be alert to the statistical circumstance that a greater number of persons earn less than average earnings than earn more than that figure as it is notorious that the average reflects some very high earners in the community. The very low figure estimated by
Barnes emerges, I believe, from overlooking the very long period of time during which the plaintiff was likely to be handicapped in exercising his earning capacity. I consider the appropriate figure for the exercise on which
I am presently engaged would be $140,000 consisting of an element of economic loss to date of notional trial of $20,000 and $120,000 for future economic loss. My estimate of the latter includes conventional allowance for adverse vicissitudes.

The element of loss accrued to the hypothesized date of trial would carry interest. For reasons already explored I would apply the rate of 7 percent over six years and the plaintiff would have recovered an interest component of $8,400.

In the above exercise I have ignored out of pocket expenses. It is convenient so to do because in estimating the appropriate damages in the present case such a figure would self-cancel when account is taken of the consent judgment.

The final element to be considered is the cost of future medical treatment.
Coombs estimated an appropriate figure at $7,000; Hickey estimated a figure of just under $6,000 but his approach included a discount for vicissitudes which would not have been appropriate and if such discount were not made his figure would be little different from that of Coombs; Mockler did not address this matter. Barnes suggested an estimate of $5,000. I find that the appropriate figure would have been $7,000.

The ingredients therefore of an appropriate award of damages if the matter had been heard in the ordinary course in April 1987 were: 
General damages  $80,000  
Interest on accrued component of general damages  $14,400  
Economic loss  $140,000  
Interest on past component of economic loss  $8,400 
Future medical treatment  $7,000  
TOTAL  $249,800  
The amount of damages received by the plaintiff from the ill-advised settlement was (in round figures) $76,000 and his damage as a result of the negligence of the defendants is therefore $173,800 and I make an assessment accordingly.

However, although tort damage accrued on 17 April 1986 the loss did not crystallize in the sum of $173,800 until the notional hearing in April 1987.
The plaintiff has therefore been kept out of that sum for a period of over ten years. Rates of interest have fluctuated during that time and I find it is appropriate that the plaintiff should receive interest at the rate of 9 percent for the period of ten years on the amount of his damage. That interest amounts to $156,420. The result will be that the assessed damages will be almost doubled by the accrual of interest but that is a direct consequence of the long gap between suffering the loss and the hearing. No submission was made that, in the event that the plaintiff was adjudged entitled to damages, there was any reason why he should be deprived of interest. The plaintiff is therefore entitled to judgment against the defendants for $330,220.

The advice given to the plaintiff had its origin in the unsupportable view emanating from the first defendant's advices that the plaintiff would recover little or possibly nominal damages for economic loss unless he produced evidence of a career path that was specifically open to him and evidence about actual work experience since injury as well as the overall mis-estimate of likely damages. As at 1985 there was abundant authority which ought to have been familiar to a practitioner practising in the accident compensation field that where a plaintiff has suffered a significant disabling injury which obviously affects the range and nature of the work which he can perform a court could and would make a judgment and assessment of a lost capacity without specific evidence, for example of what other persons with that kind of disability can earn: Kealley versus Jones [1979 1 NSWLR 723]; Yammine v
Kalwy [1979 2 NSWLR 151.] 
That misconception provided a continuing source of infection of the advice which was tendered to the plaintiff. It is argued by the second defendant that on the cross claim there should be recovery therefore of complete indemnity. I do not find that this should be granted as the second defendant did not act solely on the advice of the first defendant on the critical day and I do not traverse again material already discussed in this regard. If, as is now claimed, Mr Davidson lacked sufficient experience then he ought to have appreciated that fact and refrained from tendering flawed advice to the client until he had had the opportunity to consult and give advice with confidence.

An assessment of the relative contributions of the defendants to the plaintiff's damage must however reflect the circumstance that the first defendant's original misconception was the root from which the incompetent advice emerged and the second defendant's comparatively junior status and his subordination to the first defendant being apparent to them both, has the consequence that the first defendant should bear a greater proportion of responsibility. I assess this at three quarters.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff against the defendants for $330,220. I direct entry of judgment for the cross claimants (second, third and fourth defendants) against the cross defendant (first defendant) for $247,665.

The defendants are ordered to pay the plaintiff's costs of action. The cross defendant is ordered to pay the cross claimants' costs of the cross claim.
 * * * 
