

Regina versus Prior Matter No Cca 60232/97 [1997] NSWSC 460 (7 October 1997) 
Regina versus Trevor John Prior /97 October 1997 
Gleeson CJ, Studdert J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus TREVOR JOHN PRIOR 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant Trevor John Prior stood trial before his Honour Judge Twigg of Queen's Counsel and jury in the Penrith District Court on two counts of aggravated indecent assault. The applicant was found guilty on the first count but not guilty on the second count. Following his conviction, the applicant was sentenced to imprisonment for two years and six months with a minimum term of fifteen months dating from 9 May 1997, the date of sentence. His Honour recommended that the applicant serve his minimum term in protected custody. 
The applicant seeks leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence imposed.

The maximum penalty provided for this category of offence under <case> of the Crimes Act is seven years imprisonment.

The facts relevant to the count upon which the applicant was convicted may be shortly stated. The victim of the assault was a twelve year old child who suffered from cerebral palsy. He was being cared for on weekends at a respite centre conducted by the Northcott Society by which the applicant was employed.
The incident giving rise to the charge upon which the applicant was convicted occurred in a bedroom at that centre when, according to the victim, the applicant handled his penis. In the words of the complainant describing the applicant's activity: "He was just playing around with it... He was just moving my penis around, holding it." Whilst it was part of the applicant's duties to assist the victim in dressing after showering, the learned judge found that what the applicant did was done "for sexual gratification". That, of course, was a finding which was open to his Honour.

The applicant is fifty-one years of age, having been born on 9 January 1946.
He is a man of previous good character. A pre-sentence report to which his
Honour referred in the sentencing remarks conveniently summarises the applicant's subjective features. He was residing in a longstanding partnership with another man at the time of being sentenced. He came from a stable upbringing. His elderly parents are alive and the applicant shared with his brother the care of them. For most of his working life the applicant held a position with the family company which carried on a chemical manufacturing business. In 1988 he began his association with the Society for Crippled
Children, now the Northcott Society. To begin with he worked as a driver/assistant and later he assumed a full-time position as a residential care assistant and manager of an accommodation cottage. This was his position at the time of the commission of the offence.

The author of the pre-sentence report reported that the applicant was suitable for a community service order and that he was also suitable for periodic detention.

There were many character references presented to the court and these referred to the applicant's dedication and service to handicapped people. References came from parents of handicapped people for whom the applicant had cared or was caring and from handicapped people themselves who had experienced the applicant's care. Those references were consistently laudatory of the applicant. The Court has also been referred to evidence which was called before the sentencing judge to the like effect.

It has been submitted that the sentence was manifestly excessive in all the circumstances and a number of matters were advanced to support this submission.

It was submitted that whilst there was a need for a sentence to reflect the element of general deterrence, there was no need for the sentence to reflect an element of personal deterrence. In this respect it was submitted that the learned judge ought not to have concluded that the applicant would not re- offend and exception was taken to his Honour's remarks to that effect and to the further remarks culminating in the comment: "The opportunity for him to offend again is clearly available." 
There are to be found in the references to which I have referred expressions by parents of handicapped people and indeed by handicapped people themselves indicative of a continuing wish by such people to call upon the applicant's services. It is against the background of that evidence that the remark that the opportunity to offend again will be present ought to be viewed. The learned judge did not, as I read his sentencing remarks, find that the applicant was likely to re-offend; rather his remarks indicate that the judge was not prepared to ignore that possibility. I do not find any error in what the judge said in this regard.

A further written submission was made that the sentence imposed would cause undue hardship to other disabled people and that the judge failed to take that into account. Mr Porter QC has not pursued that submission before this Court, acknowledging that the opportunity for the applicant to continue in a caring role would be at best severely limited by reason of what has happened.
Plainly, the applicant ought not to be carrying out this sort of work in the future.

The trial judge was provided with statistics of sentences imposed under s
M(1). There were only four cases on which those statistics were based. One of those attracted a minimum term of six months and the other minimum terms were eighteen months, twenty-four months and thirty-six months respectively.
His Honour referred to those statistics in his remarks on sentence in the following passage: "I have considered the statistics supplied to me from the Judicial Commission of New South Wales through the prosecution and with the consent of the defence. Clearly a prison sentence between eighteen months and thirty-six months is open to me." 
It is submitted that those remarks indicate that his Honour fell into error in giving undue weight to those statistics having regard to the limited nature of them. Indeed it is submitted that his Honour used these statistics "as indicating a clear and arbitrary range of penalties." In my opinion a sentencing judge must always approach the use of sentencing statistics with caution. Obviously the smaller the number of cases to which statistics refer, the less helpful they are, and in any event what must be determined ultimately is what sentence is appropriate in the particular case, having regard to its features, both objective and subjective. However I do not read the sentencing remarks in point as indicating his Honour regarded those statistics as necessarily fixing the range. On the contrary, his Honour's remarks elsewhere reflect other considerations to which he specifically adverted, including the aggravating features of the offence, the maximum penalty provided by the statute and the need for general deterrence.

It was argued that the indecent assault was at the lower end of the scale of seriousness in that it was not accompanied by violence, that it was isolated and not systematic and that it was of short duration. Further it was put that it was to be regarded as a foolish impulse rather than something that had been deliberately planned and it was submitted that no physical harm was occasioned to the victim.

Those considerations, and in particular the applicant's previous good character and the service which he had performed for disabled people, it is submitted, lead to the conclusion that the sentence that was imposed in this case was manifestly excessive.

I do not come to that view. His Honour had what was obviously a very difficult sentencing task to perform. However, his Honour had a discretion within which to determine what was an appropriate sentence. Obviously it is not a question on this application as to what this Court would have fixed by way of a sentence. The question is whether his Honour fell into appealable error in imposing a sentence which was manifestly excessive. In considering that question there have to be borne in mind the aggravating features of what occurred. In particular is the aggravating circumstance that in doing what he did the applicant committed what amounted to a serious breach of trust towards a victim who was a young handicapped child.

I have come to the conclusion that this Court would not be justified in interfering with the sentence that was imposed. I would grant leave to appeal but, in my opinion, the appeal should be dismissed.

GLEESON CJ: I agree. 
BARR J: I also agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The order of the Court will be as announced by Studdert J. * * * 
