

Regina versus Carmelo Vincent Pirrottina [1996] NSWSC 457 (27 September 1996) 
REGINA versus Carmelo Vincent PIRROTTINA /96 September 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, McINERNEY J 
RESULT: Application refused 
CATCHWORDS: Criminal law and procedure - No principle that accused person facing two trials entitled to have trial of more serious charge concluded before facing trial on the other charge - Judge not required to give formal reasons for decision in routine practice matters provided that reasons are made apparent during debate leading up to decision.
 
The applicant faced a trial on assault charges in the District Court and a trial on murder charges in the Supreme Court. He sought to delay the District Court trial until the Supreme Court trial had been concluded, upon the basis that, if he gives evidence in the District Court trial, he will face cross-examination which would prejudice him in the murder trial.

Held 1. There is no principle that, where an accused person faces separate trials, he is entitled to have the trial of the more serious offence concluded before facing trial on the other charge.

Regina versus Van Phu Ho (CCA, 18 July 1984, unreported) followed
A judge is not required to give formal reasons for his or her decision in a routine practice matter, provided that the reasons for that decision are made apparent during the debate leading up to that decision. The judge should, however, ensure that a record is kept of that debate.

Housing Commission versus Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd [[1983] 3 NSWLR 378] followed 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: This is an application by Carmelo Vincent Pirrottina, pursuant to [s 5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), for leave to appeal against the refusal by Judge Court QC in the District Court to stay or to adjourn his trial in that Court on certain charges until other charges against him have been concluded in the Supreme Court.

The order of Judge Court against which leave to appeal is sought was made on June 1996. The application for leave was not filed until 4 July, which is some six days outside the period prescribed by [Rule
B](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/s5b.html) of the [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/). The applicant's solicitor has sought to explain the delay by his inability to obtain a transcript of the proceedings before Judge Court within that period.
That is no reason at all to delay the filing of the application for leave to appeal, as this Court has often pointed out to the Crown in relation to Crown appeals. The delay, however, is a minor one and I propose that the applicant be granted an extension of time until and including 4 July in which to file his application.

The charges against the applicant in the District Court consist of one of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, two of assault occasioning actual bodily harm, two of assault and one of affray. They all arise out of an incident in the early hours of New Years Day 1994 at Terrigal. According to the Facts Sheet tendered in the Local Court on 31 January 1994, the applicant is alleged to have struck the victim in the mouth with his closed fist, causing a tooth to penetrate the skin of the victim's mouth, to have kicked the victim when he was on the ground, causing a compound fracture to his arm, and then to have joined a number of his companions in threatening a police officer who witnessed the last of those assaults. The assault charges would appear to be either back up or alternative charges. It is anticipated that the trial of those charges will take seven to eight days. The trial is presently fixed to commence on 2 December next.

The charges against the applicant in the Supreme Court are two of murder. They arise out of the deaths of Robert and Genel Pitt on the Central Coast on or about 22 October 1994. According to another Facts Sheet prepared in 1995, the
Crown case is that the applicant and two others (John Cameron Brickell and
Christopher Oosterhoff) were to rob Pitt, who was a drug dealer. Brickell accompanied Pitt to a meeting with the applicant and Oosterhoff, where they were ostensibly to be involved in the purchase and sale of drugs. They were to steal some $50,000 in the possession of Pitt and which he was to use for that purchase. The applicant is alleged to have shot Pitt in the head on two occasions, and his body was thereafter buried. Brickell then suggested that he may have been identified by Pitt's wife. The three of them travelled back to the Pitt residence and took Mrs Pitt - who had been rendered unconscious by
Brickell - away in the Pitts' own motor vehicle. Mrs Pitt is then alleged to have been shot by the applicant and the vehicle was burnt. Her body was also buried.

In May of this year, and after a long voir dire relating to a proposed separate trial on the two murder charges had concluded, Oosterhoff pleaded guilty to charges of the robbery of Pitt in company and to being an accessory before the fact of the murder of Mrs Pitt. He undertook to give evidence against the applicant and Brickell. He was never arraigned on the murder charges. The trial of the applicant and Brickell was anticipated to take about four months, although that estimate has been reduced today to one of more like two months. It has not yet been given a date, but it is in a callover in the
Supreme Court next week and it was it is now anticipated that it will be given a date to commence during the first half of next year. It is only very recently that this position became clear.

The applicant's trial in the District Court was originally fixed to commence on 19 June 1995. At that stage, the applicant had already been committed for trial in the Supreme Court on the murder charges, but no complaint had been ventilated that the District Court trial should not proceed until the Supreme
Court trial had been concluded. However, an unopposed application was made by the applicant to vacate that trial date because of the serious illness of his counsel. An agreement was then reached between the solicitors for both parties that the District Court trial should be delayed until the Supreme Court trial had been concluded. This was for the expressed reasons that the District Court trial was estimated to take seven to eight days, that it was unlikely (no doubt because of that estimate) to obtain a new trial date in the District
Court that year, that it was expected that the Supreme Court trial would be fixed to commence early the following year, and that any date given to the
District Court trial may coincide with the Supreme Court trial.

The expectations in relation to the Supreme Court trial were sadly disappointed, in that it will now be heard over a year later than then anticipated. The applicant asserts that the delay has been caused because of the Crown's wish to dispose of the proceedings against Oosterhoff first, but - be that as it may - clearly enough the difficulties which the Supreme Court presently has through a lack of resources in hearing long trials such as this one was expected to be has played some part in the delay.

In the meantime, the District Court trial was mentioned and stood over on a number of occasions. In May of this year, the solicitor from the Office of the
Director of Public Prosecutions having the carriage of that trial took the stand that it should not be delayed any longer, as there was by then no prospect that the Supreme Court trial would be heard this year, and thus the considerations which had led to the agreement eleven months earlier no longer applied.

When the matter came before Judge Court to determine whether a date should be fixed, an affidavit was filed by the applicant's solicitor advancing two arguments as to why these proceedings should be held over until the Supreme
Court trial had been dealt with. Those arguments were, and I adopt the terminology used:
It was proper and just that the accused should not have to stand trial in the District Court until the Supreme Court trial - which is a matter of utmost gravity - has been concluded.
Apart from personal convenience, there were other considerations which required the Supreme Court trial to be concluded first, in the interests of a fair trial and a fair and due process - namely: that the departure from the agreement reached in June 1995 represented a detriment to the accused in terms of what he is required to face and is being exposed to in respect to the Supreme Court proceedings, and that he may well be cross-examined in the District Court trial concerning the subject matter of Supreme Court proceedings.

Counsel submitted to the judge that the District Court trial would expose the applicant to: " ... prejudice in his position in terms of any evidence he gives or any evidence of cross-examination that may be open," and that in order to ensure that he gets a fair trial the more serious matter should proceed first.

The debate before Judge Court is not fully recorded, but the judge is recorded as asking why, if the District Court could do better than the Supreme Court in the provision of hearing dates, the District Court trial should not proceed, to which counsel replied "because of the prejudice that the accused will sustain". The judge thereupon fixed the trial to commence on 2 December.

This Court has drawn a clear procedural distinction in relation to <case> appeals between applications for leave and the appeal itself.[1] It has been accepted on behalf of the applicant here that the decision to adjourn or not to adjourn the District Court proceedings was a discretionary one. In those circumstances, it is necessary for the applicant to persuade this Court that there was something in the nature of an error of principle made by the judge in the exercise of his discretion which warranted the grant of leave in order to argue in the appeal itself that the discretion had been wrongly exercised in the circumstances of this case.[2] 
The applicant submitted that the judge did not exercise his discretion at all, in that he gave no reasons for rejecting the application to delay the District
Court trial. It is true that the judge did not elaborate upon his decision, but this was a routine application for an adjournment and, provided that the judge's reasons are made apparent during the debate leading up to his or her decision in a practice matter such as this, it is not necessary for the judge to give formal reasons for such a decision.[3] In the present case, as I have pointed out, the debate is not fully recorded but that does not mean that the judge did not make his reasons apparent in that debate. It would be preferable, however, for any judge who does not propose to give formal reasons to ensure that a record is kept of the debate.

It is reasonably clear from what has been recorded that the judge simply did not accept that an accused person is entitled to have one trial proceed before another because of a fear that he will be cross-examined in the first concerning the second, notwithstanding that the second trial was of a very much more serious offence, and certainly not where there were resource difficulties in providing an earlier hearing date for the second. I would reject the submission that the judge did not exercise his discretion at all.

The applicant then submitted that an error of principle is evidenced by the judge's failure to accept that the applicant would be prejudiced by the jeopardy to which he is thereby exposed and the burden under which he would be placed by having the District Court trial proceed first.

Stripped of their orotundity, the arguments put before Judge Court are reduced to one - that the applicant will, if he gives evidence in the District Court trial, face cross-examination which would prejudice him in the murder trial.
As he was charged prior to 10 June 1994, at which time the Crimes Legislation (Unsworn Evidence) Amendment Act 1994 abolished the right of an accused person to make an unsworn statement, the applicant retains the right to make such a statement in the District Court trial, and that is so notwithstanding the subsequent passing of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/),[4] but that is not a complete answer to such prejudice if it would otherwise arise.

However, there is no principle that, where an accused person faces separate trials, he is entitled to have the trial of the more serious offence concluded before facing trial on the other charge. That is clear from the decision of this Court in Regina versus Van Phu Ho.5 That was a case where the facts giving rise to the lesser drugs charge, which was being heard first, were also relied upon by the Crown as an overt act in the more serious drugs charge, which was being heard last. Cross-examination upon the facts of the more serious drugs charge if the accused gave evidence in the first trial would have been inevitable. That principle applies whether or not a date has been fixed for the second trial; it is not restricted to drug cases; it applies also to a case such as the present.

There is no such inevitability in this matter that the applicant would be cross-examined in the District Court trial upon the facts which will arise in the Supreme Court trial. The facts of each of the cases as I have stated them are wholly unrelated one from the other. There could perhaps be a problem should the applicant raise character, but we have been informed by the Crown that he already has a criminal record so that event is extremely unlikely. The mere possibility of prejudice to the accused's position in the second trial would not be sufficient, for that can be dealt with on any appeal following conviction at the second trial. I can see no error of principle involved in the judge's exercise of discretion based upon the material and the arguments put before him.

An additional argument has been put before this Court. It is said that the judge erred in failing to consider - " ... the position of the applicant facing a trial for murder as against the unnecessary expense and use of court time with respect to the prosecution of the District Court matter." 
There was no material before the judge, and there is none before us, which suggests that the expense and court time involved in the District Court trial will be "unnecessary". It could only be thought to be unnecessary if it were accepted by the applicant that, should he be found guilty of the murder charges, he will plead guilty to the District Court charges. Understandably, the applicant is not presently prepared to indicate that that is so. It is suggested that the Crown would be unlikely to proceed with these charges in the event that he is found guilty of murder, but we are quite unable to say that that is what would happen. The charges are serious ones, and they are quite unrelated to the events which give rise to the murder charges. For myself, I would expect the Crown to proceed with them. An argument was also put that the applicant should be able to reserve his resources in order to fight the murder charges. Even if this is relevant, which we do not need to decide in this application, there is no evidence that his resources do not stretch far enough to meet both cases.

The result is a sensible one, in that the offences alleged to have been committed first will be tried first, although perhaps that fact may not be of any particular importance in the circumstances of this case. To delay the
District Court trial until the Supreme Court trial is concluded could lead to serious inconvenience should, for example, the Supreme Court trial falter and have to start again. Those are all matters which the judge would have been entitled to take into account.

Finally, I should refer to one matter raised by the Crown. It is submitted by the Crown that the District Court trial could proceed with what is described as a prohibition on publication, so that knowledge of the fact and content of those proceedings and of the result will not be gained by prospective jurors for the Supreme Court trial. The nature of the offences with which the applicant has been charged in the District Court does not, however, attract any statutory power to prohibit the publication of a report of those proceedings, and there is no general power to make such an order in the absence of such a statutory provision.[6] It does not seem to me that the
District Court trial is one which is likely to attract publicity in Sydney (as perhaps opposed to on the Central Coast), and the Supreme Court trial is to proceed in Sydney. But the risk of prejudicing prospective jurors for the
Supreme Court trial is one which the Crown will have to consider.

So far as this application for leave is concerned, however, I propose that the application be refused.

SMART J: I agree.

McINERNEY J: I agree.

HUNT CJ at CL: The order of the Court is as I have proposed.
 [1] Regina versus Matovski [(1989) 15 NSWLR 720] at 722;
Regina versus Rogerson [(1990) 45 A Crim R 253] at -254; Regina versus Steffan [(1993) 30 NSWLR 633] at 634.
 [2] Regina versus Van Phu Ho (CCA, 18 July 1994, unreported), per Mahoney JA (at 3) and Gleeson CJ (at 4).
 [3] Housing Commission versus Tatmar Pastoral Co Pty Ltd [[1983] 3 NSWLR ]
at 386; Public Service Board versus Osmond [(1986) 159 CLR 656] at -667; Apps versus Pilet [(1987) 11 NSWLR 350] at 353.
 [4] Regina versus Ivan Robert Marko Milat (Hunt CJ at CL, 22 April 1996, unreported) at 5.
 (18 July 1994, unreported) at 3.
 [6] John Fairfax & Sons Ltd versus Police Tribunal [(1986) 5 NSWLR ]
at 477-479; AG versus Mayas Pty Ltd [(1988) 14 NSWLR 342] at -359; John Fairfax Group Pty Ltd versus Local Court [(1991) 26 NSWLR ]
at 148, 169; Regina versus "Mr C" [(1993) 67 A Crim R 562] at .
 * * * 
