

Roy versus Maddocks and Anor Matter No Ca 40570/94 [1998] NSWSC 62 (23 March )

Last Updated: 7 April 1998 
JOHN MAXWELL ROY versus MARGARET ANITA MADDOCKS & ANOR 
CA 40570/94 March 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Sheller J A 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: Mr John Roy and his late brother, Leslie, were equal partners in a business from 1926 to 1992. The business began to be scaled down after 1971. 
Proceedings were brought by John against Leslie's estate, Leslie having died in late 1992, for various orders including an order claiming an interest in a property at Canyon Lea and orders relating to the dissolution of the partnership between the two brothers.

Those proceedings were heard in the Equity Division, ultimately by Hulme J.
Hulme J dismissed John Roy's claim to an interest in the Canyon Lea property.
He made a declaration that the partnership between the brothers was dissolved on 10 July 1992. He left open the prospect of ordering accounts and the matter was stood over on a number of occasions. John was ordered to file affidavits, which he did, which were considered by the Judge. Ultimately, however, on 22
September 1995 his Honour held that it would be impossible to determine the respective interests of the partners in the remaining assets and liabilities of the partnership. Accordingly, he held that no order for the taking of the partnership accounts should be made.

Mr Roy appealed and the appeal was heard by the Court of Appeal comprising
Handley JA, Powell JA and Cole JA. In a reserved judgment given by Handley JA, with the concurrence of the other two judges, the appeal was dismissed.

Handley JA noted the submission by John Roy that the result of the earlier orders in the Court meant that Leslie Roy finished up with more than his equal share of the partnership assets. However, his Honour held that the Court cannot know what the true position is between the two brothers without the taking of the accounts of the partnership; this was an application of well- established principles of partnership law. His Honour, noting that it had become impossible for those partnership accounts to be taken and that this had been acknowledged, reluctantly dismissed the appeal.

There had been an earlier stay granted which restrained the disposal of the proceeds of sale of Canyon Lea. That had been for the purpose of preserving the rights of the parties pending the disposal of the appeal. The arrangement was continued to allow the High Court to consider whether to grant leave to appeal. The High Court refused leave on 12 December 1997. On 19 December 1997
Handley JA released the opponents from the undertaking that had been given, noting that the whole purpose of that undertaking was to preserve the rights of the parties until the proceedings had been determined. They had been finally determined by the order of the High Court.

Mr John Roy misunderstood some remarks of Handley JA in thinking that this
Court could sit in judgment of the earlier decision of the Court differently constituted.

We have looked at the transcript. It does not say that. The misunderstanding by a lay litigant can perhaps be sympathised with but clearly there is no power in this Court simply to recall and revisit a matter that has been finally disposed of, particularly where it has gone to the High Court. All that Handley JA was saying was that if Mr John Roy wanted to challenge the order of Handley JA dissolving the stay and releasing the undertaking he had that right, even though he could well be wasting his money to do so. That challenge has been brought today. There is no basis for overturning the order that Handley JA made. It was clearly correct given that the litigation had come to an end.

Mr Roy obviously considers that there was an injustice done. This Court can only proceed in accordance with the law and due procedures. Those procedures were followed and followed all the way to the High Court. There is nothing further that can be done. The application must be dismissed with costs. In my view that is the order the Court should make.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree. 
SHELLER JA: I also agree. 
APPELLANT: Your Honour, if I may ask this question: Questions of law, have I the right to appeal to the High Court? 
MASON P: You have only got the right to appeal from orders that are made dismissing an appeal. We have rejected your application to dissolve a stay. It would be a total waste of your time and the High Court's time for you to take the matter any further. 
APPELLANT: But, your Honour, I have the right, do I? 
MASON P: You will have to get advice from somewhere else about that. 
APPELLANT: Yes, thank you, your Honour. 
MASON P: The formal order of the Court is that the application is refused with costs. * * * 
