

The Council of The Law Society of New South Wales versus Nutt and Anor No. Ca /95 Legal Services Tribunal [1995] NSWSC 93 (19 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
MAHONEY AP(1), MEAGHER(2) AND COLE(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 4 August 1995 #DATE 24:8:1995 #ADD 19:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant/Claimant:  J Basten QC and J M Wales 
Solicitors for the Appellant/Claimant:
G J Still, Law Society of NSW 
Counsel for the Respondent/      M L D Einfeld QC and
Opponent (1):              P G Mahony 
Solicitors for the Respondent/     Baker Deane and Nutt
Opponent :
 
Counsel for the Respondent/      Submitting appearance
Opponent (2):
ORDER
Appeal upheld
JUDGE1
MAHONEY AP John
Adrian Nutt is a solicitor. It has been claimed by a former client that, in 1986, Mr Nutt acted in a way that involved professional misconduct. Mr Nutt has denied that he has been guilty of professional misconduct. For the purpose of this proceeding, the Court is asked to assume that he did what has been suggested against him. That assumption will be made.
However, it is to be emphasised that it should not be inferred that the Court has investigated the substance of the claim or has formed any opinion as to the correctness of it.
The misconduct is serious. It is alleged that the solicitor acted for both vendor and purchaser in respect of an agreement for the sale of land "where there was a conflict of interest"; and it is claimed that he "committed or was knowingly concerned in the commission of a fraud on the Office of State
Revenue". That is misconduct the vice of which does not depend upon legislation: it is misconduct under the general law.
But, it has been said, there are legal technicalities which prevent investigation of the claim. It is said that the complaint has been referred to the wrong body: that it has been directed to the Legal Profession Disciplinary
Tribunal ("the old Tribunal") whereas it should have been directed to the
Legal Services Tribunal ("the new Tribunal"). The complaint was lodged in the office of the new Tribunal and was brought on for hearing before the new
Tribunal. That Tribunal held that it had no jurisdiction to deal with it.
The Law Society has applied to this Court for declarations: the relief it claims is limited to declarations that the new Tribunal can and should determine the complaint.
Mr Basten QC for the Law Society has taken the
Court to the terms of the [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) and the Legal Profession Reform Act 1993 and to
Regulations which have been made under each of them. He has submitted that, by the application of these provisions, jurisdiction has been conferred on the new Tribunal to determine the complaint. Mr Einfeld QC, for the solicitor, has submitted that that Tribunal can now not deal with the complaint and, insofar as it may be relevant, has submitted that if this be so it is no longer open to the Law Society to pursue the substance of that complaint before that
Tribunal.

The parties have, for the purposes of testing the jurisdiction of the
Legal Services Tribunal, dealt with the substantial issues in contest. No point has been taken in relation to the form of the proceeding before this
Court, as to the correctness of the facts placed before the Tribunal, or as to the validity of the Regulations to which reference has been made. It is proper that the Court deal with the matter on this basis.
The present problems arise because of the complicated legislation which has been passed to deal, inter alia, with the conduct of solicitors and complaints about them. For some 100 years and more, the professional misconduct of lawyers (the present case is, of course, concerned with a solicitor) was dealt with by the Supreme Court under its inherent jurisdiction: see Attorney General versus Wylde <case>; [(1946) 47 SR 99]; Re Veron, Ex parte Law Society of New South Wales 84 MIN (Pt 1) 136. For an early instance of the exercise of that Jurisdiction, see Re Lewis Levy; Ex parte The
Incorporated Lam, Institute of New South Wales <case>; [(1887) 7 LR NSW 347.] An allegation of misconduct was brought to the attention of the Supreme Court and that Court determined whether the misconduct had occurred and what should be done.
In 1935, a Statutory Committee was established to deal with the professional misconduct of solicitors. A complaint in respect of such misconduct could be made to the Law Society and the Law Society could, after investigation, refer to the Statutory Committee for inquiry any question as to the professional Misconduct of any solicitor and what should be done: see <case> et seq. An appeal could be brought from the orders of the Statutory Committee to the Supreme Court: <case>. That procedure remained to be followed until the commencement date of the [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/).
The [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) established a different procedure. A person who considered that a solicitor was guilty of professional misconduct could make a complaint to the Law Society Council: <case>. If after investigation the
Council was satisfied that the complaint involved a question of serious professional misconduct, it was required to refer the complaint to the old
Tribunal, the Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal established by that Act.
The Tribunal was required to hear the complaint and make appropriate orders: s
The Act reserved to the Council of the Law Society itself the right of its own motion to make a complaint to the Tribunal in respect of a solicitor's professional misconduct: <case>.
It was necessary that there be transitional provisions. It is accepted by the parties to this proceeding that if a complaint was in the course of being dealt with prior to the commencement of the 1987 Act, the complaint could be dealt, with by the Statutory Committee: see generally [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), Schedule 8, c11 18-20 and the Legal Professional Regulation 1994 made under that Act. It was accepted that after the commencement of the 1987 Act a complaint could be made to the old Tribunal in respect of conduct which occurred before the commencement of the Act.
In 1993, the legislature made other and different provision in respect of the legal profession and, in particular, in respect of complaints about professional misconduct. That legislation came into force on 1 July 1994. The Act inter alia, repealed Division 10 of the 1987 Act and substituted for it a new and different Division. It established, inter alia, a new tribunal, the Legal Services Tribunal which was to take the place of the tribunal established under the 1987 Act.
The procedure established envisaged, inter alia, that individuals might make a complaint about professional misconduct to the Legal Commissioner established by the 1993 Act and that the Law Society Council might itself institute a complaint against a legal practitioner: see ss 134, 135.
Provision was made for the investigation of the complaints by the Legal Services
Commissioner and by the Law Society Council: cf s 147A et seq. After investigation, proceedings could be instituted in the Legal Services Tribunal, the new Tribunal, with respect to the complaint and the Tribunal was required to hear and determine the matter: <case>.
Again, provision was made to deal with complaints in respect of misconduct occurring before I July 1994 and proceedings commenced or steps taken which, before that date, had not been brought to a conclusion: see reg et seq.
 
WHAT HAPPENED IN THE PRESENT CASE
The events giving rise to the present issues may be stated summarily in the following way: 1986 The events occurred giving rise to the complaint made by Mrs
Carole Warner.  January 1988 The [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) commenced operation.
 April 1992 Mrs Warner made a complaint to the Law Society.
 August 1993 The Law Society considered the complaint and resolved as follows: "That the questions of professional misconduct involved in the complaint be referred to the Legal Profession Disciplinary
Tribunal pursuant to [s 134(i)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html) of the [Legal Profession Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)".
 May 1994 The Council of the Law Society resolved: "That Council adopt the following amended particulars for the complaint against the Solicitor: ...
...".
 June 1994 The [Legal Profession Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) regulation here in question was published in the Government Gazette, to take effect from 1 July 1994.
 July 1994 The relevant provisions of the Legal Profession
Reform Act 1993 commenced operating.
 September 1994 Pursuant to the above resolutions, a complaint was filed in the Legal Services Tribunal on 15 September 1994 being Matter No 5 of 1994.
 
March 1995 The Legal Services Tribunal held that it had no jurisdiction to determine the complaint.
The form of complaint which physically was filed in the new Tribunal on September 1994 was in a form which has given rise to the present issues. It has been accepted by both counsel that if that complaint had been entituled in the Legal Services Tribunal, the new Tribunal, the present issues would not have arisen. But, however that be, the complaint was entituled "Legal
Profession Disciplinary Tribunal" (the old Tribunal). As far as is here relevant it was in the following form: "LEGAL PROFESSION DISCIPLINARY TRIBUNAL IN THE
MATTER OF JOHN
ADRIAN NUTT AND THE [LEGAL PROFESSION ACT, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) 
CAROLE WARNER Complainant 
THE COUNCIL OF THE LAW SOCIETY OF NEW SOUTH WALES Referrer
No 5 of 1994 
COMPLAINT 
The Council of the Law Society of New South Wales refers a
Complaint to the Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal against
John Adrian Nutt ("the solicitor") pursuant to [Section 134(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html) of the [Legal Profession Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/).

A copy of the Complaint is annexed hereto and marked 'A'.

PARTICULARS 
The Council of the Law Society of New South
Wales requests the making of the following orders:
Such orders as the Tribunal sees fit.
That John Adrian Nutt pay the costs of the Law Society of New
South Wales of these proceedings.

This complaint will be listed for mention before the Registrar of the Legal Services Tribunal at Level 19, 65 Elizabeth Street,
Sydney, at 9.30 am on 7 October 1994.
 
TO: John Adrian Nutt Crawford Street
Queanbeyan NSW 2620 
Before any attendance at that time you must file a Notice of
Address for Service of any document on you.

Orders may be made against you in your absence.

Date: 12 September 1994 ...... (Signed).......................
Solicitor for the Council of the Law Society of New South Wales"
Mr Einfeld
QC, for Mr Nutt, has submitted that, notwithstanding that upon the repeal of the old Division 10 the functions of the old Tribunal were limited: see the 1994 Regulation, c11 31-32; and notwithstanding that the complaint was physically filed in the premises of the new Tribunal, the complaint was filed with the old Tribunal and the new Tribunal had no jurisdiction to deal with it. Mr Basten
QC, for the Law Society, submitted that, insofar as it was necessary, the new Tribunal had jurisdiction by reason of c11 30-32 of the Regulation made under the 1993 Act. Those clauses are as follows: "Complaints made under former Part 10 and not yet subject to proceedings:
This clause and clause 31 apply in respect of a complaint made under form Part 10 of the Act.

If a complaint made before 1 July 1994 has not, before that date, been the subject of proceedings before the former
Board or the former Tribunal, the complaint is to be dealt with as if it had been made under new Part 10 of the Act. A matter that has been referred under former Part 10 of the Act to the former
Board or the former Tribunal by a Council, but has not, by 1
July 1994, been the subject of proceedings before the former
Board or former Tribunal, is taken to be a matter referred to the new Tribunal under new Part 10 of the Act.

If a complaint has been made to a Council (or is the subject of a notice given to a Council by the former Review Panel under former section 140(2) of the Act) before 1 July 1994, but the 
Council has made no decision in response to the complaint or notice, as the case may be, before that day, the complaint is to be dealt with by the Council as if it had been made under new
Part 10 of the Act.

Anything done under former
Part 10 of the Act in respect of a complaint to which this clause applies is taken to have been done under new Part 10 of the Act.

Complaints made under former Part 10 and already subject to proceedings:
If a complaint is the subject of proceedings before the former Board or the former Tribunal that are pending on 1 July , those proceedings may be continued before, and determined by, that Board or that Tribunal as if former Part 10 of the Act were still in force.
 
If a complaint made under former Part 10 of the Act has (whether before, or after 1 July 1994) been the subject of proceedings before the former Board or the former Tribunal resulting in a determination in relation to the complaint or the termination of the proceedings, any further action in respect of the complaint that is taken on or after 1 July 1994 is to be taken under new Part 10 of the Act. In that case, the determination or termination is to be treated as if it had been made under new
Part 10 of the Act by the new Tribunal.
Examples of further action are a review of the determination, a reference of the complaint to the Tribunal or an appeal.

To the extent that a complaint has been the subject of proceedings before the former Tribunal, this clause applies to the complaint whether the proceedings are in relation to the review of the determination of a complaint by the former Board or they are in relation to a complaint referred directly to the former Tribunal.
 
A reference in this clause to a determination: is a reference to a determination that continues to have effect after June 1994; and includes a determination that, because of this clause, is made under a provision of former Part 10 of the Act on or after July 1994; and includes any reprimand or order made as a result of a determination.
 
Continuation of former Board and former Tribunal:
The former Board continues in existence (as constituted immediately before 1 July 1994) for the purposes of determining any proceedings under clause 31.

The provisions of former Part 10 of the Act that relate to the constitution and functions of the former Board continue to apply to the former Board while it continues in existence under this clause.

The former Tribunal continues in existence (as constituted immediately before 1 July 1994) for the purposes of determining any proceedings under clause 31.

The provisions of former Part 10 of the Act that relate to the constitution and functions of the former Tribunal continue to apply to the former Tribunal while it continues in existence under this clause." 
THE JURISDICTION OF THE NEW TRIBUNAL
In my opinion, the complaint was properly before the new Tribunal and that Tribunal had the power and the duty to deal with it. The complaint is, by virtue of cl 30 of the 1994 Regulation to be taken to be a matter referred to the new Tribunal under Part 10 of the 1993 Act. Clause 30(2) provides, inter alia, that a "matter that has been referred under former Part 10 of the Act to the former Board or the former Tribunal by a Council, but has not, by 1 July , been the subject of proceedings before the former Board or former
Tribunal, is taken to be a matter referred to the new Tribunal under new Part of the Act". The Council's resolution of 12 August 1993 was, in my opinion, an operative referral of the complaint to the old Tribunal within this provision. Section 134(1)(c) of the 1987 Act provided that after an investigation a Council if satisfied that the complaint involves a question of serious professional misconduct "shall refer the complaint to the Tribunal".
There was a complaint and the question was no doubt seen as one involving serious professional misconduct.
Prima facie, a resolution in the terms of the resolution of 12 August 1993 ("that the questions of professional misconduct involved in the complaint be referred to" the old Tribunal) is the exercise of the power contained in <case>(c).
It was submitted by Mr Einfeld QC that, for there to be a reference to the old Tribunal, there must be more than a resolution to that effect. He referred to the regulations made under the 1987 Act and to the fact that those regulations made provision for (I put the matter in a neutral sense) the way in which complaints should come before the old Tribunal consequent upon a decision of the Council that the complaint be referred to it. His submission was to the effect that, unless steps of that kind were taken, the matter had not been "referred ... to ... the former Tribunal by a Council" within s (1)(c). I do not think that that submission is correct. The term "referred" in cl 30(2) was no doubt used because of the use of that term in <case>(c).
Such a term and the concept of "reference" was for long familiar to those dealing with the procedures before the statutory committee set up under the Act: see, eg, 76. I understand the resolution of 12 August 1993 to be a present act of referral: it was, I think, intended by the Council to be such and accords with the language of the procedures then provided for.
In the evidence, reference has been made to the fact that on 12 May the Council resolved to "adopt" the amended particulars for the complaint then referred to. That in my opinion is not inconsistent with the view to which I have referred. It is proper to bear in mind that this Court from time to time brought to the attention of the Council of the Law Society and of the
Statutory Committee the need in proceedings of this kind to formulate complaints with particularity and to provide appropriate particulars of them.
How the Council came to "adopt" the further particulars does not appear from the evidence. But, as I have indicated, I do not see its adoption of such further particulars as the basis for an inference that what it did on 12
August 1993 was not an operative act of referral to the old Tribunal.
In my opinion therefore the complaint was, by operation of cl 30(2), "a matter referred to the new Tribunal under the new Part 10 of the Act".
I have referred to the fact that, on 15 September 1994, the Law Society physically lodged the complaint at the office of the new Tribunal. What was done was in accord with the 1993 Act and the Regulation. The complaint was made before 1 July 1994 but had not, before that date, "been the subject of proceedings before ... the former Tribunal". The complaint was therefore "to be dealt with as if it had been made under the new Part 10 ...": cl 30(2). It was therefore necessary to determine what was to be done "under the new Part " to have it determined. It was necessary that it be brought before the new
Tribunal.
Section 167 of the new Act provides that proceedings may be "instituted in the Tribunal with respect to a complaint against a legal practitioner by an information laid by the appropriate
Council ... in accordance with this Part".
The procedure envisaged under the 1993 Act therefore involves the lodgment of a written document of complaint ("an information") with the new Tribunal. But the document (or, at least, the complaint) which, before 1 July , had been formulated or adopted by the Law Society for the purpose was not entituled "an information" but "a complaint". That document was filed with the new Tribunal to achieve the determination of the matter by the new Tribunal. The fact that it was not entituled "information" does not, I think, result in the procedure initiated before the new Tribunal being a nullity. That result would follow only if the terms of <case> are to be given a mandatory construction. I do not think that that construction should be given to the section, for the reasons to which I shall refer. But, however that be, that fact would not have invalidated the procedure in this case. The effect of the referral of the complaint to the old Tribunal was, in my opinion, that the complaint had, by that act of referral, been brought within the jurisdiction of the old
Tribunal; the proceeding before the old Tribunal had been commenced.
The effect of cl 30 of the Regulation on this was that there was, as at 1 July , a proceeding pending before the new Tribunal.
It is appropriate that a matter which by cl 30(2) is treated as referred to the new Tribunal under the new Part 10 should be taken forward by the formal lodgment of a written document generally in the manner contemplated by the Regulation made under the Act.
The fact that the document was entituled "complaint" does not invalidate the proceeding which, by virtue of the resolution and of cl 30(2), was before the new Tribunal.
If this view of the operation of the legislation be wrong, there is in my opinion at least one alternative basis upon which the complaint came properly to be before the new Tribunal. The complaint made by Mrs Warner was in my opinion "a complaint made under the former Part 10 of the Act" within cl (1). It had, before 1 July 1994, not "been the subject of proceedings before" the old Tribunal. Accordingly, that complaint "is to be dealt with as if it had been made under the new Part 10 of the Act". Accordingly, "anything done under the former Part 10 of the Act in respect of a complaint to which this clause applies is to be taken to have been done under the new Part 10 of the Act": cl 30(4). What was done by the Council in investigating the complaint and in deciding to refer it to the old Tribunal was, I think, to be seen mutatis mutandis as satisfying the provisions of <case> et seq, <case>, s and <case>. For the purposes of the new Act, the Council was to be taken to have been satisfied of the likelihood that the solicitor would be found guilty within <case> and therefore have been under an obligation to "institute proceedings in" the new Tribunal. If it had not already instituted such proceedings, the physical lodgment of the complaint on 15
September 1994 was in my opinion a commencement of those proceedings in the new Tribunal.
It was submitted that such a view should not be taken. Mr Einfeld's submissions in effect suggested that the form of the complaint lodged was inconsistent with such a view. As I have pointed out, the document lodged was entituled in the old Tribunal and purported to refer the complaint pursuant to s 134(1)(c) of the 1987 Act. But, in my opinion, such matters do not prevent what was done initiating proceedings in the new Tribunal.
The Council filed the document in the new Tribunal. It clearly intended by this to initiate a proceeding before the Tribunal and the new Tribunal was the only Tribunal which could act in relation to it. I see no compelling reason why the document, inapt though some of its language was for a complaint dealt with in total under the 1993 Act, nullifies what the Council intended to do.
 .
It is not clear why the Council did not draft and file the complaint to be filed in terms of the 1993 Act and, if necessary, of the Regulations made under that Act. If conjecture is to be made and if a technical blunder is to be excluded, it may be that those acting for the Council took the view that there had been only one resolution of the Council to initiate proceedings, viz, that of August 1993, that that resolution referred to a complaint in terms of the old Act, and that accordingly that was the only document which, albeit following the procedure under the new Act, the resolution of the
Council authorised to be filed. But however that be, the Council intended to initiate the procedures set up for the new Tribunal: the document it filed stated in terms that the complaint would "be listed for mention before the
Registrar of the Legal Services Tribunal...... Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the document filed on 15 September 1994 effectively initiated proceedings in the new Tribunal.
These conclusions are sufficient to deal with the contentions raised in this proceeding. However, in view of the submissions made by the parties, it is proper to add one further observation. It is in my opinion pellucidly clear that it was intended that complaints pending on 1 July 1994 should be dealt with under the new Act. There is no reason why the legislature should have intended that they should not; there are reasons why they should. The Court is here concerned with professional misconduct of a general kind; it is not concerned with a kind of professional misconduct which is such by virtue only of legislative provisions: cf <case> of the new Act. There is every reason why such professional misconduct should remain to be dealt with notwithstanding the changes which have been made to the legislation.
In my opinion, non-compliance with particular provisions of the legislation - at least provisions of the kind here in question - should not be seen as preventing this being done. It will be necessary in due course for the
Courts to consider the requirements of the old and the new legislation and to determine whether and to what extent they are (to adapt terms earlier used) mandatory or directory. In my opinion, the provisions which are here in question, those laying down the manner in which complaints of this kind are to be dealt with, should be construed as directory: they should not be construed in such a way that non-compliance with any of them invalidates what has been done or is sought to be done.
I am conscious of the importance of disciplinary proceedings of this kind in the public sense and to the solicitors concerned. A finding of professional misconduct can destroy a man's professional reputation, affect his professional income and restrict or prevent his practice as a solicitor. The rule of law and the general principles of construction warrant that careful attention be given to the safeguards, legislative and otherwise, which have been provided for the protection of the individual in this regard.
However, I do not think that these objectives require that the legislation be so interpreted that non-compliance with the letter of it invalidates what has been done or is sought to be done under it.
There has been, in my opinion, a general tendency within the law in recent times to move from mandatory to a directory construction of legislation: see, eg, Hatton versus Beaumont [(1977) 2 NSWLR 211] There are, I think, reasons why legislation of this kind should be treated as directory rather than mandatory. The desirability of ensuring that complaints of professional misconduct are dealt with effectively and in substance rather than by reference to technicalities are plain and I think compelling. I am, as I have indicated, conscious that one of the functions of the present provisions is to safeguard a practitioner against the harm which baseless complaints can and will do to him. I am conscious that the existing legislation provides both for the screening of complaints before they come before the relevant Tribunal and, when they do, for the determination of them to be attended by due formality. But, in my opinion, if and insofar as there have been departures from the literal requirements of the legislation in the present case, those departures do not, I think, relate to any provision which is, in substance, directed to the protection of the individual in this way. If there be in the present case an error in procedure, no such protection has been lost. In my opinion, the present legislation should be so interpreted.
For these reasons, I am of opinion that the new Tribunal was in error in declining jurisdiction in this case. The appropriate orders should be made.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA I agree with Cole
JA.
JUDGE3
COLE JA This is an appeal by way of summons in which the Council of the Law
Society of New South Wales seeks a declaration, in effect, that the decision of the Legal Services Tribunal dated 28 March 1995 that it had no jurisdiction to deal with a complaint lodged by the Law Society on 12 September 1994 be quashed and that the Legal Services Tribunal be directed to hear and deal with the matter.
 
CIRCUMSTANCES LEADING TO THE APPEAL
On 27 April 1992 a Mrs Carole Warner, by letter, lodged a complaint with the
Law Society alleging professional misconduct on the part of John Adrian
Nutt in respect of his conduct in a transaction involving a contract for sale of land dated I January 1986. That complaint constituted a complaint under s.
(1) [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) which provides that: "A person may make a complaint to the appropriate Council alleging that a legal practitioner is guilty of conduct that may constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct."
Pursuant to s.s.132, and 134, the Council was obliged to consider and investigate that complaint and either dismiss it [(s. 134(1)(a))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html), refer to the
Board if it involved alleged unsatisfactory professional conduct [(s.
(1)(b))](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html) or, in accordance with [s. 134(1)(c):](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html) "If, after it has completed an investigation into a complaint against a legal practitioner, a Council is satisfied: ...
That the complaint involves a question of professional misconduct - it shall refer the complaint to the Tribunal." [Section 135](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s135.html) [Legal Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) permitted the Council, of its own motion, to "make a complaint to the Board or the Tribunal against any legal practitioner if it appears to the Council that the legal practitioner may be guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct."
After investigation the Council resolved on 12 August 1993: "That the questions of professional misconduct involved in the complaint be referred to the Legal Profession Disciplinary
Tribunal pursuant to [section 134(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html) of the [Legal Profession
Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)."
On 12 May 1994, after further investigation, the Council resolved: "That Council adopt the following amended particulars for the complaint against the solicitor ..."
Various particulars of the alleged professional misconduct were then set forth.
At the time of those resolutions there was in force the Legal Profession
Disciplinary Tribunal Rules 1990 which provided, by
Rule 8(1) that: "An application to the Tribunal or a hearing by the Tribunal (being an application made, or a hearing into a complaint referred to the Tribunal or made under the section of the Act referred to in Column I of the Table to this Rule) is to be made or commenced by filing with the Registrar a document in or to the effect of the form in Column 2 opposite that section."
Section 134(1)(c) was included in the Table to Rule 8 and prescribed that the complaint was to be in accordance with
Form 4 to those Rules.
Nothing was done by the Council following either resolution to file an application to the Tribunal prior to 1 July 1994. On that date the [Legal
Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) was amended by the Legal Profession Reform Act 1993. Part of the 1987 Act was repealed and replaced by a new Part 10. Section was repealed. The legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal was abolished. There was created a Legal Services Commissioner and a
Legal Services Tribunal. By the new s. 134 a person could make a complaint to the Commissioner about the conduct of a legal practitioner.
By s. 135, the Council could "initiate a complaint" against any legal practitioner, and by s.136, the Commissioner could "initiate a complaint " against any legal practitioner under the new
Part 10. By the new s. 137 the complaint was required to be in writing, identify the complainant and the legal practitioner against whom the complaint was made, and give particulars of the alleged conduct of the legal practitioner that is the subject of the complaint.
Section 138 of the Act as amended provided: "A complaint may only be made within three years after the conduct is alleged to have occurred."
On 12 September 1994 the Council of the Law Society lodged in the
Registry of the Legal Services Tribunal a document headed "Complaint". The document was entitled as being in the "Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal" and, apart from the particulars, stated: "The Council of the Law Society of NSW refers a complaint to the
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal against John Adrian Nutt ("the solicitor") pursuant to [section 134(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html) of the [Legal
Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/)."
That body did not then exist, and [s. 134(1)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/s134.html) of the old Act had been repealed.
The Legal Service Tribunal determined it had no jurisdiction to hear the complaint referred to in that document.
The Legal Services Tribunal was created pursuant to s. 162 of the amending Act. Section 167(1) of the amending act provided: "Proceedings may be instituted in the Tribunal with respect to a complaint against a legal practitioner by an information laid by the appropriate Council or the Commissioner in accordance with this Part."
The Council of the Law Society has contended on this appeal that the transition provisions in the amending Act conferred upon the Legal Services
Tribunal jurisdiction to hear the complaint filed in its Registry in the form of the document dated 12 September 1994. This was said to be the consequence of the operation of the Legal Profession Regulation 1994 which commenced to operate on 1 July 1994. No challenge was made to the validity of the regulations.
Part 9 of the Legal Profession Regulation 1994 contains transitional provisions.
Regulation 29 defines "former tribunal" to mean the Legal
Profession Disciplinary Tribunal constituted under former Part 10 of the
Act, and "new Tribunal" to mean the "Legal Services Tribunal constituted under new
Part 10 of the Act".
Regulations 30, 31, (1) and 40 are critical to a determination of the matter in issue. They provide as follows: "30.(1) This clause and clause apply in respect of a complaint made under former Part 10 of the Act.

If a complaint made before 1 July 1994 has not, before that date, been the subject of proceedings before the former Board or the former Tribunal, the complaint is to be dealt with as if it had been made under new Part 10 of the Act. A matter that has been referred under former Part 10 of the Act to the former
Board or the former Tribunal by a Council but has not, by 1 July , been the subject of proceedings before the former Board or former Tribunal, is taken to be a matter referred to the new
Tribunal under new Part 10 of the
Act.

If a complaint has been made to a Council (or is the subject of a notice given to a Council by the former Review
Panel under former section 140(2) of the Act) before 1 July 1994, but the
Council has made no decision in response to the complaint or notice, as the case may be, before that day, the complaint is to be dealt with by the Council as if it had been made under new
Part 10 of the Act.

Anything done under former Part 10 of the Act in respect of a complaint to which this clause applies is taken to have been done under new Part 10 of the Act.

Complaints made under former part 10 and already subject to proceedings (1) If a complaint is already the subject of proceedings before the former Board or the former
Tribunal that are pending on 1 July 1994, those proceedings may be continued before, and determined by, that Board or that
Tribunal as if former Part of the Act were still in force.

If a complaint made under former Part 10 of the Act has (whether before, on or after 1 July 1994) been the subject of proceedings before the former Board or the former Tribunal resulting in a determination in relation to the complaint or the termination of the proceedings, any further action in respect of the complaint that is taken on or after 1 July is to be taken under new Part 10 of the Act. In that case, the determination or termination is be treated as if it had been made under new Part 10 of the Act by the new Tribunal.

Examples of further action are a review of the determination, a reference of the complaint to the Tribunal or an appeal.
 
To the extent that a complaint has been the subject of proceedings before the former Tribunal, this clause applies to the complaint whether the proceedings are in relation to the review of the determination of a complaint by the former Board or they are in relation to a complaint referred directly to the former Tribunal.

A reference in this clause to a determination: is a reference to a determination that continues to have effect after 30 June 1994; and includes a determination that, because of this clause, is made under a provision of former Part 10 of the Act on or after July 1994; and includes any reprimand or order made as a result of a determination.
 (1) Part 10, as substituted by the Legal
Profession Reform
Act 1993, applies to conduct occurring before or after the substitution of that Part (including professional misconduct occurring before the commencement of the [Legal Profession Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/), but not including unsatisfactory professional conduct occurring before that commencement).
 , In any other Act or in any statutory instrument or in any other instrument: a reference to the Disciplinary Tribunal or the Legal
Profession
Disciplinary Tribunal is to be read as a reference to the Legal Services Tribunal.
It is, in my view, clear that the word "complaint" in Regulation 30(1) refers either to a complaint made by a person to the Council pursuant to s.
(1) of the old Act or a complaint made by the Council, of its own motion, to the Tribunal pursuant to s. 135 of the old Act. It is equally clear that
Regulation 30(3) deals only with complaints made by a person to the Council pursuant to s. 130(1) and in respect of which no decision had been made by
Council regarding that complaint. Regulation 30(3) has no application to the present circumstances because the Council resolved to refer the matter to the
Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal pursuant to s. 134(1)(c).
In my view it is also clear that the second sentence of Regulation 30(2) bears no application to the instant case because the complaint was not one which "has been referred under former Part 10 of the Act to ... the former
Tribunal by a Council". It had been resolved to refer the matter but, in fact, it had not been referred by the necessary commencement of the appropriate proceedings in accordance with Rule 8 of the Legal Profession Disciplinary
Tribunal Rules. In my opinion a resolution to refer a matter is both preliminary to and different from actual referral by commencement of appropriate proceedings.
The question thus remains whether the present circumstance falls within
Regulation 30(2). In my view it does. The first sentence of Regulation 30(2) encompasses by use of the word "complaint", a complaint made by a person to the Council prior to 1 July 1994 but which had not yet been the subject of proceedings before the former Tribunal. If proceedings had been commenced in respect of that complaint prior to 1 July 1994, such proceedings would fall within Regulation 31(1), or if those proceedings had been determined, within
Regulation 31(2).
It follows, in my opinion, that "the complaint" made to the Council by
Mrs Warner, being a complaint made before 1 July 1994, "is to be dealt with as if it had been made under new Part 10 of the Act".
It was argued by the first respondent, Mr Nutt, however, that the document of September 1994 lodged in the Registry of the Legal Services
Tribunal could not be effective because it was a reference pursuant to a repealed section and purported to be a reference to a non-existent body. I do not think that is so. Section 40 of the Act as amended dealt with the construction of superseded references. If the originating process filed on 12
September 1994 constituted an "instrument" then that document is to be read as the originating process before the Legal Services Tribunal. In my opinion, bearing in mind the obvious intent of the legislature in a transition of complaints and hearings from the Legal Profession Disciplinary Tribunal to the
Legal Services Tribunal, "instrument" is to be broadly construed and includes the originating process filed on 12 September
It is a document contemplated by and in the form prescribed by the Legal Profession
Disciplinary Tribunal Rules 1990.
 .
This led to the remaining argument addressed on behalf of the respondent.
It was that as s. 13 8 of the amending Act provided that a complaint "may only be made within 3 years after the conduct is alleged to have occurred, even if the jurisdiction was conferred upon the Legal Services Tribunal, the effect of s. 138 in respect to the proceedings so commenced was to require the Legal
Services
Tribunal to dismiss them". That was said to be because the complaint the subject of the proceedings "is to be dealt as if it had been made under new Part 10 of the Act". In support of this submission reference was made to the difference in wording used in Regulation
The expression "to be dealt with as if" is used twice, once in Regulation 30(2) and once in Regulation (3). This was to be compared with the expression "taken to be a matter referred to the new Tribunal under new Part 10 of the Act" and "is taken to have been done under new Part 10 of the Act" where used in Regulation 30(2) and (4). The latter expressions were said to embody the concept that being legislatively deemed be within the new Part 10, the requirements of Part 10 (including s.138) are legislatively deemed to have been satisfied. In respect of such matters no question of s. 13 8 could arise. However it was argued that the expression "to be dealt with as if it had been made under new Part 10 of the Act" incorporated the application of all the provisions of Part such that s.138 constituted a bar to the success of the proceedings.
I do not think that submission should be sustained.
Section 37 specifically contemplates that the new Part 10 will apply to professional misconduct occurring prior to the commencement of the [Legal
Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/). It can hardy be thought that the legislature intended, in those circumstances, that where a matter in respect of such conduct remained to be dealt with after 1 July 1994 in that proceedings had not been commenced, they were to be, by the amending statute, barred.
The amending Act, and in particular s.37, show a clear legislative intent that prior complaints of professional misconduct will be dealt with by the new Tribunal.
The formal orders of the Court are: 
Declaration that the second opponent has jurisdiction under the [Legal
Profession Act 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/lpa1987179/) (and the Legal Profession Regulation 1994) to hear and determine on its merits the complaint made against the first opponent by Mrs
Carole Warner in a letter dated 27 April 1992 addressed to the Law Society of
New South Wales ("the letter of complaint") which was the subject of the proceedings numbered 5 of 1994 in the Legal Services Tribunal. 
Order that the second opponent hear and determine the proceedings number of 1994 in the Legal Services Tribunal according to law. 
Order that the first opponent pay the claimant's costs of this appeal but that the first opponent have a certificate pursuant to the Suitor's Fund Act in respect of such costs.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/93.html  
