

Tucker versus Hospital Corporation Australia Pty Ltd and Ors Matter No 12575/92 [1998] NSWSC 37 (18 February 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
MICHELLE MARIE TUCKER versus HOSPITAL CORPORATION AUSTRALIA PTY LTD & ORS /92 February 1998 
Hidden J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Michelle Marie Tucker, seeks damages for what is said to be the negligent conduct of a surgical procedure on her at the Baulkham Hills Private Hospital on 19 May 1986. On that evening, her third child, Lauren, was delivered by caesarian section, after which she underwent a tubal ligation, and it is alleged that the procedures were carried out while she was inadequately anaesthetised. The surgeon was Dr Douglas Miller (the second defendant), assisted by Dr Mervil White, and the anaesthetist was Dr Michael Levitt (the third defendant). Originally the hospital and Dr White were joined as defendants, but at the hearing the plaintiff did not proceed against them. 
The plaintiff was born on 19 February 1955 and was 31 years old at the time of the operation. She married in 1973. Her first child, Kylie, was born in 1974, and her second, Natalie, in 1981. They also were delivered by caesarian section as the plaintiff is of diminutive build and her pelvis is too small to enable natural childbirth. For her first child she had a general anaesthetic, but for the second she was anaesthetised by epidural block.

As is well known, an epidural block is a form of local anaesthesia which leaves the patient conscious. This enables her to witness the birth and to have immediate contact with the child, helping her to bond with it. The operating table would be draped so that she could not see the surgical procedure being carried out. As is also well known, the practice of hospitals in modern times is to allow the father of the child to be present during the operation if the mother is anaesthetised by epidural block, but not if she has undergone general anaesthesia. Such was the case at Baulkham Hills Private
Hospital in 1986.

The spinal column is surrounded in turn by the subarachnoid space, the dura and the epidural space. An epidural block is achieved by injecting an anaesthetic agent into the epidural space. A complication which can occur is the puncture of the dura, causing a leak of cerebrospinal fluid. This is dealt with by a procedure known as a blood patch: blood is drawn from the patient and injected into the epidural space to provide a clot, thereby sealing the puncture. This occurred on the occasion of the birth of the plaintiff's second child in 1981. The plaintiff's evidence was that, notwithstanding this, the surgery was not painful and she found that birth a "wonderful experience". She wanted her third child delivered in the same way for this reason and so that her husband, who had not been at the birth of the second child, could be present to share the experience.

All three children were delivered by Dr Miller, who had been the plaintiff's family doctor since her childhood. He is a general practitioner with some training and considerable experience in obstetrics. At the relevant time he was in practice in a partnership, which included Dr White (a professional association which endured at the time of the hearing).

At the time the plaintiff attended the hospital on 19 May 1986 it was intended that the caesarean section and the tubal ligation would be performed the following morning. However, in the evening of the 19th she unexpectedly went into labour and it was necessary to bring the procedure forward. Before this was discovered she had been served a three course meal. For reasons which will appear, this made the administration of a general anaesthetic undesirable. As the operation had to be performed that evening, the anaesthetist who usually worked with Dr White was not available, and that task fell to Dr Levitt who was then on call.

Dr Levitt saw the plaintiff in the ward before she was taken to the operating theatre. According to him, she wanted a general anaesthetic and that is what he intended to do until he was informed that she had eaten earlier in the evening. He then told her that a general anaesthetic would be dangerous and, despite the complication leading to the blood patch in 1981, an epidural would be the appropriate course. Although the plaintiff confirmed that Dr Levitt spoke of the danger of a general anaesthetic on a full stomach, I do not accept his evidence that she requested that form of anaesthesia. That the plaintiff had planned to have an epidural is supported by the evidence of her husband and Dr Miller, and there is every reason to accept that that is what she wanted for the reasons set out above. In any event, Dr Levitt's evidence about this matter is not consistent with a note (Exhibit A) which he wrote to her in the days after the operation urging her to opt for a general anaesthetic for any future procedure, as he put it, "in view of the difficulties encountered with your epidural ... and your previous dural puncture and blood patch ..." The note clearly suggests that she had not sought a general anaesthetic on this occasion.

The plaintiff was taken to an anaesthetic bay where Dr Levitt administered the epidural block. His description of the procedure in evidence need not be repeated. It is sufficient to say that a mixture of lignocaine and adrenalin was injected, and an epidural catheter was inserted to enable the anaesthetic to be topped up at a later stage if necessary. The plaintiff was wheeled to the operating theatre and, according to Dr Levitt, about ten or fifteen minutes later he pinched her abdomen to check that the epidural block was effective. The plaintiff said that she could feel it, so he topped up the anaesthetic by injecting further solution down the epidural catheter. Some minutes later he did a further pinch test which elicited no reaction. The plaintiff had no recollection of this but I accept that it occurred. The top up is confirmed by the anaesthetic record with the hospital notes.

A Hudson mask supplying a mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide was applied to the plaintiff's mouth and, from her arrival in the operating theatre, she had been connected to a machine which automatically took her blood pressure. She was transferred to an operating table and, before the operation commenced, Dr
Miller performed a further test of the efficacy of the block by squeezing the plaintiff's abdomen with forceps. This also elicited no reaction from her.
Again, the plaintiff has no recollection of this test, but I accept that it was done. (Of course her view of her lower abdomen would have been obscured by the drape.) Dr Levitt said that he asked Dr Miller to "check the block", and
Dr Miller gave evidence that this forceps test was his usual practice. The reliability of the test was explored to some extent in the evidence but, at the end of the day, I do not think that anything turns on it.

There is a deal of conflict in the evidence as to what happened thereafter.
The plaintiff's account is that Dr Miller confirmed with Dr Levitt that they were "ready to go", and commenced an incision along the pubic hair line. She felt a sharp piercing pain and shouted that she could feel it. Dr Miller looked amazed and asked Dr Levitt, "What's going on?" Dr Levitt replied, "It's just the drag of the knife." He "fiddled with something" and, shortly thereafter, Dr Miller continued to make an incision. She felt severe, shocking pain and shouted, "It's not the drag of the knife, I can feel it." She was petrified, thinking that she was going to die.

The plaintiff's husband was present during this period and, in his evidence, he confirmed in detail her account of these events. He said that she looked "very disturbed and upset". The doctors discussed what was to be done, Dr
Levitt saying that it would be necessary to do "another block", and the husband was sent from the operating theatre.

Dr Levitt's evidence was that, when Dr Miller made the incision, the plaintiff said that she could feel it, but did not react emotionally. Dr Miller recalled that she called out that she could feel the incision and she looked distressed. Dr White, who was assisting Dr Miller, said that she exclaimed something to the effect that she could feel the incision, or that it hurt. He thought that she appeared "tense and apprehensive and upset". Dr Levitt denied having said anything about "the drag of the knife", which was not an expression he ever used. Dr Miller had no recollection of it, but was unable to deny that it was said. He did not remember making any further incision at that stage and Dr Levitt's evidence is silent on this matter. However, Dr
White recalled that Dr Miller tried to deepen the wound with a further small incision, but the plaintiff again "exclaimed that it was painful".

None of the three doctors could recall the plaintiff's husband being present at any stage of the procedure.

Dr Levitt did not wish to administer a general anaesthetic as the plaintiff had eaten, and decided upon a subarachnoid (or spinal) block. This was administered by injecting a solution of marcain into the subarachnoid space.
Again, it is unnecessary to recount Dr Levitt's description of this process.
After waiting for a period, the effectiveness of the block was tested by Dr
Miller making a tentative cut, and Dr White pinching the plaintiff's abdomen, either with forceps or the pointed end of a scalpel. The plaintiff said that she could feel this, and Dr Levitt had Dr Miller inject marcain into the incision itself by way of further local anaesthesia. In evidence, Dr Miller said that he hoped that he had "got down to the peritoneum which is the most sensitive part". In addition, Dr Levitt administered a mixture of droperidol and fentanyl intravenously. This combination of drugs provides sedation as a supplement to local anaesthesia, while also inhibiting vomiting.

According to the plaintiff, Dr Levitt said that they were "going to have to go" because the baby was at risk and in distress. Dr Miller began to cut again and she felt what she described as "excruciating, horrific pain". At one stage she wanted to die. Her husband, who had come back into the theatre just before the operation resumed, was holding one of her hands while a theatre sister held the other. Her head was moving back and forth, and her right leg was moving up and down and had to be held down. She was screaming, which only exacerbated the pain. She was also breathing deeply into the Hudson mask in an attempt, as she put it, "to pull myself through that operation". Dr Miller asked if she could hold on and, when she enquired for how long, he said "two minutes". She said, "Well, I have been this long." The operation continued and the pain got worse. She felt Dr Miller pushing down to deliver the baby and then the placenta. She continued to scream but she recalled also groaning each time he pushed down. After the delivery she felt nauseous.

Again, her husband corroborated her account of events after the operation resumed (although he said nothing about her leg being held down). He added that, in addition to screaming, she swore from time to time and he saw that her face was red and contorted. He thought that it was in the order of ten minutes after Dr Miller asked her to hold on that the baby was delivered. He, himself, was upset and felt sick, although he acknowledged a general dislike of operations. He said that, when the theatre sister told his wife that she had given birth to a girl, she did not look at the baby and asked that she be taken away. At that stage he was again escorted from the operating theatre.

Dr Levitt's evidence was that, after the operation resumed, there was no further complaint from the plaintiff - at least none of any significance. He acknowledged that in a report of the operation which he subsequently prepared he recorded that she "complained once or twice that she could feel parts of the operation and that she was uncomfortable, especially on the peritoneum."
That report became Exhibit 2 and it will be necessary to say more about it later. Dr Levitt explained that, even with entirely successful local anaesthesia, caesarean patients usually feel some parts of the operation and experience discomfort at times. He also acknowledged that, in a statement of 9
November 1992, he said that the plaintiff was "somewhat disinhibited" at this time. In evidence he did not explain what he meant by this term, although he denied that she was swearing. He said that the baby was never at risk and denied having said that it was. He could not recall the conversation in which
Dr Miller asked the plaintiff if she could hold on. He had no recollection of her leg being held down, saying that it was something he would expect to recall if it had happened.

Dr Miller gave evidence that he could not remember any "definite complaints about pain" after the operation resumed, and he thought that the plaintiff was "settling down". He acknowledged that she may have experienced discomfort and said that it is not unusual for patients to complain during the delivery as the fundus of the uterus is pushed hard at that time. However, he had no specific recollection of the plaintiff's reaction at the time of delivery. He agreed that pain is subjective and that what might be uncomfortable to one person might be painful to another. He denied that her leg was held down. He said that her head could have been moving but he did not see it. He did not recall Dr Levitt saying that the baby was at risk, but could not deny that it was said. He also said that, in fact, the baby was not at risk. He did not recall asking the plaintiff if she could "hold on" but, again, could not deny that the conversation occurred. However, he did remember that, apparently in response to a question from him, she said that she was agreeable for the operation to continue as she realised that the baby had to be delivered.

Dr White could not recall the plaintiff complaining of pain or exhibiting any sign of pain after the operation resumed. He also denied that her leg was held down. However, he did recall Dr Miller asking her if she could "hold on", or saying something similar to that.

All three doctors denied that the plaintiff screamed at any stage of the operation. However, in the course of cross examination, Dr Levitt gave an answer touching indirectly on this matter which is not without significance.
He was being questioned about his evidence that, after the operation resumed, the plaintiff exhibited no more than discomfort. In the course of some questions suggesting that the line between discomfort and pain is a fine one, the following exchange occurred (page 272 of the transcript): "Q. ... So Mrs Tucker's discomfort, so far as you were concerned, might have been Mrs Tucker's pain for her? 
A. No, because she already set a standard in her own behaviour earlier on which I accepted as pain, the initial incision. This was nowhere near the screaming ..." 
Dr Levitt appears to have been contrasting the plaintiff's reactions at this later stage with her response to the initial incision which he was content to describe as "screaming". At the very least, this evidence suggests that the initial incision provoked a reaction much more vociferous than he had described earlier in his evidence.

After the delivery the medical team proceeded with the tubal ligation. The plaintiff said that she started to feel "groggy" at that time. She was still in pain but had ceased complaining of it. At some stage she became unconscious and, as in a dream, heard the voice of her mother or grandmother calling her name. She woke to feel, as she put it, "my body being pummelled with the sewing". Dr Levitt observed that her colour was looking better and she was told to take deep breaths into the mask. She was then taken to the recovery ward.

Dr Levitt recalled that the plaintiff did go to sleep at some stage, although he added that she was always rousable. Neither Dr Miller nor Dr White had any recollection of how she appeared during the tubal ligation. Given that she made no complaint of pain, this is not surprising. According to Dr Levitt, Dr
Miller asked the plaintiff after the delivery whether she wished to proceed with the tubal ligation and she replied that she did. I do not accept this evidence. Dr Levitt acknowledged that he had made no record of it and no-one else suggested that such a conversation took place.

The hospital records disclose that the operation commenced at 9.35 pm and was completed at 11.05 pm. The baby was born at about 10.10 pm. The three doctors said in evidence that they retained some recollection of it, quite apart from what they gleaned from the hospital notes, because of the unusual course it took. Dr Levitt described it as "something quite out of the ordinary". I have already referred to the note which he subsequently gave to the plaintiff acknowledging the difficulties which had been encountered. Dr Miller described it as unique, saying that it was "a stressful night for everyone concerned".
According to the plaintiff, Dr Miller saw her in the ward afterwards and said that he was sorry that she had to go through "all that", but once he had started to cut he couldn't stop. Dr Miller agreed that he said something to that effect. It was common ground that, at a subsequent consultation at his surgery, Dr Miller told a nurse that the plaintiff had been "a very brave young lady", to which the plaintiff responded that she had had no choice.

Liability 
At the hearing there was a fairly detailed examination of the forms of anaesthesia used, Dr Levitt's technique in administering them, and the adequacy of his consultation with the plaintiff prior to the operation: particularly in the lengthy and interesting reports and oral evidence of Dr E
H Morgan, an expert called in the plaintiff's case. However, at the end of the day, counsel for the plaintiff made no submission about Dr Levitt's pre- operative examination of the plaintiff and did not press any claim that the methods of anaesthesia he used were chosen inappropriately, or administered negligently. This included the injection of marcain into the wound by Dr
Miller, although it may not have been effective. In a report tendered in the plaintiff's case (Exhibit D), Dr John Newlinds described it as, in the circumstances, "a valiant and reasonable thing to do". However, the doctor added that such a block "is a difficult procedure and time consuming and requires practice". Dr Miller had never done it before.

The expert evidence was that, on occasions, an epidural block and, more rarely, a subarachnoid block may not be entirely effective. In the plaintiff's case, the failure of the epidural could have been the result of adhesions formed after the blood patch procedure which she had undergone previously. In closing address, counsel for the plaintiff argued that Dr Levitt and Dr Miller failed to communicate with her during the procedure and, as a result, failed to appreciate the extent of her pain. It was said that Dr Miller should have insisted that that pain be dealt with before the operation proceeded and that, in the circumstances, Dr Levitt could, and should, have administered a general anaesthetic. At the very least, they should not have performed the tubal ligation which, it was common ground, was not urgent.

It is clear from the expert evidence - and is widely known - that it is desirable for patients undergoing a general anaesthetic to have fasted for at least 12 hours. If the patient's stomach is not empty there is a risk of vomiting or reflux, with the introduction of material into the airway. This could cause permanent respiratory damage or hypoxia leading to brain damage and, in some cases, could result in death. In a woman carrying a baby at term the risk of vomiting is increased, particularly when, as here, she had eaten only a few hours before the operation. However, this is not to say that a general anaesthetic can never be administered to a patient on a full stomach.
Dr Levitt himself had done so on several occasions. It may be necessary in emergency cases, for example, after a road accident. Indeed, as Dr Newlinds pointed out in the report referred to earlier, obstetric emergencies of various kinds might necessitate a general anaesthetic in the course of a delivery. In such cases the patient is intubated to ensure that, in the event of vomiting or reflux, the airway is protected. Again, it is unnecessary to recount the detail of this procedure, which was given in evidence.

Of the benefits to mother and baby of a caesarean being performed with local rather than general anaesthetic, the experts spoke with one voice. Dr John
McGuinness, called in the defence case, explained that under epidural anaesthesia, as it was administered in 1986, it was not uncommon for mothers to feel some pain as well as pressure. However, he considered this disadvantage to be outweighed by the benefits of that form of anaesthesia. As he put it in oral evidence (transcript p 405): "... the advantage of the epidural to both the mother and the child, both in the intra operative and in the post operative period, far outweigh the general anaesthetic and as such we are quite prepared to, you might say, have the patient have a little bit of discomfort because that is the best anaesthetic." 
Dr McGuinness said that, if a patient were complaining of pain, he would try to talk her through the procedure and perhaps give some intravenous supplement to the anaesthesia, particularly if the operation had reached the stage where delivery was a matter of minutes away. However, he acknowledged that there have been cases where it was necessary to administer a general anaesthetic after the failure of local anaesthesia, although he described them as "relatively rare". In the plaintiff's case, he considered that a general anaesthetic may not have been out of the question, but was "very much a recourse of last resort". He said that to add a general anaesthetic to the forms of anaesthesia already administered to her would have "depressing effects, both to mother and to the foetus", and added that "it can be a fairly hazardous situation" (transcript p 406).

Dr Morgan had no doubt that, if the plaintiff's account were accepted, she should have been given a general anaesthetic, and the same view emerges from the report of Dr Newlinds. I have earlier referred to the evidence of both Dr
Miller and Dr Levitt that the baby was not at risk when the operation was resumed, and it is not suggested that there was no time to administer a general anaesthetic. Dr Miller's evidence was that he would not have proceeded at that stage if he were aware that the plaintiff was in significant pain. It is clear that Dr Levitt saw a general anaesthetic as a feasible option at all relevant times. In the course of examination in chief (transcript p 242), he gave the following evidence: "Q. Was there ever a time when you considered the possibility of switching to a general anaesthetic? 
A. I always considered the possibility.

Q. Was it something that was absolutely in your mind prohibited at the time, or was there something else? 
A. Well I thought that we had adequate anaesthesia, but certainly had there been objective signs of the patient's distress, it would have been on the balance of risk a better way to go." 
The matter turns, then, upon the extent of the plaintiff's pain and whether Dr
Levitt and Dr Miller were, or should have been, aware of it. They accepted that the initial incision was painful but the effect of their evidence is that, when the operation was resumed, the various forms of anaesthesia had taken effect as the plaintiff made no further complaint of any significance.
Their counsel submitted that no responsible medical practitioner would have proceeded if she were reacting in the manner she described in evidence and, in particular, to have carried on with the tubal ligation in such circumstances would have been simply callous. Counsel did not suggest that the plaintiff or her husband were being consciously untruthful in their evidence. Rather, he submitted that their recollection of the operation had become distorted over the years. He acknowledged that it had not been a pleasant experience for the plaintiff or her husband, who did not enjoy being present at operations under any circumstances. The effect of the evidence on the question of damages, to which I shall refer in due course, is that the plaintiff suffered a number of emotional problems in the years after the birth, including the breakdown of the marriage for a time, and counsel submitted that she and her husband had mistakenly attributed these difficulties to her experience of the birth itself. He noted that six years elapsed before these proceedings were instituted, and it was another four years before they were heard.

I mentioned earlier that, in the operating theatre, the plaintiff's blood pressure was monitored. Contained in the hospital records, Exhibit F, is a graph recording her systolic blood pressure at more or less regular intervals.
The readings are represented by the horizontal lines on the graph and the intervals at which they were taken by the vertical lines. The graph does not disclose what period of time is represented by the vertical lines, but the preponderance of the evidence is that they were intervals of ten minutes. If this be so, the graph records systolic blood pressure readings throughout most, if not all, of the operation. Those readings are represented by ticks on the graph, most of which were entered by Dr Levitt himself. This also was the subject of a deal of analysis in the evidence of Dr Levitt and the independent experts called on both sides. My conclusions about what the graph conveys, and its significance to the issue at hand, can be stated fairly shortly.

I am satisfied that the first recorded reading (125) represents the plaintiff's systolic blood pressure shortly before the epidural was administered. The next reading (just above 100) records a fall in blood pressure due to the anaesthesia. The third and fourth readings show a rise to a little more than 110, and I shall deal with the evidence about them in a moment. The fifth reading discloses a sudden drop to a little below 90, and the three readings thereafter show a descent to almost 80. Dr Levitt attributed this drop to the top-up of the epidural anaesthetic, but Dr Morgan and Dr McGuinness considered it more likely to be the result of the subarachnoid block. I see no need to resolve that matter: what the fall in blood pressure does reveal is that a deeper level of anaesthesia had been achieved. From the last three readings it appears that the blood pressure rose to around 90, but no comment upon this was sought from any of the witnesses.

Counsel for the defendants relied upon the evidence of both Dr Morgan and Dr
McGuinness that pain normally gives rise to a marked increase in blood pressure. In a report, Exhibit C2, Dr Morgan wrote that a rise in both blood pressures (systolic and diastolic) "is very common in response to painful stimuli ..." Dr McGuinness considered that it would be rare for there to be no significant increase in blood pressure in the event of significant pain. Dr
Morgan thought that the rise in the plaintiff's systolic blood pressure between the second recorded reading (just above 100) and the third and fourth (just above 110) could be the result of the pain she experienced upon the initial incision. On the other hand, Dr McGuinness saw this rise as unremarkable and not indicative of what he would describe as "significant" pain. He would have expected a rise to something of the order of 140 or 150.

In my view, this evidence does not assist the defence case in the manner contended for by counsel. True it is that the graph does not record a marked rise in systolic blood pressure but, on any view of the evidence, the plaintiff did experience significant pain at the time of the initial incision.
As observed earlier, her account of her reaction was supported by the evidence of Dr Miller and Dr White (and maybe of Dr Levitt, given the answer in cross examination which I have set out at p 8 of these reasons). Certainly, that reaction was such as to lead to Dr Levitt to try another form of anaesthesia.
The graph could hardly be described as a sophisticated record and, in these circumstances, one must question how reliable it is in registering changes in blood pressure. In any event, in his report Dr Morgan, having stated that a rise in blood pressure is a very common response to pain, went on to observe that "negative inferences cannot be interpreted in an absolutely positive sense, in this, as in any other field of endeavour." Both experts explained that pain usually leads to a rise in the heart rate which, according to Dr
McGuinness, "often tells more than the blood pressure recordings" (transcript p 410). Unfortunately, the hospital notes contain no record of the plaintiff's heart rate.

Apart from the suggested distortion of memory over the years, counsel for the defendants also relied upon evidence that the combination of droperidol and fentanyl, which had been administered to the plaintiff before the operation resumed, can affect memory. The evidence of Dr McGuinness was that they can cause confusion at the time they are administered and can also have an impact upon later recollection of events. The evidence of Dr Morgan was to much the same effect, although not without some reservations. However, nothing in the plaintiff's account suggests confusion or impairment of memory and, indeed, aspects of it point to a remarkably accurate recall. Dr Morgan dealt with a number of these matters in appendices to his report, Exhibit C2. It is sufficient to refer to a few features of the plaintiff's evidence which were corroborated by other evidence which I consider reliable.

Broadly speaking, her account of the sequence of events accords with that of the medical team. I have already referred to her evidence that, shortly after the initial incision, Dr Miller made a further cut which elicited another protest from her, and to the fact that this was confirmed by Dr White. She also said that after the operation resumed she felt a severe pain in her chest and, when she complained of it, Dr Levitt said that it was "just gas". Dr
Levitt did not recall this, but he agreed that such a phenomenon could occur, although he would not have used the word "gas" to explain it. His explanation of it was to much the same effect as that set out in an appendix to Dr
Morgan's report, Exhibit C2: a pocket of air can become trapped in the fundus and the progressive entry of nitrous oxide into this airspace can distend the fundus, giving rise to discomfort which appears as a pain in the chest.
Further, the plaintiff described a burning smell after the baby was delivered.
This is consistent with Dr Miller's evidence that he used the technique of diathermy, which is cauterising a bleeding vessel with a hot needle, although he did not say when this occurred. Dr Levitt described hearing and smelling the diathermy, but he said this was prior to the delivery: in fact, immediately prior to the administration of droperidol and fentanyl and Dr
Miller's injection of marcain into the wound. The plaintiff may have been mistaken about when it occurred, but the fact that she recalls the sensation of it is significant.

I accept that the three doctors involved retain some memory of the operation because of the unexpected developments in the course of it, but it was necessary for them to supplement their recollection by reference to the hospital records and their usual practice at the time. It is interesting to note that none of them remembered the plaintiff's husband being present at any stage, although clearly he was. I consider there is force in the submission of counsel for the plaintiff that she and her husband were more likely to retain a vivid memory of what occurred because the operation was an isolated incident in their lives. I am mindful of the danger that the husband's independent recollection might have been contaminated by discussion of the matter with the plaintiff over the years. Nevertheless, he appeared to me to be an open and honest witness and I found that his evidence lent considerable support to the plaintiff's account.

Pain, of course, is intensely personal and not susceptible of objective measurement. I am in no position to quantify the plaintiff's pain or distress, and I am not satisfied of the accuracy of every detail of her account. It may be that her reactions throughout the operation did not appear as dramatic to the medical team as she recalled them. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that she suffered an unacceptable level of pain, not only at the outset of the operation but throughout it, and Dr Miller and Dr Levitt should not have proceeded until it had been remedied. Clearly, the forms of anaesthesia which were administered failed and "on the balance of risk", to use Dr Levitt's expression, a general anaesthetic should have been administered.

Dr Levitt and Dr Miller should have been aware that the plaintiff was suffering pain calling for further action. To what extent they were aware of her pain I cannot say but I am satisfied that, after the operation resumed, they observed a greater level of distress than they described in evidence. I accept the plaintiff's evidence that, before the delivery, Dr Levitt asked her if she could "hold on" (using those words or words to that effect), which finds support in the evidence of Dr White and Dr Miller himself. Why would she be asked this if she were not exhibiting signs of significant distress? 
That she appeared to be experiencing an unacceptable level of pain is confirmed also by the reactions of the doctors after the event. I have referred earlier to the plaintiff's uncontested evidence that Dr Miller apologised afterwards to her in the ward, saying that once he had started to cut he couldn't stop, and that on a subsequent occasion he described her as "a very brave young lady". I have also referred to the note (Exhibit A) which Dr
Levitt gave to the plaintiff and to the report (Exhibit 2) which he prepared.
That report is headed "Medicolegal File Case Report", and it records his being called to the hospital on the evening of 19 May, his consultation with the plaintiff and the course of the operation, with particular emphasis upon the anaesthesia before and during it. It does so in such a way as to suggest that it is an exercise in self justification. He dictated it to his secretary who typed it on his computer. He claimed that he did so in accordance with his normal practice to report an unusual case, or a case which might be useful for teaching purposes. He denied that it had been prepared with an eye to possible litigation, and said that he did not access it until years later when the plaintiff commenced proceedings.

A computer expert gave evidence that the document had not been altered in any way ("modified" to use his expression) since 30 May 1986, about ten days after the operation. That being so, the heading "Medicolegal File Case Report" was entered on the document no later than that day. The report itself is not dated. Dr Levitt's evidence was that he prepared it the day after the operation, 20th May, but it may be that it was on the 30th. In any event, it is obvious that it was prepared against the possibility of legal proceedings.
Dr Levitt suggested that his secretary had inserted that heading of her own motion because she had previously been a legal secretary and may have thought that litigation might ensue, given that the epidural had failed. I say no more than that I find this explanation unconvincing.

The fact that I reject Dr Levitt's evidence in this and other respects referred to earlier does not mean that I consider him to have been deliberately untruthful. Of the three doctors involved in the operation I found him the most defensive witness, but in the circumstances this is understandable. Equally, I do not doubt the honesty of Dr Miller and Dr White.
Counsel for the plaintiff made no submission to the contrary. I consider, however, that each of them has a patchy recollection of relevant events.

Both Dr Morgan and Dr McGuinness gave evidence about rapport with a patient, on the part of the anaesthetist as well as the surgeon. Dr McGuinness said that, in considering whether the plaintiff required a general anaesthetic, he would first have assessed the severity of her discomfort. Asked how he would do that, he answered, "You do it by communicating with the patient ..." (transcript p 380). There is no evidence that Dr Levitt or Dr Miller asked the plaintiff what she was feeling at any stage of the operation. Counsel for the defendants submitted that they must have done so, but would have no reason to recall it. I think not. The probability, in my view, is that the medical team had to contend with a series of unexpected developments and, in doing so, rapport with the plaintiff was lost. I can understand that they were in a difficult position, but I am driven to the conclusion that better communication with the plaintiff might have led to her pain being relieved and these proceedings being averted.

In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that Dr Levitt and Dr Miller failed to maintain the standard of care which the law demands of medical practitioners. Equally, I am satisfied that the plaintiff suffered damage as a result. To that matter I shall now turn.

Damages 
There was relatively little dispute between counsel about the effects of the operation, immediately thereafter and in the longer term, upon the plaintiff.
I sought their views about the amount which should be awarded and, although there was considerable divergence between them, I found their submissions on this aspect helpful. My findings can be stated fairly briefly.

For the plaintiff the operation was a painful and terrifying experience. It had a marked effect upon her emotionally and soured her relationship with the child and with her husband. Dr William Barclay, the respected forensic psychiatrist, considered that she suffered from a post traumatic depressive illness reactive to the trauma of the operation.

I have already referred to evidence that, after the baby was delivered, the plaintiff did not wish to see her. In the ensuing days at the hospital she was exhausted and did not want the child in the room with her. Upon returning home, she did not feel the same bonding with her as she had with her other two children. It was five or six days before the baby was named because she could not interest herself in choosing a name. On one occasion she contemplated smothering the child with a pillow. Despite this, she became over protective of her and for a time was obsessed about her dying. She acknowledged in cross examination that she loves the child very much and feels a special attachment to her because of what they both had been through. She acknowledged also that she had come to treat the child as the equal of her other two children, although she still felt over protective of her. It does seem that she has achieved a satisfactory relationship with the child and I am well aware that the early experience of motherhood is never free of difficulty. Nevertheless, she was deprived of that unbridled joy which a woman ought to derive from the birth and nurture of her baby.

For about a year after returning home she was exhausted and could cope only with the day to day care of the baby. She neglected the housework, although fortunately she had the assistance of family members. She could not give the other two children the attention they deserved. The aftermath of the birth of each of those older children had been a much happier experience.

Her personality changed considerably. Prior to the operation she had been prone to anxiety from time to time, but was basically a person of happy disposition who enjoyed good physical health and had experienced no psychiatric or psychological disorders. Her husband described her as having been "very bubbly, energetic". After the operation she was lethargic, nervy, irritable and easily moved to tears. She had nightmares about the operation and, on occasions, suicidal thoughts. Her relationship with her husband, both physical and emotional, deteriorated and, in late 1988 they separated.
Although not the only contributing factor, her change of personality was the primary cause of the breakdown of the relationship. An attempt at reconciliation at the end of that year failed but, towards the middle of 1989, they got back together.

The marriage endured at the time of the hearing. In the meantime they had been through other difficulties in their lives which, it seems, only strengthened the relationship. The plaintiff's condition improved considerably until the death of her father in 1993, which affected her deeply. Of course, I can have no regard to this tragic development in assessing damages. Dr Barclay, in a report of 18 February 1992 prepared before the father's death, considered that the plaintiff had mostly recovered from her depressive illness. He concluded that there "should not be any long term adverse psychological effects of the operation except for some (reasonable) apprehension about any future surgery or anaesthetic she might have to undergo." 
Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that some allowance should be made for the possible effect of her personality change upon her employment prospects. I need not elaborate on this. It is sufficient to say that I can find no basis in the evidence for it. A claim for economic loss was not pursued at the hearing and there are no out of pocket expenses. Counsel for the plaintiff suggested a figure in excess of $100,000 as appropriate but, in all the circumstances, I think that this is too high. Counsel for the defendant put a range of $45,000 to $90,000, which is more realistic, although I think that the plaintiff's entitlement is at the top of that range. She should be awarded $90,000 plus interest under <case> of the Act. I request the parties to make the necessary calculation and bring in short minutes.
 * * * 
