

Drummond versus National Australia Bank Ltd [1997] NSWSC 31 (14 February 1997) 
DRUMMOND V NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK LIMITED /95 COMM D 10690/93 FEBRUARY 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, CLARKE JA, MEAGHER JA 
CATCHWORDS: HOME AND BUSINESS LOANS - MORTGAGE - GUARANTEE - UNCONSCIONABILITY - CONSTRUCTION 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
HOME AND BUSINESS LOANS - MORTGAGE - GUARANTEE - UNCONSCIONABILITY -
CONSTRUCTION - appellant was one of principals of computer sales company - bank made credit facility available to company and home loan to principal - credit facility to company secured by guarantee given by appellant and others supported by mortgage over appellant's home - bank subsequently increased credit facility and obtained equitable charge over assets of company as well as further guarantee from appellant and others - further finance provided to company by second financier, secured by equitable charge over company's assets - bank and second financier agreed with company that second financier's charge should have priority over bank's charge - default by company - second financier entered into possession of company's assets - bank called upon appellant under guarantee - bank began proceedings under mortgage to obtain possession of appellant's home when appellant did not pay - appellant cross- claimed alleging unconscionable behaviour on the part of the bank in regard to credit facility to company and home loan to principal - Giles J finds for the bank .

On appeal: 1. whether bank acted unconscientiously; 2. whether trial judge incorrectly interpreted a clause in the guarantee allowing the bank to cede priority to the second financier; 3. whether there was an agreement between the appellant and respondent that the primary security for the loan would be the equitable charge; 4. whether to admit certain further evidence.

Held: 1. the claims of unconscionable behaviour on the part of the bank were not made out; 2. the trial judge correctly interpreted the relevant clauses of the guarantee; 3. as to the claim that an agreement as to the primary security existed between the appellant and respondent, it was submitted by the respondent that the claim was not made at trial and was therefore unavailable to the appellant on appeal; although that submission may be right, not ruled on because in any event the evidence did not support the asserted agreement; applications to rely on further evidence refused.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.

JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: 
Background and parties. In this appeal Mrs Drummond, the appellant, seeks to have reversed a decision by Giles J that she owed two amounts to the respondent bank and that she was bound by a guarantee she signed in October 1986. 
In October 1985 Mrs Drummond was married to Mr Van-Lane but there was a possibility their marriage might not continue. They visited a marriage counsellor in that month. At the time their main business activity was in conducting the business of Wosenda Pty Limited (Wosenda). This was a computer sales company. They both had technical qualifications which fitted them for the business. Mr Van-Lane also had qualifications in accountancy and sales experience. Mrs Drummond owned 80% of the shares in Wosenda. The other 20% were owned by Mr Wells. They were living in a house at Birchgrove which they owned. In evidence given before Giles J Mrs Drummond suggested that she held her shares in Wosenda on her husband's behalf. This evidence was not particularly precise, and it seems likely that until the possibility of separation became apparent no particular attention was given to the name in which the shares and the house were registered. After seeing the marriage counsellor they agreed upon a division of their property that would result in
Mr Van-Lane owning all the shares and Mrs Drummond owning the house. Mrs
Drummond was pregnant with her third child at the time. They eventually separated in 1992.

At about the beginning of 1986 Mr Van-Lane and Mrs Drummond decided that the
Birchgrove house should be sold and that Mrs Drummond should become the owner of another house which would be financed in part by the proceeds of sale of the Birchgrove house. Borrowed money would also be needed for the purchase of the new house. Wosenda also needed further loan capital at the time. So they tried various institutions for finance, and ended up dealing with the manager of the Artarmon branch of the National Australia Bank Limited, Mr Trompp.

Two banks were actually conducting business at the Artarmon branch at that time, one a trading bank, the National Australia Bank Limited (NAB) and the other a savings bank, the National Australia Savings Bank Limited (NAS).
Pursuant to the [Bank Integration Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/bia1991166/), on 1
October 1992, the assets and liabilities of NAS vested in NAB. The proceedings in which Mrs Drummond is now appealing were begun in 1993 by NAB as plaintiff.

Outline facts - April/May 1986. At the beginning of 1986 Wosenda owed
Australia Bank approximately $190,000. Australia Bank wanted this amount to be repaid and was no longer interested in financing business of the type conducted by Wosenda. In early 1986 Mr Van-Lane, who was in charge of
Wosenda's financing as well as being concerned in its day to day running, began negotiations for finance both for Wosenda and the new house with Mr
Trompp at the Artarmon branch.

The original proposal to Mr Trompp was that two separate financing transactions be entered into, one to do with the completion of the purchase of the new home, the other replacement financing for Wosenda. The proceeds of sale of the Birchgrove home were to be used in the purchase of the new home, and some money would be borrowed from NAS which would make up the balance of the purchase price of the new home and also permit some renovations of it. Mrs
Drummond would be the owner of the new home and owe a comparatively small amount on it to NAS, secured by mortgage. Wosenda would organise credit facilities with NAB from which the Australia Bank would be paid out. Wosenda would then be directly the debtor to NAB for the amount borrowed under the credit facility, which would at the time of the payment out of the Australia
Bank be at least in the order of $190,000. It seems as a practical matter that
Wosenda would only have been able to obtain this credit facility by arranging for Mrs Drummond to make available the new home as security for NAB's advances to Wosenda.

Mr Van-Lane and Mrs Drummond found themselves in the situation where they had to complete the sale of the Birchgrove home before the purchase of their new home was complete. This had happened because the house they had been intending to buy at the time of their selling the Birchgrove house was sold to someone else. They then entered into a contract to buy the Drummoyne house, but the change meant later completion of the purchase of the new house than originally foreseen. In the meantime the Birchgrove sale was completed and the proceeds of sale lodged with the Australia Bank as security for the amount still then owing by Wosenda to the Australia Bank. That amount was used to discharge
Wosenda's liability to the Australia Bank shortly before the settlement of the purchase of the Drummoyne house. When that settlement took place on 6 May 1986
NAS advanced $170,000 to Mrs Drummond secured by mortgage over the Drummoyne house, and NAB advanced $30,000 which was part of the $70,000 credit facility
NAB was making available to Wosenda.

The result was that the moneys from the sale of the Birchgrove house had been used to discharge Wosenda's liability to the Australia Bank and Mrs Drummond had become directly liable to NAS for $170,000 and to NAB for $30,000. Wosenda obtained credit facilities with NAB to a limit of $70,000. Mrs Drummond had given mortgages to both NAS and NAB securing the advances from the two banks and guarantees, the relevant one being the guarantee of Wosenda's liability to
NAB under its credit facility arrangement which she had given together with Mr
Van-Lane and Mr Wells. At this stage Mrs Drummond and Wosenda were both fully solvent. They were in a position to work out between them any rearrangement that suited them concerning their liabilities and entitlements between themselves.

Preparatory to the settlement of the house purchase of 6 May 1986 Mrs Drummond and Mr Van-Lane signed a number of documents at the Artarmon branch. These were: "Home-Loan Contract". This was an application by Mrs Drummond and Mr
Van-Lane for a loan of $90,000 from NAS at 15.5%.

An offer by NAS to lend a further $80,000 to Mrs Drummond and Mr Van-Lane on their current savings bank mortgage at 18%. Mrs Drummond's acceptance signature appeared at the foot of the document.
 "Guarantee and Indemnity". A document with this title was signed by Mrs
Drummond. She guaranteed and indemnified NAS in respect of the basic liability (defined in the document as $170,000) of herself and Mr Van-Lane to NAS.

Mortgage registered No W344560 of the Drummoyne house to NAS by Mrs
Drummond, in consideration of NAS having provided or agreed to provide advances to Mrs Drummond, upon terms to pay on demand any moneys secured by it and upon the terms in the memorandum filed in the Registrar General's Office
Number V 90059.
 "Guarantee and Indemnity". Another document with this title was signed by Mrs Drummond, Mr Van-Lane and Mr Wells. They guaranteed and indemnified NAB in respect of Wosenda's "basic liability" of $70,000.

Mortgage registered No W344561 of the Drummoyne house to NAB by Mrs
Drummond, in the same terms as W344560, except that it was expressed to be subject to that mortgage.

After the settlement of 6 May 1986 the above listed documents stated the legal position of the parties as it was then understood to be.

From the point of view of the two banks, after the settlement of 6 May 1996 finance had been made available for Wosenda and the purchase of the Drummoyne house. Mrs Drummond had become liable to NAS for $170,000 in connection with the house purchase, and to NAB for up to $70,000 in connection with Wosenda's financing, secured as to NAS by first mortgage of the Drummoyne house and as to NAB by guarantee secured by second mortgage of the Drummoyne house.

Outline facts - October 1986. In October 1986 Wosenda sought to increase its credit facility from $70,000 to $270,000. NAB agreed. At this stage it obtained an equitable charge over the assets of Wosenda and a further guarantee from Mr Van-Lane, Mrs Drummond and Mr Wells for up to $270,000 "basic liability" as further security for Wosenda's liability to NAB. (Giles
J later held that this guarantee replaced and discharged that numbered (5) in the list of documents on foot at 6 May 1986.) We will call this guarantee of
October 1986 the Wosenda guarantee.

This accommodation was renewed in April 1988, when Mrs Drummond signed another guarantee, but nothing seems to have depended on this in the later proceedings..

Outline facts, late 1988-1990. By the end of 1988, because of more stringent credit conditions imposed upon Wosenda by its chief supplier, it was in need of further capital. NAB declined an application for further finance, which was however provided by a company called Carrington Confirmers Pty Limited in March 1989, which secured its accommodation by an equitable charge over Wosenda's assets, which, by agreement between NAB, Wosenda and
Carrington itself, was given priority over NAB's charge of October 1986. Mrs
Drummond, who had had little to do with Wosenda's finances or administration for some time, knew money was being raised from Carrington but had no knowledge of the details or of the priority arrangement.

Wosenda was soon again in financial difficulties. In January 1990 it ceased trading. On 14 February 1990 Carrington entered into possession of Wosenda's assets under its charge and appointed Mr Walker as its agent. On 2 July 1991
Mr Walker advised that he had recovered $571,608.91 of which $232,505.26 was paid to Carrington in discharge of its debt, $105,476.89 paid to employees, $60,771 in dispute with IBM paid into court and the balance of $31,945.73 paid to NAB in part payment of Wosenda's debt.

NAB then called upon Mrs Drummond under her guarantees of Wosenda's liability.
As things turned out, the guarantee upon which her liability was found to depend was that of October 1986. When she did not pay, NAB began proceedings under the two mortgages to obtain possession of the Drummoyne house, with a view to exercising power of sale.

Proceedings at first instance. Mrs Drummond defended the claim for possession of the house and cross-claimed against the plaintiff on bases which included (using non technical language) claims by her that she had been led into signing the mortgages and guarantees by misrepresentations on the part of the two banks, by unfair conduct by the two banks, that the terms of the
Wosenda guarantee were unfair, and that unconscientious behaviour by NAB had discharged any liability she may have had under that guarantee.

The claim and cross claims were heard by Giles J.

Although the plaintiff's proceedings did not claim a money sum from Mrs
Drummond, Giles J thought it necessary, in dealing with the claim for possession, to consider her liability to the plaintiff; he concluded that Mrs
Drummond was liable to the plaintiff as guarantor with "basic liabilities", (as defined in the plaintiff's documentation) of $170,000 in respect of the
NAS borrowing and $270,000 in respect of the NAB borrowing. He held the
Drummoyne house secured those liabilities, found that neither defences nor cross-claims had been established, and that the plaintiff was entitled to possession.

General considerations affecting the appeal. A great many matters of fact were canvassed before Giles J and many points of law argued. With one exception, (that the guarantee for $70,000 had been discharged and replaced by the Wosenda guarantee), all the legal issues were decided in favour of NAB. He explained his reasons for his various conclusions in full detail. Mrs
Drummond's defences and cross-claims were very largely based on allegations which could be stated briefly as being that NAB had unconscientiously taken advantage of its superior economic position and her lack of understanding of the obligations she was undertaking in her transactions with NAB in unfairly bringing about the result, which she had never understood or intended, that she and her home would be liable to NAB for the amounts borrowed from NAB by
Wosenda for its business purposes. Again stated briefly, she failed in making good any of the ways in which her case was presented to the court because
Giles J came to the conclusion that she was an intelligent person, with business experience sufficient for her to deal competently with NAB in regard to financial matters, who had not been subjected by NAB to any unfair treatment in her dealings with NAB. Giles J had ample opportunity of observing
Mrs Drummond when cross-examined by counsel for NAB about her experience and various qualifications. This court is not in a position to interfere with any of his basic factual findings, nor, after reading the documentary materials and the transcript of the oral evidence, do we see any reason to do so.

Most of the grounds of appeal which were pursued in the argument before this court were challenges to findings by Giles J based on his application of recognised legal rules to the facts as he found them to be and where the outcome of the application of the legal rules was heavily influenced by the views he had formed of the competence and experience of Mrs Drummond and her ability to deal with NAB as a person having full legal capacity.

One result of this, so far as the appeal is concerned, is that many of the matters argued on Mrs Drummond's behalf had little prospect of success. We do not propose to deal with those matters at any length. There is one matter that we will need to deal with at a little greater length after shortly indicating our opinion on the earlier points.

The grounds of appeal. At the hearing of the appeal some of the grounds in the notice of appeal were abandoned. Those relied on in regard to what we will call the home loan were 1(b), 5(a), 6 and 8. As these were argued they developed into an attack on the conduct of the two banks in the two lending transactions of April-May 1986.

The two lending transactions of April-May 1986. The appellant's argument was that the two banks had acted unconscientiously in bringing it about that the lending of money to Wosenda shortly before the lending of money for the purchase of the Drummoyne house on 6 May 1986 was carried out in the way that it was. This was said to have been a matter of significance to the appellant because if she had in fact borrowed on the house in her own name NAB would later have had to rely in obtaining satisfaction of Wosenda's debt, so far as the appellant was concerned, upon her liability under a guarantee rather than as a primary debtor, and then, if she succeeded in obtaining a declaration that cl 5(g) of the guarantee was unenforceable, (a point to be dealt with later and one important to the appellant even if the attack on the April-May transactions fails) then she would be under no liability for the Wosenda borrowing.

The court was taken to many aspects of the evidence which were said to support this claim by the appellant; having considered the arguments and the evidence it seems sufficient to say that we do not see any sign of unconscionability or unfairness of any kind in the transactions of May 1986 having been carried out in the manner in which they actually took place and with their resulting documentation. We do not think there is any basis for effective criticism of the trial judge's findings of fact concerning the transactions and that in itself means that this first argument of the appellant must fail. Further, the evidence before the judge seems to us to have made it quite plain that both Mr
Van-Lane and the appellant had reasonable capacity to understand what was happening at the time of those transactions and were quite content to let them take the form they did, with sufficient awareness of the significance of what was happening to make it unreasonable for the appellant to complain that the bank, or anyone else, was then taking advantage of her. The appellant and her husband were solvent. It was open for them to re-arrange the assets and liabilities of the company and themselves in any way they chose, but there was then no particular point in their doing so.

The failure of this aspect of the appeal means that Mrs Drummond's defences to
NAB's claim for possession of the Drummoyne house all fail, as Giles J held.
The order for possession will stand. The remaining grounds of appeal all concern Mrs Drummond's cross claims, which, if successful, would reduce but not extinguish, her liability to NAB.

Grounds of appeal in regard to Wosenda guarantee. The remaining grounds of appeal relied on were identified as grounds 1(a), 2, 3, 4, 11, 12 and 13.
Grounds 1(a) and 11 asserted that NAB's activities in regard to the priority deed had discharged the appellant from liability under the guarantee. Ground 2 asserted that the trial judge had incorrectly interpreted cl 5(g) of the
Wosenda guarantee of October 1986. Ground 3 said the judge should have set aside cl 5(g) under the Contracts Review Act. Ground 4 asserted NAB had failed to explain cl 5(g) to the appellant, and as a result could not rely on it.
Ground 12 said the judge should have found against the NAB under the Trade
Practices Act and for breach of fiduciary duty. Ground 13 asserted misleading and deceptive conduct against the NAB.

Although these grounds appear to raise a variety of matters, they can nearly all be dealt with in substance, under two headings, construction and unconscionability. Ground 2 raises the construction point and all the others raise, in one form or another, questions of unconscionability; this is subject to one final point we deal with after the unconscionability matters.

Ground 2 - Construction. Clause 5(g) was as follows: "This Guarantee shall be a continuing guarantee and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing shall not be affected by:- ...
 the Bank abandoning or releasing, wholly or partially, or exchanging, varying, giving up or in any way dealing with any security which it now holds or may hereafter hold to secure the moneys hereby secured;" 
Clauses 7 and 9 were also said by NAB to be relevant: "7. Whilst any moneys or other liabilities are owing or outstanding from the customer to the Bank (whether or not the guarantor is liable hereunder to make payment to the Bank in respect thereof) the guarantor will not in any way claim the benefit or seek the transfer of any security or any part thereof, and generally waives in favour of the Bank all rights against the Bank and the customer and any other person, estates and assets including rights of subrogation, contribution and marshalling.
 ...
All moneys received by the Bank from or on account of the customer (including any dividends upon the bankruptcy or liquidation of or any arrangement, assignment or composition by the customer) or from any other person or from the realisation or enforcement of any security capable of being applied by the Bank in reduction of the moneys hereby secured shall be regarded for all purposes as payments in gross, without any right on the part of the guarantor to stand in the place of the Bank or claim the benefit of any moneys so received, until the guarantor has paid the moneys hereby secured and so that in the event of the guarantor becoming bankrupt or making any arrangement, assignment or composition or going into liquidation the Bank shall be entitled to prove for the moneys hereby secured up to the limit of the guarantee." 
The appellant submitted that cll 5(g), 7 and 9 must be construed strictly and, so construed, were not wide enough to permit the ceding of priority by the respondent to Carrington. This submission was put in a variety of ways.
However, his Honour below had held that even on a strict interpretation the conduct of the respondent fell squarely within the four corners of the cl (g). We agree. From whatever point of view the ceding of priority is viewed it clearly was a dealing with the charge within the meaning of the relevant phrase in cl 5(g). Once this is recognised we think it follows from the authorities that, in the absence of circumstances which might cast a different light on the respondent's behaviour, the appellant, by contract, gave up her right to complain about the alteration in security effected by the ceding of priority.

In connection with this point, counsel for the appellant referred to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s3.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/) which gives statutory effect to the rule that a guarantor who discharges the liability of a debtor is entitled to the securities held by the creditor for that debt. A question was raised whether a guarantor can bargain away the statutory entitlement, but counsel properly referred us to Johnson v
Australian Guarantee Corporation [(1992) 59 SASR 382], and Chin
Hoat Pty Limited versus National Australia Bank Limited, McLelland CJ in Eq, 20
March 1995, which both decide that a party can contract out of the statute, and did not then take the matter any further. We think we should adopt the conclusion stated in these cases.

Remaining grounds - Unconscionability. For the appellant it was submitted that if, as we have held, contractual provisions in the guarantee were to be construed as giving NAB a legal right to give priority to Carrington's charge, without affecting its own rights against Mrs Drummond under the guarantee, nevertheless a number of special factors in the case combined to make exercise of its legal right by NAB unconscionable.

The factors relied on by the appellant were (a) that various misrepresentations or statements of a misleading kind had been made to Mrs
Drummond at relevant times, (b) that because of the unusual nature of cl 5(g), the ramifications of it should have been explained to her either at the time she executed the guarantee or when NAB was proposing to give priority to
Carrington, (c) that the granting of the priority to Carrington had been prejudicial to the right of subrogation that Mrs Drummond would have had, in certain events, to the NAB's rights under its equitable charge and (d) that the agreement to cede priority to Carrington was made without notice to Mrs
Drummond.

These matters, when taken with the potential for prejudice which cl 5(g) in any event carried with it gave rise, it was submitted, to a power in the court to avoid cl 5(g) or declare it unenforceable under the general law of unconscionability, or by use of provisions of the Contracts Review Act or by use of provisions of the Trade Practices Act, or because of breach of fiduciary obligations which it was submitted had fastened upon NAB in the circumstances.

Before dealing with the elements of this argument we set out some relevant findings made by his Honour concerning Mrs Drummond: "Mrs Drummond was highly educated (BSc majoring in mathematics and chemistry,
MSc, and a year of an MBA course) and had considerable business experience: she was effectively general manager of the TCG (the computer group) business with significant involvement in its financial management. She presented in the witness box as an extremely intelligent person, and the agreement dated 25 May and letter to the bank of 27 May 1988 are in my view indicative of a care for her own position which operated in earlier years. And the October guarantee was not entered into in haste, under pressure, or otherwise in a situation which prevented her from reading it, and appreciating had she done so, that her obligations under the guarantee would remain unaffected if the bank released or otherwise dealt with the securities for Wosenda's indebtedness." 
His Honour considered the appellant's previous knowledge and execution of guarantees saying: "Mrs Drummond had signed guarantees on a number of occasions prior to 1986, including guarantees to Australian Bank. The 1981 guarantee to Australian Bank contained comprehensive provisions of the nature of cl 5(g) of the April and
October guarantees, Mrs Drummond's signature was witnessed by Mr Gemmell of
Messrs Glasson Gemmell and McGill, and it was signed in his presence as one of his clients: although not expressly gone into, it is likely that Mrs Drummond obtained from Mr Gemmell such explanation as was then appropriate. Other guarantees signed by Mrs Drummond had provisions of the nature of cl 5(g). She and Mr Van-Lane had used the services of Messrs Glasson Gemmell & McGill over the years, and could have obtained advice from that firm at any time; even in the absence of advice, I consider that Mrs Drummond was well able, had she read the October guarantee, to appreciate that her obligations thereunder would remain unaffected if the Bank released or otherwise dealt with the securities for Wosenda's indebtedness. She had earlier signed the April guarantee, on which occasion she had similarly had the opportunity to read and relevantly understood her position, and it would have been obvious that the
October guarantee was in the same terms as the April guarantee. The explanations which I accept Mr Trompp gave according to his practice were rudimentary, but they were accurate so far as they went and not to the contrary of the effect of cl 5(g). It must have been obvious to Mrs Drummond that she was signing a formal legal document with many provisions material to her obligations as a guarantor, and it is not easy to see why cl 5(g) should be held to be an unjust provision when a commercially sophisticated guarantor with experience of guarantees (though not necessarily of their intricacies) chose to sign such a document without reading it or obtaining advice when she could have done both." 
One matter Giles J took into account was whether the appellant would have acted any differently if she had been made aware of the significance of cl (g) before she signed the October 1986 guarantee. His view was that there was no evidence that she would not have signed the deed of guarantee in those circumstances. Further, as his Honour pointed out, in May 1988 the appellant expressly took exception to cl 15 of the guarantee but made no adverse comment in relation to any of the other clauses. This was a pointer, in his Honour's view, to the likelihood that if she had known of the effect of cl 5(g) she would nonetheless have signed the guarantee.

It is against this background that the elements of what for brevity's sake we have called the unconscionability argument have to be considered.

As to the claims of various misrepresentations by officers of NAB, this subject matter was reviewed by Giles J. He had seen the most important witnesses give evidence. With that assistance he had considered the documentary materials in the case and had come to the conclusion that none of the charges had been made out. These factual findings are of a kind with which this court will not interfere unless it becomes apparent that the trial judge has made an obvious error or has palpably misused the advantage that a trial judge has from all the input to be gained by courtroom observation of witnesses. We have seen nothing to bring this case into that category.

The next matter relied on was that a clause such as cl 5 (g) is unusual in nature and drastic in result to an extent that produces an obligation upon the party seeking the benefit of the guarantee to explain to a guarantor before accepting the obligation undertaken by the guarantor.

We might have some sympathy with this submission if this were the first time such a contractual condition had appeared in a guarantee. However, such contractual conditions have been the subject of numberless judicial decisions over many years. A sampling of such cases dating from the 1930s until today is given in The Modern Contract of Guarantee by O'Donovan and Phillips (3rd edn) 1996 at pp 350-352. The fact that such conditions have regularly appeared in guarantees for such a long period as to have become part of regular commercial usage, in our view makes it impossible to say that they are of a character requiring explanation to a competent intending guarantor. We would not exclude the possibility that the circumstances in particular cases may combine with the existence of such a condition in a guarantee, to give rise to the obligation contended for here, but if and when that should happen, it will be because of much stronger circumstances than those found in the present case.

The next element relied on by the appellant was the potential prejudice caused to her subrogation rights by NAB's granting of priority to Carrington. There was considerable argument before us concerning the validity of this proposition. Counsel for the respondent sought to demonstrate either that there was no potential prejudice to the appellant or that there was no evidence upon which the conclusion could be drawn that there was such potential prejudice. He also argued that the point had not been in issue before Giles J.

On this last matter it appears from Giles J's reasons that a more difficult proposition was sought to be maintained in final address to him by the then counsel for the appellant. It was submitted that NAB intended to injure Mrs
Drummond in order to make her bear the full loss at that stage, with the bank manoeuvring so its subsidiary could lend money at higher rates and obtain a preferred security. This submission charged the bank with a much higher degree of unconscionability than has been put forward in the appeal. The submission was not accepted by Giles J whose reasons for not accepting it included the fact that it had never been put to Mr Trompp that he acted with such intent or had received any instructions to act in such a way. Such an allegation, in
Giles J's view, if it were to be maintained on Mrs Drummond's behalf, should have been put, or the material factual parts of it put to Mr Trompp so that there would be an opportunity of replying.

The fact that the more serious charge was put in final address, without the ground work having been laid for it during the evidentiary part of the hearing, suggests that the lesser charge of unconscionability made in the appeal had no ground work laid for it either.

On the material in the appeal papers, counsel for the appellant made a powerful submission tending to support the factual proposition that in the circumstances in which Wosenda found itself at the time Carrington granted its facility and took its first priority charge, the transaction must have been prejudicial to Mrs Drummond's potential rights of subrogation.

Assuming in the appellant's favour, without deciding, that this part of the argument is one that is open to be put in the appeal, and that the transaction was prejudicial to Mrs Drummond's rights (if they were unaffected by the terms of the contract guarantee), we nevertheless are of the view that unconscionability (to use that term to embrace the various heads under which the appellant sought to make this point) was not made out.

At the time when Carrington made its facility available and took its charge, to NAB's knowledge Mr Van-Lane and Mrs Drummond were married and living together, they had a joint overdraft account at the Artarmon branch (see vol 3
Appeal Book p 569 (see also p 608))and between them they had an 80% shareholding interest in the company. Giles J was not satisfied that if Mrs
Drummond's attitude to Wosenda had then changed, that was known to Mr Trompp in March 1989. So from NAB's point of view, it was agreeing to an advance of money to Wosenda, which was within its rights to agree to under cl 5(g) of the guarantee, the two people NAB mainly knew of in its dealings with Wosenda were a married couple in whose apparent interest it was that Wosenda obtain further finance.

At one point in his reasons Giles J had found that in October 1986 "Mrs Drummond was content to undertake a personal liability for the 'basic liability' of $270,000, and to give security over the Drummoyne property, regardless of the status or priority of Wosenda's charge" 
He had continued that if were inappropriate for him to reach that positive conclusion he was not satisfied that Mrs Drummond would not have signed the guarantee if she had had a complete awareness of the effect of cl 5(g). In our view on the material before him these were proper findings of fact. In our view also NAB had no reason in October 1986 to think otherwise; nor, in our opinion, did the evidence accepted by Giles J show that the bank should have had any different understanding of the matter at the time of the Carrington transaction in January-March 1988.

In these circumstances we do not think Mrs Drummond made out a case of unconscionability against the respondent.

Further argument on Wosenda guarantee. An additional argument put by the appellant to those we have dealt with under the unconscionability heading was that there was an express or implied agreement by the respondent in October that the primary security for the loan then made was to be the registered equitable charge and that the respondent would maintain that primary security until it became necessary to enforce it or the primary debt was repaid. In reliance on Marston versus Charles H Griffith & Co Pty Limited [1985] 3 NSWLR -299 and Bleyer versus Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Limited (Court of
Appeal, 15 December 1987, unreported) it was submitted for the appellant that the non fulfilment of this agreement released her from liability under the guarantees. The agreement relied on for this submission was said to have been concluded between the respondent and the guarantors.

Counsel for the respondent said this submission too had not been made at the trial and, because, if it had been, the respondent may have called evidence on it, or otherwise conducted its case differently, it was not open to the appellant to maintain it in this appeal. So far as we can see, this submission appears to be correct but even if this be wrong, we can see no sign in the written guarantee or in the conduct of the parties as found by Giles J which would support any such agreement as that claimed.

Fresh evidence. In the course of the argument the appellant sought leave to rely on certain further evidence on two matters. One matter related to the quantification of the two basic liabilities referred to in Giles J's declarations 3 and 4. We formed the view that this quantification was not relevant to the appeal. Any arguments about it will have to be examined elsewhere. The application was refused.

The other application concerned the question whether Carrington was a subsidiary of NAB. Giles J had said the evidence about this was unsatisfactory. We think there was enough evidence in the trial materials (in scattered places) to justify the conclusion that Carrington was a subsidiary; we also understood that, after argument, counsel for NAB was eventually content to conduct the appeal on this basis. There was thus no occasion for the application to be pursued. On the usual rules it should be refused. The fact that Carrington was a subsidiary of NAB does not affect our conclusion that no unconscionability was shown in NAB's conduct in ceding priority to
Carrington in early 1989.

Conclusion. In our opinion the grounds of appeal relied on by Mrs Drummond all fail, and her appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
