

Tcn Channel Nine Pty Ltd versus Antoniadis Matter Nos Ca 40240/97; Ca 40067/97 [1998] NSWSC 543 (1 October 1998) 
Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
TCN CHANNEL NINE PTY LTD versus LORNA LASSANDA ANTONIADIS 
CA 40240/97, 11047/90; CA 40067/97, 14914/91 October 1998 
Handley JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Supreme Court Common Law Division 
Defamation List (Levine J) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40240/97, 11047/90; CA 40067/97, 14914/91 
DELIVERED: 1 October 1998 
HEARING DATE/S: 23, 24, 27, 28, 29 July 1998 
PARTIES: TCN CHANNEL NINE PTY LTD versus LORNA LASSANDA ANTONIADIS 
JUDGMENT OF: Handley JA Beazley JA Stein JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: B R McClintock SC/G O'L Reynolds 
Respondent: A B Shand QC/M B Duncan 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: Gilbert & Tobin 
Respondent: Bush Burke & Company 
CATCHWORDS: 
DEFAMATION - pleadings - imputations - contextual truth - amendment of defences 
DEFAMATION - cross-examination - credit - use of 
EVIDENCE - cross-examination - limits in defamation cases 
JURY - discharge - discretion of trial judge 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed with costs 
NO OF PAGES: 48 
TCN CHANNEL 9 PTY LIMITED versus LORNA LASSANDA ANTONIADIS 
DEFAMATION - pleadings - imputations - contextual truth - amendment of defences 
DEFAMATION - cross-examination - credit - use of 
EVIDENCE - cross-examination - limits in defamation cases 
JURY - discharge - discretion of trial judge 
The appellant was sued by a marriage celebrant for telecasts on A Current
Affair in 1990-91 relating to bogus marriages by Chinese to Australian citizens to circumvent the immigration laws. There were three trials; in the first two the jury was discharged. In the third trial the jury awarded damages of $200,000 in respect of the first telecast, $175,000 in respect of the second, and found for the appellant in respect of a third.

HELD: Allowing the appeal: (1) The trial Judge was correct in holding that all but one of the imputations pleaded by the respondent were capable of being conveyed by the telecasts but one of the imputations based on the second telecast was not as it required the viewer to draw an inference from an inference. Because the jury returned a single verdict on the three causes of action based on the second telecast, there must be a new trial. Trial judges should consider using the power in <case> to require separate verdicts. Cutts versus Buckley <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 189] applied. 
ORDERS 
Appeal allowed with costs.

Verdict for $200,000 on causes of action based on the telecast of 6
February 1990 and the judgment entered thereon set aside.

Verdict for $175,000 on causes of action based on the telecast of 30
November 1990 and the judgment entered thereon set aside.

Order a new trial of the causes of action pleaded as imputations P1, P2 and P3 based on the telecast of 6 February 1990 and of the causes of action pleaded as imputations P1 and P3 based on the telecast of 30 November 1990.

Costs of the third trial to be in the discretion of the Judge presiding at the new trial.

Leave to appeal from the order discharging the jury in the second trial granted, and appeal allowed.

Set aside the order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the second trial.

In lieu thereof order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the second trial, assessment to await the result of the new trial.

Respondent to have certificates under the Suitors Fund Act.

Liberty to apply to Handley JA on 7 days' notice for orders under SCR Pt r 23 (5)(b) and (c).

TCN CHANNEL 9 PTY LIMITED versus LORNA LASSANDA ANTONIADIS 
JUDGMENT 
THE COURT: TCN Channel 9 Pty Limited has appealed from judgments entered in favour of Mrs Antoniadis, a marriage celebrant, (the plaintiff) at the conclusion of the third trial of her libel action which lasted for 27 days. The plaintiff sued in respect of three telecasts by Channel 9 in "A Current Affair" on 6 February, 30 November 1990 and 16 July 1991. The jury returned verdicts of $200,000 in respect of the first programme, $175,000 in respect of the second and found for Channel 9 on the third. 
The case has a most unfortunate history. On 4 March 1992 Hunt CJatCL gave judgment following a separate trial directed to whether imputations pleaded by the plaintiff disclosed causes of action reasonably capable of being conveyed by the telecasts. A number of imputations were upheld, subject in some cases to amendments, and a number were disallowed.

The action first came on for trial before Abadee J and a jury on 29 January but the jury was discharged on the sixth day. The second trial commenced before Levine J and a jury on 3 February 1997, but the jury was discharged on the twelfth day. Channel 9 has appealed from the order discharging this jury.
The third trial commenced before Levine J and a jury on 24 February, and concluded on 3 April.

The grounds of appeal were conveniently arranged in three groups, and the
Court heard full argument on each group before argument on any other. The first group comprised challenges to the plaintiff's imputations, the decision to strike out Channel 9's particulars of justification of some of the imputations, and the refusal of its application for leave to plead additional contextual imputations. The second group comprised the grounds based on directions to the jury and the third the grounds challenging the discharge of the jury in the second trial.

Capacity of matter complained of to carry imputations 
The imputations pleaded in respect of the first and second telecasts were: "(i) The plaintiff as a marriage celebrant performed marriage ceremonies which she knew to be illegal; (P1) 
The plaintiff as a marriage celebrant performed marriage ceremonies which she knew to be invalid; (P2) 
The plaintiff knowingly and for profit assisted to arrange and perform marriages as part of an illegal immigration racket involving Asian immigrants going through sham marriages". (P3) 
The text of the telecasts was set out in schedules to the statement of claim and need not be repeated. Channel 9 challenged the first two imputations in both cases and the third imputation in the second case as not reasonably capable of arising from the telecasts.

The first telecast was about "sham weddings" and "marriages of convenience" between Asian men and Australian women for the purpose of conferring permanent resident status on the grooms. It was described as an "immigration racket" involving payment by the men of up to $20,000. The film footage commenced with a walk in on a wedding at Centennial Park to be celebrated by the plaintiff between an Asian groom and an Australian bride, an aspiring actress who had been infiltrated into the racket. The reporter interrupts the ceremony stating, "Sorry to interrupt, this wedding must stop, the law is being broken". He said later, "A number of people may be deported, others sent to jail". The programme included a segment where a former "bride" said she had been married by the plaintiff to an Asian in a marriage of convenience and the plaintiff knew all about it. The "bride" agreed that there was "no way" the plaintiff could have been a celebrant at any of these events and not known that they were marriages "designed to be marriages of convenience".

Imputation P1 ("ceremonies ... illegal") was capable of being conveyed by the reporter's statement at the start of the walk in, "... this wedding must stop, the law is being broken", and the further statement, "A number of people may be deported" (i.e. Asian men) and "others (i.e. Australians) sent to jail".

Imputation P2 ("ceremonies ... invalid") was also capable of being conveyed by the repeated references in this telecast to sham marriages and marriages of convenience. The ordinary reasonable viewer could readily infer from these references that the marriage ceremonies were "invalid". It is not to the point that under the Marriage Act the marriages were neither void nor voidable and the parties were legally married. The ordinary reasonable viewer could not be expected to have this knowledge. Channel 9's challenges to these imputations fail.

The second telecast was much shorter. It went to air as part of the last programme for "A Current Affair" in 1990 which revisted, as Jana Wendt said, "Some of the high and low points of the year". This was followed within seconds by a re-run of the same film footage of the reporter walking in on the plaintiff starting a marriage ceremony in Centennial Park. This again included the reporter's statement, "... this wedding must stop, the law is being broken". The reporter continued, "Australians are being paid to marry Chinese, who in turn pay the organisers" in amounts said to be around $19,000. The reporter concludes, "A number of people may be deported, others sent to jail".
There was other footage of the scene at Centennial Park, but the plaintiff was only shown at the beginning when the walk in occurred. No other "wedding" was shown and no other marriage celebrant.

Mr McClintock SC for Channel 9 submitted that the second telecast did not support P1 and P2 in the plural because the plaintiff was only shown as officiating at one wedding. While this is correct so far as it goes, the programme was not about a single wedding. The text includes "Australians are being paid to marry Chinese", "How much does a Chinese person pay ...", and "A number of people may be deported, others sent to jail". Although these references are not in terms applied to the plaintiff, there is nothing in the programme which suggests that the interrupted wedding was an isolated incident so far as she was concerned.

Levine J referred, in one of his rulings, to his unreported decision in
Bazdaric versus Channel 9 (10 June 1994) where he held that a "walk in" could be relevant in considering whether a particular meaning was conveyed by a telecast. We agree. The jury could well consider that the walk in on the plaintiff conveyed an accusation against her as well as the parties. It suggests that the people concerned had been "caught in the act".

The revisiting of the topic in the final programme for the year, presumably as one of its high points, and the inclusion of this episode, suggests that it was the culmination of successful investigative journalism. This is reinforced by the prediction that the result would be the deportation of some and the jailing of others.

Mr McClintock relied upon comments by Hunt CJatCL to support his argument that these imputations could only be conveyed if the jury thought that the plaintiff's reaction to the walk in was "a guilty look". Since the matter is before this Court on an appeal from a final judgment, he did not rely on the separate decision as a res judicata. This was correct. See Crowley v
Glissan <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 402.] 
This Court has had the benefit of arguments not presented to Hunt CJatCL, which have satisfied us that P1 and P3 were conveyed by this telecast independently of any "guilty look". Once one concludes that the second telecast was capable of conveying imputations about the plaintiff in connection with more than one marriage ceremony, there is no difficulty with
P1 ("ceremonies ... illegal"). This telecast, like the first, included the reporter's statement on the walk in ("the law is being broken") and his prediction ("a number ... deported ... sent to jail").

The availability of P3 ("illegal immigration racket") was challenged on a number of grounds. Some have already been dealt with in relation to P1. The remaining grounds were that the elements of "for profit", "arranged", "knowingly ... as part of ... a ... racket", and "sham marriages" were not capable of being conveyed.

We are inclined to think that the element "for profit" was not capable of being conveyed simply because the plaintiff was a marriage celebrant who presumably conducted weddings for normal fees. Something more was needed, but there were two bases on which the jury could find that something. Chinese were said to pay "the organisers" around $19,000, and there were only two possible organisers shown, the plaintiff, and Linda Zeang. This telecast implies (the walk in etc) that the plaintiff was involved on a regular basis and is capable of conveying that she was an organiser making a profit. The other basis is that the plaintiff's willingness to conduct such services was likely to attract volume business, which also imported the notion of profit. If this telecast was capable of conveying that the plaintiff was one of the organisers, it was also capable of conveying that she had a role in arranging these marriages apart from her role as a marriage celebrant.

Mr McClintock's principal submission was that there was nothing capable of conveying that the plaintiff was knowingly involved. The jury, however, were entitled to find that the programme conveyed that there was a racket, and since the only possible organisers pointed to were the plaintiff and Linda
Zeang, they were also entitled to find that it conveyed that the plaintiff was knowingly involved.

A sham marriage is a pretended marriage and not a real one, and this was capable of being conveyed by inference from the references to payments for marrying a Chinese, and "the convenience of the marriage". The second telecast was therefore capable of conveying P3.

Imputation P2 ("ceremonies ... invalid") is in a different category. If the invalidity was conveyed simply because the ceremonies were illegal, it would not differ in substance from P1 and should have been struck out under SCR Pt , r 11 (3).

If the invalidity did not flow simply from the illegality asserted ("the law is being broken") there is nothing which directly supports it. The marriages are said to be marriages of convenience but still marriages. This telecast did not state that the marriages were shams but if, as we have held, it was capable of conveying that imputation, this can only be because that was an inference which the ordinary reasonable viewer could draw.

P2 is an imputation that the marriage ceremonies were invalid. This was not stated in the telecast and was not implied by the references to marriages of convenience and payments for them. A marriage ceremony that was invalid would not give rise to a marriage at all. The inference open to the ordinary reasonable viewer that the marriages were shams could lead to a further inference that the marriage ceremonies were invalid and there was no marriage at all, but that meaning could only be derived by drawing an inference from an inference. A publisher is not legally responsible for a meaning derived in this way. The relevant principles were recently restated by Hunt CJatCL in
Amalgamated Television Services Ltd versus Marsden <case>; [(1998) 43 NSWLR 158] CA, 167 as follows: "The publisher is not held responsible ... for an inference which the ordinary reasonable reader, listener or viewer draws from an inference already drawn from the matter complained of, because it is unreasonable for the publisher to be held so responsible ... It is necessary to emphasise the important distinction between an implication and an inference. An implication is included in and is part of that which is expressed by the publisher. It is something which the ... viewer understands the publisher ... intended to say.
An inference is something which the ... viewer adds to what is stated by the publisher; it may reasonably or even irresistibly follow from what has been expressly or impliedly said, but it is nevertheless a conclusion drawn by the ... viewer from what has been expressly or impliedly said by the publisher ...

An inference is drawn from an inference when the ... viewer draws an inference which is available in the matter complained of then uses that inference as a basis (at least in part) from which a further inference is drawn. The publisher is held responsible for the first of those inferences but not for the second because - as I have already said - it is unreasonable for the publisher to be held so responsible".

P2 therefore was not capable of being separately conveyed by the second telecast.

The jury returned a single verdict on the three causes of action based on the second telecast, a course sanctioned by [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html) (5) of the [Defamation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/) .
However the trial Judge could have directed the jury to return separate verdicts. Where the jury return a general verdict on more than one cause of action which cannot be supported on all causes of action, there must be a new trial. See Cutts versus Buckley <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 189.] The Court is not entitled in a defamation case to speculate that the jury would or might have awarded the same damages on the other causes of action. See Bray versus Ford [[1896] AC 44], 48, 53.

In such circumstances, a trial judge should consider exercising the power conferred by [s (5)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s9.html) to require the jury to return separate verdicts. The taking of separate verdicts could avoid the necessity for a new trial if an appellate court should conclude that one or more of the disputed imputations was not capable of being conveyed.

Decision to strike out particulars of justification 
Channel 9 pleaded the defence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/da197499/s15.html) that P1, P2 and P3 based on the first and second telecasts were substantially true and related to matters of public interest. On the seventh day of the second trial the Judge struck out Channel 9's particulars of substantial truth to P1 and P2 leaving the substantial truth of contextual imputation P3 as its only defence to those imputations.

P1 and P2 refer to marriage ceremonies performed by the plaintiff which she knew to be illegal or invalid. However, as the Judge held, the marriages were valid, as a matter of law, and the illegality or invalidity of the ceremonies could not be proved. Channel 9 argued that the ceremonies were illegal or invalid because they were part of a conspiracy to commit offences against the
Migration Act, contrary to <case> of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/) . The submission was that the otherwise lawful ceremonies were overt acts in furtherance of the conspiracy and as such were lawful. The Court asked Mr
McClintock for authority for this proposition but none was ever produced.

Channel 9, in seeking to justify P1 and P2, undertook to establish that the ceremonies were illegal and invalid. It could not do this as a matter of law, and the decision to strike out its particulars of justification was correct.

Leave refused to plead defences of contextual truth 
During the argument on the plaintiff's application to strike out the particulars of justification, Mr McClintock foreshadowed an application for leave to amend to plead defences of contextual truth to P1 and P2. The decision to strike out the particulars of justification was given on 14
February. The foreshadowed application was made, and refused on 17 February.
The jury were discharged the following day. Channel 9 renewed its application and on 21 February the Judge again refused leave. The third trial began on 24
February. The proposed amendment would have added the following contextual imputations: "(i) That the plaintiff as a marriage celebrant performed marriage ceremonies which she knew were not genuine (in that the bride and groom did not have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the exclusion of all others voluntarily for life) but intended solely to obtain residence in
Australia for one of the parties; (D1) 
That the plaintiff as a marriage celebrant performed marriage ceremonies in which to her knowledge, those involved in the ceremony broke the law by going through marriages of convenience intending dishonestly to rely upon those marriages of convenience as genuine so as to obtain permanent residence in Australia for one of the parties". (D2) 
In his reasons for rejecting the first application, the Judge noted that
Channel 9 did not rely on any new facts in support of the proposed defences, but only those particularised under its defence of justification to P3. This, as he recognised, was a vital matter on the question of prejudice. He held that D1 and D2 were different in substance and differed from P3, but considered jointly contained nothing not already in P3.

The Judge said that "in reality the defendant is seeking to ... have two extra bites of the one cherry". Since its defence of justification to P3 included all the components of both D1 and D2, we take it his Honour meant that the defendant would have the opportunity to prove those components as part of its justification of P3, again as part of its justification for D1 and D2 severally, and again as part of its justification of D1 and D2 jointly. He held that this was "contrary to the purpose and the policy behind contextual imputations", as explained by Priestley JA in Perkins versus Harris (C/A, unrep, May 1995). He said that his analysis of the structure of P3, D1 and D2, severally and in combination, showed that there was nothing "new" in D1 and
D2. He continued: "The proposition that the defendant cannot use the mechanism of the contextual imputation to prove no more than what it seeks to prove by proving the truth of a plaintiff's imputation is still valid in my respectful view.

This is an attempt by a very ingenious means to `plead back' in the form of separate contextual imputations, an imputation pleaded by the plaintiff in any event being sought to be justified by the defendant. Further in the light of the way that the argument was presented on behalf of the defendant, it would appear that rather than have the proposed contextual imputations ...
considered distributively among (P1 and P2) it is sought to allocate them specifically as follows: (D2-P1 and D1-P2). This also goes against, in my opinion, that part of the judgment of Priestley JA at pages 12-13 where his
Honour deals with this area.

The difference in substance between (D1 and D2) is not determinative of whether or not leave should be granted. (D1 and D2) individually are less in their seriousness than (P3) and combined are not worse than (P3). For this reasons the defendant's application must fail".

He also rejected the application on discretionary grounds, relevant to that trial. He considered that Channel 9 would not be prejudiced by the refusal of leave, because all its evidence would be before the jury under its defence of justification to P3. He thought that the contextual imputations were "artificially contrived" and would be confusing to the jury.

In his second decision the Judge said that he had not been persuaded to change his ruling. He noted that Channel 9 again sought to correlate D1 ("marriages ... not genuine") with P2 ("ceremonies ... invalid"), and D2 ("broke the law ... marriages ... dishonestly ... obtain permanent residence") with P1 ("ceremonies ... illegal"). He concluded: "I cannot hold that any such correlation is available by reference to the language of the plaintiff's imputations at all. The defendant's case on proposed (D1 and D2), as I have ruled, is the same as its [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s15.html) plea to (P3) and in the posited situation to which Mr McClintock referred its case on truth would and could stay or go only with (P3)".

The significant finding in the earlier decision was that Channel 9 did not rely on any new facts in support of the proposed defences. There was no suggestion that allowance of the amendment would have caused an adjournment.
The position on the renewed application was even clearer because it was refused before the third trial commenced. SCR [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/index.html#p20) r 1 (2) provides: "All necessary amendments shall be made for the purpose of determining the real questions raised by or otherwise depending on the proceedings, ...".

This Court said in Commonwealth versus McLean [(1996) 41 NSWLR 389] at 396: "The Court has a duty to allow proper amendments and a party has a correlative right although this can be lost through delay or neglect where serious injustice would be occasioned to the opposite party by the amendment".

This Court referred to Shannon versus Lee Chun <case>; [(1912) 15 CLR 257] at 261-2 where Barton J approved the following statement by
Bowen LJ: "... as soon as it appears that the way in which a party has framed his case will not lead to a decision of the real matter in controversy, it is as much a matter of right on his part to have it corrected, if it can be done without injustice, as anything else in the case is a matter of right ...

The question seems to me to be this, can you by the imposition of any terms place the other side in as good a position for the purpose of having the question of right determined as they were in at the time when the mistake of judgment was committed?" 
In the same case Isaacs J said at 265-6: "There is not only a power, but even an imperative duty cast ... on the Court, to let no formality stand in the way of solid justice. The Court is directed to make every amendment, and at all times, so as to enable it to do what is right between the parties, and in the fairest and fullest manner possible to arrive at a determination of the substantial matter in dispute ... Although it may be that the plaintiff was lax or forgetful in not putting his pleading in the form in which it should have been originally, if any harm arising from that can be compensated for by costs, there is no reason for not allowing him to repair the error. ... The question therefore, in this case is, would the defendant be so prejudiced by this amendment that he would not have justice done?" 
These principles were endorsed in Queensland versus J L Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1997) 189 CLR 146], 153, in the joint judgment of Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ, where the following passage from Clough versus Frog [(1974) 48 ALJR 481], 482 was quoted with approval: "As the defence, if established, would be a complete answer in either action, the amendments sought should have been allowed unless it appeared that injustice would thereby have been occasioned to the respondent, there being nothing to suggest fraud or improper concealment of the defence on the part of the appellants. With (one) exception ... the matters relied upon by the respondent in opposition to the amendment sought go at the most to delay and irregularity only, matters which are relevant to costs but do not constitute injustice to the respondent in the sense in which that expression is used".

Channel 9's application was made late in the litigation, but so was the plaintiff's successful application to strike out the particulars of justification to P1 and P2. If the defence of the contextual truth of P3 failed, Channel 9 had no other defence to P1 and P2. It was a serious matter for leave to be refused since refusal would be final and would deprive Channel of the opportunity of litigating the issues raised by the proposed defences.

It is evident that the Judge thought that the amendment should be refused because D1 and D2 failed to satisfy the legal requirements for this defence established by this Court in Waterhouse versus Hickie [(1995) Aust Torts Reports -347] and Perkins versus Harris (u/r, 26 May 1995).

In Waterhouse versus Hickie at 62493-4, Priestley JA adopted the analysis of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16.html) established by Hunt J in Jackson versus John Fairfax & Sons Ltd [(1981) 1
NSWLR 36] and Hepburn versus TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd [(1984) 1 NSWLR ]
and identified the issues of law which arise: "(1) Does the defendant's contextual imputation (or the combined effect of those contextual imputations where more than one, and where appropriate to be so combined) differ in substance from the plaintiff's imputations to which it is or they are pleaded as a defence? 
Is the defendant's contextual imputation (or the combined effect of those contextual imputations where more than one, and where appropriate to be so combined) capable of being conveyed by the matter complained at the same time as and in addition to the plaintiff's imputation to which it is or they are pleaded as a defence? 
Is the nature of the defendant's contextual imputation (or the combined effect of those contextual imputations where more than one, and where appropriate to be so combined) such that its or their substantial truth is capable of being rationally considered by the jury as so affecting the plaintiff's reputation that the plaintiff's imputation to which it is or they are pleaded did not further injure that reputation? 
Is there evidence upon which the jury could find that the contextual imputation is substantially true? 
Does the contextual imputation relate to a matter of public interest or was it published under qualified privilege?" 
D1 and D2 satisfied the first of these tests when considered severally in relation to P2 and P1, and the contrary was not argued. The relevance of their combined effect will be considered subsequently, but it was never suggested that they could be a defence to P3. The Judge found, and it was common ground, that D1 and D2 contained nothing that was not already in P3. P1 and P2 were capable of being conveyed by the first telecast and P1 by the second in each case in addition to P3. It follows that D1 and D2, which were included in P3, were also capable of being conveyed by the first telecast in addition to P1 and P2 and by the second in addition to P1, and the second test was also satisfied.

We see no difficulty with the third test when assessing D1 against P2 and D2 against P1. D1 ("marriages ... not genuine") in our judgment was capable of being considered by the jury as having the required effect in relation to P2 ("ceremonies ... invalid"), and likewise D2 ("broke the law ... marriages ...
dishonestly ... obtain permanent residence") in relation to P1 ("ceremonies ... illegal"). It is still necessary to consider the combined effect of D1 and
D2.

The fourth test requires consideration of the evidence and did not fall for consideration on the application for leave to amend, and there was no dispute that the contextual imputations related to matters of public interest.

The Judge was concerned with the combined effect of D1 and D2 in relation to
P3, and this requires consideration of the reference in the first three tests to the combined effect of multiple contextual imputations "where appropriate to be so combined". The existing defence did not attempt to plead an imputation back as a defence to itself. Such an attempt, as Hunt J said in
Hepburn versus TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd [(1984) 1 NSWLR 386] at 399, "could not possibly succeed". But as Priestley JA said in Waterhouse versus Hickie at 62495: "... it will often be more convenient for all the contextual imputations to be included in the one paragraph ... so long as it is understood that the paragraph must be read distributively in regard to each of the plaintiff's imputations, and that the defendants cannot plead back the plaintiff's imputation in a [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16.html) defence to that imputation ...".

Priestley JA did not consider when it would be "appropriate" to consider the combined effect of contractual imputations. The necessary analysis is to be found in Hepburn versus TCN Channel 9 Pty Ltd at 395-407. Hunt J held that [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s16.html) (c) enabled the jury to consider the combined effect of all the contextual imputations found to have been conveyed and to be substantially true because :
 "It does not ... accord with either commonsense or reality if the jury is to be restricted to weighing or measuring each of (the) contextual imputations separately against the ... imputation of the plaintiff which cannot be established as being true, without having regard to the combined effect of those ... imputations". (emphasis supplied) 
His Honour thus accepted that the jury would be entitled to weigh each contextual imputation separately against a plaintiff's imputation but could also weigh their combined effect. He considered when combination would be appropriate and concluded (399): "... where the defendant has taken advantage of his entitlement to plead contextual imputations which are either contradictory or but different gradations of seriousness of the same basic assertion, he obviously will not be entitled to ask the jury to consider the combined effect of all of his contextual imputations when weighing or measuring his contextual imputations against the plaintiff's imputation to which they are pleaded. Similarly when the issue of law arises with which I am presently concerned, it will be necessary for the defendant to nominate which of the truly alternative imputations he wishes to have considered together ...".

A defendant's ability to combine contextual imputations is therefore subject to legal restrictions and a trial judge may have to rule on whether particular combinations are permissible. A single contextual imputation pleaded to an imputation must differ in substance from it (Hepburn at 399, Jackson versus John
Fairfax & Sons Ltd at 39-40), but where a defendant is entitled to rely on the combined effect of more than one contextual imputation, the only requirement is that their combined effect should differ in substance from the imputation to which they are pleaded (Hepburn at 399). A defendant is thus entitled to combine contextual imputations, within limits, but is entitled to have them considered severally, provided they differ from the imputation to which they are pleaded.

His Honour's reasons reveal a concern about the combined effect of D1 and D2 in relation to P3 which in his view required the amendment to be refused.
Channel 9 may not have been entitled to have the jury consider a defence of contextual truth to P3 based on a combination of D1 and D2. If, as the Judge thought (1/297), D1 and D2 together were "no more than" P3, the combination would duplicate the defence of justification and could have been withdrawn from the jury in relation to P3. If the combination did not include all elements of P3, the third test of Priestley JA in Waterhouse versus Hickie would not be satisfied, and again the Judge would have been entitled to withdraw the combination from the jury in relation to P3.

His Honour's remarks about two extra bites of the one cherry are difficult to understand, as is his reference to the three opportunities for the defendant to prove the truth of the common elements of D1, D2 and P3. Channel 9 was not entitled to have the same evidence admitted three times, but a litigant may rely on evidence on more than one issue.

His Honour considered that the proposed defence was "contrary to the purpose and policy behind contextual imputations". He added that his analysis of P3 and D1 and D2, "severally and in combination", demonstrated that there was "no difference in substance". We are prepared to assume that the combination did not differ in substance from P3, but each considered separately clearly did.
D1 ("ceremonies ... not genuine") does not include the elements in P3 of "for profit", "arranged" (in addition to perform), "illegal", and "racket". D2 ("ceremonies ... broke the law") does not include the elements of "for profit", "arranged" and "racket". The Judge so held. (1/296) The elements not included were significant, and their existence was strongly contested on the defence of justification to P3. His Honour reiterated that there was "nothing new" in D1 and D2 and "nothing more serious than what presently exists on the record in (P3). The proposition that the defendant cannot use the mechanism of the contextual imputation to prove no more than what it seeks to prove by proving the truth of a plaintiff's imputation is still valid ...".
(emphasis supplied) 
There were good reasons for not allowing a defence of contextual truth based on D1 and D2 to be considered by the jury in relation to P3. However, with respect, his Honour did not address the relevance of D1 and D2 considered severally or in combination in relation to P1 and P2. Channel 9's proposed defence must be read distributively, as Priestley JA explained, and the fact that it could not succeed in relation to one imputation was no reason for rejecting it in relation to others. Allowance of the amendment would not have obliged the Judge to leave the combination to the jury in relation to P3 because it was not available for this purpose.

The Judge referred to pp 12/13 of the judgment of Priestley JA in Perkins v
Harris, but these pages dealt with the principle that an imputation cannot be pleaded back to a cause of action on that imputation and the consequent need to give a distributive construction to this defence. There is nothing in these pages which denies Channel 9 the right to plead D1 and D2 jointly and severally in answer to P1 and P2. His Honour did not appear to consider the proposed defence except in relation to P3.

The Judge's reasons for his second decision added little to his earlier reasons. He concluded by referring to Channel 9's attempt to "correlate" D1 with P2, and D2 with P1, and said: "I cannot hold that any such correlation is available by reference to the language of the plaintiff's imputations at all. The defendant's case on proposed (D1 and D2), as I have ruled, is the same as its [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ca191482/s15.html) plea to (P3) and ... its case on truth would and could stay or go only with (P3)".

We presume the references to correlation reflect the use of this expression by
Mr McClintock in argument. If so it can only have referred to the third of the issues identified by Priestley JA in Waterhouse versus Hickie which requires the
Court to assess the relative impact of the plaintiff's and defendant's imputations. This had earlier been described by Hunt J in Hepburn at 399 as requiring the jury to "weigh or measure" the contextual imputations against the plaintiff's imputation to which it or they were pleaded.

Neither the third issue, nor the requirement for a jury to weigh or measure the imputations, involved correlation "by reference to the language of the plaintiff's imputations". The point may be illustrated by the example given by
Hunt J in Hepburn at 397 where a plaintiff was described as a blackmailer, liar, swindler, and illegal immigrant. The former descriptions would be contextual to an imputation that the plaintiff was an illegal immigrant, and if the former were true, a jury could be expected to find that they outweighed the impact of the latter. However there is nothing resembling correlation in the language of those imputations. The question of correlation raised a false issue and its absence provided no reason for refusing the amendment.

There being no legal objection to the proposed contextual imputations, the finding that Channel 9 did not rely on any new facts to support them was a compelling reason for allowing the amendment. An amendment which reformulates a claim or defence within a cause of action or defence which has already been pleaded, based on evidence that has been or will be adduced, should ordinarily be allowed in order to raise the real questions at issue between the parties.
Such an amendment should be allowed even after the evidence had closed. This is not a new principle, as can be seen from Clough versus London & NW Railway
Co [(1871) LR 7 Ex 26], 30 and it was emphatically endorsed by Stephen, Mason and Jacobs JJ in Leotta versus Public Transport Commission [(1976) 50 ALJR ]
at 668, and by this Court in Commonwealth versus McLean [(1996) 41 NSWLR ]
at 397-8.

The Judge held that Channel 9 could not be prejudiced by the refusal of leave but it clearly was. It was left with its justification of P3 as its only defence to P1 and P2, and if the jury found that those imputations were conveyed and rejected the defence of justification, Channel 9 would have no defence. This was likely to occasion serious prejudice to Channel 9. Although it failed to justify P3, it may have succeeded in establishing the substantial truth of either or both of D1 and D2.

We are satisfied that the Judge's exercise of discretion in his second decision refusing Channel 9 leave to amend seriously miscarried, and the amendment should have been allowed. This makes a fourth trial inevitable. We have considered but rejected Mr Shand's submission that the Court, in the exercise of its discretion, should not order a new trial. We have done this because we cannot conclude that there has been no "substantial wrong or miscarriage". Compare Burchett versus Kane [(1980) 2 NSWLR 266] CA.

Challenge to Judge's directions 
In ground 38 of the notice of appeal, Channel 9 alleged error in the refusal of the Judge to direct the jury that they could only find that P1 and P2 were conveyed "if they were satisfied that the matter complained of referred to illegality and invalidity under the Marriage Act". The Judge said to the jury: "Your task is to determine whether or not the programs mean (P1) and/or (P2) neither of which refer to the Marriage Act. They are quite clear in their terms in relation to marriage ceremonies she knew to be illegal and marriage ceremonies she knew to be invalid. Do the programs say either of those two things?" 
A redirection was refused. Mr McClintock argued that this direction was inconsistent with the Judge's decision to strike out the particulars of justification. They were struck out because the ceremonies were lawful and valid, and the imputations could not be justified. The meaning of the imputations was a question of law for the Judge. Singleton versus Ffrench [(1986) NSWLR 425], 428, 435. The direction sought assumed that the imputations were limited to illegality and invalidity derived from the Marriage Act, but that does not appear from their language, and there was no basis for that construction. There was no such inconsistency as alleged and this ground of appeal fails.

Ground 43 alleged error in the Judge's direction that the defence of justification to P3 required Channel 9 to prove "that the respondent was `a racketeer' and `profiteer'." Mr Shand made this submission to the jury more than once in his final address, and the Judge referred to these submissions in his summing-up using the words complained of and "profiteering racketeer" and "profiteering" as well. Redirection was refused. Given that P3, with its references to "racket" and "profit" was capable of being conveyed, it was neither improper nor inappropriate for Mr Shand, in a hard fought case, to use the terms he did in his final address.

Rackets may take many forms, and the plaintiff's counsel could not rely on a more defamatory shade of meaning for the imputation when arguing against a finding that it was true without being stuck with the same shade of meaning when arguing that the imputation, so understood, was conveyed. A more defamatory shade of meaning would be harder to justify but may not be conveyed. A less defamatory meaning would be easier to justify but more likely to be conveyed. The different shades of meaning carried risks and advantages for both parties. This ground of appeal also fails.

Ground 44 alleged error in the Judge's refusal to direct the jury "that it was relevant on the question of damages that the plaintiff was not identified by name in the 30 November 1990 program and that they could only award damages in respect of publication to such people as knew the plaintiff or her appearance". The Judge said: " ... it was open to the defendant's counsel in his address to the jury on the issue of damages to draw any such matter to their attention as a limiting matter and I do not see it my function to so direct the jury and I decline to do so".

The jury were directed to assess the damages flowing from the imputations conveyed by each telecast. This required them, as a matter of common sense, to assess the extent of the publication, and the injury to the plaintiff's reputation. The most that could be said was that the jury were inadequately instructed on a matter of fact, but this is rarely a ground for a new trial.
See Manning versus Bernard Manning & Co Pty Ltd <case>; [(1960) 101 CLR 345], 351; General Motors-Holdens Pty Ltd versus Moularas <case>; [(1964) 111 CLR 234], 255, 259. This ground also fails.

Ground 47 alleges that the damages of $175,000 awarded by the jury for the second telecast were so unreasonable as to call for a new trial, limited to damages, on this part of the case. It is not necessary to consider this.

Discharge of jury during second trial 
On 18 February 1997 Levine J discharged the jury on the twelfth day of the second trial. The application for discharge was based on questions in the cross-examination of the plaintiff by Mr McClintock. The plaintiff was asked whether she knew Pearl Poh and knew her as an associate of Virginia
Hardy in 1989. She said, "I'm not sure". She denied that in 1989 she knew that
Miss Xiang (Zeang) was in the business of arranging sham marriages for immigration purposes (T328-9). She was shown her 1990 diary (produced on discovery), and asked about the "whitening out" of various entries for
January. She was asked about an entry for 6 pm on 24 January about "Gary/Pearl" which had not been whited out. She thought they were a couple she married on the 28th (T331).

It was suggested that she whited out entries because she thought they might be used adversely to her interests (T332). She was then asked further questions about the visible entry "Gary/Pearl" (T332-3). The cross-examination that day concluded with questions about the whitening out of other entries, and the obliteration of one entry with blue/black ink. The jury were then released.

After they had gone Mr Shand referred (T336) to the fact that Pearl Poh and
Angela Kain, both mentioned in the cross-examination, had not been particularised by Channel 9. It turned out that Angela Kain had been particularised. Mr McClintock said that Pearl Poh was an employee of Virginia
Hardy (also said to have been engaged in arranging sham marriages for immigration purposes). His Honour said, "One would have expected her name to have appeared". Mr McClintock agreed and said that the evidence had not been objected to. He also said that there was a question whether the evidence about
Pearl Poh "goes anywhere".

Mr Shand responded that he had warned Mr McClintock when Pearl Poh's name was first mentioned that she may not have been included in Channel 9's particulars. He said that he would seek instructions on whether to apply for a discharge.

The application was made the following day on the ground that "Pearl Poh has never figured in any particulars at all" (T338). The Judge said, "As far as I was concerned it was just another name". Mr Shand addressed relying on what he said was the defendant's attitude "of ignoring particulars" and seeking to conduct its case "outside the particulars". The application was also based on the cross-examination as to Janice Kent and Angela Kain, said to have been referred to in whited out entries in the diary. (T341-2) 
Mr McClintock submitted that the cross-examination as to the whitening out was relevant to establish admissions by conduct and went to the plaintiff's credit, "to show that she was the sort of person who would wilfully alter documents to obscure their true effect" (T343). He submitted that such cross- examination did not have to be particularised, that the questions as to Pearl
Poh had not occasioned any prejudice, and any prejudice was curable. (T343-4).

In reply Mr Shand took issue with the suggestion that the plaintiff could be cross-examined as to credit outside the particulars of justification (T345).
He continued (T346-7): "... for cross-examination to be conducted on matters outside those particularised is to burden the plaintiff's case with material that should not be ventilated in this Court, material that the plaintiff had proper cause not to expect to be ventilated, material that is only introduced by my learned friend because he regards it ... as adverse to the plaintiff's case otherwise he would not introduce it. Prejudice speaks for itself ... ".

Mr Shand refined his proposition to make it clear that his objection related to cross-examination as to matters of credit "though in fact they ... relate to matters (which) ... go to an issue and should have been particularised but have not". (T347) 
The Judge commenced his reasons for judgment by noting that "the argument was about the mere mention of one name, Pearl Poh that hitherto has not been mentioned ... in any communication between the parties". (2/313) He noted that this arose in the context of the whited out entries (although Pearl had not been whited out). (2/314).

He said that the mere mention of Pearl Poh "does not immediately strike one as a profound departure warranting" a discharge (2/315), but thought that the reasons of Abadee J for discharging the first jury made a difference. Abadee J criticised Channel 9's attempt to rely upon particulars elicited in cross- examination "in support of its defence of truth and justification". The Judge referred to the further difficulties which had arisen in the second trial as a result of inadequate and incomplete particulars of justification and continued (2/318): "What was not articulated by Mr Shand in his submissions ... was any objection to the effect `we have had no particulars that the whitening out process in the diary would be relied upon in any way in support of the defence of justification' that position was not taken.

The nub of the matter, however, does lie, I have concluded, in that component of Mr Shand's submissions reflected in the proposition that the defendant has conducted itself in the same way as it did before Abadee J. The extracts from his Honour's reasons are pertinent whilst not ultimately ruling on it in the context of what his Honour was dealing with, his Honour was clearly concerned with the situation to which I myself had adverted at (1/250-9) of the device of cross-examination as to credit being used to introduce material to found submissions to the jury on matters of fact in support of a plea of justification, which matters have hitherto not been particularised; and whilst
Mr Shand did not in terms take the point to which I have referred ... his references to the defendant's conduct in the first trial and the reminder of what I had remarked in passing before, highlight the peril that can arise by an attempt to use cross-examination, clothed in a submission that it relates to credit, to provide material for an unparticularised case on justification".

He said that "the device of using cross-examination as to credit cannot be exploited to present an unparticularised case of justification" (319) and thought the plaintiff would have been entitled to a particular "to the effect that the plaintiff whited out entries in her diary for 1990", as conduct to be relied upon by the defendant in support of the proposition that she knew of the matters in P3 (321).

He held that the prejudice which required the discharge of the jury included the repetition of conduct which had led to the discharge of the first jury, and the existence of material before the jury "available for the plea of justification". This could not be cured by directions to the jury although the mere mention of the name of Pearl Poh "might be considered curable because of its insignificance". (322) The outcome was "outrageous". (323) 
The Judge referred more than once in the course of his decision to the principle that a defendant cannot prove an unparticularised defence of justification by cross-examination of witnesses, including the plaintiff, in the plaintiff's case. The scope of this principle is fundamental to this part of the appeal, and is of considerable importance in libel actions.

In England truth is a defence which must be specially pleaded. Where it has not been pleaded, evidence of truth is not admissible in mitigation of damages, either in the defendant's own case, or in the cross-examination of witnesses in the plaintiff's case. Watt versus Watt [[1905] AC 115], 118 per Lord
Halsbury; Hobbs versus Tinling [[1929] 2 KB 1] CA, 18, 43, 50;
Plato Films Ltd versus Speidel [[1961] AC 1090], 1133-4. The defendant may prove that the plaintiff had a bad reputation before the libel to mitigate damages (Scott versus Sampson [(1882) 8 QBD 491]; Hobbs v
Tinling 17, 46, 50; Plato Films Ltd versus Speidel) but may not lead evidence of particular facts either to establish this or that the plaintiff's good reputation was undeserved and cannot use cross-examination for those purposes either. On the same principle the plaintiff cannot lead evidence-in-chief or in cross-examination to establish particular facts to support his good reputation. Hobbs versus Tinling 39.

Truth has not been a defence in this State since well before the Defamation
Act 1912 . A defendant, as currently provided in <case>, must also establish that publication of the truth was for the public benefit. It was not clear in this State until Cohen versus Mirror Newspapers Ltd [(1971) 1 NSWLR 623] CA that a defendant could not prove truth in mitigation of damages. That decision was overruled by <case> of the 1974 Act.

SCR Pt 67, r 18 (2) provides that a defendant who intends to make a case in mitigation of damages by reference to the reputation of the plaintiff must give particulars of the facts and matters on which he relies, and r 18 (3) provides that a defendant who intends to show, in mitigation of damages, that any imputation complained of was a matter of substantial truth, must give particulars identifying that imputation and stating that intention. Rule 18 requires the particulars in each case to be set out in the defence or in a separate document filed and served with the defence. Rule 18 (5) provides that a defendant need not include particulars of the facts and matters on which it relies to establish truth, but such particulars may be ordered under r 18 (6).

The Judge considered that cross-examination as to credit on unparticularised matters relevant to justification was not permitted. He did not refer to any authority directly in point and in this Court Mr Shand was not able to do so either. The question has been considered in a number of cases and it is convenient to start with Hobbs versus Tinling (above). At 18-19 Scrutton LJ said: "When a witness has given evidence material to the issues in the case you can cross-examine him on matters not directly material to the case in order to ask the jury to infer from his answers that he is not worthy of belief, not a credible person ... This is cross-examination as to his credibility, commonly called cross-examination to credit. But as it is on matters not directly material to the case, the party cross-examining is not allowed to call evidence-in-chief to contradict his answers".
 (emphasis supplied) 
He later said (21) that evidence obtained in cross-examination did not entitle the defendant to justify where this had not been pleaded and the defendant could not cross-examine: " ... as to other specific facts in the plaintiff's life to mitigate damages, contrary to the ruling in Scott versus Sampson. The defendant would, however, be entitled to cross-examine on such facts to prove that the witness was not a credible person, and to employ that proof of unreliability to the evidence he had given in chief ". (emphasis supplied) 
The other members of the Court were of the same opinion. See per Greer LJ at , and per Sankey LJ at 49. Such cross-examination is admissible for only one purpose, and may not be used for any other. This gives rise to difficulties, as Greer LJ said (40): "... under the circumstances, it would have been difficult for any jury to exclude from their consideration in estimating the damages any admission that he made in cross-examination, but the jury should have been told that they ought, as far as possible to do so".

Sankey LJ at 49-50 was to the same effect: "Dealing with the cross-examination of the plaintiff, I am of opinion that it was legitimate in so far as it purports to be a cross-examination as to credit, but great care has to be taken to see that a jury appreciates, though it may be a difficult task for them, that answers given to such a cross- examination may not be relevant upon the issue of mitigation of damages".

These judgments do not establish a different principle for cross-examination as to credit on matters related to the libel. Scrutton LJ appeared to distinguish between cross-examination as to credit generally and cross- examination as to specific facts to the same effect as the libel (18, 19, 20).
However his remarks were directed to the restrictions on the use of cross- examination as to credit where it related to the subject matter of the libel, not to any restrictions on the cross-examination itself (21).

The same principles were applied in decisions of our Full Court. In Mutch v
Sleeman <case>; [(1928) 29 SR 125], -5 Ferguson J said: "It is clear law that neither under the plea of justification nor in mitigation of damages are the defendants entitled to give evidence of facts to the plaintiff's discredit other than those stated in the libel: Scott v
Sampson ... It is immaterial whether the evidence is sought to be given by the defendants' own witnesses or to be elicited from the plaintiff or his witnesses on cross-examination. Inadmissible evidence is not made admissible merely by endeavouring to obtain it from the other side.

The rule so stated does not exclude evidence of the plaintiff's bad reputation as distinguished from his bad conduct ... Again, the plaintiff, if he goes into the witness box, is liable, in common with every other witness, to be asked in cross-examination questions tending to discredit him as a witness.
But this cross-examination as to credit is subject in his case, as in the case of every other witness, to the discretion of the judge ... Its justification is that it may elicit facts tending to show that his evidence is not worthy of belief. Except in so far as it can be so justified, it may properly be disallowed. The nature of the questions which may be asked is not affected either by the nature of the action or by the fact that the witness is a party to it. The plaintiff in a libel action is not liable to be asked upon cross- examination to credit any question which might not be put to him if he were a disinterested witness in an action for goods sold and delivered".

See also Maling versus S Bennett Ltd <case>; [(1928) 29 SR 280],
In Judd versus Sun Newspapers Ltd <case>; [(1930) 30 SR 294], -2, Harvey CJinEq said: "That a jury may be improperly influenced on the question of damages by answers going only to credibility is an evil unavoidable in cases heard before a jury. The only safeguard the plaintiff has is the summing-up of the judge who will always stress this point to the jury, and also a strict use of the right given by the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) to disallow questions which do not really bear upon the credibility of the witness ...
Although the plaintiff's counsel was not ... entitled to object to his client being cross-examined on credit, answers as to credit could not be considered in mitigation of damages".

See also per Halse-Rogers J at 314-5, who added at 316: "Cross-examination as to credit has one legitimate object only, and that is to cut away the effect of the evidence given by the plaintiff, to induce the jury to refuse to accept it - in other words, to destroy it. In a case where there has been such cross-examination, it is the duty of the judge to warn the jury that the answers given by the plaintiff are not to be taken into account in mitigation of damages, but must only be used as a test as to their acceptance of testimony. It is only as to truthfulness that the character of the plaintiff comes into question".

See also Horne versus Milne [(1881) 7 VLR 296] FC, and
Peatling versus Watson <case>; [(1909) VLR 198] FC, 203-4.

In Lang versus Beardsmore [(1968) 2 NSWLR 673], 686-7,
Walsh JA said: "It was said that, in the absence of a plea of justification, the defendant cannot, in order to mitigate damages, produce evidence of facts tending to prove the truth of a libel and likewise he cannot achieve the same purpose by cross-examination. Although a plaintiff may be cross-examined as to credit upon matters `outside' the libel, it was submitted he cannot be cross-examined even as to credit on any matter which is so related to the libel that it tends towards a justification of it.

If one assumes that in New South Wales the English rule is applicable which prohibits the giving of evidence in mitigation of damages which tends towards a justification of a libel where justification is not pleaded ... the consequence does not follow that a plaintiff cannot be asked questions, as bearing on his credit, about convictions for crimes involving dishonesty.
There is a clear distinction between evidence which a defendant seeks to use to mitigate damages, that is, to be used as evidence to be weighed by the jury in determining one of the questions which it has to decide, and evidence which is limited to the credit to be given to the testimony of the plaintiff. This was the distinction which the learned judge explained to the jury ...
Notwithstanding some observations made in Hobbs versus Tinling ... I am of opinion that the authorities do not warrant the conclusion that the learned judge was in error in regarding the question as to the convictions as being admissible as going to the plaintiff's credit. In my opinion his conclusion on this question was the correct one, being in accordance with the authorities to which he referred".

Wallace P agreed (674). The observations in Hobbs versus Tinling, to which Walsh
JA referred, were those by Scrutton LJ where he appeared to distinguish between cross-examination as to credit generally, and cross-examination as to specific facts to the same effect as the libel. Lang versus Beardsmore therefore establishes that cross-examination as to credit is not restricted to facts outside the libel.

There is nothing in Plato Films Ltd versus Speidel [[1961] AC 1090] which entitles this Court to re-open the questions decided in these cases. See per Viscount
Simonds at 1125, Lord Radcliffe at 1130, and Lord Morris at 1147. At 1143 Lord
Denning said: "The only legitimate purpose of cross-examination to credit is to damage or destroy the plaintiff's credibility ... if the purpose of the cross- examination is to introduce illegitimately specific instances of misconduct - which cannot be legitimately put in evidence - then it should be discouraged.
It is not good for the law that the judge admit a `roving' cross-examination to credit and then go on to tell the jury to ignore it when they come to assess damages, knowing that it is an impossible thing to ask them to do.
Better not to have it introduced at all. Better to keep to general evidence of bad character ...".

The discretion to limit cross-examination as to credit, which at the time of
Lang versus Beardsmore was based on <case> of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ea189880/) , is now governed by <case> of the 1995 Act, and the discretions conferred by ss 135 and
These provisions do not alter the basis on which cross-examination as to credit has hitherto been allowed in libel actions, although the discretion may have been widened. It is not necessary to consider this because the relevant questions were not objected to.

In our judgment therefore Mr McClintock was entitled to cross-examine the plaintiff as to credit on matters which might have been, but were not, particularised under the defence of justification. However the evidence so obtained would be relevant only to the plaintiff's credibility and the defendant could not lead evidence to contradict the plaintiff's answers. The
Judge would also have been bound, in his summing-up, and earlier if necessary, to direct the jury that they were not entitled to use such cross-examination for any other purpose and, if appropriate, why it would be unfair for them to do so.

It is not clear that the cross-examination as to Pearl Poh was relevant to the plaintiff's credit, but Mr Shand did not argue that it was not, and the Judge made no finding. On the other hand, cross-examination about the whitening out of entries in the diary could obviously be relevant to credit and the contrary was not argued. If the jury found that the whited out entries tended to establish the truth of one or more of the elements of P3, that would be relevant to justification, and the whitening out would be an admission by conduct that the plaintiff realised this. See Allen versus Tobias <case>; [(1955) 98 CLR 367], 375.

The Judge held that Channel 9's intention to use the whited out entries in the diary for this purpose should have been particularised and this needs to be examined. The proper function of particulars is to limit the issues under the pleadings and inform the opposite party of the case he has to meet. In general a party providing particulars need not disclose the evidence on which he relies, but particulars may have this effect. Particulars of a written contract will identify the documents relied upon, and particulars of an oral contract will identify the time, place and parties to be proved in evidence.
In R versus The Associated Northern Collieries <case>; [(1910) 11 CLR 738], 740-1, Isaacs J said: "I take the fundamental principle to be that the opposite party shall always be fairly apprised of the nature of the case he is called upon to meet, shall be placed in possession of its broad outlines and the constitutive facts which are said to raise his legal liability. He is to receive sufficient information to ensure a fair trial and to guard against what the law terms `surprise', but he is not entitled to be told the mode by which the case is to be proved against him".

In Bailey versus F C T <case>; [(1977) 136 CLR 214], 220 Mason J said: "An order for particulars does no more than require the Commissioner to furnish in advance of the hearing particulars of the case which he intends to present in court. Such an order does not require the Commissioner to disclose the evidence by which he proposes to support his case ... ".

The scope of particulars in a defamation case was considered by Hunt J in
Sims versus Wran [(1984) 1 NSWLR 317], 321-2: "There is often a fine line between giving particulars of the case which a party proposes to make and disclosing the evidence by which that case is to be proved. It all depends upon what is necessary to guard the other party against surprise. If the other party cannot otherwise be so guarded, it may sometimes be necessary for a party to disclose his evidence, or at least a broad outline of it. The starting point is what is necessary to guard the other party against surprise; the starting point is not what can be said without disclosing the evidence to be led. It is however important to emphasise that, ordinarily speaking, particulars are concerned with the nature of the case which is to be made by way of evidence ...".

See also Pinson versus Lloyds Bank [[1941] 2 KB 72] CA, 75.

Channel 9 particularised the sham marriages which it alleged the plaintiff knowingly assisted to arrange and perform as part of the racket. A bare list would not be enough, unless Channel 9 only intended to rely upon inferences from the sheer volume of "mixed" marriages. If it intended to rely upon additional facts such as the sources of business for these "mixed" marriages, this would have to be particularised. However it did not have to give particulars of its allegation that the plaintiff acted "knowingly". SCR Pt 16 r 3 provides: "(1) A party pleading any condition of mind shall give particulars of the facts on which he relies.

In sub rule (1) `condition of mind' ... does not include knowledge".

Thus while particulars have to be given of an allegation that a party "ought to have known" something, there is no need to particularise an allegation that he actually knew it. See Fox versus H. Wood (Harrow) Ltd [[1963] 2 QB 601] CA. An allegation that the plaintiff knew Pearl Poh would not need to be particularised, but if she was involved in the "racket" and was acquainted with the plaintiff those matters would need to be particularised. If it was alleged that she was a source of "clients" and paid monies to the plaintiff which represented more than normal marriage celebrant fees, these facts would also have to be particularised. However the cross-examination was limited to the plaintiff's knowledge of Pearl Poh, and the latter's association with
Virginia Hardy, and these matters did not have to be particularised.

There was no need to particularise the use which Channel 9 intended to make of the diary. It not a material fact but a piece of evidence. The plaintiff's purpose in whitening out entries could be relevant in showing their materiality, her awareness of this, and her desire to conceal them. These matters, insofar as they related to the plaintiff's knowledge, did not have to be particularised.

The whited out entries, and cross-examination, could also provide evidence relating to the persons or events referred to. This would only be evidence going to an issue if the subject matter had been particularised. This may have been done by particularising the relevant marriage, or by particularising persons such as Virginia Hardy, her alleged involvement in the racket, and the nature of her association with the plaintiff. Once this had been done there was no need for Channel 9 to give particulars of the evidence on which it would rely to establish these matters, including the diary and cross- examination on it. The cross-examination on the whited out entries was perfectly proper.

The cross-examination about Pearl Poh, as far as it went, without prior particulars, did not involve technical misconduct of the kind which might justify a discharge. In any event, as the Judge said more than once, it did not cause any prejudice to the plaintiff. There was no need to give any special directions to the jury, and the matter could have been allowed to rest. The cross-examination as to the whited out entries was relevant and potentially adverse but called for no action because it was perfectly proper.

Even if both grounds relied upon by the Judge had been sustainable the situation did not call for a discharge. There was no need for any immediate direction about Pearl Poh, and if her name was not mentioned again, in all probability the jury would forget her.

The Judge could have invited argument, in the absence of the jury, on whether he should direct that there be no further cross-examination on the whited out entries. This should have demonstrated that the cross-examination should be allowed to continue. Even if the Judge ruled to the contrary, his ruling would have been respected and the earlier cross-examination would have been ignored.
This would have ensured that in all probability the jury did not act on it in reaching their verdict.

The principles governing the exercise by a trial judge of his discretion to discharge a jury, and its appellate review, were considered in Morgan versus John
Fairfax & Sons Ltd [(1988) 13 NSWLR 208] and don't require restatement. As Clarke JA said at 239, with the concurrence of Kirby P and Samuels JA: "... the consequences of discharging a jury towards the end of a lengthy trial are so serious that, in my opinion, the course should only be adopted in rare cases where irremediable prejudice has been caused".

A decision to discharge the jury in the second trial on the twelfth day should only have been reached after the most anxious consideration of other courses open to the Judge for curing or mitigating any prejudice to the plaintiff. An exploration of the alternative courses open to the Judge would soon have demonstrated that the extreme course of a discharge was not necessary.

The Judge's decision to discharge the jury was thus vitiated by significant errors of principle. This Court, of course, has had the benefit of fuller argument and time for reflection which was denied to the Judge. Moreover this trial had previously been interrupted on a number of occasions because of difficulties created by inadequate particulars of justification and applications for their enlargement. These continuing difficulties affected the
Judge's decision but they occurred in the absence of the jury and provided no basis for a discharge. Leave to appeal from the order discharging the second jury should be granted, the appeal allowed, and the order for costs made by the Judge set aside.

This case shows how easy it is for the trial of a libel action to miscarry, and how difficult is the task of the trial judge. We have concluded that there must be a fourth trial of this action. This is an unsatisfactory, indeed an appalling, state of affairs but this is only one of a number of libel actions in the last ten or fifteen years with a history of multiple trials.

The following orders should be made: 
Appeal allowed with costs.

Verdict for $200,000 on causes of action based on the telecast of 6
February 1990 and the judgment entered thereon set aside.

Verdict for $175,000 on causes of action based on the telecast of 30
November 1990 and the judgment entered thereon set aside.

Order a new trial of the causes of action pleaded as imputations P1, P2 and P3 based on the telecast of 6 February 1990 and of the causes of action pleaded as imputations P1 and P3 based on the telecast of 30 November 1990.

Costs of the third trial to be in the discretion of the Judge presiding at the new trial.

Leave to appeal from the order discharging the jury in the second trial granted, and appeal allowed.

Set aside the order that the defendant pay the plaintiff's costs of the second trial.

In lieu thereof order that the respondent pay the appellant's costs of the second trial, assessment to await the result of the new trial.

Respondent to have certificates under the Suitors Fund Act.

Liberty to apply to Handley JA on 7 days' notice for orders under SCR Pt r 23 (5)(b) and (c).
 * * * 
