

Roberts versus The Registrar of the Workers Compensation Commission of NSW and
Ors [2007] NSWSC 612 (19 June 2007) 
Last Updated: 20 June 2007 
NEW SOUTH WALES SUPREME COURT  
CITATION: Roberts versus The Registrar of the Workers Compensation Commission of
NSW & Ors <case>  
JURISDICTION:  
FILE NUMBER(S): 30094/06  
HEARING DATE{S): 14/06/2007  
JUDGMENT DATE: 19 June 2007  
PARTIES: 
Adrian Roberts (Pl) 
The Registrar of the Workers Compensation Commission of NSW (1st Def) 
Fine Meats Pty Limited (2nd Def) 
Ross Bell, Dr Greg McGroder and Dr Stephen Potter being the medical panel appointed by the First Defendant (3rd Def)  
JUDGMENT OF: Associate Justice Malpass  
LOWER COURT JURISDICTION: Workers Compensation Commission  
LOWER COURT FILE NUMBER(S): WCC 4851-2005  
LOWER COURT JUDICIAL OFFICER: Medical Appeal Panel  
LOWER COURT DATE OF DECISION: 03/05/2006  
COUNSEL: 
Mr J. W. Dodd (Pl) 
Mr G. J. Parker (2nd Def)  
SOLICITORS: 
Capital Lawyers (Pl) 
Crown Solicitor (1st & 3rd Def's) 
Turkslegal (2nd Def)  
CATCHWORDS: 
Judicial review 
Appeal Panel  jurisdiction  alleged wrong issue addressed by it  discretionary remedy  
LEGISLATION CITED:  [Supreme Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/)  
Workplace Injury Management & Workers Compensation Act 1998  
CASES CITED: 
Cornett versus Plateau View Aged Care Facility & Ors <case> 
Skillen versus MKT Removals Pty Ltd & Ors <case>  
DECISION: 
The Summons is dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons.  
JUDGMENT:  - 1 - 
IN THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION  
ASSOCIATE JUSTICE MALPASS  JUNE 2007  /06 Adrian Roberts versus The Registrar of the Workers Compensation Commission of New South Wales & Ors  
JUDGMENT  HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff claims that on 2 April 2002, he sustained an injury to his left eye in the course of his employment with the second defendant.  On 24 March 2005, he filed an application to resolve a dispute in the
Workers Compensation Commission (the Commission). The application was expressed to be for a "threshold dispute for work injury damages or commutation". That application was referred for assessment to Dr Pittar, an
Approved Medical Specialist (the AMS).  The AMS had before him certain reports. There was material from Dr Petsoglou (who is not an Approved Medical Specialist). It was procured by the plaintiff.
There was also material from Dr Duke. It was relied on by the second defendant. There was other material, which need not be mentioned for present purposes. The AMS also conducted his own examination.  The material from Dr Petsoglou expressed the view that the plaintiff had a degree of permanent impairment of 15%. The material from Dr Duke presented a figure of 9%, however that figure was expressed to be subject to qualifications.  It appears that the complaints made by the plaintiff depended on subjective symptoms and could not be verified by objective testing. The qualifications expressed by Dr Duke included those of causation and of a hysterical response or feigning.  The plaintiff was assessed and the AMS issued his Medical Certificate. The whole person impairment of the plaintiff was assessed at 0%. In substance, the
AMS did not accept the plaintiff's subjective complaints.  The plaintiff made application to appeal against the decision of the AMS.
The grounds of the appeal were that the Assessment was made on the basis of incorrect criteria and that the Certificate contained a demonstrable error.  The appeal was allowed to proceed and it was referred to an Appeal Panel for review. The Registrar was satisfied that both grounds had been made out.  The Appeal Panel had before it the material that was in evidence before the
AMS, together with other material (including a Reply). The Reply was not before the AMS. It contained, inter alia, the following:-  "That the applicant does not suffer any permanent loss or impairment as the result of any injury as alleged, or in the alternative, any loss is less than alleged."  
This material was placed before the Appeal Panel by consent. Neither of the medical specialists on the Panel were ophthalmologists. The Panel did not conduct a medical examination of the plaintiff.  The Appeal Panel issued a Medical Assessment Certificate. It also assessed the whole person impairment at 0%. A new Certificate was issued because material had been omitted from the original Certificate.  On 25 July 2006, the plaintiff filed a Summons in this Court. The process seeks relief by way of judicial review pursuant to s69 of the Supreme
Court Act 1970 in respect of the decision of the Appeal Panel.  The proceedings were heard on 14 June 2007. Mr Dodd appeared for the plaintiff. Mr Parker appeared for the second defendant. The parties relied on written submissions, which were supplemented by oral argument.  Mr Parker made a formal challenge to jurisdiction. It was done so as to preserve the position of his client. He freely conceded that there was strong and compelling authority that supported the view that the Court did have jurisdiction.  The substance of the submission was that the Appeal Panel was not a Court or Tribunal to whom a writ in the nature of certiorari would lie. It was also submitted that the decision making body was not the Appeal Panel but the
Workers Compensation Commission (the Commission) and that, by reason of s350 of the Workplace Injury Management & Workers Compensation Act 1998 (the Act), decisions of the Commission were not subject to appeal or review.  The submission can be put aside. It does not need to be dealt with in this case. I shall proceed on the basis of assumption of jurisdiction.  There was also debate about the status of a Certificate and whether or not a decision had been made by the Panel. I pass on as it is unnecessary to deal with these questions.  The argument advanced on behalf of the plaintiff is a short point. It is said that the Appeal Panel addressed the wrong question (the issue was said to be the degree of permanent impairment and did not encompass the question of whether or not there was any impairment at all). The plaintiff relied upon the decision of Cornett versus Plateau View Aged Care Facility & Ors <case>.  The foundation for the argument is what was said to be the issue before the
AMS. The reply was not before the AMS and could not have any relevance to what was in issue before him. This left the issue to be discerned from the material from Drs Petsoglou and Duke (it was said that the area of dispute fell within the range between 15% and 9%). The Certificate throws no further light on the matter (it describes the matters referred for assessment as being "Threshold dispute - left eye injury").  I do not accept the plaintiff's argument. It seems to me that it does not have regard to the qualifications expressed by Dr Duke. I am not satisfied that an issue of no permanent impairment was not before the AMS.  This finding operates to dispose of the plaintiff's claim for relief in this Court. However, because of what was argued, I shall make some further brief observations.  The matter that was argued in this Court was not raised in the grounds of appeal. What was before the Appeal Panel was a review of the issues before the
AMS as restricted by the grounds of appeal (see Skillen versus MKT Removals Pty
Ltd & Ors <case>). In the circumstances, it was untenable to argue that the Appeal Panel addressed the wrong issue.  The relief that may be granted pursuant to s69 is discretionary in nature.
One matter that concerned me was the question of the utility of any relief granted to the plaintiff in this case. There was room for the view that the plaintiff had but slim prospects of successfully obtaining an assessment of permanent impairment to a degree of at least 15%. Because of what has been earlier said, I do not need to dwell on this matter. In my view, it was certainly one which presented an obstacle to the granting of relief in this case.  The Summons is dismissed. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the Summons.  
LAST UPDATED: 19 June 2007 * * * 
