

Regina versus D J Katavich; Regina versus J M Katavich [1996] NSWSC 449 (25
September 1996) 
REGINA versus DEAN JOHN KATAVICH REGINA versus JOHN MUDT KATAVICH /96 60432/96 
WEDNESDAY, 25 SEPTEMBER 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ AT CL, SMART J, McINERNEY J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: John Mudt Katavich and Dean John Katavich, who are father and son, have applied for leave to appeal against a decision of Judge Nield refusing to order a change of venue for their forthcoming trial on charges of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm, as to both complainants, and charges of assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The trial is estimated to take three to five days.

The Crown case is that on 23 September 1995 the accused attended at the Kemps
Creek property of Gloria Dawn Arora and assaulted both her and her son. She is alleged to have suffered a broken right arm, wrenched thumb and extensive bruising to her face, shoulder and chest. She spent two days in hospital. Her son allegedly suffered bruising and cuts to the head, face and body. There are allegations of bashing, kicking and punching.

An article appeared in the Liverpool Champion on 27 September 1995 recounting the events which had happened. The defendants were not named. The article described Mrs Arora as a "leading local Liberal".

Mrs Arora unsuccessfully contested the State seat of Liverpool in the 1991
Elections for the New South Wales Legislative Assembly on behalf of the
Liberal Party. She received some 6,921 first preference votes. The figures indicate that the seat is a Labor stronghold. It covers the City of Liverpool and surrounding areas extending from Warwick Farm to Casula to Edmonson Park to Green Valley.

She also unsuccessfully contested the Federal seat of Fowler in the 1990 and Elections for the House of Representatives on behalf of the Liberal
Party. In the 1990 Elections she received about 36.78 per cent of the total vote, approximately 22,417 votes. In the 1993 Elections she received about .91 per cent of the first preference votes cast which totalled 73,271.
Fowler covers the areas of Liverpool, Cabramatta, Canley Heights, St John's
Park, Fairfield, Edensor Park, Bonnyrigg, Mount Pritchard, Green Valley,
Liverpool and Warwick Farm.

The area from which jurors are summoned extends from South Merrylands to the north, Ingleburn and Macquarie Fields to the south, Picnic Point and George's
Hall to the east and Luddenham, Badgery's Creek and Bringelly to the west. The
Federal and State seats are within the jury area. It is considerably larger.

It is most unlikely that any prospective juror will recall a newspaper article printed a year ago and even more unlikely that they would link it up with the unnamed accused after such a lapse of time.

It would not be a ground for changing venue that somebody had stood as a candidate for election in a State or Federal Election on behalf of a major political party. That has no relevance to the hearing of the charges and I cannot imagine any juror being influenced by that fact. The jury will be concerned with whether the Crown has proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused attacked the victims as alleged.

The fact that a person has some public profile is generally not of itself a ground for shifting the venue. Of course, there may be cases where something very specific exists or a country member of long-standing may have dealt with a great many people in his area over the years. That is not this case. The area in question in the present case is a large and diverse one. The judge at the start of the trial will make the usual enquiries as to anyone on the jury panel who knows the accused or who might feel embarrassed by hearing the matter.

The judge dealt with the application under District Court Rules Pt 53 rr 7 and
Those rules are subject to any order made by the Supreme Court under s of the Crimes Act or by the Attorney General. Where a court under r 7(3) entertains an application for a change of venue it should apply the test in s otherwise the situation would be anomalous. That requires the court to be satisfied that unless there is a change of venue a fair or unprejudiced trial cannot otherwise be had or there is some other reason making it expedient to do so.

I acknowledge that we are not dealing with a case where the Attorney General has fixed the venue. It has been fixed pursuant to r 7 and the magistrate committing the accused for trial at Liverpool.

There is a long-standing principle that a criminal trial should occur in the place where the events or the crime took place. There is an onus which has been described as a heavy one for the accused to show to the contrary. There must be real and substantial reasons. The relevant authorities are collected in the judgment of the Court of Appeal in R versus Dorrington [(1969) 1 NSWR ]
at 382-3.

Liverpool is the appropriate place for the District Court to try events or crimes occurring at Kemps Creek.

There is no good reason to interfere with the judge's discretion. He regarded the suggestions of possible prejudice and unfairness as fanciful.

The application for leave to appeal is unarguable. Leave to appeal should be refused.

HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the order proposed by Smart J, for the reasons which he has given.

I would add only that, although the provisions of [s (7)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/s38.html) of the [Jury Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ja197791/) are permissive, I would expect the judge in this case, when it goes to trial, to specifically have the Crown prosecutor inform the jurors of the identity of the principal witnesses and then to call on those on the jury panel to apply to be excused if they consider that they are not able to give an impartial consideration to the case.

McINERNEY J: I agree with the order proposed.

HUNT CJ at CL: The order of the Court is as proposed by Smart J.
 * * * 
