

Pedler versus Richardson Matter No 1860/97 [1997] NSWSC 488 (16 October 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
Pedler versus Richardson /97 October 1997 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff seeks orders: (a) that the Court revoke letters of administration of the estate of the late Roger Kevin Pedler which were granted by the Probate Division to the defendant; and (b) that a Deed of Arrangement, made between the plaintiff and the defendant on 5 July, 1996, be set aside. 
Roger Pedler died in an automobile accident at Kempsey on 25 August, 1994. I will refer to him as "the deceased". The deceased left an estate of approximately 1.5 million dollars gross. He had been born on 26 July, 1934 and married once only, to Kay Veronica Pedler on 4 November, 1965. Kay Pedler obtained a decree of divorce from the deceased on the ground of his desertion on 19 March, 1974. This union had produced one child, the plaintiff, who was born on 18 October, 1967. The deceased did not have any more children. At the date of his death he was living with the defendant in a de facto relationship.
The defendant says that this relationship commenced in about March, 1991. Thus the plaintiff and the defendant are the only persons who, subject to any will that the deceased may have made, are entitled to benefit from the deceased's estate.

There was litigation between the plaintiff and the defendant both in the
Probate Division with respect to the defendant's application for grant of administration, and also in this Division under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/). Those two sets of proceedings were settled on 5 July, 1996 by a Deed of Arrangement pursuant to which the defendant was to apply for letters of administration in respect of the deceased's estate, the deceased's real property was to be listed for sale and then the proceeds of the estate were to be distributed so that $10,000 was set aside for care of two dogs and a cat, the next $5,000 passed to the plaintiff, the next $200,000 realized passed to the defendant, the next $200,000 realized to the plaintiff and any balance to be split evenly between the parties.

Following this deed and terms of settlement, the Registrar granted letters of administration of the deceased's estate to the defendant.

The plaintiff is now convinced in his own mind that the deceased did leave a will which he made in the early 1990s and which the defendant has destroyed.
He says that whilst there is no copy of the will in existence, Mr Pedler's last will was as follows (amended summons, paragraph 4):- "This is the last Will and Testament of Roger Kevin Pedler of 2 Woodward Road,
Hunters Hill.

I do hereby revoke all previous wills and appoint my solicitor friend 
Ken Hickey as my executor.

I leave to my friend Colin Crockett all my trade tools.

I leave my real property situated at and known as 2 Woodward Road, Hunters
Hill, to my son, Glenn, for his life, and then to the first son that Glenn sires. In the event that Glenn dies without a son, I leave the real estate to the Salvation Army to be used as a home for the destitute.

If the Salvation Army at some time decides that it no longer wants this property, then it will pass in title to the Royal Blind Society.

I leave the remainder of my estate to my son Glenn absolutely." 
The plaintiff seeks an order that the deed be set aside because of the fraud of the defendant in destroying the will and pretending that no such will had been made.

I heard this case on 26 and 27 May, 1997 and then received written submissions after that date. Unfortunately the latest of these arrived on 22 July, after I had already prepared what I thought was the final draft, and I had to spend further time reconsidering the draft. I have found the decision on the evidence not at all easy and apologise that I have been longer than customary in producing these reasons.

The main plank of the plaintiff's case was that the defendant confessed to her husband that she had shredded the will. Before dealing with this confession in detail, I should note the rather odd circumstances of the defendant's marriage. The defendant's husband, David Edward Gill, first comes on the scene in August, 1996 as a builder who was doing work on the deceased's home at 2
Woodward Place, Hunters Hill. He married the defendant on 23 December, 1996.
The marriage did not last long as, less than three months later, the defendant made an application to the Family Court for him to repay her $165,000. Those
Family Court proceedings were transferred to this Court (now numbered 2575 of in this Court), and were heard at the same time as these present proceedings and I am delivering a judgment in those proceedings on the same day as I hand down these written reasons.

Because of its crucial significance in this case, I should first set the scene and give the background details to the hotel meeting where the defendant allegedly made her confession.

The meeting took place at what was described in evidence as the lower pub at
Hunters Hill. There were present the defendant, Mr Gill and Mr Gill's cousin,
John Robertson.

In his principal affidavit, Mr Gill said that he recalls that after he and his wife had been out one evening in February 1997, she said to him, "Do you know that I shredded the proper will of Roger Pedler. That will left everything to his son Glenn. If he got all of the estate I would have killed him - it was my only chance." He says that she said on two other occasions, "He left the whole estate to Glenn" and "I lived with him for three years and I deserved it." Mr
Gill says he replied, "You're shifty - you're a bitch to do that - that's his son", to which the defendant replied, "Yes I am, aren't I?" and smiled. Mr
Gill's affidavit of 26 March, 1997 continues, "These discussions became the beginning to the end of our marriage and it is for this reason why I have now come forward with information regarding the Estate of the Late Roger Pedler. I was not willing and I am not willing to involve myself in any illegal activities for and on behalf of Robyn Anne Richardson. On the first occasion that she spoke to me my cousin John Robertson was present as he was visiting me from the country." 
Mr Robertson swore an affidavit on the same day which said that he was party to a conversation in which the defendant spoke to Mr Gill these words, "The proper will left everything to Glenn. If I didn't shred it I'd have nothing, so I put it through a shredder." He also says that he recalls the defendant saying something to the effect, "I think the will was signed at the hospital."
He says that Mr Gill replied, "You're a sneaky bitch", to which the defendant replied, "Yes I know." 
The defendant denies that those conversations took place in her affidavit . She says that the marriage began to end at the time when Mr Gill asked her to co-operate with him in an illegal scheme to report falsely that a caravan and backhoe had been stolen. She said this was the culmination of a number of incidents which showed that Mr Gill was merely after her money.

Under cross examination, Mr Robertson said (T21) that everyone was getting drunk and he wanted to go back home, but the conversation kept going. There was only Mr Gill, the defendant and himself in the party, and they had been in the hotel about two hours. He had had three schooners of beer, Mr Gill was drinking light beer and the defendant was drinking wine. The defendant was not actually drunk, but she was starting to relax more and talk more. She was getting happy. Mr Gill was joking with his wife most of the time, and Mr Gill and his wife were doing most of the talking. It was just after lunch, Mr
Robertson thinks about 2 o'clock, and the three of them were sitting in a group and the conversation took place as he had deposed.

At T84, Mr Gill was cross examined by Mr Willmott of counsel for the defendant, about the key conversation and asked about the conversation which he had deposed had occurred "after we had been out one evening in February".
In his reply, Mr Gill insisted it was the afternoon, late afternoon. That was as far as Mr Gill was questioned about the hotel meeting.

The defendant said (T121) that there was a meeting in late February of 1997 in a pub at Hunters Hill. She says that she was not drinking wine, she was drinking coke. She says that Mr Robertson was just making up what he said and that Mr Robertson's son, Sean, was also at the pub and that Mr Robertson took
Sean back to Sefton and then came back to the pub. There was, however, no cross examination of Mr Robertson about his evidence that the defendant had been drinking wine and was getting happy and talkative at the pub.

Mr Gill's evidence was strongly affected by his cross examination and by other evidence in the case. One piece of evidence was by a Miss Hyerachi who was a legal secretary employed by the defendant's solicitors. She was handed the defendant's mobile phone and played back a message on that phone's message bank which was as follows, "Robyn, it's Dave. I'm on my way to Sydney to see
Glenn, to tell Glenn you ripped him off for heaps of money. I've got all the proof. You're in big shit, you'll do your ass you smart ass. For telling lies and that thing you wrote about me, you're just a liar - you're the most filthiest liar I've ever heard in my life. You won't do any good in court.
I've been there before and done that." Miss Hyerachi then could not understand the next part of the message, but it ended "You're fucked, no chance, been there before." 
Indeed, Miss Hyerachi was not cross examined and I am confident that I can accept her evidence.

Apart from denials, the defendant took the line that Mr Gill had constructed his evidence out of an incident that had occurred in September, 1996.

The deceased had had a considerable amount of litigation with the Hunters Hill
Council over the house in which the defendant and the deceased resided. She says that the access doors to the loft had been drilled shut by the deceased, but she had Mr Gill open them for her. When she and Mr Gill went into the loft, they found boxes of papers, mostly dealing with the litigation, but including a draft unsigned will in pale ink on light blue paper in a stationer's form which had partly been eaten by rats. The defendant says that she said, "I've found another will" and Mr Gill replied, "You'd better be quiet, Glenn will find out about it." The defendant says that she then told Mr
Gill it was unsigned and threw it away.

Mr Willmott put to Mr Gill that he had invented the pub story and he had derived it from the time when the light blue document had been found, which appeared to be a will. Mr Willmott suggested that Mr Gill had told the defendant "You better be quiet. Glenn will find out about it". Mr Gill denied that he had ever been told that the defendant had found a will in the loft.
His emphatic reply to the suggestion was "No way in the wide world." Mr Gill did remember the defendant finding papers in the loft, but says that he told the defendant merely to be careful not to throw away papers relating to the building.

Mr Willmott then put to Mr Gill that, in early February, with reference to the light blue document, Mr Gill had said to the defendant, "You shredded the will giving everything to Glenn?" and she answered "No, I didn't. It was not valid.
It was not signed... ." Mr Gill answered "I don't know what you are talking about. Is that her affidavit she said it?" 
Q. "You have seen her affidavit?" 
A. "Half of it was a lot of lies. I didn't bother going through it.

I can't believe it, you know." 
I now must leave the crucial conversation and turn to other evidentiary material.

The evidence establishes that the deceased had made a series of wills over the last 25 years. The earliest in evidence is a will dated 10 August, 1962 by which he left his entire estate to his mother. This will was in handwriting on a stationer's will form. It was before the deceased's marriage to Kay.

The next will is dated 24 July, 1974, shortly after his divorce. This is again a handwritten document on a stationer's form. In it, Mr Pedler appoints Mr K J
Hickey, solicitor, as his executor, leaves his property to his mother for life and then to his son, Glenn, purporting to prevent Glenn from passing the property to his mother, Kay.

The defendant says she found two copies of a draft will on cream coloured paper, unexecuted. The documents, dated about 1990, left the deceased's estate to Glenn Pedler for life and then to the Royal North Shore Hospital. The defendant threw these documents away.

There is also in existence a draft will signed by the deceased on 5 December, , but not witnessed. Mr Shepherd, an estate agent in the Hunters Hill district, has deposed that the deceased brought this signed form to his office with a request for it to be witnessed. Mr Shepherd returned it with a message that the document would have to be re-executed in the presence of himself and another witness, but the deceased did not return. This document provided that
Mr K J Hickey was to be executor, the deceased's cats and dogs were to be looked after, Mr Crockett was to have a life interest in the deceased's tools which would then pass to Glenn. Glenn was to receive the home unit at 112
Bland Street, Ashfield outright and the defendant was to receive the rest of the estate.

There are also documents puporting to be draft wills bearing date 1 April, and 6 May, 1994. These documents are in similar terms, purporting to leave the deceased's property to the plaintiff and the defendant and to any child by the deceased, failing which the deceased's property was to pass to the Salvation Army so long as they wanted to use it and then to the Royal
Blind Society "(within the rule against perpetuity)". The defendant says that they were created on the deceased's computer and she found hard copies filed near his computer. There is no evidence that either of them was executed. The documents bear the mark of the deceased's involvement. The deceased had qualified as a barrister through the Barristers' Admission Board course.
Indeed I had taught him land law and obviously at least one of my students had appreciated some of the significance of the rule against perpetuities. There are other signs of convoluted legalistic prose in the documents typical of a person who has qualified as a lawyer, but never practised. However, there is the possibility that the documents reproduce some of a genuine testamentary document of the deceased's together with some other material.

In an early affidavit in the Probate Division, the defendant said that the wills had been signed. She later corrected this to "unsigned", saying that there was a typographical error. She was not challenged on this.

The existence of these documents is significant for a couple of reasons.
First, it makes me wonder about the accuracy of Mr Shepherd's evidence that the deceased told him that a person would be "Jonahed" if he made a will.
However, perhaps the deceased was playing a joke. Secondly, the text of the drafts tells against the deceased making a will in the early 1990s in accordance with the reconstructed text set out in paragraph 4 of the amended summons.

Another relevant set of facts concerns the relationship between the defendant and Mr Gill.

The defendant says that Mr Gill had been married before, his previous marriage being to a lady called Vicky. He was not happy that Vicky had obtained property orders and so had placed his property in the name of various friends or employees. He had then lived in a de facto relationship with a lady called
Vanessa. He and Vanessa had children and he promised to leave Vanessa when he married the defendant. However, after a civil marriage ceremony in December , and after a celebration at a hotel, Mr Gill heard that one of his children had turned up at the home at Lisarow or Ourimbah which he shared with
Vanessa and he had to go home. The defendant says that she thus spent her wedding night alone. She says that in fact she has never cohabited with Mr
Gill though they have had sexual relations.

The defendant also says she has handed Mr Gill a total of $165,000 in cash.
She says that Mr Gill told her that he would kick her cats to death if she ever crossed him and she was frightened of him. She says that on 26 February, Mr Gill telephoned her at about 7.30 am and she said that she wanted her money back, to which Mr Gill replied, "No, you are not getting it back. I have been through this twice before. I have given all the money to a barrister. As your husband I am entitled to that money. If I have to I will take $20,000 at a time and say I have gambled it. ... You won't find that money. I have ways of hiding money. I make sure I never have anything in my name. ... I only married you for your money and I think it is terrible how you are ripping off
Glenn. I have kept a diary of how you have ripped him off here and there." She says that, as far as she knows, Mr Gill has never told Vanessa that he married the defendant.

The defendant's case is that Mr Gill has invented the story about shredding the will in order to apply pressure to the defendant not to press her claim for the return of $165,000. I should note that the claim for the $165,000 is the substantial matter to be dealt with in 2575 of 1997.

That sets the basic picture. Unfortunately, neither Mr Gill nor the defendant presented well in the witness box and I must confess I would not believe either of them unless their evidence was corroborated for reasons that will appear later. Accordingly, it is necessary to look at collateral matters to see whether or not it is more likely than not that the defendant said that she had shredded the deceased's last will and that when she made that statement she told the truth.

Both counsel agreed that the vital facts in this case amounted to a most serious crime, vide <case> of the Crimes Act, which makes fraudulently destroying a will punishable by penal servitude for seven years. Accordingly, whilst I apply the civil standard of proof, I must have a comfortable satisfaction that the case has been established before finding for the plaintiff: Briginshaw versus Briginshaw <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 336.] 
It should be noted that the present case was tried under the [Evidence Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) of that Act reads as follows: "1. In a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities.
Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account: the nature of the cause of action or defence, and the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and the gravity of the matters alleged." 
The usual gloss on Briginshaw, that one must be comfortably satisfied in certain classes of cases, derives from the judgment of Rich, J at 350.
However, caution must always be had against picking up glosses and tags and one must look to see what the actual principle in Briginshaw and later cases is. In Neat Holdings Pty Ltd versus Karajan Holdings Pty Ltd <case>; [(1992) 110 ALR 449],450; <case>; [67
ALJR 170],171, four Justices of the High Court said that the Briginshaw rule should be understood "as merely reflecting a conventional perception that members of our society do not ordinarily engage in fraudulent or criminal conduct and a judicial approach that a court should not lightly make a finding that, on the balance of probabilities, a party to civil litigation has been guilty of such conduct." Cross on Evidence 5th Australian edition, para 9050 pp 249-250 puts it, "The most that can validly be said in such a case is that the trial judge should be conscious of the gravity of the allegations made on both sides when reaching his or her conclusion. Ultimately, however, it remains incumbent upon the trial judge to determine the issue by reference to the balance of probabilities." 
Although there is some debate about the matter, the better view appears to be that [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s140.html) intended to adopt the Briginshaw test.

Mr Hallen of counsel for the plaintiff, submitted that I must surely be comfortably satisfied on the evidence that the deceased left a will which the defendant had destroyed. He says that the evidence shows that the plaintiff believed there was a will in existence, but could not prove it. It was only when Mr Gill and Mr Robertson informed the plaintiff about what the defendant had said that he realized that he had a case. He had only met Mr Gill once before Mr Gill had made the allegation, and had never met Mr Robertson before.
There was no attack on Mr Pedler's credibility.

Mr Pedler's case was supported by his former girlfriend, Michelle Caruana.
Miss Caruana said that she often visited the deceased and on one occasion he handed her and the plaintiff a copy of his will to read. She remembers being incensed because she at that stage was engaged to be married to the plaintiff and the will said that the Hunters Hill home was to be handed down from generation to generation and that if Glenn Pedler did not have any male children, it was to pass to the Salvation Army to be a refuge for the destitute and if they didn't want it, it was to go to the Blind Society. The rest of the property was to go to the plaintiff, with the tools to go to Colin
Crockett, whom she had never met, and Ken Hickey, solicitor, was to be the executor. She says she remembers particularly that the will gave only a life estate in the Hunters Hill property to the plaintiff and then it went to the first born son because she was incensed that the deceased had excluded female heirs. She says that she spoke to the plaintiff on leaving the deceased's home and told him that she took offence to the way in which the deceased excluded the plaintiff's wife and any daughters that he might have, and the plaintiff replied, "My father never leaves real property to [a] woman, he only makes provision for them. Even as a baby, my father left all real property to me with provision for my grandmother. Don't take it personally as it is in no way aimed at you." Miss Caruana's evidence was not shaken in cross examination.

Mr Hallen also says that the evidence of Miss Anne Brown supports the plaintiff's case. Miss Brown worked at Royal North Shore Hospital, where the deceased worked, and she can remember witnessing a will though she cannot remember precisely when she did so. As the deceased left the Hospital's employ in 1991, it is clear that the will must have been made before the end of 1991.
She could not remember what was in the will, except that it contained a reference to a dog as there was some conversation between the deceased and herself about that matter.

Mr Crockett, the person who was to get the tools, says he too was shown a will which had been typed on the deceased's computer screen at a time before the defendant went to live with the deceased. The "will" which Mr Crockett saw was almost certainly a draft and was probably the same text as was referred to in
Miss Caruana's evidence. Mr Crockett says he could have told the defendant about this will though she positively denies that he ever did so. Mr Crockett gave his evidence a little tentatively, but his credibility was not affected.

As to the crucial evidence of Mr Robertson which I have already discussed, Mr
Hallen says, how could Mr Robertson have known that the will which the deceased had executed and had had witnessed had been signed by the deceased at the hospital yet this, as I have already set out, was his evidence.

Mr Willmott submitted that it was vital to realize that the evidence of Messrs
Gill and Robertson was not of what they saw, but what they say the defendant said. He agrees that it is possible that Mr Robertson's evidence that the will was signed at the hospital could have been derived from the defendant, but it is equally possible that it came from another source. He says that there is no evidence connecting the will which Michele Caruana or Colin Crockett saw with the will which Anne Brown witnessed.

The defendant's principal defence was to attack the credibility of Mr Gill and
Mr Robertson, and to rely on her own evidence. She succeeded to some great extent with her attack on Mr Gill, but not, to my mind, with her attack on Mr
Robertson and her own evidence was rather hard to believe.

Dealing first with Mr Robertson, the criticism is that his version in his affidavit which I have quoted, differed markedly from his oral evidence.
Secondly, he admitted he only came into the conversation every now and again.
Thirdly, he may have been distracted by the fact that the conversation took place in a public bar, and fourthly, he received some benefit from Mr Gill, namely, a truck in lieu of being paid moneys for the work he did for Mr Gill.

As to the first of these matters, in cross examination to Mr Willmott, Mr
Robertson said that when he heard the defendant using the word "shredded" when talking to her husband, he said "You shredded the will?" and that is when Mr
Gill said to her, "You're a real bitch". He later amended this to sneaky bitch. Although this was an extra detail, it does not seem to me that it makes less credible what the witness said he overheard or contradicts anything that he said in his affidavit. The attack on the evidence that he might have been distracted or was not fully listening to the conversation did not break any ice with me. I thought that the allegation was such that anyone would have pricked up his ears and paid close attention. So far as the truck is concerned, it was not suggested that Mr Robertson had been bribed, rather there was a variance between his evidence on affidavit that he got paid for work he did at Hunters Hill for Mr Gill and his evidence in the witness box that he did not get money but got a truck. I do not really consider this is a variance of any moment.

Accordingly, I would accept Mr Robertson's evidence.

The atttack on Mr Gill's credibilty was far more successful. The defendant gave evidence to the effect that, during February 1997, Mr Gill was often drunk and was very threatening to her, not only in respect of the matter of kicking her cats to which I have already referred. In cross examination, Mr
Gill admitted most of this conduct, but said that it was justified because the defendant had threatened to shoot him. There seems to be little doubt that, particularly under drink, he did become abusive and made threats.

The defendant says that Mr Gill has become revengeful about her making the application in the other proceedings for the return of the $165,000 she says that she handed to him. Mr Hallen poured scorn on this suggestion saying, "Revenge for what?" The suggestion is that if anyone was to be taking revenge, it would be the defendant. After all it was she who had parted with $165,000, had married a man who did not even spend his wedding night with her, and had been subject to verbal abuse and threats by a man who had lost her $165,000 before telling her that she'd only been married for her money.

I think, however, the answer to Mr Hallen's question is that Mr Gill did not consider that it was appropriate for a woman to take proceedings against him and win. If anyone was to be stupid enough to do that, then she should be paid back in kind. As it was quite clear that Mr Gill was not going to get any more money out of the defendant, and as I am sure he is confident in his own mind that he will never have to pay back any of the money she handed him, the way was open for punishment action. Hence we have the telephone call which Miss
Hyerachi transcribed, on 16 March (that is, about two weeks after the Family
Law proceedings were instituted) and the evidence supplied to the plaintiff on March.

I also consider Mr Willmott's submission is justified that it is significant that Mr Gill did not tell Glenn Pedler about the admission until after the defendant had obtained an interlocutory order from the Family Court. This reinforces the case for revenge.

I find the revenge argument a very powerful one.

The revenge argument does not, however, take Mr Willmott the whole way. There is a wise saying, "Don't worry so much about the lies people tell about you, worry about it when they tell the truth!" The aphorism is relevant in the instant case. Even if Mr Gill was acting out of revenge, why does it follow that the revenge was exacted by telling something which was false? It is far more effective to gain revenge on people by saying something which is true which they would rather not have heard. Accordingly, although I am of the view that Mr Gill did act out of revenge, I do not consider that this finding necessarily destroys his evidence.

Apart from the matter of revenge, there are other aspects of Mr Gill's evidence which must be considered. I should note here that whilst Mr J D Shaw of counsel appeared for Mr Gill, he took little part in this aspect of the case.

Mr Willmott cross examined Mr Gill in his usual thorough way. However, Mr Gill tried to take control of the examination by being very direct to Mr Willmott.
A sample of this appears at T85 where Mr Willmott was endeavouring to have Mr
Gill fix the date of the pub meeting: 
Q. "February has four weeks?" 
A. "I know." 
Q. "Is it the last week?" 
A. "You are smart too." ...

Q. "I am asking you whether there were two other occasions after this incident in the pub in late February 1997 when she raised the topic about the estate?" 
A. "She has always raised the topic about the estate. Which way?" 
Q. "I am asking you. I was not there." 
A. "Obviously when you are married and living together you talk about things - what's you wife like- don't you?" 
I really got the impression from the whole of Mr Gill's evidence that apart from wreaking vengeance on the defendant, he really could not care less about the case because he was confident that either he had hidden the $165,000 which had been handed to him by the defendant, or at least what was left of it, or alternatively had, as he claimed, lost it all gambling in the casinos. With this position he could just "have some fun" with counsel and not take the matter very seriously at all.

However, Mr Willmott did at least get some dividend from his cross- examination. At T 85, Mr Gill said for the first time that he had told the defendant just before he went to Queensland that he would give her a week to sort things out with the plaintiff. As Mr Willmott says, this contrasts badly with the evidence that Mr Gill was so shocked at what he had heard that he had to inform the plaintiff. However, this material does not take the matter that far. It is equally consistent with Mr Gill first using the truth for his own purposes and then when that failed, to get revenge. than with the scenario that he had invented the admission.

I have heavily discounted the evidence which Mr Gill gave because of the problems with his evidence highlighted above. Despite this discount, and despite the attitude of vengeance, I still consider, however, that his evidence provides some material to corroborate Mr Robertson's evidence.

In addition to Mr Robertson and Mr Gill, there is the collateral evidence of
Miss Brown and others to which I referred earlier which supports the theory that the deceased did die testate.

On the other side, there is the defendant's denial. It is, of course, often far more difficult to corroborate a denial than any other type of evidence. I also recognize, of course, that it is for the plaintiff to prove his case, not for the defendant to disprove it, or prove the opposite. The defendant, was, however, not a very good witness. For instance, her allegation that she was drinking coke, not wine, at the Hunters Hill pub on the day the conversation took place, must be viewed with great suspicion when her counsel did not ask one question of Mr Robertson to contest his evidence that she was drinking wine when obviously this was a matter which went to the core of the case. I can only conclude that at no stage had the defendant instructed her solicitor and counsel that she was only partaking of a non-alcoholic drink until she got into the witness box.

It is necessary at this point to go into some matters of background which are relevant to the question of the defendant's credibility.

The defendant says that there was a robbery at her house and the computer was stolen. She suggests that Mr Gill may have been behind the robbery. Mr Gill says that he did not conduct the robbery, but that he did, by himself or his agent, get into the house at Hunters Hill and obtain information off the defendant's computer. This included a copy of letters which she had sent to her then solicitor, Mr Peter Carver, when the litigation between herself and the present plaintiff was active. In one letter she suggested to Mr Carver that it would be good tactics to confuse the plaintiff and his lawyers with a series of options. Her denial that she had done this at T107 is hard to reconcile with the documents which were abstracted from her computer.

Secondly, the cross examination clearly established that the defendant was extremely reticent about giving any information about the estate to the plaintiff, and indeed, it goes further than this. Mr West, who lived close to the deceased's Bundaberg property, gave evidence which was not contradicted and which I accept, that the defendant was selling estate property and obtaining cheques payable to her mother so that they did not go into the estate account. Her explanation as to this transaction at T114-5 is extremely difficult to accept and I do not accept it. There are two possible explanations for her conduct, neither of which does her any credit. The first is that she was concealing assets from the plaintiff so that he would not have his 50% of their sale price, or secondly, that she strongly suspected that one day the presence of the will might become known and she wanted to quarantine assets that might be able to be recovered.

Mr Willmott submits that the defendant was not challenged in cross examination at all as to whether she had destroyed the will which is sought to be propounded by the plaintiff, or even whether she had admitted doing so to John
Robertson or David Gill.

I reread the transcript to see whether this was so. Although the bulk of the cross examination by Mr Hallen was directed to the defendant's alleged prior inconsistent statements and to her attempts to hide estate assets, he did ask a series of questions about the meeting at the Hunters Hill pub. At T122, Mr
Hallen was suggesting to the defendant that her evidence really was that everybody was telling lies except herself. In the course of this, Mr Hallen put to the defendant that Mr Robertson had just made up his whole evidence of the crucial conversation and that Mr Gill was lying, at least in part. The cross examination continued with respect to Mr Gill: 
Q. " What part is he telling the truth about?" 
A. " He first suggested to me that I destroyed a will." ...

Q. " It was not that you told him that. He told you that?" 
A. " That I had destroyed a will leaving everything to Glenn, yes." 
Q. " In other respects he is lying, is he?" 
A. " In reference to what?" 
Q. " The conversation that he has given evidence of regarding your telling him that you destroyed a will?" 
A. "Yes." 
Mr Hallen returned to the topic again at T126.

I consider that there was sufficient challenge to the defendant's denial about the conversation in the Hunters Hill hotel. However, it is true that the defendant was never actually asked whether she denied that she shredded the will.

It was odd that this question was not put. Perhaps it was somehow or other overlooked in a long case, perhaps the cross examiner thought that the suggestion that the defendant had shredded the will had already been clearly signalled and there was no need to go through the farce of asking the question which would either result in the defendant declining to answer the question, or improving her case with a denial. In any event, the omission is not fatal as the matter was clearly one over which the parties were at issue. However, as Mr Willmott submits, it is a factor to be taken into account.

Applying the Briginshaw test to the evidence in the present case, I am comfortably satisfied, despite the criminality of the act, that there was a will left by the deceased which the defendant destroyed after his death. What were the terms of that will I will come to presently. It is easier to make this finding in the present case than perhaps some other cases because the conduct of both the defendant and of Mr Gill show almost a complete lack of commercial morality. The objection that ordinary citizens would not contemplate destroying a will has a much weakened force when applied to this defendant.

It seems to me that it is far more likely than not that Mr Robertson's evidence is correct that the defendant was starting to become talkative under the influence of wine and made the admission. I do not accept her evidence that she was drinking "straight coke." I contemplated the possibility that the "admission" was just bravado, but discarded this, not only because it was never put by counsel, but also because it was extremely unlikely. The evidence of Mr Robertson is corroborated by admittedly small pieces of other evidence, including that of Anne Brown. I then add to this my disbelief of some of the defendant's evidence and the evidence that the defendant was attempting to hide the estate assets. I ask myself, why did she lie or attempt to hide the assets if she had not shredded the will? One answer would be that she did not have sufficient confidence that a court would accept her story. A more probable explanation is that she knew the charge was true.

I now pass to consider whether the plaintiff has adequately proved the contents of the will which has been destroyed for the purpose of obtaining probate of it.

What is necessary to establish before the alleged will can be admitted to probate is - that the "will" was duly executed; that it was not revoked; and that its terms can be set down on paper with sufficient accuracy.

Mr Willmott makes the strong point that great care must be taken when referring to "the will". He puts that there is no proper link in the evidence between the unexecuted wills which Miss Caruana and Mr Crockett saw and the will which Anne Brown witnessed. Furthermore, Mr Willmott puts that the evidence of Mr Shepherd suggests that, in the early nineties, the deceased was "scratching out" many draft wills without executing them.

The 1994 drafts tell against a 1991 will in the form which is set out in paragraph 4 of the amended summons. However, as the relationship between the deceased and the defendant only commenced in March, 1991, a will before that date or even shortly after that date would not refer to the defendant.

However, I accept the evidence of Miss Brown that she witnessed a will at the deceased's request about 1991 and that the will referred to a dog.

The other evidence suggests that the deceased was trying different drafts of a replacement will between 1993 and his death, but he never got around to executing them. The preponderance of the evidence suggests that it was this will that the defendant destroyed.

Ms Brown witnessed the will, but she cannot remember whether the other witness, Mr Nuttell, was present at the same time, though she believes he was.
This, however, is not fatal at the present time because of the provisions of s
A of the Wills Probate etc Act 1898. In any event, it is more likely than not that the will was properly executed. The factors that go to this conclusion are that there is a presumption of due execution which applies, inter alia, where the witnesses have little recollection of the circumstances; see eg Woodhouse versus Balfour [(1887) 13 PD 2]; McLeod v
Burchall [(1972) 8 SASR 312], 318.
Furthermore, as in Woodhouse's case, the deceased was a person who had qualified in law and had made wills on previous occasions and it is more likely than not that he knew of the provisions of the Wills etc Act as to form and followed them.

The next question is whether the will, not having been produced after death, must be presumed to have been revoked.

The law as to presumption of revocation is usefully summarized by Powell, J in
Whiteley versus Clune (No 2) 13 May 1993, unreported, though a verbatim extract from the heart of the decision is extracted in the casenote by
Rosalind Atherton in [(1993) 67 ALJ 859] at 862-3. Powell, J's third proposition was, "Where the will makes a careful, and complete, disposition of the testator's property, and there are no other circumstances to point to a probable destruction, animo revocandi, by the testator, the presumption is so slight that it may be said not to exist." 
One's first thought is that there would be no sense in destroying the will if there was any substantial suggestion that the will had been revoked. Thus, probably the presumption is overcome by the facts that I have already found on the shredding of the will. However, it might be suggested that the history of the production of many drafts of a new will in 1993/4 goes the other way.

As appears earlier in these reasons, I consider that it is more likely than not that the deceased was contemplating revoking his will that was destroyed, but never got around to it.

Thus I find that the will in question has not been revoked.

The next problem is that the remembrance of the terms of the will is imperfect. As Powell, J says in Whiteley's case, "Probate may be granted of so much of the contents as may be proved, even though proof is not available of the entirety." What is customary in such cases is for the applicant to produce in the short minutes of order the best reconstruction of the will that he can. If the court is satisfied that that reconstruction is the will, it may grant probate. In the instant case, as Mr Hickey has clearly indicated that he will renounce probate, letters of administration cta will issue instead. In other cases, letters of administration cta may be granted annexing so much of the contents of the will as have been proved until a more authentic version comes to light.

However, the matter is a more complex one in the present case. The evidence is clear that the destroyed will mentioned a dog. The plaintiff in evidence said that there was a gift to be used to look after the deceased's dog Penny. There is no reference to Penny in the reconstruction. I have set out in the Appendix to these reasons the best reconstruction I can make of the will. This is clearly based on the language used by the deceased in his May, 1994 draft. I consider that even though this document may have in some circumstances required interpretation, it more closely represents what the deceased would have written. The Court's task is merely to reproduce the lost will, not to improve on its drafting. This will, of course, bend to a later more authentic version if one is found.

There are various procedural matters that will need to be covered. The first is that the prescribed advertisement for probate will need to be published before a grant can be made. Secondly, the present case is unusual because it is in the Equity Division. Technically it may be that only a person exercising the jurisdiction of the Probate Judge in the Probate Division should direct the Registrar in Probate to make a grant. Solicitors for the plaintiff should confer with the registry as to the appropriate form of order. If necessary, a new suit may have to be commenced in the Probate Division or the present suit transferred to that Division.

Finally, I have not as yet dealt with the application to set aside the deed.

In my view, it follows from my findings that there was fraud in destroying the will and that fraud had an operative effect on Mr Glenn Pedler's mind when executing and delivering the deed. Mr Willmott said that there was some estoppel preventing the deed being set aside, but did not develop this point and I cannot see how it can be so. The deed must thus be set aside.

Accordingly, the grant of letters of administration and the deed must be set aside. There will be a direction to grant letters of administration with the reconstructed will annexed to the plaintiff. It may be that the defendant will wish to bring proceedings under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/), and, as she is technically out of time, she may wish to ventilate that in a cross claim in these proceedings, though it would probably be preferable for that matter, if it is to be litigated, to be the subject of new proceedings, because it should only be commenced after there has been a grant of administration to Mr Glenn
Pedler.

I will stand the matter over for short minutes of order to be brought in. The short minutes should deal with the costs of the proceedings and also the transfer to the new administrator of the assets held by the defendant. If the defendant has dissipated those assets, and there was an administration bond, it may also be necessary to involve the insurer that issued the administration bond.

I will tentatively fix the bringing in of the short minutes for 18 November, at 9.30 am. However, should counsel find that date inappropriate, they may, on reasonable notice to my Associate, arrange for some alternative date.
If more than 10 minutes are to be required to deal with the matters that may arise at the short minutes stage, my Associate should be informed of that as soon as possible.
 * * * 
