

Regina versus Peter Kingsley Rowston [1996] NSWSC 205 (18 June 1996) 
REGINA versus PETER KINGSLEY ROWSTON /95 
MONDAY 17 JUNE 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES CRIMINAL DIVISION 
HULME J (AND A JURY OF TWELVE) 
DRAFT 
SUMMING-UP 
HIS HONOUR: Members of the jury, under the procedure laid down for the conduct of criminal trials it is now my duty to give you what is called a summing-up. Of necessity, there will be some repetition but I will keep this to what I regard as the essential minimum. I propose to deal primarily with the law and, given that counsel have dealt in detail with the evidence, I will only say little on that topic.

I will commence with some propositions of law that are found in a trial such as this. Nothing I say hereafter should be regarded by you in any way whatsoever as a qualification of these fundamental principles. Firstly, you are duty bound to accept my directions as to the law. Secondly, you and you alone decide issues of fact and what evidence to accept. You may accept the whole or only part of a witness's evidence. You may reject it wholly. You may take either of these approaches because you are satisfied the evidence is wrong or merely because you are not satisfied it is right. Thirdly, you are duty bound to disregard any views you think I may have as to the facts or concerning the evidence unless those views accord with your own. In that case, of course, you will be following your view and not mine. Fourthly, your decision must be based on and only on the evidence. Fifthly, the accused is presumed to be innocent. He does not have to prove anything. Sixthly, you cannot find the accused guilty unless the Crown satisfies you of his guilt to the high standard embodied in the words "beyond reasonable doubt". Allow me to emphasise those words, "beyond reasonable doubt". They embody a much higher standard than that which applies in civil trials on which some of you may have sat as jurors where the test is on balance of probabilities. Seventhly, because you are being asked to rely on circumstantial evidence and not, for example, that of eye witnesses who saw the interference with the deceased, you should not conclude that the accused is guilty unless guilt is the only rational inference that can be drawn from the circumstances.

Because of their importance let me repeat these propositions briefly and emphasise that nothing I say hereafter is a qualification of them:
You are duty bound to accept my directions as to the law.
You and you alone decide issues of fact and what evidence to accept.
You are duty bound to disregard any views you think I may have as to the facts or concerning the evidence unless those views accord with yours.
Your decision must be based on the evidence alone.
The accused is presumed to be innocent. He does not have to prove anything.
You cannot find the accused guilty unless the Crown satisfies you to the high standard embodied in the words "beyond reasonable doubt".
You should not find the accused guilty unless guilt is the only rational inference that can be drawn from the circumstances.

The charge in the indictment which you have to consider is "that Peter
Kingsley Rowston on 25 October 1994 at Coogee did murder Irene Rowston." 
Let me begin my discussion of the concept of murder by introducing a complication to which counsel have referred. When a charge of murder is brought it is open to a jury that finds murder has not been proved to find an accused guilty of another offence known as manslaughter and this is even though there is no reference to manslaughter in the indictment. Hence it is necessary for me to instruct you in the law of manslaughter also.

In law murder and manslaughter involve a number of ingredients. In a moment you will have handed to you a document which, so far as is presently relevant, sets out the ingredients of the offences of murder and manslaughter and you should regard the document as part of my summing-up. In this area particularly precision is required and the document is being provided to avoid you having to write down the ingredients. I will explain some of them but give you an opportunity of reading what is written first.

DOCUMENT HEADED THE QUEEN V PETER KINGSLEY ROWSTON - DIRECTIONS DISTRIBUTED TO JURY AND COUNSEL.
 
I start off with the ingredients of murder. Before you can convict of murder the Crown must establish to your satisfaction beyond all reasonable doubt - sorry, beyond reasonable doubt each of the matters listed in sub-paragraphs 1 to 4 under that heading.

That Irene Rowston has died will, I expect, cause you little difficulty although, to emphasise what I said about the facts being for you, even that decision is something for you to make.

The next matter is whether that death was caused by a deliberate act. Now, please note that at this point you are addressing the issue of whether the act which caused death was deliberate, not whether the death was. Indeed, the
Crown does not suggest that the accused intended the deceased's death. Again, the resolution of this issue is unlikely to cause you any difficulty for you may think it difficult to see how any object of the nature of that envisaged by the doctors could have been inserted inside the deceased's vagina otherwise than by a deliberate act.

The third element, that is that the deliberate act was an act of the accused, is self explanatory and raises probably the main issue in the case although, as I have said, you must be satisfied as to all elements before you can convict. To that third element I shall return.

The fourth element was whether the act was done with an intention to inflict grievous bodily harm on the deceased.

Now, murder can arise in other ways but they are not relevant here. There are two aspects of that fourth element. One arises by reason of the use of the word "intention". Even if you conclude that it was Mr Rowston who inflicted the injuries on the deceased you could not convict him of murder unless you concluded that the act was done with an intention of inflicting grievous bodily harm. You don't just look at the consequences. The second element of this fourth - I withdraw that. The second aspect of this fourth element arises from the use of the words "grievous bodily hard". That means really serious physical injury. I will say a little more about degrees of injury shortly.

Let me now turn to the ingredients of manslaughter for the purposes of illustrating the difference and emphasising one aspect or two aspects of the fourth element of murder because, as I said earlier, you will only come to consider manslaughter once you have concluded, if you have concluded, that the accused is not guilty of murder.

If you do come to consider manslaughter you will recognise that the first three ingredients I have listed are identical with the first three in the offence of murder. The fourth ingredient is different and I have sought to explain it in the document but let me draw particular attention to some of the matters mentioned.

The test is not whether the person who did the act which was the cause of death realised his act was dangerous or her act was dangerous. The test is an objective one. It is whether a reasonable person in the position of the accused would have realised that he or she was exposing the deceased to an appreciable or a significant risk of injury. I have said "in the position of the accused" because you do take into account his state of knowledge. He is a married adult male. You do not take into account, for example, the knowledge of Dr Murray. It is not necessary that the realisation be of injury of the precise nature or extent that occurred. In judging whether an act was dangerous you won't limit your consideration to the actual manner of death to which Dr Lawrence and the other doctors referred. If you find an intrusion into the deceased's vagina such as that envisaged by, for example, Dr Murray occurred or, indeed, either of the other doctors you will consider whether a reasonable person with the knowledge of the accused would have realised that that event created an appreciable risk of serious injury.

I have set out part of what I have just said in the concluding paragraph of those instructions but I trust that short exposition indicates, perhaps by way of additional emphasis, the matters that I have sought to draw attention to.
If you look at that last person - I withdraw that. If you look at that last paragraph you see I draw attention to not the accused in the first line but, rather, a "reasonable person" but then "in the position of the accused".

Now, going back to the bottom of the first page of those directions, there is also the matter raised of whether the act was unlawful. An act is unlawful if it involves a deliberate application of force to another person without that person's consent. There is, of course, no direct evidence whether or not the deceased consented to any intrusion into her vagina and your decision on that topic must be one reached taking account of inferences. You heard evidence from Dr Murray that apparently there is thought by some to be some possibility of sexual enjoyment from fisting. He also said that in the circumstances apparent he would have expected the deceased to suffer considerable pain immediately after her external injuries. That evidence concerning pain obviously bears on the question of whether you would infer consent, but you also must bear in mind that the issue is whether the deceased consented, in effect beforehand, not whether she may have regretted the consent or intrusion into her vagina afterwards. You will recall some questioning, or, rather, you will recall the evidence of Dr Murray that indicated that pain would only occur after there was some action.

There is also the possibility recognised by at least one of the medical witnesses - and to their evidence I will come in a little more detail later - he reckoned with the possibility that the external injuries might have occurred after the internal ones. In that event, of course, there would not be the same reason for any initial consent to be withdrawn prior to the internal injuries.

Now, I just want to draw your attention to the distinction between grievous bodily harm, an expression used when we are considering the element of murder, and the lesser hurt embodied in the phrase "serious injury", an expression used when I am talking under the heading manslaughter, of whether an act is dangerous. There is a very real distinction between grievous bodily harm and injury which is appropriately described as merely serious. I say "merely" not to trivialise it but to draw the distinction. In any judgment which you come to as to the category in which any injury, actual or contemplated, falls it is proper, I think, that you also bear in mind that there must be injuries below that of serious injury. At least two descriptions which I can think of are "trivial" and "minor".

Let me say something next about how you should approach the question of what evidence you accept and at this stage I will leave aside these written directions. Because there was not a great deal of challenge by Mr Williams to most of the evidence given by the Crown witnesses your task in approaching the question of what evidence you accept and how you use it is much easier than in many other cases but nevertheless it is for each of you to decide what evidence you accept and you may be assisted by reflecting on the following suggestions. Most are but commonsense and some at least you will have thought out for yourselves for this won't be the first time for any of you to have to consider the reliability of what you have been told but may I invite you to consider at least the following matters:
Has a witness any reason not to be objective?
What was the witness's opportunity to observe?
To what extent is the witness's evidence generally or in a particular respect supported by the evidence of another? Having regard to the totality of what a witness observed, is a particular matter likely to be remembered? 
Now, let me just pose a problem or an issue perhaps raised by the evidence which may provide an illustration or an occasion for application of some of those matters. Living in the household was the deceased's son, Adrian, and, of course, Neil with Adrian and the two Indonesian students. Now, statements were read to you by the Crown from those three persons, Adrian and the two students. Those statements - and I will take you to them - suggest that the three people were there at tea time. Adrian's statement indicates an argument.
The two students who also, if you accept what they say, had been around do not suggest such an argument and may possibly suggest there was not one. Now, you have not seen any one of those persons but somehow or other you may have to consider which version you accept. Has one of them any reason not to be objective? What was the opportunity to observe? To what extent is the witness's evidence supported by the evidence of another? Having regard to the totality, is a particular matter such as an argument on that day likely to be remembered? 
There is another aspect. Obviously if you conclude a particular witness has deliberately lied on one or more matters you may have difficulty accepting the balance of that witness's evidence but you must recognise that of that balance the total, or at least some, might still be truthful.

How do you deal with the evidence? That depends, in part, on its nature and the issue under consideration. For example, there is some which you would merely accept or reject. An example of this may be that of Dr Lawrence as to the cause of death. A second type is that which, if accepted, forms the basis for inferences which you are asked to draw. An example of this may be provided by the evidence of the relationship between the deceased and the accused because it is from that evidence that the Crown asks you to infer the accused had a motive to physically harm the deceased or that physical harm by him was more likely than it otherwise would have been. A third type is evidence which, if you accept it, then becomes the foundation or part of the foundations for an exercise of judgment on your part. An example may be Dr Lawrence's evidence as to the intrusion into the deceased's vagina. Was that intrusion dangerous? 
As Mr Williams (I think it was) said to you, you come here as a cross-section of the community and you make your determination after bringing into account your general experience of the world. I suspect that some or all of you have learnt things in this case which are outside your general experience but, that said, I suspect also that there are nevertheless many aspects of the evidence which fall within that general experience. You are the tribunal of fact and you take that general knowledge of the world into account in making your judgment.

I said I would return to the third matter, namely in my written directions, whether any deliberate act was an act of the accused. I said at the outset that I was not going to go at great length into the evidence but it occurred to me that it might be useful if I listed a number of matters which seem to me at least worth your consideration. You may think of others. You may think that the ones I am about to list are not worth any or more than a moment's thought but I will at least suggest them.

The first one is motive. The second, opportunity. Thirdly, the accused's pre- occupation with the relationship with his wife or some elements of it.
Fourthly, his mental state and medication. The physical circumstances: where the deceased was found. Is the open lounge room visible from the stairs? Next, the examples - I withdraw that - the instances of the accused's violence towards objects. Next, his reaction as described by Dr Mordecai and the
Mollers and as in part seen in the video tape after the deceased's death. The wet clothing in the storeroom. The evidence of the absence of any blood found on the accused or any clothing. Next, the absence of any injury to the accused. Next, the absence of any violence by the accused to the deceased. The deceased's instruction to her solicitor that she had no fear of him. The absence of any noise, at least absence of any noticed noise during the night she died. The deceased's dislike of the accused. The fact the back door was unlocked. The deceased's other relationships. The accused's denials of guilt, for example, in the interview and to Mr Moller. Next, the strength of the accused and the deceased. The question whether there was any argument or significant argument on the night in question and, next, the medical evidence.

Now, I make it clear in listing those matters I do not mean to indicate a conclusion on any of them. I mention them only as topics for you to consider.
As I said earlier, you are the tribunal of fact, not me. Let me illustrate. I think the evidence and the only evidence on the topic is that the back door was unlocked and that is the expression I have used in the list but whether it was is something for you to consider so treat the list as something to think about, not a list of matters which are established one way or the other.

Now, let me just mention a few matters in relation to some of those topics.
Most of the topics have been covered to a greater or lesser extent by counsel, so I propose to say nothing on the question of motive or opportunity.

On the topic of the pre-occupation with the relationship or some elements of it, the Crown has taken you to Exhibit A, the exhibit containing these handwritten writings of the accused. It is, I would suggest, essential that you look not only at the passages to which the Crown directed your attention, but all of what is said.

For example, while the Crown directed your attention to two or three occasions where the word "rape" appears, you will find in there also some evidence which indicates, you might think, some feelings of at least affection for the deceased, or past affection, or for either her or some of her attributes.

It would be wrong just to look at those pages without looking at the totality of what is said. Bear in mind that most of those pages bear no date. Many, if not most, contain no reference to an event from which you could infer a date.
Some of the writings would seem to be utterly irrelevant. Thus, the first page of document 9 seems to be at least mainly a shopping list. As I said, if you have not already done so, you should look at what is written.

I propose to say nothing further on the topics of mental state and medication, or the physical circumstances of the lounge and its visibility from the stairs save and except to raise the query whether there was evidence of a door from the hallway or stairwell into the lounge and whether there were other doors which might, if closed, have meant the area was not quite as open as the Crown suggested.

On the question of violence, all I am going to say is to invite you as, indeed, I think Mr Williams did, to apply your knowledge or experience to the significance of the accused's past violence to objects and absence of violence towards the deceased. Obviously the fact - if it be the fact - that he had not previously been violent towards the deceased does not mean that the accused could not have committed the actions from which the deceased suffered on the night in question, but the history - good or bad: some violence towards objects, none towards his wife - at least none apparent from the evidence - is something which you have to weigh-up.

I am going to say nothing on the topic of any of his reaction to the deceased's death. I will, however, say something in relation to the wet clothing. You might think it was an odd place for it to be. Equally - as Mr
Williams said, I think - if the accused was guilty of the attack on his wife such as the evidence suggests occurred and found it necessary to wash his t-shirts after that attack, putting them in the storeroom was not a very good hiding place if he really reflected on what might or might not be found, or their prospects of being found.

That said, you have to draw from that what you think are the possibilities, I suppose, that his wife might have found them at some stage and just on the day before and thrown them into the storeroom because he left them in a heap on the bathroom floor. Who knows? Nevertheless, in the context of that wet clothing, I think it proper to say this to you: as I have said, the Crown bears the onus of satisfying you beyond reasonable doubt that the accused is guilty of the offence with which he is charged and the accused bears no onus and does not have to prove anything and for that reason, he is under no obligation to give evidence and you cannot infer guilt from his failure to do so.

It was open to him to give evidence. The consequence of his failure to do so is this: you have no evidence from the accused to add to or explain or vary or contradict the evidence put before you by the prosecution. The Crown asks you to infer guilt from a whole collection of circumstances. It asks you to draw inferences from such facts as it is able to prove. Such an inference may be more safely drawn from the proven facts when an accused person elects not to give evidence of relevant facts which it can easily be perceived must be within his knowledge. Now, you might think he is in a position to know whether he put the wet clothing in the storeroom and, if so, why? 
The next matter I mentioned, I think, was the absence of blood. Mr Williams directed your attention to some of the police evidence of the use of a poly light and you might reasonably infer that the police would have looked long and hard for the presence of blood around the house or on the accused's clothing. If, indeed, there was blood on it at any stage during the night in question he must have either in somewhat pressured circumstances washed things very well or been lucky, or possibly, that there never was any on him or on his clothing, notwithstanding the evidence as, I think, came from one of the earlier witnesses that they would have expected significant blood on at least the person who intruded or who caused the intrusion in the deceased's vagina.

The next matter to which I referred was the absence of injury to the accused.
Now, you have heard evidence and seen the accused and the accused's size and the size of his wife. Even if a victim is unable to prevent an attack, it does not follow that that victim cannot at least cause some injury to the attacker.
Again, you might infer that if there was any evidence of injury having been suffered by the accused, the Crown would have adduced that evidence.

The next topic I would mention is the absence of noise. This is one of those matters - and I do not suggest the only one - which can be used both for and against the accused. It argues against some stranger having broken into the house, but gives the at least history of the deceased having been vocal to the extent of having been heard by neighbours on one side and in the Moller household, the other in the course of arguments with the accused then absent some disabling action imposed on her, you might think that she would have screamed fairly loudly at being attacked by him on the night that she died.

Nothing was heard by the other occupants of the house, it would seem. You have their statements, or you have had their statements read to you.

I need, I think, say nothing further about the deceased's dislike of the accused, or of the state of the back door nor, I think, on the topic of the deceased's other relationships.

The next topic I mentioned was the accused's denial of guilt and you have seen the interview and you will remember that Mr Moller asked him shortly after his wife's death whether in all honesty he could say that he did not kill his wife and he denied having done so.

The next topic I mentioned was the strength of the accused and the deceased and I think I have said enough on that topic.

That leads of the list I gave you but two: the question of any argument on the night in question and the medical evidence. I want to be precise on those matters and I am not going to conclude all I have to say today and, in any event, that, if I did, would leave you fairly little time before the normal adjournment to consider your verdict. You probably would not wish me to exercise the power of locking you up overnight, so what I am going to do is finish early today and we will start at 10 o'clock in the morning and you will finally be asked to retire, I think, probably by half past 10, to consider your verdict.

So, while I have not quite finished all I want to say and I want to remind you of some of the legal matters very briefly, I have said most of what I want to say. I will invite you to retire now and we will start again at 10 o'clock tomorrow morning when I will be asking you to consider your verdict probably about 10.30.

IN THE ABSENCE OF THE JURY 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Does your Honour intend locking them up if they are still considering their verdict tomorrow night? 
If your Honour does, I wonder if they should be told to bring overnight facilities? 
HIS HONOUR: It is a difficult question. I won't because once one says that, there is pressure on them to reach a verdict.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: On the other hand, if that is the course your Honour intends to take -- 
HIS HONOUR: No, I think, unless either counsel wants to make any representations or submissions, I would probably let them go at the end of tomorrow's proceedings if they have not reached a verdict and bring them back on Wednesday.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: It is just the way your Honour prefaced it by saying not wanting to lock them up overnight.

WILLIAMS: I must say, I did not take that inference, your Honour.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: Your Honour has not directed the jury as to the drawing of inferences.

HIS HONOUR: I invite both of you to raise any matters now.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: Just one factual matter and that is that your Honour just directed the jury as to the presence or absence of blood, that there is evidence on the Crown case from - I assume your Honour was speaking about
Detective Whybro - that there would be a substantial amount of blood on the person who inflicted those injuries.

HIS HONOUR: I do not think I said "substantial." 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: You did say "substantial," your Honour.

WILLIAMS: I did not think so, your Honour, but I am told your Honour did.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: The only evidence comes from Detective Whybro at page 47 where she is asked, "Would you agree with me" - at line 53 - "that there would ... vicinity of the deceased ...." She says it is possible. She certainly does not say -- 
HIS HONOUR: If I said "substantial," it was not a word I intended to use and I will correct that.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: Thank you, your Honour. That is the only factual matter.

ADJOURNED TO 10AM TUESDAY 18 JUNE 1996 * * * 
