

Regina versus George Mark Barbouttis Regina versus Rodney Harold Dale Regina v
Stephen Francie Single Nos. 60262/94, 60263/94 and 60264/94 Criminal Law and
Practice - Conspiracy [1995] NSWSC 115 (31 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1) SMART(2) AND DUNFORD(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, 6 December #DATE 18:9:1995 #ADD 31:10:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant        C K Maxwell QC 
Solicitors for the Appellant
S E O'Connor 
Counsel for the Respondents       P Byrne 
Solicitors for the Respondents     William P
O'Brien
ORDER
Appeals dismissed
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ The issue in this appeal concerns what is sometimes, loosely, described as the problem of a conspiracy to achieve an impossible object. As the facts of the present case show, that is a somewhat ambiguous expression.
The matter comes before the court by way of a Crown appeal, pursuant to [s5C](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5c.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/), against the quashing of an indictment by his Honour Judge Graham in the District Court. No point is taken by the Crown as to the procedure that was followed in the court below, and the matter has been argued upon the assumption that, if his Honour were correct in the view he took of the law, then it was appropriate for him to make an order quashing the indictment.
It will be necessary to consider the precise form of the charge against the respondents, and the particulars that were given. It is convenient, however, to commence by stating in a summary form the circumstances which resulted in the prosecution. These appear from the particulars of overt acts set out in the indictment. What follows was common ground before Graham DCJ and in this court.
For the purpose of exposing persons suspected of dealing in stolen cigarettes, the police set up an operation in which an undercover police officer sought out persons interested in acquiring, at a very cheap price, cigarettes which were represented to have been stolen. The undercover operative made contact with the three respondents, and certain other people, and they expressed an interest in buying stolen cigarettes from him. After a series of meetings, and some negotiations as to price, an agreement was entered into. The undercover operative had a truck on which there were loaded eighty boxes of cigarettes. According to the Crown, the respondents (and others) agreed to purchase fifty of those eighty boxes of cigarettes. That agreement was alleged to constitute the conspiracy.
The Crown case was that the agreement to acquire the cigarettes, to which the respondents were parties, related to specific, ascertained, goods, ie fifty boxes of cigarettes which were in the truck. The boxes were inspected by one of the respondents and a price was agreed.
At that stage the police intervened, and the transaction proceeded no further.
Although it is alleged that the respondents believed the cigarettes they agreed to purchase to have been stolen, in truth, the cigarettes were not stolen. They had been loaned to the police by a cigarette manufacturing company, for the purpose of the occasion.
Presumably the conspiracy, as charged, was confined to an agreement whose object was the purchase of the fifty particular boxes in question at least partly because of the way in which the transaction was set up, and the element of entrapment involved in it. I do not use the word "entrapment" in any technical sense, or for the purpose of attaching to it any particular legal consequence. It was not submitted that it is of legal significance for the purposes of this appeal, although it was foreshadowed that, if this appeal were allowed, the respondents would wish to raise the point in separate proceedings. (cf Ridgeway versus The Queen <case>; [(1995) 69 ALJR 484).] The point is that the particular transaction was initiated by the undercover police officer, and there appears to have been no evidence of any anterior, or wider, agreement between the alleged conspirators. The object of their agreement was to purchase the fifty boxes of cigarettes shown to them by the putative vendor.
According to the Crown, the respondents believed, albeit mistakenly, that the cigarettes were stolen. It follows, so the Crown contends, that they were parties to a conspiracy to receive stolen property.
 .
The respondents were charged as follows: "On the 9th May 1994 the Director of Public Prosecutions, on behalf of Her Majesty, charges that George Mark Barbouttis,
Rodney Harold Dale, Stephen Francis Single, between about the 6th September and the nd October 1992 at Auburn and elsewhere in the State of New South Wales did conspire together and amongst themselves and with persons known as Theo and
Tony to commit a Criminal offence, namely the offence of receiving stolen property." .
The offence of receiving stolen property is created by [s188](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s188.html) of the [Crimes
Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), which is in the following terms: "188 Whosoever receives, or disposes of, or attempts to dispose of, any property, the stealing whereof amounts to felony, knowing the same to have been stolen, shall be guilty of felony, and may be indicted, either as an accessory after the fact, or for a substantive felony, and in the latter case whether the principal felon has been previously tried or not, or is amenable to justice or not, and in either case shall be liable to penal servitude for ten years." [Section 189](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s189.html), which is to like effect, deals with a case where the stealing of property is a misdemeanour.
The elements of the offence of receiving are, so far as is presently relevant, receiving property knowing the same to have been stolen. If the sale had gone ahead, and the respondents had taken delivery of the cigarettes, they could not have been convicted of receiving stolen property.
What, however, of a charge that they had conspired to receive stolen property?
The particulars, which were included in the indictment, were expressed as follows: "The object of the conspiracy was the purchase of cigarettes which the accused believed were stolen. At no stage were these cigarettes stolen. The cigarettes were obtained and placed in a truck by police officers for the purpose of satisfying the accused that there were in fact cigarettes available to be supplied to them upon the payment of money."
There is some ambiguity in those particulars. However, as was noted above, the argument was conducted on the basis that the agreement to buy cigarettes, which was alleged to constitute the conspiracy, was an agreement to purchase fifty boxes which were on the truck referred to.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondents, at first instance, that the outcome of the case is determined by the principles applied by the House of Lords in Director of Public Prosecutions versus Nock [(1978) AC 979.] That submission was accepted. Accordingly, it is convenient to begin a review of the authorities by reference to that decision.
In Nock the defendants agreed to produce cocaine by separating it from other substances in a powder which they believed to be a mixture of a certain kind. In fact the powder was a mixture of a different kind, and contained no cocaine. As a result, there were no circumstances in which cocaine could have been produced from it. The House of Lords held that a conviction of conspiracy could not stand. A great deal was said to turn upon the scope of the conspiracy charged. The defendants were not simply charged with conspiring to produce cocaine. Lord Russell of Killowen said ((1978) AC at 993): "The important point to note is that the agreement that is said to have been an unlawful conspiracy was not an agreement in general terms to produce cocaine, but an agreement in specific terms to produce cocaine from a particular powder which in fact, however treated, would never yield cocaine.
In order to see whether there is a criminal conspiracy it is necessary to consider the whole agreement. The specific limits of the agreement cannot be discarded, leaving a general agreement to produce cocaine, for that would be to find an agreement other than that which was made: and that is not a permissible approach to any agreement, conspiracy or other."
On a reading of the bare facts as they appear from the Law Reports, that may seem a slightly surprising characterisation of the crime.
Their Lordships, however, made it clear that they regarded that characterisation as decisive.
Lord Scarman said at 998: "This is a case not of an agreement to commit a crime capable of being committed in the way agreed upon, but frustrated by a supervening event making its completion impossible ....
but of an agreement upon a course of conduct which could not in any circumstances result in the statutory offence alleged ie the offence of producing the controlled drug, cocaine."
The leading speech was that of Lord Scarman, with whom the other members of the House of Lords agreed. The principal difficulty in determining the present status of -Nock as a persuasive authority in this State lies in the circumstance that, central to the reasoning of Lord Scarman, was the proposition that the recent decision of the House of Lords in Reg versus Smith (1975) AC 476, (sometimes cited as Haughton v Smith), a case concerning the crime of attempt, applied with equal force to the crime of conspiracy. That was a case where the charge was one of attempting to handle stolen goods. At the time of the attempted handling, the goods had been restored to lawful custody. This had occurred in the following circumstances.
Police officers stopped, on a motorway, a van containing stolen goods.
They decided to allow the driver to continue his journey along the motorway, but with two police officers in the van. When the van arrived at a service area a number of people, including Smith, handled the goods. The Crown conceded that, at the time of the alleged offence of attempting to handle stolen property, the goods, being in the lawful custody of the police, had ceased to be stolen goods.
The House of Lords held that the accused must be acquitted.
Lord Scarman regarded the offences of attempt and conspiracy as being, in point of principle, indistinguishable. The case of Smith, he said, stood for the proposition that steps on the way to the doing of something which is thereafter done, and which is no crime, or steps on the way to doing something which, if done, would have been no crime, cannot be regarded as attempts to commit a crime ((1978) AC at 998). Applying that principle to conspiracy, his
Lordship concluded that where two or more persons agreed upon a course of conduct with the object of committing a criminal offence, but, unknown to them, it is not possible to achieve their object by the course of conduct agreed upon, they do not commit the crime of conspiracy.
The decision of the House of Lords in Smith has since been severely criticised. A later decision in which the
House of Lords followed Smith was subsequently overruled by the House of Lords. The courts of a number of
Australian States, including this court, have refused to follow Smith.
The decision in Smith was followed by the House of Lords in Anderton v
Ryan <case>; [(1985) AC 560.] That was a case of attempt, but otherwise the facts were very close to the facts of the present case. The accused set out to buy a very cheap video cassette recorder believing, erroneously, that it had been stolen.
The House of Lords held that she could not be convicted of an attempt to receive stolen property. After the decision in Smith, the English Parliament had introduced legislation aimed at overcoming its effect, but the House of
Lords held that the legislation was not effective to do so.
In Reg versus Shivpuri <case>; [(1987) 1 AC 1] the House of Lords declared Anderton v
Ryan to have been wrongly decided, and overruled it. What makes the decision so striking is that one of the parties to it (Lord Hailsham of St Marylebone
LC) had been a party to the decision in Smith, and the author of the leading speech (Lord Bridge of Harwich) had been the author of one of the leading speeches in Anderton versus Ryan. The recantation, therefore, was doubly impressive. Shivpuri was a case of attempt, involving vegetable substances erroneously believed by the accused to be heroin.
The House of Lords held that the accused was properly convicted of attempting to be knowingly concerned in dealing with and harbouring a controlled drug. Lord Bridge, on reconsideration, found the distinction between objectively innocent acts and objectively guilty acts impossible to sustain. Nor did his Lordship think that a solution could be found by distinguishing between the dominant and subordinate intention of the accused. In that respect the observations of the
Lord Chancellor are of interest, having regard to the circumstances of the present case. He said (at 12), referring to a possible basis of distinguishing the facts of Shivpuri from Anderton v Ryan: "In this connection I do not feel it would have been necessary to invoke the doctrine of dominant and subordinate intention referred to by my noble and learned friend. The sole intent of the instant appellant from start to finish was to defeat the customs prohibition. In Anderton versus Ryan the only intention of Mrs Ryan was to buy a particular video cassette recorder at a knock-down price, and the fact that she believed it to be stolen formed no part of that intention. It was a belief, assumed to be false, and not an intention at all. It was a false belief as to a state of fact, and, if it became an intention it was only the result of the deeming provisions of (the English legislation). Whether or not Anderton versus Ryan was correctly decided, one has to go to (the legislation) to decide whether Mrs Ryan had committed a criminal attempt under the Act as the result of her belief, assumed to be false, that the video cassette recorder had in fact been stolen.
Similarly, to my mind, the only intention of the lustful youth postulated .... by way of example in Anderton v Ryan was to have carnal connection with a particular girl.
One has to go to (the deeming provision in the legislation) to discover whether or not a criminal attempt had been committed as the result of his false belief that she was under age."
The lustful youth mentioned in the above passage is one of the characters commonly referred to in examples which are thrown up to illustrate the difficulties that can arise in this area of the law. He is the person who is supposed to have had sexual intercourse with a girl he mistakenly believed to be under the age of sixteen, when in truth, she was over the age of sixteen.
Another common example is the very one which arises in the present case, that is, of the person who receives, or sets out to receive, property which he mistakenly believes to be stolen but, which is, in fact, not stolen. In both of those cases there has been a mistake of fact. To ask whether the person in question has (to use the language of conspiracy) achieved his entire object or (to use the language of attempt) has done all he set out to do, invites a further enquiry as to the meaning of the question. It is a matter upon which distinguished commentators have disagreed.
In an article entitled "The Lords and Impossible Attempts or Quis
Custodiet Ipsos Custodes?" [(1986) 45 CLJ 33], Professor Glanville Williams made it plain, in the strongest terms, that he thought that Smith was a bad decision, and that the refusal of the House of Lords in Anderton versus Ryan to apply the subsequent legislation in such a manner as to reverse the effect of
Smith was perverse. He pointed out that the House of Lords had failed to recognise a material distinction between mistakes of fact and mistakes of law.
He also pointed out that the use of the term "impossibility" to describe all of the problems that arise in this area is inadequate, and that those problems manifest themselves in a variety of forms.
In relation to mistakes of fact, he addressed a distinction which had been drawn by another distinguished academic, Professor Smith, and which was noted above. Professor
Smith (like Lord Hailsham) saw a difference between a mistaken belief going to motivation and a mistaken belief not going to motivation.
To return to the lustful youth, his mistaken belief that the girl was under sixteen was not part of the reason why he wanted to have intercourse with her. Similarly, a receiver of property mistakenly believed to be stolen is motivated by a desire to obtain the property, not by a desire to acquire something that has been stolen. (The same distinction is supported by George P
Fletcher, "Constructing a Theory of Impossible Attempts" 1986 Criminal Justice
Ethics'. V.5 p53). Professor Williams rejected the distinction as irrelevant.
It will be necessary to return to his reasons.
In recent years, because drug trafficking has occupied so much of the attention of law enforcement agencies, and because of the methods used by police to detect offenders, this whole issue has taken on considerable practical importance. It is not uncommon for the importation, manufacture, or dealing in illegal drugs to take place under police surveillance, and with the-involvement of undercover operatives. Nor is it uncommon for illegal drugs to be intercepted, and for other, harmless, substances to be substituted. Many cases now come before the courts where, for example, persons handling what they believed to be heroin were in truth handling a substance such as plaster of paris, or where persons who believed they were acquiring heroin from a drug dealer were in truth acquiring some harmless substance from an undercover police officer.
Some months after the decision of the House of Lords in Shivpuri, the
Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria, in Britten versus Alpogut <case>; [(1987) VR ] had to consider a case involving an alleged attempt to import prohibited imports into Australia contrary to the Customs Act 1909 . The defendant believed that he was importing, and intended to import, cannabis, but the substance which he believed to be cannabis was found, on analysis, to be another substance (an anaesthetic, procaine), which was not a prohibited import. Relying upon the decision of the House of Lords in Smith, the magistrate before whom the defendant was charged dismissed the information.
The prosecuting authorities sought a review of the magistrate's decision, and the Supreme Court held that the magistrate was in error.
The court applied
Shivpuri, and held that Smith did not reflect the common law of Victoria applicable to criminal attempts. It was held that, in order to prove the statutory crime of attempting to import prohibited imports into Australia, what the Crown had to prove was that the accused intended to import something which as a matter of law was a prohibited import, as he knew, and that, in pursuit of his intention, he did acts sufficiently proximate to the intended commission of the crime. The court rejected what was described as the heresy in Smith. That heresy was said to involve a departure from the subjective nature of the crime of attempt, and an illogical and inappropriate concentration upon the question whether, if the accused had continued with the course of conduct upon which he had embarked, then, objectively, a crime would have been committed.
Britten versus Alpogut was followed by the Supreme
Court of Western Australia in R versus Lee [(1990) 47 A Crim R 187] Mai was a case which raised precisely the kind of problem, in the area of drug dealing, mentioned above. Police officers substituted plaster of paris for what the persons involved in a drug transaction believed to be heroin. In consequence, one of those persons, the accused Mai, came to be in possession of a quantity of what he thought was heroin. It was, in truth, plaster of paris. His physical custody of that substance was the basis of the charge of attempting to obtain possession of heroin. The Court of Criminal
Appeal held that he was properly convicted of that offence. The court declined to follow Smith, and applied the law as stated in Britten v Alpogut.
The present being a case of conspiracy, rather than attempt, the respondents argued that the decision of the House of Lords which is directly in point is Nock, and not Smith. Furthermore, the respondents pointed out that in 1984, in R versus Kingswell [(1984) 14 A Crim R 211], this court accepted that
Nock represented the law of New South Wales. Kingswell was a case involving an alleged conspiracy to import heroin. The supposed importance of the performance of the conspiracy arose out of the circumstance that the person believed by the accused to be willing to import the heroin was an undercover police officer who had no intention of doing so. The Court of Criminal
Appeal upheld the conviction. It was accepted that Nock reflected the common law of
New South Wales, but the decision turned upon the finding that what was involved was not a relevant form of impossibility.
Two observations are to be made about Kingswell.
First, since the court distinguished Nock on the facts, the statement that it reflected the law of
New South Wales was obiter, and it did not form part of any binding rule established by the case. Second, Kingswell was decided before the House of
Lords, in Shivpuri, decided that the common law of England was different from what had been assumed in Nock. Nock, it will be remembered, was decided shortly after Smith, and the essence of the reasoning in Nock was that there was no relevant difference, on the point in question, between the law of attempt and the law of conspiracy.
On any view of the matter, the status of Nock as a persuasive authority in this State has been undermined by the decision of the House of Lords not to follow Smith, and by the subsequent refusal of a number of Australian courts and, in particular, this court, to follow Smith.
Whatever be the outcome of the present appeal, it cannot turn upon the decisions in Nock and Kingswell. If the respondents are entitled to succeed, it must be upon some basis other than mere reliance upon that line of authority, because subsequent events have discredited the reasoning in Nock.
This does not necessarily mean that the respondents must fail. To succeed, however, they need to find a way of distinguishing the more modern authorities such as Shivpuri, Britten versus Alpogut and Mai.
It should be added that the Court of Appeal of New Zealand has recently indicated a strong disinclination to follow Nock. In R versus Sew Hoy [(1994) 1 NZLR ], a case involving a charge of conspiracy to defraud revenue, the trial judge, relying upon the authority of Nock, directed an acquittal.
The Court of
Appeal held that he was wrong to do so, although it should be said that the court evidently regarded the case as distinguishable from Nock on the facts.
In the course of reviewing the current status of Nock as an authority the court observed (at 265) that it had tended to follow its progenitor Smith into disfavour. The judgment contains an interesting comparison of the offences of conspiracy and attempt. The court was far from convinced that it was appropriate to regard conspiracy as being, like attempt, a merely auxiliary crime. In other words, their Honours had strong reservations about the premise upon which Nock proceeded in following Smith. The court said at 267: "We have indicated a view that even if, in accordance with
Nock, conspiracy is to be regarded as similar to attempt in that it is auxiliary to the main offence, the appellants here would be guilty of the crime. However, there is much force in the view that conspiracy is properly to be seen as an act inherently culpable. The essence of conspiracy is an intention to agree coupled with a common design to commit an offence, that is, to put the design into effect. The mens rea is the intention to achieve the common design, the actus reus is the fact of agreement, the translation of that intention into agreement ... The offence is therefore complete when the agreement is made. It is the making of the agreement itself that is seen as inimical to the public good, whether it proceeds further or not. It should therefore be irrelevant that it may not be possible in fact to carry out the agreement.
This does not mean that the parties are punished on the basis of guilty intention alone. They will have gone further, and have acted upon their intention by making their agreement." .
If, then, the respondents cannot rely upon Nock as a persuasive authority, is there a basis upon which, without offending the principles acted upon in the later cases, they can demonstrate that the present is a case in which the charge of conspiracy, as particularised, was bound to fail?
It was argued on behalf of the respondents that, even if, in the light of later authorities, it must be accepted that the reasoning in Nock was flawed, nevertheless that case remains instructive in one important respect. It demonstrates the importance of identifying with precision the nature and scope of the agreement the making of which constitutes the alleged conspiracy.
If, in Nock, it had been decided that the agreement was to produce cocaine, then the problem in the case would never have arisen.
There is nothing impossible about performing an agreement to produce cocaine. If the conspirators are so inept as to set about performing their agreement in a manner that will be incapable of producing cocaine, that is beside the point. It was the characterisation of the agreement as one to produce cocaine from specific chemicals that gave rise to the issue in the case. Similarly, in the present case, there would be no problem of law (as distinct, perhaps, from a problem of proof) if the Crown were alleging that the respondents had agreed between themselves to find and buy some stolen cigarettes. If, for example, the respondents had formed themselves into a buying group to purchase stolen cigarettes and had sought out the person who offered to supply them in the present case, it would not have made a presently relevant difference to their culpability if, unknown to them, he had been an undercover policeman who had no real intention of supplying stolen cigarettes. They would, nevertheless, have made an agreement between themselves to purchase stolen cigarettes. The problem in the present case arises because the agreement alleged by the Crown is limited to an agreement to purchase, from a particular person, particular cigarettes which were mistakenly believed to be stolen. It is the same as the case referred to in the passage in the judgment of the Lord Chancellor in
Shivpuri quoted above, where his Lordship said that the only intention of Mrs
Ryan was to buy a particular video cassette recorder at a knock-down price, and the fact that she believed it to be stolen formed no part of that intention.
This, it is argued, is the critical feature of the present case, and is what distinguishes it from Shivpuri and the later cases considered above. The point may be illustrated by contrasting it with the facts in Mai. In that case the accused wanted, and intended, to obtain possession of heroin. He only wanted the substance which he in fact possessed because he believed it to be heroin. That belief was not merely incidental to his intention, it was central to it. It was a belief concerning the nature and quality of what he set out to possess, and but for that belief he would have had no desire to possess the object in question. On the other hand, as the Lord Chancellor saw the matter,
Mrs Ryan's belief that the video cassette recorder was stolen was merely incidental. It explained why she wanted to buy it in the sense that it explained why it was so cheap. It did not, however, go to the nature and quality of what she was seeking to buy. Is this a legally relevant distinction? That is the question upon which the present case turns.
Professor Glanville Williams in the article referred to above, considered and rejected the distinction.
He referred to it as "the motivation theory", and listed a number of objections, including the following. First, he said, it does not rely on grounds of policy. Second, motivation is normally irrelevant for intention. Most receivers of stolen goods would prefer to have non-stolen goods at the same price, if given the choice, but if a person knows or believes goods are stolen then he intends to receive stolen goods. Third, because of the complexity of human motivation, the law does not normally go behind intention to motivation.
If a person who believes he is smuggling heroin into the country has been paid for his services as a courier in advance, then he might not care whether what is in his suitcase is heroin or plaster of paris. However, his criminal culpability cannot be made to turn upon whether he is paid in advance or only upon delivery. Fourth, insofar as the law should be in step with morality, there is no difference in moral culpability, in a case such as the present, between the narrower agreement alleged by the Crown and the wider agreement upon the basis of which the respondents would clearly be liable. Professor Williams, it should be said, was considering the issue in the context of the law of attempt, but his arguments would have equal weight in relation to the law of conspiracy.
In the context of conspiracy, the matter must depend upon the proper characterisation of the object of the agreement made by the conspirators, or what the Court of Appeal of New Zealand called "the common design". In the present case, as particularised by the Crown, was the obtaining of stolen goods part of the common design, or can the agreement, for the purposes of the criminal law, be characterised accurately and adequately as an agreement to acquire fifty particular boxes of cigarettes for a certain price, such agreement being accompanied by a merely incidental belief that the reason the cigarettes were so cheap was that they were stolen?
If the cigarettes had in truth been stolen, then such a characterisation would certainly not have been regarded as either accurate or adequate for the purposes of the criminal law. Far from being incidental, the belief that the cigarettes were stolen would have been of the essence of the agreement. How can that belief cease to be of the essence of the agreement because of an objective fact unknown to the parties to the agreement?
On the facts alleged by the Crown, the common design of the respondents and the other parties to the agreement was to obtain stolen property. The law relating to conspiracy punishes people because of the nature of the agreement they have made. I find it impossible to regard the (alleged) belief on the part of the parties to the agreement that the cigarettes were stolen as a merely incidental matter. For the reasons advanced by Professor Glanville
Williams, the motivation theory, which underlies the argument that the belief was incidental, cannot be sustained. If a person intends to receive goods which he knows or believes are stolen, than he intends to receive stolen goods.
In conclusion I would return to a matter mentioned above. This case was argued at first instance, and before this court, on a specific point of law different from that considered by the High Court in Ridgeway, and we have not gone into the problems that may arise by reason of the conduct of the police officers.
The appeal should be allowed and the order made by Judge Graham set aside. The matter should be remitted to the District Court to be dealt with according to law.
JUDGE2
SMART J The Crown has appealed against the decision of Judge Graham quashing an Indictment charging that George Mark Barbouttis, Rodney Harold Dale and
Stephen Francis Single between about 6 September and 2 October 1992 at Auburn and elsewhere conspired together and amongst themselves and with persons known as Theo and Tony to commit the criminal offence of receiving stolen property.
These Particulars were furnished: "The object of the conspiracy was the purchase of cigarettes which the Accused believed were stolen. At no stage were these cigarettes stolen. Cigarettes were obtained and placed in a truck by Police Officers for the purposes of satisfying the
Accused that there were in fact cigarettes available to be supplied to them upon the payment of money."
These overt acts were relied upon: "1. On 7-9-92 Single and a person named Theo met an undercover
Police Officer who was using the name Peter. Single and Theo expressed a desire to purchase cigarettes and there was a discussion as to the amount of cigarettes to be supplied and the price. The retail price of a box of these cigarettes was $1,700. The price to be paid was to be in the vicinity of $400 per box. Also discussed was the method of delivery and mode of payment.
On the 8th and 9th of September, 1992 Single had further discussions with
Peter concerning the price, the amount of cigarettes to be supplied and the method of delivery.
On the 11.9.92 Single and Dale met Peter in Chisholm Road,
Auburn. There was further discussion concerning the amount of cigarettes to be supplied, the price, the fact that the cigarettes were stolen, the method of delivery and the mode of payment.
On the 22.9.92
Single had a discussion with Peter concerning the sale of the cigarettes.
On the 30.9.92 Single had a further discussion with Peter about the sale of the cigarettes.
On the 1.10.92 Peter met Single on Princess Road East,
Auburn. Single inspected the rear of Peter's truck. Single counted boxes of cigarettes which were in the rear of the truck. There were two further discussions between Peter and
Single on this date relative to the purchase of these cigarettes.
At 12.30 pm on 1.10.92 Single and Dale went to Chisholm Road,
Auburn where they inspected 80 boxes of cigarettes which were in the rear of Peter's truck. There was a discussion between
Peter and Dale about price and delivery.
At 12.50 pm on 1.10.92
Peter met Single, Dale Barbouttis,
Theo and Tony at the Auburn Gardens Coffee Lounge. Single and
Dale discussed with Peter the quantity, the price and mode of delivery.
Single, Theo and Peter then went to the Auburn Bowling
Club Car Park where Peter's truck with cigarettes was parked.
Single and Barbouttis then inspected the rear of the truck where the cigarettes were contained.
Single, Barbouttis, Theo and Peter then returned to the
Auburn Gardens Coffee Lounge where, in the presence of Dale,
Single produced a white bag which contained a sum of money.
Peter then gave the keys to his truck to Single who handed them to Barbouttis who then walked away in the direction of the Auburn Bowling Club car park where Peter's truck with the cigarettes was parked."
The cigarettes in the truck had been lent to the police by a cigarette company. Initially, the agreement was of a general character, namely, that cigarettes were to be purchased by the accused from Peter, the police detective, at about $400 per box, a very cheap price. The usual retail price was $1,700 per box. Types, quantities and delivery details had to be resolved.
No particular boxes of cigarettes were in contemplation. At such a price it was likely that the cigarettes had been stolen even if nothing had been said to that effect. After the initial discussions there were further discussions as to quantities, type, delivery and other details.
Whatever the agreement was initially, by 1 October 1992 it was an agreement which had in contemplation a particular set of boxes of cigarettes.
The case before the judge proceeded on the basis colloquially and pithily encapsulated as "Here we've got some goods which are stolen. Let's agree to you receiving them".
The conspiracy alleged was deliberately framed in narrow terms, namely, that the accused agreed to receive specific cigarettes which they believed were stolen.
The Crown told the judge that it would rise or fall on the specific property. The Crown did not allege the existence of a more general conspiracy, such as an agreement to receive some stolen cigarettes at some stage. The significance of such a distinction was emphasised by the House of
Lords in DPP versus Nock [(1978) AC 979.] [Section 188](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s188.html) of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) reads: "Whosoever receives, or disposes of, or attempts to dispose of any property, the stealing whereof amounts to felony, knowing the same to have been stolen, shall, be guilty of felony ... " [Section 189](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s189.html) is in parallel terms but deals with receiving property, the stealing of which amounts to a misdemeanour.
To constitute the substantive offence of receiving under either [s.188](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s188.html) or s.[189](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s189.html) the prosecution must prove that the property in question was actually 'stolen' at the time of receipt (Walters versus Lunt (1951) 35 Cr
App R 94; Creamer KB 564).
As the cigarettes were never stolen it was impossible for the accused to have committed the substantive offence of receiving. Nevertheless, the Crown case is that the accused believed that the cigarettes were stolen and they intended to take possession of them. Accordingly, they possessed the state of mind necessary to constitute the statutory offence.
The present case involves a situation where the accused agreed to commit a substantive offence in circumstances where they could not commit that offence. Does 'impossibility' preclude liability arising for the crime of conspiracy?
Counsel for the accused primarily relied upon the principles enunciated in DPP versus Nock [(1978) AC 979] Nock can be taken as authority for this proposition: 
When two or more persons agree upon a course of conduct with the object of committing a criminal offence but, unknown to them, it is not possible to achieve their object by the course of conduct agreed upon, they do not commit the crime of conspiracy.
The Crown contended that, given recent developments in the law of attempt, Nock should no longer be regarded as authoritative. The Crown relied on R versus Mai [(1992) 26 NSWLR 371], where it was held that an attempt to commit a crime which was "impossible" of accomplishment could constitute an offence if it were proved that: the accused, with the relevant state of mind, intended to do the acts which together comprised the intended crime (that is, if the facts and circumstances had been as he believed them to be, he would have committed the crime), and with that intention, he did some act towards the commission of the crime which went beyond mere preparation and which could not reasonably be regarded as having any purpose other than the commission of that crime.

The Crown contended that similar principles should apply to the crime of conspiracy.
One of the most frequently cited formulations of the crime of conspiracy is that of Willes J in Mulcahy versus R [LR 3 HL 306] at 338, stated: "The essential elements of the crime of conspiracy are. not in doubt. "A conspiracy," said Willes J., in
Mulcahy versus R ..., "consists not merely in the intention of two or more but in the agreement of two or more to do an unlawful act, or to do a lawful act by unlawful means." It is the agreement, and not the intention, that constitutes the offence.
So long as such a design rests only in intention it is not indictable, but so soon as two or more persons form an unlawful combination the offence is complete even though no step be taken to carry out their intention."
Lord Pearson in Reg y Doot [(1973) AC 807], at 827, stated: "A conspiracy involves an agreement expressed or implied. ...
When the conspiratorial agreement has been made, the offence of conspiracy is complete, it has been committed, and the conspirators can be prosecuted even though no performance has taken place."
Woolfe LJ in R versus Bolton [(1992) 94 Cr App R 74] at 80, stated: "In the case of conspiracy as opposed to the substantive offence, it is what is agreed to be done and not what was in fact done which is all important."
The position has been authoritatively stated in Savvas v. The Oueen <case>; [69
ALJR 564] at 568 where the High Court in a joint judgment said: "It is commonplace that the ingredients of the offence of conspiracy are complete once there is agreement between two or more persons. But it is equally plain that the conspiracy does not end with the making of the agreement. It will continue so long as there are two or more parties to it intending to carry out the design."
In Gerakiteys v. The Queen <case>; [153 CLR 317] at 334 Deane J observed: "The gist of the crime of conspiracy lies in the making of the relevant agreement. It is the subject matter and purpose of the agreement which determines whether it is criminally unlawful."
In Savvas at 566 and 567 the High Court accepted that when sentencing for conspiracy "considerations which advert to 'the content and duration and reality of the conspiracy must be taken into account". The Court also observed that if an accused had a change of heart and decided not to play any part in carrying out the conspiracy this would be taken into account in mitigation of sentence. The Court referred at 567 to the shadow which the courts have cast over the bringing of conspiracy charges and the possible misuse of these charges. This is especially so where no substantive charge has been or can be brought.
The Court's remarks as to sentence highlight the problems which may arise when dealing with a charge of conspiracy. It is a particular difficulty where an agreement is made to effect an unlawful purpose or object and the agreement cannot be or is never sought to be implemented.
The Crown usually seeks to prove the conspiracy by overt acts but these are evidentiary and do not form part of the act required to constitute the crime of conspiracy. The act required to constitute the crime is limited to the acts by which the conspirators form their agreement (Partridge <case>; [(1930) 47
WN 173]
The mens rea of conspiracy was formulated by Lord Hailsham LC in Kamara [(1974) AC 104], at 119, thus: "... mens rea is an essential ingredient in the crime of conspiracy. This mens rea consists in the intention to execute the illegal elements in the conduct contemplated by the agreement, in the knowledge of those facts which render the conduct illegal ..."
The Crown contends that the requirement of the guilty mind is satisfied as the accused intended to take possession of goods which they believed were stolen and that the act required to constitute the crime was satisfied on the basis that the accused agreed amongst themselves to carry into effect their unlawful intentions. It contends that it is immaterial that the subject matter of the conspiracy, namely, stolen goods did not exist.
In Howard's Criminal Law (5th ed 1990), at p 383, it is written: "The definition of conspiracy in terms of an agreement between two or more parties to achieve an unlawful object suggests that impossibility is no bar to liability except where the object intended is not unlawful on the facts as the parties suppose them to be." 
The author contends that " ... this view of the law was clouded by the decision of the House of Lords in D.P.P. versus Nock in 1978." The decision in Nock was primarily based upon an earlier decision of their Lordships in Reg v
Smith (1975) AC 476, a case concerning impossibility in the context of attempt.
It is helpful to highlight the distinction between the crime of conspiracy and that of attempt.
In Reg versus Eagleton [(1884) Dears CC 515], at 538, Parke B described a criminal attempt thus: "The mere intention to commit a misdemeanour is not criminal.
Some act is required, and we do not think that all acts towards committing a misdemeanour are indictable. Acts remotely leading towards the commission of the offence are not to be considered as attempts to commit it, but acts immediately connected with it are."
A more recent formulation is found in the judgment of Lord Parker CJ in
Davey versus Lee [(1968) 1 QB 366], at 370, where he adopted the definition suggested in Stephen's Digest of Criminal Law (5th ed 1894), art. 50, which reads: "An attempt to commit a crime is an act done with intent to commit that crime, and forming part of a series of acts which would constitute its actual commission if it were not interrupted."
The mens rea of conspiracy, attempt and the substantive offence is satisfied by proof of an intention to commit the substantive offence.
Conspiracy, unlike attempt, does not require acts immediately connected with the commission of the offence.
In the United Kingdom the crimes of conspiracy and attempt have been treated, in the area of impossibility, as governed by similar considerations.
In Reg versus Smith (1975) AC 476 the accused was charged with attempting to handle stolen goods. At the time of the attempted handling, the goods had been restored to lawful custody and by virtue of s.24(3) of the Theft Act 1968 (UK) could no longer be regarded as stolen. It was held that no offence had been committed. Lord Hailsham (at 493) quoted with approval from the judgment of
Turner J in the Supreme Court of New Zealand in
Reg versus Donnelly [(1970) NZLR ], (at 990): "He who sets out to commit a crime may in the event fall short of the complete commission of that crime for any one of a number of reasons. First, he may, of course simply change his mind before committing any act sufficiently overt to amount to an attempt. Second, he may change his mind, but too late to deny that he had got-so far as an attempt. Third, he may be prevented by some outside agency from doing some act necessary to complete commission of the crime - as when a police officer interrupts him while he is endeavouring to force the window open, but before he has broken into the premises.
Fourth, he may suffer no such outside interference, but may fail to complete the commission of the crime through ineptitude, inefficiency or insufficient means. The jemmy which he has brought with him may not be strong enough to force the window open. Fifth, he may find that what he is proposing to do is after all impossible - not because of insufficiency of means, but because it is for some reason physically not possible, whatever means adopted. He who walks into a room intending to steal, say a specific diamond ring, and finds that the ring is no longer there, but has been removed by the owner to the bank, is thus prevented from committing the crime which he intended, and which, but for the supervening physical impossibility imposed by events he would have committed.
Sixth, he may without interruption efficiently do every act which he set out to do, but may be saved from criminal liability by the fact that what he has done, contrary to his own belief at the time, does not after all amount in law to a crime."
Lord Hailsham stated that cases falling within the first, fifth and sixth classes did not constitute indictable attempts; whereas cases falling within the second, third and fourth classes did, provided that the acts relied upon were sufficiently proximate to the completion of the substantive offence. Lord
Hailsham regarded the facts in the case before him as falling within the sixth category. He stated (at 490): "... I do not think that it is possible to convert a completed act of handling, which is not itself criminal because it was not the handling of stolen goods, into a criminal act by the simple device of alleging that it was an attempt to handle stolen goods on the ground that at the time of handling the accused falsely believed them to be stolen." 
Lord Hailsham (at 497) also approved of the following remarks of Birkett J in
Rex versus Percy Dalton (London) Ltd [(1949) 33 Cr App R 102], at 110: "Steps on the way to the completion of what would be a crime, if the acts were completed, may amount to attempts to commit that crime, to which, unless interrupted, they would have led; but steps on the way to the doing of something, which is thereafter done, and which is no crime, cannot be regarded as attempts to commit a crime." 
He then added: "... equally steps on the way to do something which is thereafter not completed, but which if done would not constitute a crime cannot be indicted as attempts to commit that crime."
In his speech Lord Hailsham gave a series of examples in which the accused had an intent to murder and did some act to carry out that intention, such as firing into a corpse or a bolster in bed, believing the body or the bolster to be his enemy who was alive or into an empty room believing his enemy was there. His Lordship thought that in general a charge of attempted murder would not lie since if the contemplated sequence of actions had been completed (as they were) no substantive offence could have been committed. In the case of conspiracy what would be the position if two men
Intended to and agreed to murder their enemy in his bed but shortly before their agreement (and unkown to them) their enemy died.
What would be the position if two soldiers intended to and agreed to kill a much hated officer but prior to the agreement the officer was killed by an enemy bullet?
Lord Reid noted the theory that if the accused does not know the true facts but erroneously believes the facts to be such that his conduct would be an offence if the facts had been as he believed them to be, he is guilty of an attempt to commit the offence. After referring to the traditional view that to constitute an attempt the act must be proximate to and not remote from the crime itself Lord Reid pointed out that where the accused had done everything which he intended to do there was no question of drawing a line so that remote acts of preparation were not attempts but acts proximate to the crime are attempts. The crime was impossible in the circumstances so that no acts could be proximate to it. Lord Reid thought the theory confused attempt with intent.
He continued: "If the facts had been as he believed they were the man would have committed a crime.
He intended to commit it. But he took no step towards the commission of a crime because there was no crime to commit."
This last sentence is, I think, the key to Lord Reid's approach. If there was no substantive offence to commit the accused could take no step towards the commission of the crime.
Lord Reid referred to a number of examples. In addition to the case where the intended victim had died before the accused carried out his acts his
Lordship referred to the man who married a woman believing that her husband was alive and they were still married but that earlier husband was dead.
Lord Reid thought that the theory was really an attempt to punish people for their guilty intention and that this was too radical a change for the courts to introduce into the criminal law.
Lord Reid said that he would not decide the matter entirely on logical argument. The life blood of the law was common sense.
Lord Reid could not accept that a person took steps towards committing a crime where there was no crime to commit. He did not regard taking steps in the belief that a crime was going to be committed as sufficient. He was not prepared to regard such steps as going beyond the intent stage although he recognised that the person had a wicked intent and had taken steps designed to result in the commission of a crime. In Lord Reid's opinion acts going nowhere, that is, where no substantive offence could be committed, should not result in or lead to criminal responsibility. For him the acts had to be capable of leading to the commission of a crime.
Lord Salmon agreed with Lord Hailsham. Lord Morris and Viscount Dilhorne in separate speeches took the same view as Lord Hailsham. The speeches of Lord
Hailsham and Lord Reid were not inconsistent. Lord Reid's approach was pragmatic and based on the difficulties he saw arising if the Crown's approach were correct.
The principles enunciated by their Lordships in Smith were subsequently applied to the law of conspiracy in DPP versus Nock [(1978) AC 979.] The accused were charged with conspiracy to contravene section 4 of the Misuse of Drugs Act (UK). They had agreed to produce cocaine by separating it from other substances in a powder which they believed to be a mixture of cocaine and lignocaine. In fact, the powder was lignocaine hydro-chloride, a substance which contained no cocaine at all. It was impossible for the accused to have produced any quantity of the prohibited drug. Their Lordships unanimously held that no crime of conspiracy had been committed.
The ultimate decision in Nock turned on the nature of the agreement entered into between the defendants, which, as in the present case, was narrow and specific in scope. At 993 Lord Russell stated: "The important point to note is that the agreement that is said to have been an unlawful conspiracy was not an agreement in general terms to produce cocaine, but an agreement in specific terms to produce cocaine from a particular powder which in fact, however treated, would never yield cocaine. In order to see whether there is a criminal conspiracy it is necessary to consider the whole agreement. The specific limits of the agreement cannot be discarded, leaving a general agreement to produce cocaine, for that would be to find an agreement other than that which was made: and that is not a permissible approach to any agreement, conspiracy or other."
The leading judgment in Nock was delivered by Lord Scarman, with whom the other Law Lords agreed. His Lordship began by referring to the classic definition of conspiracy as expounded by Willes J in Mulcahy versus R. He stated (at 994): "The agreement itself constitutes the offence. The mens rea of the offence is the intention to do the unlawful act: the actus reus is the fact of agreement".
He compared the crime of conspiracy with that of attempt and, after noting the differences between the two, pointed out that both were "auxiliary" in nature and could equally be justified on the basis of preventing the commission of substantive offences.
He concluded that, as such, conspiracy should be placed "firmly in the same class and category as attempts to commit a crime." At he stated: "Both are criminal because they are steps towards the commission of a substantive offence. The distinction between the two is that, whereas a "proximate" act is that which constitutes the crime of attempt, agreement is the necessary ingredient in conspiracy. The importance of the distinction is that agreement may, and usually will, occur well before the first step which can be said to be an attempt. The law of conspiracy thus makes possible an earlier intervention by the law to prevent the commission of the substantive offence. But the distinction has no relevance in determining whether the impossibility of committing the substantive offence should be a defence. Indeed ... logic and justice would seem to require that the question as to the effect of the impossibility of the substantive offence should be answered in the same way, whether the crime charged be conspiracy or attempt."
It was held that the principles enunciated in Smith were equally applicable to conspiracy.
At 998 Lord Scarman stated: "Unless the law requires the actus reus as well as mens rea to be proved, men, whether they be accused of conspiracy or attempt, will be punished for their guilty intentions alone.
... common sense and justice combine to require of the law that no man should be punished criminally for the intention with which he enters an agreement unless it can also be shown that what he has agreed to do is unlawful."
The principles enunciated in Smith and Nock, and their application to both conspiracy and attempt, were criticised by the English Law Commission in its report Criminal
Law: Attempt, and Impossibility in Relation to Attempt,
Conspiracy and Incitement (Report No 102, 1980). At para 2.93, in relation to attempt, and again at para 3.6, in relation to conspiracy, the Commission stated: the present law as determined by the two cases in the House of Lords (ie. Smith and Nock) leads us to the conclusion that it is over-analytical in its approach,.
uncertain in its application and produces results which informed public opinion would regard as capricious."
The Commission recommended (at para 3.6) that it was desirable in principle to provide a similar solution for the problem of impossibility in relation to both conspiracy and attempt.
The Commission concluded (at para 2.96): "... if a man possesses the appropriate mens rea and commits acts which are sufficiently proximate to the actus reus of a criminal offence, he is guilty of attempting to commit that offence. Where, with that intention, he commits acts which, if the facts were as he believed them to be, would have amounted to the actus reus of the full crime or would have been sufficiently proximate to amount to an attempt, we cannot see why his failure to appreciate the true facts should, in principle, relieve him of liability for the attempt. We stress that this solution to the problem does not punish people simply for their intentions."
At para 3.6 the Commission concluded that the above reasoning was equally applicable in the context of conspiracy. The Commission ultimately recommended, in relation to both conspiracy and attempt, that impossibility in committing the substantive offence contemplated should provide no bar to conviction, save where the situation involves an agreement or attempt to commit an offence unknown to the law, or what is often referred to as an "imaginary" crime.
Following the recommendations of the Commission, the United Kingdom
Parliament introduced amendments aimed at overcoming the decisions in Smith and in Nock. As to attempt, the amendments appeared in s.1 of the
Criminal
Attempts Act 1981 (UK). As to conspiracy, s.1(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977 was amended.
In Anderton versus Ryan <case>; [(1985) AC 560] the House of Lords was called upon to construe the effect of the amendments to the legislation. The amendments to the Criminal Attempts
Act 1981 (UK) abolished the common law offence of attempt and provided a statutory code. A woman had bought a video recorder believing it to be stolen. It was not stolen. She was charged with attempting to receive stolen property. By majority, the House held that on the true construction of s.1 of the Criminal Attempts Act 1981 the accused could not be convicted of an attempt to commit an offence where, whatever the person's belief, the completed act intended could not, on the true facts, have amounted to a criminal offence.
Lord Roskill attached considerable weight to the views of Lord Reid in R v. Smith, supra. Lord Roskill shared with Lord Bridge the view that, if the actions of the accused were innocent in themselves and the accused had done everything that person intended to do, the language of s.1(3) did not compel the conclusion that erroneous belief in the existence of the facts which, if true, would have made the completed act a crime, made the person guilty of an attempt to commit the crime.
Lord Bridge, like Lord Roskill, referred to a number of troublesome examples. One of those was of a man who has consensual intercourse with a girl over 16 believing her to be under 16. His Lordship pointed out that the common feature of the examples and the case under appeal was that the mind alone was guilty and the acts themselves were innocent.
Underlying both speeches is the distinction between "objectively innocent acts" and "guilty acts".
In R v. Shivpuri <case>; [1987 1 AC 1] the House of Lords reconsidered Anderton v.
Ryan and over-ruled it. Shivpuri intended to receive, store and in due course pass on to third parties packages of heroin or cannabis which he knew had been smuggled into England from India. He received a quantity of vegetable material, held it in his flat and attempted to deliver a package of that material to another man. That material was not heroin or cannabis. The House held that in each case the act was more than preparatory to the commission of the intended offence.
It was not and could not be more than preparatory to the commission of the actual offence, because on the facts, the commission of the actual offence was impossible.
Lord Bridge's consideration of the problem was based on the true construction of s.1 of the Criminal Attempts Act 1981. His narration of the facts is in line with the terms of the section. After referring to the examples in his speech in Anderton, Lord Bridge stated that the majority of the House in Anderton was concerned to avoid convictions in situations which most people, as a matter of common sense, would not regard as involving criminality. Lord Bridge regretted that the House had previously attached undue weight to some extreme and exceptional cases where prosecution was theoretically possible (p.21).
 .
I interpolate that I would not be content to rely on prosecutional discretion not to prosecute in extreme and exceptional circumstances.
Lord Bridge, with whom the other members of the House agreed, concluded that, as a matter of statutory construction, s.1 of the Criminal Attempts Act precluded the defence of impossibility in relation to criminal attempts.
He was not directing his attention to the common law position.
At 21-22 his Lordship said: " ... the distinction between acts which are "objectively innocent" and those which are not is an essential element in the reasoning in Anderton versus Ryan and the decision, unless it can be supported on some other ground, must stand or fall by the validity of this distinction. I am satisfied on further consideration that the concept of "objective innocence" is incapable of sensible application in relation to the law of criminal attempts. The reason for this is that in any attempt to commit an offence which involves "an act which is more than merely preparatory to the commission of the offence" but for any reason fails, so that in the event no offence is committed, must ex hypothesi, from the point of view of the criminal law, be "objectively innocent". What turns what would otherwise, from the point of view of the criminal law, be an innocent act into a crime is the intent of the actor to commit an offence.
... These considerations lead me to the conclusion that the distinction sought to be drawn in
Anderton versus Ryan between innocent and guilty acts considered "objectively" and independently of the state of mind of the actor cannot be sensibly maintained."
Since Shivpuri most Australian States have rejected the defence of impossibility as to attempt and refused or expressed a disinclination to follow Smith: NSW - R versus Mai [(1992) 26 NSWLR 371] and R v. English [(1993) 68
A Crim R 96]; Tas: Baldock versus Barnes (Zeeman J, 22 June 1993, unreported).
In Britten versus Alpogut <case>; [(1987) VR 929] at 938 Murphy J, with whom Fullagar and Gobbo JJ agreed, said: "... at common law a criminal attempt is committed if it is proven that the accused had at all material times the guilty intent to commit a recognised crime and it is proven that at the same time he did an act or acts (which in appropriate circumstances would include omissions) which are seen to be sufficiently proximate to the commission of the said crime and are not seen to be merely preparatory to it. The 'objective innocence' or otherwise of those acts is irrelevant.
Impossibility is also irrelevant, unless it be that the so-called crime intended is not a crime known to the law, in which case a criminal attempt to commit it cannot be made." 
This decision was applied in R v. Cogley <case>; [1989 VR 799] where the facts were very unusual.
Notwithstanding Shivpuri and the Australian decisions I regard the views of Lord Reid in
Smith as formidable and the examples given in Anderton v. Ryan at 583 and Shivpuri at 21 as telling. I would not be content to rely on the prosecution not prosecuting where the result may be unfair. Indeed in Shivpuri
Lord Bridge at 21 indicated some surprise that a prosecution was instituted in
Anderton.
In Smith Lord Reid recognised the difficulty in the area of the law of attempt.
He thought that there could be many borderline cases.
He declined to lay down the law in detail beyond what was necessary for that case. Lord Reid was concerned about unfair results. Interestingly, Lord
Bridge remarked at 23 that if there was a valid ground on which to distinguish cases similar to that considered in Anderton his present opinion would not foreclose the option of making such a distinction in some future case.
The case law as to conspiracy has been far less extensive than that as to attempt.
The decision in Nock was accepted by the Supreme Court of South
Australia in The Queen versus Wilk [(1982) 32 SASR 12] In both these cases, however, the facts were distinguished from those in Nock and it was unnecessary for the court to apply the principles that had been enunciated in Nock.
Over the years different approaches have been adopted to the crime of conspiracy. It has been treated as an "inchoate" or "auxiliary" offence falling short of the substantive offence intended. Courts have discouraged its use where a substantive offence is available. Some courts have regarded it as an offence of great gravity sometimes outweighing in injury to the public, the commission of the contemplated crime. The combination is said to represent a threat to the fabric of society.
These two approaches are not necessarily inconsistent. Much depends on the particular facts. Contrast Nock and R v.
Carusi (1990) A Crim R at 195; affd [(1990) 64 ALJR 657] at 644; Mogul Steamship Co Ltd v. McGregor, Gow and Co.
[(1889) 23 QBD 589] by I.Dennis.
It could be contended that the second rationale supports the view that impossibility is not and should not be a bar. There are instances where the agreement could be one to commit a grave crime. There are other instances which could relate to relatively minor crimes. In such circumstances there would be no threat to the fabric of society. This is not a case where the graver view would be appropriate. Any distinction based on the gravity of the crime the subject of the agreement would be unsustainable as well as difficult of application. Where what was agreed to be done is impossible, the agreement has little bite as nothing of consequence can happen.
In R v. Sew Hoy [(1994) 1 NZLR 257] it was held that it was irrelevant that it may not be possible to carry out the agreement. This was on the basis that the offence was complete when the agreement was made. This approach has much logical force but it is too clinical. It does not distinguish between the various types of impossibility.
Even if Smith be wrongly decided, I do not regard the reasoning in
Shivpuri and Mai as well as the other Australian cases as necessarily being determinative of the position as to conspiracy. However, the attempt cases are persuasive. Many of the examples which troubled the House of Lords in the attempt cases would, with slight adjustments, be troubling in the conspiracy context.
The accused may have rights to seek permanent stay of proceedings:
Ridgeway v. The Queen <case>; [69 ALJR 484.] That is a separate matter and does not touch upon the present issues.
I return to the facts of the present case. The agreement alleged appears to have been formed after a series of telephone discussions and meetings between one or more of the accused and police officers (undercover), the effect of which was that there were stolen cigarettes available for purchase cheaply. Further, the accused were shown the specific cigarettes which were to be the subject of the agreement. The accused were given to understand that these were stolen. The essence of the matter was that the accused agreed to purchase specific cigarettes which were not stolen.

Those cigarettes were falsely represented by the police to be stolen and the accused believed that they were stolen and that they were purchasing cigarettes which had been stolen. While the accused had the purpose or object of purchasing stolen cigarettes the specific cigarettes the subject matter of the agreement to purchase were not stolen.
I would uphold the order of the judge quashing the indictment.
JUDGE3
DUNFORD J I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgments prepared by Gleeson CJ and Smart J where the nature of the proceedings and the precise form of the charge and the particulars contained in the Indictment are set out.
For the reasons given by the Chief Justice I agree that R versus Smith (Roger)
AC 476 and Anderton versus Ryan <case>;  <case>; [(1987) 1 AC 1] not to follow R versus Smith and Anderton versus Ryan, and by the subsequent refusal by the
Australian Courts, including this Court, to follow
R versus Smith.
The law relating to criminal conspiracies has often been regarded as analogous to that relating to criminal attempts; but I am not sure that this is universally appropriate or correct. Whereas the law relating to criminal attempts focuses on the party's intention and the steps taken to achieve that intention, the law relating to conspiracy focuses on the agreement between the parties rather than on their intention and the steps taken to achieve such intention. It is not sufficient to constitute a conspiracy that two persons have the same criminal intention unless there is an agreement between them relating to the carrying out of Such intention:
R versus Moore  <case>; [(1930) 30 SR 336] at 338.
Similar questions concerning the relationship between attempts and conspiracy have recently been discussed by the New
Zealand Court of Appeal in
R versus Sew Hoy [(1994) 1 NZLR 257] where it was held that persons could be guilty of conspiracy to defraud the revenue notwithstanding that the means adopted pursuant to the agreement was incapable of achieving their purpose. The Court (at 261) regarded the premise that conspiracy and attempt should be treated alike as debatable, and after a review of the authorities expressed their conclusions in the passage (at 267) quoted by the Chief Justice.
In my opinion, the determination of this appeal does not depend on resolving general principles relating to a conspiracy to achieve the impossible, but rather on considering the nature of the conspiracy here alleged.
Conspiracy has been defined as the agreement of two or more persons to do an unlawful act or to do a lawful act by unlawful means: R versus Mulcahy [(1868) LR HL 306] at 317, R versus Gunn. and Howden supra. The identity of the conspiracy is to be found in what the conspirators commonly agree to or accept:
Gerakiteys v
The Queen <case>; [(1984) 153 CLR 317] at 327 per Brennan J, and as the gist of the offence lies in the making of the relevant agreement, it is the subject matter and purpose of the agreement which determines whether it is criminally unlawful; ibid at 334 per Deane J.
In the present case the conspiracy alleged was one to commit a specific substantive offence, namely the offence of receiving stolen property contrary to <case> [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), by receiving the cigarettes which were at the time in the back of the relevant truck and which were not stolen.
In order to establish the commission of the substantive offence wider [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s188.html) it would be necessary for the Crown to establish: 
That the cigarettes had been stolen.
That the accused received such cigarettes; and
That at the time they knew the cigarettes were stolen.

See Watson and Purnell: Criminal Law in NSW vol 1 para, (698). Belief as opposed to mere suspicion, but falling short of actual knowledge, that the cigarettes were stolen would be sufficient: R versus Schipanski [(1987) 17 NSWLR .] But here, if the alleged conspiracy had been carried out, no substantive offence would have been committed because the goods had not been stolen, even though the accused mistakenly believed they had been, and proof of the stolen character of the goods is fundamental to a conviction under the section: R v
Sbarra [(1919) 13 Cr App R 118.]
It follows that the conspiracy alleged in this case was not an agreement to do an unlawful act because the act agreed to be done, ie receive the cigarettes, was not an unlawful act; nor was it an agreement to do a lawful act by unlawful means; and so it was not, in my view, a criminal conspiracy.
The subject matter of the agreement was the cigarettes in the back of the truck and the purpose of the agreement was to acquire or receive them, but the acquisition of those particular cigarettes would not have been criminal, irrespective of the beliefs of the appellants.
If the alleged conspirators in Director of Public Prosecutions versus Nock had succeeded in carrying out their agreement to produce cocaine from the mixture they had (which was impossible), they would have committed a
Substantive criminal offence and similarly, to borrow the example referred to by the Chief
Justice, if the two robbers had succeeded in robbing the country branch of tile bank (which was impossible because the branch had previously closed down) they also would have committed a substantive criminal offence; but on the other hand, if the appellants in the present case had succeeded in carrying out their agreement by acquiring the cigarettes which were in the back of the truck (which was in fact possible), they would not have committed any substantive criminal offence because the goods were not stolen.
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed and the ruling of Judge
Graham quashing the Indictment affirmed.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/115.html  
