

Laminex (Australia) Pty Limited versus Coe Manufacturing Company and Ors Matter
No 21051/95 [1997] NSWSC 665 (19 December 1997) 
Last Updated: 4 March 1998 
Laminex (Australia) Pty Limited versus Coe Manufacturing Company & Ors /95 December 1997 
James J 
Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - Laminex (Australia) Pty Limited versus Coe Manufacturing Company & Ors 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Two applications brought in these proceedings are to be determined by me. One application has been brought by all the defendants. The other application has been brought by the plaintiff. 
The plaintiff in the principal proceedings, Laminex (Australia) Pty Limited, is a company incorporated in New South Wales and carrying on business in New
South Wales as a manufacturer of medium density fibreboard. I will refer to the plaintiff as "Laminex".

The first defendant in the principal proceedings, Coe Manufacturing Company, is a company incorporated in the United States of America, which carries on inter alia the business of designing and manufacturing plant and equipment used in the production of medium density fibreboard ("MDF"). I will refer to
Coe Manufacturing Company as "Coe". A division of Coe is known as "Washington
Iron Works".

The second defendant and the third defendant in the principal proceedings,
Reliance Electric Industrial Company and Reliance Electric Company respectively, are related companies incorporated and carrying on business in the United States of America. The fourth defendant, Reliance Automation Pty
Limited, is a company incorporated and carrying on business in Australia and has some relationship to the second defendant and the third defendant. I will sometimes in this judgment refer to the second defendant and the third defendant as "the Reliance Companies". I will refer to the fourth defendant as "Reliance Australia" 
The principal proceedings were commenced by a statement of claim filed in the common law division of this Court on 16 October 1995. The parties to the proceedings as originally constituted were the same parties as I have stated above, except that "Washington Iron Works" was originally joined as a defendant in the erroneous belief that it was a separate entity.

On the same day, 16 October 1995, proceedings were commenced by Laminex against the same defendants in the United States, in a circuit court of the
State of Oregon for the county of Multnomah. The claims made by Laminex in the
United States proceedings were similar to the claims made in the New South
Wales proceedings.

The originating process in the United States proceedings was served on the defendants on or about 6 December 1995. However, the statement of claim in the
New South Wales proceedings was not served on the defendants until February , when it was served on Coe and the Reliance defendants in the United
States. The other defendant, Reliance Australia, was served within Australia.

On 19 August 1996 Laminex was given leave to amend its statement of claim in the proceedings in this Court and an amended statement of claim was filed on September 1996.

Neither Coe nor either of the Reliance defendants has filed an appearance to either the original or the amended statement of claim.

The substantive relief sought in the defendants' notice of motion is:-
That service of the originating process herein be set aside upon the ground that it was not authorised by the Supreme Court Rules.
That these proceedings be stayed permanently upon the ground that: the Supreme Court of New South Wales is an inappropriate forum for the trial of the proceedings; the plaintiff agreed to submit all disputes arising out of its relations with the First Defendant to the Courts of Multnomah County, Oregon, USA; the New South Wales proceedings are vexatious or oppressive.

The substantive relief sought in the plaintiff's notice of motion is that the plaintiff be given leave pursuant to Pt10 r2 of the Supreme Court Rules to proceed against the first defendant, the second defendant and the third defendant.

A very considerable volume of affidavit evidence was read on the hearing of the applications. The hearing itself lasted almost three days. No fewer than five sets of written submissions were received by me.

As I indicated earlier, Laminex has for a number of years carried on the business of manufacturing medium density fibreboard. Coe has carried on the business of selling goods and services worldwide for use in the forest products industry.

Laminex and Coe have had dealings with each other over a number of years. In about 1980 Coe supplied to Laminex a medium density fibreboard forming line, which was used by Laminex at its premises in Wagga in New South Wales for manufacturing medium density fibreboard panels. The forming line included a press and a loader. On four occasions between December 1987 and August 1989
Laminex purchased items of equipment from Coe.

In 1991 Mr Kelly, an engineer at Laminex's Wagga premises who has since become
Laminex's process development manager, was giving consideration to how the performance of the press in Laminex's medium density fibreboard forming line at Wagga could be improved. In 1991 Mr Bird of Coe visited Laminex's premises in Wagga and advised Mr Kelly that Coe could provide press control systems which were more advanced than Laminex's existing system. After Mr Bird's visit
Mr Kelly on 5 June 1991 sent a fax to Mr Bird, which included the following passage:- "During your last visit to Laminex Australia's Wagga Wagga plant we were discussing the problems we experience with our press LVOT position system. You mentioned a new system to replace the LVOTs which was far more accurate, repetitive and reliable.

Could you please send me details on the system's principle of operation, accuracy and repeatability; and installation details".

In June 1991 Mr Bird sent to Mr Kelly "a package of information" including a leaflet and specifications relating to Coe's press process management systems.
On 4 July 1991 Mr Kelly sent a fax to Mr Bird in which he said inter alia:- "We want to tackle the whole press control system... currently our biggest concern is upgrading or replacing the LVOTs".

On 12 July 1991 Mr Marsh of Coe replied on behalf of Mr Bird in the following terms:- "Meredith Bird has requested I respond to your recent fax addressed to him.

We have no problems controlling the complete Washington Iron Works press with either an Allen Bradley PLC 540 Or 525 and its related hardware and software.
We do however, recommend a video screen for operator interface.

The replacement of the LVOT's with the new temposonics is also a routine up- grade.

We would be pleased to do any of this engineering. We can also supply all hardware and software needed.

If you require pricing for any portion of your project, please feel free to contact myself or Don Bleha." 
On 2 August 1991 Mr Kelly sent a fax to Mr Marsh in which he said inter alia:- "We are interested in you quoting the engineering portion of this project upgrade.
 * * * 
We have a need immediately to improve our existing LVOT system, the new temposonic system may be the answer. Please send details of this system including price, installation operation and set up procedures".

There was a delay in replying to Mr Kelly's fax of 2 August 1991. However, on January 1992 Mr Marsh sent a fax to Mr Kelly. In this fax Mr Marsh said that he had needed "to do a little more research". However, "after this research I am convinced I have all the bases covered and will be issuing this quote next week".

In a fax of 24 January 1992 from Mr Kelly to Mr Marsh Mr Kelly requested that a representative of Coe, preferably Mr Marsh, attend at Laminex's premises on February 1992 to discuss the project of upgrading Laminex's press. However,
Mr Rudman, engineering manager of Coe, replied by a fax of 27 January 1992 that Mr Marsh was unavailable and that it was impossible to arrange a visit to
Australia by any of Coe's personnel in early February 1992.

In a fax of 3 February 1992 from Mr Kelly to Mr Rudman Mr Kelly expressed his disappointment with the contents of the fax of 27 January 1992. The fax of 3
February 1992 concluded as follows:- "As I also advised your Department in my last Fax of January 24, 1992 that WIW need to bring us up to date with the company's capacity to support our requirements, and inform us of WIWs press technology. Your specialist needs to see our operation, hear what we have to say and assist our project.

We are currently upgrading our MDF operation and the press is strategically a most important part of this upgrade, so I can only stress to you the urgency of the discussions we require. By the end of February 1992, we will be making some extremely important decisions regarding our press operation, and WIW need to show us some extensive support to continue being an integral part of this operation.

I look forward to a more positive response from WIW to indicate that representation from WIW will hold technical discussions with us in February." 
Subsequently, an arrangement was made for Mr Rudman of Coe to come to
Australia and between 19 and 21 February 1992 Mr Rudman viewed Laminex's operations at Wagga and discussed with representatives of Laminex the proposed upgrading of the press and the loader.

On 6 March 1992 by a fax from Mr Rudman to Mr Kelly Coe submitted "budget estimates for the items discussed during our recent visit to the Wagga Wagga plant". Paragraph F of the budget estimates dealt with the upgrading of
Laminex's loader.

Between 25 April and 7 May 1992 Mr Kelly visited the United States and inspected plants which included Coe's press control system to see the system in operation. He was accompanied on these inspections by either Mr Marsh or Mr
Rudman of Coe.

In June 1992 a Mr Sandford, an engineer from Coe, attended Laminex's New South
Wales premises. The functions to be performed by him were set out in a fax from Coe to Laminex of 30 April 1992 and included a full inspection of
Laminex's press and a number of other tasks.

On 22 June 1992 by a fax from Mr Rudman to Coe, Coe made "a firm proposal...
for the supply of the parts and equipment described and quoted in the following paragraphs". After this proposal was made Mr Kelly made various further enquiries and there were further negotiations between the parties. In a telephone conversation Mr Marsh told Mr Kelly that the system Coe would be supplying to Laminex would have been tested in the United States.

On 21 December 1992 Mr Rudman, sent a facsimile to Mr Kelly of Laminex, which was in the following terms:- "Our revised quotation follows this FAX. It contains a take-out price for the mat weight system and contains the clarifications you requested regarding documentation and shipping weights, etc.

The rates we charge for sending our key engineers into the field are very modest when compared to what others charge for similar skills. General
Electric, for instance, charges us US$125 per hour for technician class help on their drives. I'm sorry but we can not move on this point.

We were able to move a little on the payment terms, as you will see from the quote. And we were able to allow you some time to see that the changes work as intended. 15 days is plenty of time to be assured that the equipment works correctly. It may take you longer to learn how to use it, but we can not be held responsible for this.

I trust this package is one you can now accept. We look forward to working with you on this." 
A quotation from Coe to Laminex No.3456-PR-92R1 was forwarded at the same time. The quotation commenced:- "This is a REVISED FIRM proposal from WASHINGTON IRON WORKS, a Division of The
Coe Manufacturing Company (`Seller'), for the supply of the parts, equipment and engineering as described and quoted in the following paragraphs. The price will hold firm as quoted, with no escalation if this proposal is accepted prior to February 19, 1993.
DESCRIPTION - Five primarily electrical / control related jobs are offered and described below. Each has been reviewed at length with the Buyer's agents and the Seller believes the scope of work and the results that are expected are well understood by both parties. Each job is described in the following paragraphs and the work quoted in Paragraph 8 of this proposal." 
The five jobs were then described in the rest of paragraph 1. Paragraph 3 of the quotation was as follows:-.
 "SHIPMENT - Seller can have the purchased equipment and documentation ready for shipment to Buyer 14 to 16 weeks after receipt of order and down payment, contingent upon prompt receipt of all necessary information and approvals from the Buyer. It should be noted that the time required for the Buyer to complete the required programming, once the documentation has been delivered, will be significant and must be considered in scheduling the installation and start up of this work.

Shipment shall be F.O.B Portland, Oregon, USA, with the exception of the nuclear source. Title and risk of loss shall pass to Buyer upon delivery to
Carrier. The nuclear device will be shipped freight prepaid by the manufacturer of the device, who is experienced in the handling and export of such devices. The costs incurred in shipping the nuclear device are estimated to be about US$ 9,500 Delivered Duty Unpaid. Seller's actual expenses will be billed at cost." 
Paragraph 4 of the quotation provided:- "INSTALLATION AND START UP - The extent of the field work involved in the installation of the above items is generally known, but the actual time that it will take can not be accurately estimated because of the unanticipated delays inherent in working with older, existing equipment. Rather than burden the basic project with the risks of the worst start up conditions, it is the
Seller's custom to handle start-up services on a Time and Material basis under a separate order.

The services of installation supervisors and engineers are NOT included in the quoted prices but will be made available as required. Charges for such services will be based upon Seller's rate schedule in effect at the time service is rendered, plus reasonable travel and living expenses, which will be billed at Seller's cost. Purchase of this service is necessary to keep the equipment warranties in full effect.

For budgeting purposes it can be assumed the rate for Seller's personnel will be US$ 550 per day, plus reasonable travel and living expenses. This rate must be held because the personnel to be assigned are key members of the Seller's staff. The nuclear gauge specialist will bill at the rate of about US$ 1600 per day portal to portal, including travel and living expenses. These services will be billed at cost." 
Paragraph 6 of the quotation provided:- "INTERPRETATION - The following provisions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this Proposal: 
A. This Proposal supersedes all prior understandings, transactions and communications of Buyer and Seller with respect to the matters referred to herein. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, SELLER'S ONLY
WARRANTIES OF THE GOODS SOLD UNDER THIS PROPOSAL ARE THOSE SET FORTH IN THE
ATTACHED GENERAL CONDITIONS, WHICH ARE BY REFERENCE INCORPORATED HEREIN AS
THOUGH SET FORTH IN FULL IN THE PROPOSAL.

B. No amendment or modification of the terms of the Proposal shall be binding upon Seller unless in writing and signed at Seller's home office by its
General Manager. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, BUYER'S
ACCEPTANCE OF THIS PROPOSAL IS LIMITED TO THE TERMS OF THIS PROPOSAL, AND
SELLER SHALL NOT BE BOUND BY ANY ISSUE OF ANY PURCHASE ORDERS OR OTHER
SUBSEQUENT INSTRUMENT RECEIVED BY SELLER FROM BUYER THAT ARE ADDITIONAL TO OR
DIFFERENT FROM THE TERMS OF THIS PROPOSAL UNLESS SO SIGNED ON BEHALF OF
SELLER.

C. The Seller reserves the right to make technical modifications or improvements during the period of design and manufacture. Such changes will not alter the basic functioning nor the established criteria for the project." 
Paragraph 7 of the quotation provided:- 
GUARANTEES - Seller guarantees that the equipment and services offered will result in the operation and performance described, provided certain conditions are met. These conditions include the requirement that the Seller's instructions for installation, modification and programming are followed and that the existing equipment with which the new supply interfaces is in good condition and operates in a consistent manner as originally designed. Also that the Seller's field service representatives are engaged on the job as described in Paragraph 3 above. The Seller has no control over the condition or operation of the plant or the existing primary equipment, and therefore can make no guarantees as to time and cost savings, thickness tolerances and the like beyond those specifics stated in the above paragraphs describing each specific job." 
Paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 were in the following terms:- "TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SALE - The attached `General Conditions for
Sale' of Washington Iron Works Boardline Equipment shall govern the terms and conditions of this sale and are specifically made an integral part of this proposal.
PRICE - The price of the equipment to be supplied by Seller in accordance with the Proposal is: 
A. One (1) lot of parts, materials and engineering to complete the five jobs described in paragraphs 1A through 1E above: 
Price, FOB Portland, OR, USA US$ 318,800 
B. DEDUCT for removing Item 1C `Mat Weight Display and Control System' from the scope of supply: 
Price, DEDUCT US$ 74, ,400 
These proposal prices are subject to adjustment as herein provided. Buyer agrees to pay all sales, excise, use or similar taxes or import duties due as a result of this sale and to indemnify and hold harmless the Seller for all or other amounts that are due or may become due.
PAYMENT - The Total Purchase Price shall be paid as follows: 
A. A down payment of twenty five percent (25%) of the Purchase Price shall be paid to Seller on the date a formal purchase order is delivered to Seller.

B. Within Three (3) weeks of date of down payment the Purchaser shall open an irrevocable letter of credit for the balance of the contract amount confirmed at a first class U.S. Bank payable in U.S. Dollars issued in the name of Coe
Export Corporation, 609 Bank Street, Painesville, Ohio 44077. Partial payment against partial shipments permitted. Payment upon shipment against the letter of credit for the balance of outstanding funds shall be made upon presentation of a `Clean Bill of Lading' and a `Commercial Invoice'. Letter of credit shall be established for five (5) months longer than longest specified shipment time and will be extended if necessary.

C. Seventy percent (70%) of the Purchase Price shall be paid to Seller upon shipment of equipment materials, documentation and/or engineering, F.O.B
Manufacturing Point.

D. The final five percent (5%) payment on the contract shall be released 15 calendar days after start-up. Seller to notify bank of such start-up within two (2) working days of said event and authorize payment in writing upon the completion of the 15 day period. Under any circumstances, final release of the balance due on the order shall be made no later than 90 days after shipment.

E. In the event of change in the Total Purchase Price occurring after the acceptance of this Proposal, each installation payable thereafter shall be increased or decreased to reflect such change." 
A copy of the general conditions for sales of Washington Iron Works was also forwarded. Paragraph 1 was in the following terms:- "1. SELLER warrants that all goods delivered under this order will conform to the requirements of this order including the descriptions, specifications and drawings, as attached to the Contract documents as signed by BUYER and will be free from defects in material and workmanship. This warranty is limited to defects appearing and stated in written claims made within one year following date of start-up (i.e. first operation) or eighteen months following the date of final delivery, whichever comes first, and is conditioned upon normal use, maintenance and service of the warranted goods and upon written notice being given to SELLER promptly after BUYER's discovery of a breach of this warranty.
In full discharge of this warranty SELLER shall repair or replace non- conforming or defective goods, free of charge, FOB SELLER's plant. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply to all such replacements and repaired goods.
If SELLER shall attempt repairs and/or replacements which shall for any reason fail SELLER may continue its attempts for such time as in its judgment it justified. No such attempt or continuation shall enlarge or alter the foregoing warranty. If in SELLER's judgment any defect cannot be remedied by repairs or replacements, or if for any other reason SELLER shall determine that repairs or replacements are commercially impractical SELLER may cease such repairs or replacement and BUYER shall have the exclusive remedy upon return of such defective parts or materials to SELLER the right to a refund in the amount of the then air market value of such defective part or material for its defect as reasonably established by SELLER.
The foregoing warranty does not cover and SELLER makes no warranty with respect to: 
Failure or damage due to negligence other than that of SELLER accident abuse, improper installation (other than installations made by SELLER) or improper operation: 
Goods which have been in any way repaired, altered or tampered with by anyone other than an authorized representative of SELLER.

Goods damaged in shipment or otherwise without the fault of SELLER.
SELLER will assign to BUYER all its rights arising out of its supplier's warranties
THE FOREGOING WARRANTY IS EXCLUSIVE AND IN LIEU OF ALL OTHER WARRANTIES
WRITTEN OR ORAL EXPRESS OR IMPLIED INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY
OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE." 
Paragraph 5 contained a conditional, limited promise by Washington Iron Works to indemnify a buyer against claims arising out of or in connection with the operations of Washington Iron Works in carrying out a buyer's order.

Paragraph 9 of the general conditions provided in part as follows:- "91 ANY ACTION BY BUYER AGAINST SELLER FOR ANY BREACH OF ANY OBLIGATION UNDER
PARAGRAPH 1 OR PARAGRAPH 5 HEREOF OR OTHERWISE ARISING IN CONNECTION WITH THE
EQUIPMENT OR GOODS PROVIDED TO BUYER HEREUNDER MUST BE COMMENCED NO LATER THAN
TWO YEARS FOLLOWING SELLER'S FINAL DELIVERY OF THE EQUIPMENT TO BUYER OR 90
DAYS AFTER THE EXPIRATION OF THE WARRANTY PERIOD SET FORTH IN PARAGRAPH 1
HEREOF WHICHEVER DATE IS LATER.
In any action arising under this proposal or any resulting agreement,
SELLER shall in no event be liable for any incidental, contingent, special or consequential damages, including but not limited to, loss of profits or revenue, loss of use of any item or services to be furnished hereunder, cost of capital, cost of substitute items, facilities or services down-time costs or any claims of BUYER'S customers nor shall SELLER have any liability to
BUYER OR TO ANY THIRD PARTY FOR DAMAGES OF ANY CHARACTER, EXCEPT AS PROVIDED
IN Paragraph 5, for any defect in the design manufacture, installation or operation of any equipment or other goods furnished hereunder. whether any such claimed liability is based on contract tort, (including negligence) or otherwise. The provisions of this paragraph are without prejudice to the provisions of Paragraph 1." 
Importantly, paragraph 113 of the general conditions for sales provided:- "The terms, conditions and covenants herein shall be governed by the laws of the State of Oregon and venue shall be in Multnomah County, Oregon for any actions arising hereunder".

On 29 December 1992 Mr Smith, an engineering manager of Laminex, sent a facsimile to Mr Rudman, which was in the following terms:- "Ref: YOUR QUOTATION No 3456-PR-92 R1 
David, 
Thank you for your promptness in reply to our enquiries regarding the above proposal. I was disappointed to see the payment terms had not changed along with the delivery dates. It was indicated during our telephone conversation that the longest lead-time was for the density measurement, does this mean that the sub-projects may have individual lead-times less than the 14 weeks.
If so, might you consider part deliveries as the equipment becomes available.

With this in mind, please accept this as formal acceptance of your proposal (3456-PR-92 R1) against which we now issue our purchase order number 7755 with delivery expected 2/4/93 or sooner. A formal order document will be despatched immediately along with the necessary deposit monies, however, I would ask you to progress the necessary arrangements upon receipt of this Fax. In order to expedite the earliest delivery possible.

We will be in contact with yourselves soon, to discuss the arrangements further. Should you have any concerns regarding this Fax. Please do not hesitate to contact myself or Steve".

For the purposes of the hearing of the defendants' application Laminex's solicitors required the defendants to produce the original or any copy of the facsimile of 29 December 1992 which bore handwritten notations by any lawyers or agents of Coe. A copy of the facsimile was produced which bears the following notations. The words in the facsimile reading "Please accept this as formal acceptance of your proposal (3456-PR-92 R1) against which we now issue our purchase order No.7755 with delivery expected 2/4/93 or sooner" are underlined and words have been written in the margin which read "delivery was stated 14 weeks or mid-April. Will have to clear this up". At the top of the documents the words "this is a ~~confirming ord~~ tentative order" are written.

On 6 January 1993 Laminex telegraphically transferred A$118,427.37 to Coe.
This was a down payment of 25 percent of the purchase price (see paragraph 10A of Coe's revised quotation).

On 21 January 1993 Coe sent another facsimile to Laminex, which was in the following terms:- "First, we want to thank you for the order of the press upgrade work presented in our quotation 3456-PR-92 R1 of December 21, 1992. We have received the down payment and are considering your FAX of December 29, 1992, with the purchase order number it contained, (7755) as sufficient commitment on your part for us to proceed with the work.

Our accountants, however, are anxious to complete the formalities of this order and would appreciate receiving a formal purchase order as soon as possible. This, and the opening of the Letter of Credit, are matters that need to be completed in the near future. Is there anything we can do to help in finalizing these steps? 
The work on this project is already under way and we fully expect to complete the shop and office work in the 16 weeks stated in our proposal. All the hardware, software and documentation should ship about the first week in May.

Again, thanks for the order. We look forward to working with you on this".

On 25 January 1993 Laminex caused a letter of credit to be opened in favour of
Coe with a United States Bank for US$ 239,100, which, it was accepted, was the balance of the purchase price.

On 4 February 1993 Laminex sent a fax to Coe in the following terms:- "Find following - Our order for the control upgrades. Quote No: 3456-PR-92: and Laminex specifications. A letter of credit has been raised in your favour".

The purchase order from Laminex No. 7755, which was faxed to Coe on 4 February is dated 27 January 1993. On the purchase order "the goods" are described as "supply of parts, equipment and engineering as per your proposal 3456-PR-92
R1 and Laminex specifications, terms and conditions attached. Item C details to confirm at a later date".

It was not suggested at the hearing that the last words in the description of the goods "item C details to confirm at a later date" had any significance.
The Laminex specifications consisting of two pages were faxed to Coe at the same time as the purchase order was faxed. These specifications were in the following terms:- "TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION: 
The following details are to be perused by Washington Iron Works in acceptance of Laminex Industries order number 7755 dated 27/Jan/1993. Reference
Washington Iron Works Quotation No 3456-PR-92 R1.

ENGINEERING DESIGN: 
All engineering design and equipment is to comply to Australian Standards
Mechanically and Electrically.

All engineering design to conform with existing equipment. Details of which have been provided to Washington Iron Works. Any additional details required can be made readily available.

ENGINEERING DESIGN FUNCTIONALITY: 
Engineering functionality of equipment and systems to be supplied must maintain compatibility with software and hardware of existing equipment. This includes Mechanical, Electrical and Digitally based systems equipment with which Washington Iron Works will supply and Interface with.

Engineering functionality must operate within the capability of the existing equipment without the requirement of custom software programs or additional heavy engineering. The engineering functionality must operate within a safe secure, reliable manner and maintain the integrity of the existing equipment with which Washington Iron Works will Interface. It is expected that
Washington Iron Works are familiar with the equipment and systems with which they will interface and engineer the proposed designs within the capability of this equipment.

POWER REQUIREMENTS: 
Control Power: 220 to 240 VAC 50 HZ 
VDC is used in few applications on this site.

VDC is used in few PLC applications on this site.
 VDC Hard wired to Automax system (New Press Loader applications) will be acceptable.

Line Power: 415 VAC 3 Phase.

Washington Iron Works will be required to send details of power distribution with explanation of the inter-connections and the purpose of operation. For confirmation by Laminex.

EXISTING PRESS EQUIPMENT: 
Where Washington Iron Works have advised Laminex Industries that existing equipment is required to be in an `as new state' Washington Iron Works is to advise Laminex Industries with detailed specifications of the expected equipment state; i.e. Gear Slip, Switch position and operation,.....etc. To enable the above conditions to be achieved in advance of the project modifications taking place.

GENERAL: 
It is generally accepted that Laminex Industries will be responsible for the installation of mechanical and electrical equipment and programming of the
PLC3 and Foxboro I/A system.

But it is deemed the method of operation, details and requirements of the equipment is the responsibility of Washington Iron Works." 
Notwithstanding the reference in the purchase order to "terms and conditions attached", no copy of Laminex's terms and conditions was faxed to Coe on 4
February 1993. It was accepted at the hearing that Laminex's "terms and conditions" was intended by Laminex to be a reference to the conditions of purchase set out on the reverse of Laminex's form of purchase order but the reverse of a Laminex purchase order was not faxed to Coe. A number of these conditions are inconsistent with Coe's general conditions for sales. Condition of Laminex's terms and conditions provides:- "Acknowledgment by the vendor to the purchaser or any delivery made by the vendor pursuant to this order shall constitute acceptance by the vendor of this order and a contract between the vendor and the purchaser in terms of this order to the exclusion of all other terms and conditions between them".

On 9 February 1993 Coe sent a fax to Laminex, which is in the following terms:- "In early January we received the down payment for the referenced order and the letter of credit for the balance of the order was received on January th. Both these documents appear in good order. On February 4th we received your FAX and its attached purchase order No. 7755 for this work, with your proposed terms and conditions. We appreciate this nice order, but the terms and conditions you attach are new to us and not part of what we offered.

Your objective in adding these conditions is understandable, but we are talking about modifications to well used, existing equipment and the risks of accepting the rather drastic blanket guaranties you ask for are more than we can accept. This project is a joint effort in which LAMINEX must accept their fair share of the risks.

We want this to be a successful and trouble free installation. And we fully intend to do everything possible to comply with the spirit of your requests, which are all directed towards this same end.

But we must ask that you amend this purchase order by formally agreeing to the comments and exceptions enumerated below. I will address the points of your proposed specification paragraph by paragraph, in the order presented in your
FAX.

A) We are not familiar enough with Australian standards to make a blanket guarantee of compliance with these standards. North American standards are generally acceptable in your country and we have had no problems with this on recent projects in Australia. Engineering design will be to North American standards except for specifics such as power supply voltages and frequency.

With regards to the nuclear device, our subcontractor is working directly with his representative in Australia. Because of the strict nature of regulations governing this type of equipment, I'm confident it will meet your standards by the time it is delivered.

B) We will make every effort to assure what we provide fits with the existing equipment. Our work will be based on the original drawings for this equipment, revised to the best of our knowledge to reflect existing field conditions. We rely on LAMINEX to alert us to any serious field changes in the areas pertinent to this work.

We are talking about modifications to relatively old and well used equipment.
We can not make a blanket guarantee that the equipment will install perfectly, with no fitting or adjusting required.

C) We know the control program we are providing is compatible in the global sense with WIW press, loading and unloading equipment, of which yours is typical. We have the system already operating on other WIW lines. We also know the ALLEN-BRADLEY and RELIANCE AUTOMAX equipment, whether old or new, will all be compatible, with no custom software required.

We are providing written and graphic logic that we know is compatible with your mechanical systems and in itself is compatible with all digital control systems. It is in fact operating already in several different systems. But incorporating this logic into your specific FOXBORO system is the responsibility of LAMINEX. We will do our best to be sure everything works, but supplying detailed expertise on the FOXBORO systems, or other systems over which we have no control, is outside the scope of our work.

D) See Paragraph C) above.

E) We will design for the line and control power specifications you list.

F) Single line drawings of the modifications to the power systems will be sent for your review and approval.

G) We will provide mechanical specifications, switch count, switch specification, switch location and other details to advise you on the reconditioning of the existing equipment.

H) Your statement regarding LAMINEX responsibility for electrical and mechanical installation agrees with our understanding.

I) We agree that definition of the method of operation is our responsibility, but because the equipment is used and has seen changes since it was installed, the details of this upgrade are a shared responsibility. As I've indicated several times, to guarantee every aspect of this endeavour to be perfect and flawless would be unrealistic. But we know the new systems will work and we are investing our best efforts to see that all goes as smoothly as possible.

We trust these clarifications are acceptable to you and ask that you acknowledge this by returning a signed copy of this communication to us, by courier, in the very near future".

It can be seen that in this fax, despite the reference in the first paragraph to Laminex's "terms and conditions", Coe was replying to the Laminex specifications, a copy of which had been forwarded on 4 February 1993, and not to the Laminex "terms and conditions", no copy of which had been forwarded on February 1993.

On 23 March 1993 Laminex forwarded to Coe a copy of Coe's communication of 9
February 1993, containing the following endorsement signed on behalf of
Laminex:- "The above conditions are accepted as revisions to the Laminex specifications, terms and conditions referred to in your purchase order No. 7755 and attached thereto".

The items which Coe had agreed to supply were delivered. However, Mr Kelly became concerned whether the upgrading of Laminex's press and loader could be carried out during a planned shutdown of Laminex's factory at Easter 1993. In
March 1993 Mr Kelly went to the United States and it was agreed by Laminex and
Coe that the upgrading of the press would be carried out in April 1993 but that the upgrading of the loader would be carried out later.

The upgrading of the press took place at Wagga in April 1993. Mr Ken Grant and
Mr Orville Lervold, engineers from Coe, were present to commission the equipment supplied by Coe, following its installation at Laminex's premises.

In October 1993 Laminex's premises at Wagga were handed over to Coe for the purpose of the upgrading of the loader. A team of engineers provided by Coe, including Mr Grant, attended. Mr Smith, who was employed by one or other of the Reliance defendants, attended at the expense of Coe as part of the team of engineers supplied by Coe. Mr Davenport attended on behalf of the Reliance defendants.

The loader upgrading was not completed within the agreed time. According to Mr
Kelly's affidavit, the Reliance defendants had provided faulty and untested software. On 17 November 1993 Coe sent a fax to Laminex, which stated inter alia:- "The programming of the Reliance drives was an unexpected problem, overshadowing all else in the big picture. WIW bought the drives and programming for this upgrade from Reliance in good faith and worked closely with them throughout the project. We had no reason to expect anything but a reasonably easy and relatively trouble free start-up. It was well into the start-up when it first became evident the Reliance software was flawed and that in fact Reliance had not delivered a viable programme. Reliance has acknowledged this".

It is also alleged by Mr Kelly in his affidavit that Coe failed to properly calculate the power supply to the clutches driving the loader multiflights and that Coe failed to provide clutches which were strong enough to perform their designated task.

Mr Kelly said that by reason of the breaches and defaults of the defendants
Laminex's plant could not operate at all between 25 October 1993 and 17
November 1993 and could operate only at reduced capacity between 17 November and July 1994. Mr Shoemark, Laminex's financial controller, assessed the value of the lost output as being at least $6,900,000.

I have already noted that on the same day Laminex commenced similar proceedings against Coe and the Reliance defendants, both in a court in the
State of Oregon in the United States and in this Court. According to part of an affidavit by Mr Murphy, a partner in the firm of solicitors acting for
Laminex, which was not read by counsel for Laminex but which was admitted into evidence after having been tendered by counsel for the defendants, the two sets of proceedings were commenced because Laminex was unsure as to which of its alleged causes of action should be brought in which jurisdiction. The two proceedings were commenced in October 1995 in an endeavour to avoid an argument, if the commencement of the proceedings was further delayed, that
Laminex's causes of action were barred by paragraph 91 of Coe's general conditions for sales.

Coe and the Reliance defendants were served with the originating process in the Oregon proceedings in December 1995. Each of Coe and the Reliance defendants instructed American lawyers to act in the Oregon proceedings. Each of the lawyers who was instructed took a number of steps with a view to defending the proceedings. The steps taken by the American lawyers for Coe included interviewing the President of Coe, examining Coe's files, conferring with the lawyer for the Reliance defendants, making a request for discovery of documents by Laminex and filing an answer and a counter claim in the Oregon proceedings.

According to a part of an affidavit by Mr Murphy, which was not read by counsel for Laminex but which was admitted into evidence after having been tendered by counsel for the defendants, Laminex obtained advice from lawyers in New South Wales and Oregon and on the basis of that advice elected to withdraw from the Oregon proceedings and to go ahead only with the proceedings in New South Wales. I infer that this advice was received in about February .

The subsequent history of the Oregon proceedings is involved. However, it is sufficient to note that, notwithstanding an earlier dismissal of an application by Laminex to abate the proceedings, by the time Mr Murphy swore his affidavit of 5 August 1996 all of Laminex's claims against both Coe and the Reliance defendants had, on Laminex's application and against the opposition of the defendants, been dismissed, but without prejudice, that is without prejudice to the validity of the claims and without prejudice to
Laminex "refiling its complaint at any time in Oregon or another US court".
Some questions of legal costs incurred in the proceedings commenced by Laminex arose but were resolved. Laminex paid the amount of Coe's agreed attorney's fees. However, on 25 July 1996 each of Coe and the Reliance defendants commenced proceedings in a court in Multnomah County, Oregon, seeking inter alia a declaration that the only proper venue or forum for the hearing of disputes between the parties is Multnomah County and an injunction restraining
Laminex from further prosecuting claims arising out of the same facts in courts in Australia. In December 1996 each of these two proceedings was dismissed. The proceedings by the Reliance defendants were dismissed for lack of jurisdiction over Laminex and no appeal has been brought by the Reliance defendants. The proceedings by Coe were dismissed on the grounds that "another action is pending in Australia between the same parties for the same cause".
Coe has appealed against the decision dismissing its proceedings and the appeal is still outstanding 
In Laminex's amended statement of claim in these proceedings in this Court five sets of claims are made:-
In paragraphs 7-17 a claim against Coe in tort is pleaded. It is alleged that Coe became subject to a duty of care in providing advice and assistance to Laminex in improving the performance of Laminex's medium density fibreboard forming line by modifying and upgrading its plant and equipment and that Coe breached this duty of care.
In paragraphs 18-22 a claim in tort against the second, third and fourth defendants is pleaded. It is alleged that Coe requested these defendants to supply it with software to be used in upgrading Laminex's plant, that these defendants became subject to a duty to Laminex to exercise reasonable care in producing software for use in the upgrading of Laminex's plant and that these defendants breached this duty of care.
In paragraphs 23-30 of the amended statement of claim claims against Coe based on alleged breaches of implied warranties under the Trade Practices Act are pleaded. It is alleged that what was to be supplied by Coe to
Laminex included computer software and clutches, that Laminex acquired the computer software and clutches as a "consumer" within s4B of the Trade
Practices Act, that by virtue of s71 of the Trade Practices Act conditions were implied into the contract by which Coe supplied the software and clutches that they would be of merchantable quality and reasonably fit for the purpose for which Laminex was acquiring them and that those implied conditions had been breached. Breach of an implied warranty allegedly implied by s74(1) of the Trade Practices Act was also alleged.
In paragraphs 31-37 of the amended statement of claim claims against Coe based on ss52, 53(a), 53(aa) and s51A of the Trade Practices Act are pleaded.
It is alleged inter alia that Coe made representations to Laminex which were misleading or deceptive or likely to mislead or deceive.
In paragraphs 38-45 of the amended statement of claim claims in contract by Laminex against Coe are pleaded. It is alleged that a contract between
Laminex and Coe resulted from an offer made by Laminex in the fax from Laminex to Coe of 4 February 1993 including the purchase order No.7755 from Laminex to
Coe and from the acceptance of this offer, either by Coe delivering in accordance with Laminex's purchase order or by the fax from Coe to Laminex of February 1993. It is further alleged that it was an express term of that contract that the goods supplied pursuant to the contract would be of merchantable quality and that there were implied terms of that contract that the goods supplied pursuant to the contract would be of merchantable quality and reasonably fit for the purpose for which they were required and that all of these terms had been breached.

It is alleged in the amended statement of claim that by reason of the defendants' breaches and defaults Laminex's plant could not operate at all between 25 October 1993 and 17 November 1993 and could operate only at reduced capacity between 17 November 1993 and July 1994 and that by reason of this loss of production Laminex suffered loss of profits totalling nearly $7m.

I now turn to a consideration of the various claims made in the defendants' application.

Claim that Service of the Originating Process be Set Aside 
In paragraph 1 of the defendants' notice of motion the defendants seek an order "that service of the originating process herein be set aside upon the ground that it was not authorised by the Supreme Court Rules". It was submitted by counsel for the defendants that service of parts of the amended statement of claim outside Australia on Coe and the Reliance defendants was not authorised by any part of Pt10 r1A(1) of the Supreme Court Rules. It was not submitted that service of the whole of the amended statement of claim was not authorised and should be set aside. The submission by counsel for the defendants was limited to contending that service of the amended statement of claim outside Australia on Coe and the Reliance defendants was not authorised, insofar as the amended statement of claim contained paragraphs 22-30 (claims against Coe arising out of alleged breaches of implied conditions and warranties under the Trade Practices Act - "the implied terms claims") and paragraphs 38-45 (claims against Coe in contract - "the contract claims").

It was accepted at the hearing of the applications that the onus rested on
Laminex to show that its proceedings against Coe on the implied terms claims and on the contract claims fell within one or more of the paragraphs of Pt10 r1A(1).

It was also accepted that the fact that service of the amended statement of claim outside Australia, insofar as the amended statement of claim contained the claims in tort against Coe, the claims in tort against the second defendant the third defendant and the fourth defendant and the claims under
Pt5 Div1 of the Trade Practices Act against Coe, may have been authorised and was not challenged, would not authorise service outside Australia of the amended statement of claim insofar as it contained the implied terms claims and the contract claims. See The News Corporation Limited versus Lenfest
Communications Inc [(1996) 21 ACSR 553] at 557.

Counsel for the defendants, who addressed the Court first on the hearing of the applications, anticipated that counsel for Laminex would submit that the implied terms claims and the contract claims fell within paragraph (c) (i) of
Pt10 r1A, that is that the subject matter of the proceedings was a contract and the contract had been made in New South Wales. However, after counsel for the defendants had addressed the Court at some length, counsel for Laminex informed the Court that Laminex did not seek to rely on paragraph (c) (i) but did seek to rely on paragraphs (a), that is that the proceedings were founded on a cause of action arising in New South Wales, (b), that is that the proceedings were founded on a breach of contract occurring in New South Wales, (iii), that is that the subject matter of the proceedings was a contract governed by the law of New South Wales, and (c) (iv), that the subject matter of the proceedings was a contract a breach of which had been committed in New
South Wales.

In order to determine whether the proceedings on the contract claims or the proceedings on the implied terms claims fall within any of paragraphs (a), , (c) (iii) and (c) (iv), it is necessary to determine what were the terms of the contract between Laminex and Coe.

Counsel for the defendants contended that the contract between Coe and Laminex was made when Coe in the United States received Laminex's fax of 29 December , on the basis that the fax from Coe to Laminex of 21 December 1992 was an offer and the fax of 29 December 1992 was an acceptance of that offer, so that the contract came into existence when Coe received the acceptance.
Alternatively, it was contended that if a contract had not come into existence when Coe received Laminex's fax of 29 December 1992, the contract came into existence, either when Coe received Laminex's fax of 4 February 1993 which included the front of Laminex's form of purchase order or, at the latest, when
Coe received Laminex's fax of 23 March 1993, which included the endorsement by
Laminex accepting the "revisions" to the "Laminex specifications terms and conditions". It was submitted that, whether the making of the contract was concluded on 29 December 1992 or 4 February 1993 or 23 March 1993, the contract incorporated Coe's general conditions for sales and did not incorporate the conditions of purchase on the reverse of the Laminex purchase order form.

Counsel for Laminex submitted, in accordance with the pleading of the contract claims in the amended statement of claim, that the contract between Coe and
Laminex was concluded, when an offer made by Laminex in its fax of 4 February was accepted by Coe delivering what had been ordered or, alternatively, by Coe sending its fax of 9 February 1993. This version of how the contract between Coe and Laminex was concluded would be in accordance with condition 1 of the conditions of purchase on the reverse of Laminex's form of purchase order. It is not in accordance with how Laminex alleged that the contract had been concluded in either the original statement of claim or in the originating process in the Oregon proceedings. In each of these documents Laminex had alleged that the contract had been made by Coe, by its fax of 21 December , making an offer and by Laminex by its issue of its purchase order on or about 4 February 1993, accepting that offer.

Whenever the contract between Coe and Laminex was concluded, I am of the opinion that the conditions on the reverse of Laminex's form of purchase order did not become terms of the contract. The Laminex purchase order faxed on 4
February 1993 was for the supply of parts, equipment and engineering "as per your proposal 3456-TR 92 RI", which would include Coe's quotation (including paragraph 6B) and the general conditions for sales. Furthermore, as stated earlier, the reverse of the purchase order containing Laminex's conditions was not faxed by Laminex to Coe on 4 February 1993. It is true that the front of the purchase order, which was faxed to Coe on 4 February 1993, referred to "specifications, terms and conditions attached". However, as is clearly shown by the terms of Coe's fax of 9 February 1993, these words were understood, quite reasonably, by Coe as being simply a reference to the two pages of
Laminex's specifications, which were faxed to Coe on 4 February. There is no evidence that a copy of Laminex's conditions were communicated to Coe at any time between 4 February 1993 and 23 March 1993, when, at the latest, a contract came into existence.

Counsel for Laminex submitted that I should hold that the conditions on the reverse of Laminex's form of purchase order were incorporated into the instant contract by reason of the previous course of dealing between Coe and Laminex.
On four occasions between December 1987 and August 1989 Laminex had purchased items of equipment from Coe and on at least three of those occasions it had issued a purchase order having on its reverse conditions which were the same, or substantially the same, as the conditions on the reverse of its purchase order in early 1993. However, I do not regard three or four transactions spread over more than a year and a half, the last of which had occurred more than three years previously, as being a course of dealing sufficiently frequent and long to authorise the implication into the instant contract of
Laminex's conditions. See Carter and Harland Contract Law in Australia 3rd ed (1996) at par618. Furthermore, the terms sought to be implied are inconsistent with the terms of the express communications between the parties.

If, as I have held, the conditions on the reverse of Laminex's form of purchase order did not become terms of the contract between Coe and Laminex, it is really unnecessary for me to determine how the contract between Coe and
Laminex was concluded. Whether the contract was concluded in any one of the three ways contended for by counsel for the defendants or even if it was concluded as a result of Laminex's purchase order (minus Laminex's conditions) being accepted by Coe, Coe's quotation and general conditions for sales would be incorporated in the contract.

Of the various ways in which it was suggested that a contract came into existence, I would prefer the primary submission made by counsel for the defendants. Coe's fax of 21 December 1992 followed a long period of negotiations, is described as a "revised firm proposal" and makes detailed provision for many matters. In Laminex's fax of 29 December 1992 Mr Kelly describes the fax as a "formal acceptance of your proposal". The fax states that a purchase order is "now" being issued and gives the number of the purchase order, 7755. The fax states that Laminex will dispatch immediately the formal purchase order and a deposit (or down payment). Coe is asked "to progress the necessary arrangements upon receipt of this fax in order to expedite the earliest delivery possible". On 6 January 1993, without any further communication between the parties, Laminex, in accordance with paragraph 10A of the quotation, paid a down payment of 25 per cent of the purchase price.

Against the view that a contract was concluded when Coe received Laminex's fax of 29 December 1992, it can be argued that in Laminex's fax Mr Kelly referred to the delivery time as being fourteen weeks, whereas under paragraph 3 of the quotation Coe was to have the purchased equipment and documentation ready for shipment 14 to 16 weeks after receipt of the order and down payment. Mr Kelly requested part deliveries in less than fourteen weeks as equipment became available and Mr Kelly said that delivery was expected "2/4/97" (that is in fourteen weeks) or sooner. Furthermore, a representative of Coe wrote on
Laminex's fax of 29 December that Coe would have to clear up the matter of delivery times and that Laminex's offer was merely a tentative offer.

It is, of course, correct that, for a contract to result, an acceptance of an offer must precisely correspond with what has been proposed by the offeror.
However, in my opinion, Laminex by the language used in its fax of 29 December accepted what had been offered by Coe. In referring to the delivery time as being fourteen weeks Mr Kelly used the expression "the (my emphasis) fourteen weeks", which I take as being a shorthand way of referring to what is stated in paragraph 3 of the quotation about delivery times. A request "might you consider part deliveries as the equipment becomes available" is not inconsistent with an intention on the part of Laminex to be immediately bound, even though it might be hoped by Laminex that what had been agreed on could be varied. Any reservations on the part of some representative of Coe is of less importance in determining whether a contract had come into existence, than are the terms of the communications between the parties.

If a contract between Coe and Laminex came into existence when Laminex "formally accepted" Coe's "proposal" of 21 December 1992, then it is clear that the quotation or proposal and the general conditions for sales which were expressed in the proposal to be incorporated in the proposal, became terms of the contract between Coe and Laminex. However, even if a contract did not come into existence until Coe received Laminex's formal purchase order on 4
February 1993, by which time Laminex had in accordance with paragraph 10A of the quotation opened a letter of credit for the whole of the balance of the purchase price, or until Coe received Laminex's fax of 23 March 1993, then I am satisfied that the contract incorporated Coe's quotation and general conditions for sales. I note that in Laminex's original statement of claim in these proceedings, which was verified by Mr Shoemark, it was alleged that Coe had breached paragraph 7 of the quotation of 21 December 1992 and cl11 of the general conditions for sales. The contract claims are, of course, pleaded differently in the amended statement of claim. Of particular importance amongst the provisions of the quotation and the general conditions for sales are paragraph 3 of the quotation providing that shipment of the goods would be
F.O.B Portland, Oregon, USA and that title and risk would pass to the buyer on delivery of the goods to the carrier and cl113 of the general conditions for sales providing that "the terms conditions and covenants herein shall be governed by the laws of the State of Oregon and venue shall be in Multnomah
County, Oregon for any actions arising hereunder".

I now return to the question of whether the proceedings on the implied terms claims or the proceedings on the contract claims fall within one or more of paragraphs (a), (b), (c) (iii) and (c) (iv). It is convenient to deal first with the proceedings on the contract claims.

The proceedings on the contract claims allege that the contract between Coe and Laminex was a contract for the sale of goods and the supply of services.
However, apart from this general allegation, the only terms of the contract which are pleaded are an express term that the goods supplied would be of merchantable quality and terms implied by the [Sale of Goods
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/soga128/) that the goods supplied would be of merchantable quality and reasonably fit for the purpose for which they were being acquired and the only breaches alleged are breaches of these terms.

Having regard to the conclusions I have already reached, the proceedings on the contract claims do not fall within any of paragraphs (a), (b), (c) (iii) or (c) (iv) of Pt10 r1A.

As to paragraph (a) the proceedings are not founded on a cause of action arising in New South Wales, because the proceedings are founded on a contract made outside New South Wales (in Oregon) and any breaches of the contract which are alleged would have occurred outside New South Wales before the goods supplied were delivered F.O.B to a carrier in Oregon.

As to paragraphs (b), and (c)(iv) the alleged breaches on which the proceedings are founded did not occur in New South Wales.

As to paragraph (c) (iii) the contract between Coe and Laminex contained in c113 of the general conditions for sales an express choice of the laws of the
State of Oregon. Even without the express choice of the laws of the State of
Oregon, New South Wales is not the jurisdiction with which the contract has its closest and most substantial connection. I have found that the contract was made in Oregon. Insofar as the contract consisted of a contract for the sale of goods, it was to be fully performed by Coe outside New South Wales and by the time the goods were shipped in Oregon. The contract was to be performed by Laminex by payment in the United States.

Counsel for Laminex referred to paragraph 4 of the quotation in support of the submission that the contract was more than a contract for the sale of goods, that it was a contract for the achieving of a result in New South Wales and that when the contract was so viewed New South Wales was the jurisdiction with which the contract had its closest and most substantial connection.

I would accept that under paragraph 4 of the quotation Coe assumed an obligation to make available services of installation supervisors and engineers, who would do their work in New South Wales. However, the cost of such services was not included in the contract price and such services were to be charged under later, separate contracts. The "basic project" was a contract for the sale and delivery of goods. Counsel also referred to the provision in paragraph 10 of the quotation that the payment of the last 5 per cent of the purchase price was to be deferred until fifteen days after "start-up".
However, I do not consider that this provision indicates that the contract was otherwise than predominantly a contract for the sale and delivery of goods.

I am accordingly of the opinion that service outside Australia of the amended statement of claim, insofar as it contains paragraphs 38-45 was not authorised by the Supreme Court Rules and should be set aside.

I turn now to the proceedings on the implied terms.

The proceedings on the implied terms allege that Coe supplied goods and services to Laminex. However, the implied terms which it is alleged Coe breached are implied terms that the goods supplied would be of merchantable quality (s71(1) of the Trade Practices Act) and that the goods supplied would be reasonably fit for the purpose (s71(2) of the Trade Practices Act) and that the materials supplied in connection with the services supplied would be reasonably fit for the purpose. (s74(2) of the Trade Practices Act). In a case where the goods to be supplied were to be supplied F.O.B at a port in the
United States for shipment at the buyer's risk to Australia, I do not consider that, even if the goods were not of merchantable quality or not reasonably fit, there is any cause of action arising in New South Wales or any breach by the supplier occurring in New South Wales. Nor, for reasons already given, do
I consider that the contract under which the goods were supplied is governed by New South Wales law. Section 67 of the Trade Practices Act does not assist
Laminex, because I do not consider that, even apart from paragraph 113 of the general conditions for sales, the proper law of the contract under which the goods were supplied would be the law of some part of Australia.

I accordingly consider that service outside Australia of the amended statement of claim, insofar as it contains paragraphs 23-30, was not authorised by the
Supreme Court Rules and should be set aside.

I have reached this conclusion without having to determine submissions made by counsel for the defendants that the Trade Practices Act did not apply extraterritorially to the supply of goods outside Australia and that Laminex could not validly bring itself within the definition of "consumer" in s4B of the Trade Practices Act by the expedient of allocating parts of the total purchase price not exceeding $40,000 to each of the clutches and the software supplied by Coe.

The Claim that the Proceedings should be Stayed because of the Exclusive Jurisdiction Clause.

In paragraph (b) of the defendants' notice of motion the defendants seek an order that these proceedings be stayed permanently, on the ground that Laminex agreed to submit all disputes arising out of its relations with Coe to the courts of Multnomah County, Oregon, United States of America. The steps in counsel for the defendants' argument in support of the application for this order were as follows:-
Paragraph 113 of the general conditions for sales was a term of the contract between Coe and Laminex. I have already held that paragraph 113 was a term of this contract.
Paragraph 113 is an exclusive jurisdiction clause, conferring exclusive jurisdiction on the courts of Multnomah County, Oregon over all court proceedings to which it applies.
Paragraph 113 should be interpreted as applying to all court proceedings arising out of "the relationship" between Coe and Laminex.
An exclusive jurisdiction clause in a contract conferring exclusive jurisdiction on the courts of a foreign country should be enforced by staying local proceedings falling within the exclusive jurisdiction clause, unless strong reasons are shown why a stay should not be granted. Akai Pty Limited v The Peoples Insurance Co Limited (1996) [71 ALJR 156] at 160-1 per Dawson and
McHugh JJ and at 171 per Toohey, Gaudron and Gummow JJ. The principles applying to an application for a stay of proceedings on the grounds of forum non conveniens do not apply to an application for a stay based on an exclusive jurisdiction clause. (Akai per Dawson and McHugh JJ at 161). In the present case, strong reasons had not been shown why a stay should not be granted.

Some principles which should be applied in determining whether a clause in a contract is an exclusive jurisdiction clause were stated by Giles CJ Comm D in
FAI General Insurance Co Limited versus Ocean Marine Mutual Protection and
Indemnity Association [(1996) 41 NSWLR 117] at 126-7.
Omitting citation of authority and some exegesis by his Honour, Giles J said:- "(a) Whether a jurisdiction clause is an exclusive jurisdiction clause is a question of construction of the particular contract, with such regard to the circumstances surrounding the entry into the contract as is permissible.

The word `exclusive' is not determinative, and a clause may be held to be an exclusive jurisdiction clause notwithstanding the absence of that or a similar word or phrase:....it would be a surrender to formalism to require a jurisdiction clause to provide in express terms that the chosen court is to be the exclusive forum.

Although mutuality, in the sense that both parties agree to the relevant jurisdiction, has been thought to point to exclusive jurisdiction, I have some difficulty seeing why that should be so. Lack of mutuality is likely to tell against exclusive jurisdiction... but mutuality is consistent with no more than submission to the jurisdiction. However, when taken with other matters mutuality may assist in finding a contractual intention that disputes shall be submitted only to the courts of the relevant jurisdiction...

Other language in the clause or the nature of the contract may point towards that contractual intention...

If the courts of the relevant jurisdiction would have jurisdiction in the absence of the clause, that may indicate that the clause was intended to confer exclusive jurisdiction... It will not always be so, as the clause may have been intended only to put beyond doubt the existing jurisdiction...." 
Applying these principles, I have concluded that paragraph 113 is an exclusive jurisdiction clause for all court proceedings falling within its terms. The word "exclusive" is not used but this is not determinative. The mandatory word "shall" is used and indicates that all actions must be brought in Multnomah
County, Oregon. Mutuality is present and the courts of Multnomah County,
Oregon would be likely to have jurisdiction, in the absence of such a provision.

The next question which arises is the scope of paragraph 113 of the general conditions for sales. On its proper interpretation does it apply, as counsel for the defendants submitted, to all proceedings arising out of the relationship between Coe and Laminex, so that it would apply to claims brought by Laminex against Coe in tort and under the Trade Practices Act, or is its scope more limited? 
It was recognised by counsel for the defendants that, on at least a literal reading, the language in paragraph 113, and particularly the word "hereunder", was not as wide as the language used in some other exclusive jurisdiction or arbitration clauses which have come before the courts. However, it was submitted that the same approach should be adopted in interpreting exclusive jurisdiction clauses as should be adopted in interpreting arbitration clauses.
Continental Bank NA versus Aeakos Compania Navera SA [(1994) 1 WLR 588] especially at 592-3 per Steyn LJ on behalf of the court; Aggeliki Charis Compania
Maritima SA versus Pagnan Sp.A (1995) 1 Lloyds' Law Reports 87 per Millett LJ at and per Neill LJ at 97.

In Francis Travel Marketing Pty Limited versus Virgin Atlantic Airways Limited [(1996) 39 NSWLR 160], a case involving an arbitration clause, Gleeson CJ said at :- "When the parties to a commercial contract agree, at the time of making the contract, and before any disputes have yet arisen, to refer to arbitration any dispute or difference arising out of the agreement, their agreement should not be construed narrowly. They are unlikely to have intended that different disputes should be resolved before different tribunals, or that the appropriate tribunal should be determined by fine shades of difference in the legal character of individual issues, or by the ingenuity of lawyers in developing points of argument".

In Continental Bank, a case involving an exclusive jurisdiction clause,
Steyn LJ stressed the need to adopt "a common sense approach" to the interpretation of such a clause and to be slow to attribute to reasonable persons an intention that there should in any foreseeable eventuality be two sets of proceedings.

Counsel for the defendants cited a number of cases in which it has been held that claims within the Trade Practices Act or claims in tort fell within the terms of arbitration clauses properly construed. These cases, apart from
Francis Travel, included IBM Australia Limited versus National Distribution
Services Limited [(1991) 22 NSWLR 466] and Hi-
Fert Pty Limited versus Kiukiang Maritime Carriers Inc <case>; [(1996) 71 FCR 172 (Tamberlin] J).

As regards the use of the word "hereunder" in paragraph 113 counsel for the defendants referred to dicta in Union of India versus EB Aaby's Rederi A/S "the
Evje" [(1975) AC 797] by Viscount Dilhorne at 814 and Lord Salmon at 817. The arbitration clause in the charter party in Union of India referred to "all disputes from time to time arising out of the contract". At p814 Viscount
Dilhorne said:- "In Heyman versus Darwins Ltd [[1942] A.C. 356], 398 Lord Porter said that the words `arising out of a contract' have a wider meaning than the words `under a contract,' a view which was repeated by Sellers J. in
Government of Gibraltar versus Kenney [1956] 2Q.B. 410, 421. Although the words are different, I must confess my inability to discern any difference in their content." 
At p817 Lord Salmon said:- "We have been referred to a statement by Lord Porter in Heyman versus Darwins Ltd [[1942] A.C. 356], 399, to the effect that the words `arising out of' a contract have a wider meaning than the words `arising under' a contract. Lord
Porter did not, however, define the difference, and I confess that I find difficulty in understanding what it is. Nor do I think that it has any significance for the purposes of the present appeal".

Counsel for Laminex submitted that paragraph 113 on its proper construction was limited to actions arising under the terms, conditions and covenants in the general conditions for sales.

I have come to the conclusion that, even adopting fully the approaches to interpretation stated in such cases as Francis Travel and Continental
Bank, paragraph 113 cannot be interpreted in the way contended for by counsel for the defendants, as extending to all disputes arising out of the relationship between Coe and Laminex.

The language used in paragraph 113 is narrower than the language of the arbitration clauses or jurisdiction clauses in the other cases I was referred to. In Francis Travel the arbitration clause provided that "any dispute or difference arising out of this agreement" was to be referred to arbitration.
In IBM Australia the arbitration clause was expressed to apply to "any controversy or claim arising out of or related to this agreement or a breach thereof". In Leigh-Mardon Pty Limited versus PRC Inc <case>; [(1993) 44 FCR 88] the exclusive jurisdiction clause applied to "any judicial proceedings by one party against the other involving any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the performance of services under this agreement". In Hi-Fert the arbitration clause applied to "any dispute arising from this charter or any bill of lading issued hereunder".

There are references in these cases to the width of the language used in the clauses under consideration. For example, in Francis Travel Gleeson CJ said that the expression "arising out of" has usually been given a wide meaning. In IBM Australia each of the three judges, Kirby P at 475, Clarke
JA at 483 and Handley JA at 487 referred to the width of the language used in the arbitration clause in that case. In Hi-Fert Tamberlin J said that the words "arising from" in the case before him should be construed as equivalent to "arising out of" or "in connection with".

As regards the word "under" or "hereunder", there have been suggestions in cases in England since Union of India that the expression "under" a contract is not as wide as expressions such as "in connection with" a contract.

In Ashville Investments Limited versus Elmer Contractors Limited [(1989) 1 QB ], where an arbitration clause provided for reference to arbitration "in the case of any dispute or difference... as to the construction of the contract or as to any matter or thing of whatsoever nature arising thereunder or in connection therewith", Balcombe LJ at 503 said that a dispute about an alleged mistake leading to a claim for rectification of the contract was not a dispute or difference as to any matter or thing arising under the contract. Bingham
LJ said at 508 that the part of the clause which provided for the reference to arbitration of any matter or thing "arising thereunder" would apply to all contractual claims arising under the contract but would not apply to claims in tort.

In Overseas Union Insurance Limited versus AA Mutual International Insurance Co
Limited (1988) 2 Lloyd's Law Reports 63 Evans J said at 67:- "There is, I suggest, a broad distinction which may be drawn between those clauses which refer to arbitration only those disputes which may arise regarding the rights and obligations which are created by the contract itself, and other clauses which show an intention to refer some wider class or classes of disputes. This distinction is obviously clear and justified as a matter of law. It may also be one which would be recognised by the parties whose contract it is, for at the very least, by making the contract, they demonstrate their agreement to create a new category of legal rights and obligations, legally enforceable between themselves. Disputes regarding this category may well be described, as a matter of language, as ones arising `under' the contract, and this meaning of that phrase has been authoritatively recognized and established e.g. by the House of Lords in Heyman versus Darwins and by the Court of Appeal in Ashville. Conversely, if the parties agree to refer disputes arising `in relation to' or `in connection with' their contract, a fortiori if the clause covers disputes arising `during the execution of this contract' (The Damianos, [[1971] 1 Lloyd's Rep. 502]; [1971] 2 Q.C 588) or in relation to `the work to be carried out hereunder', a common form in construction contracts, then both as a matter of language and of authority some wider category may be intended. Ashville itself holds, understandably, and in my respectful opinion consistently with earlier authorities, that `in connection with this contract' is wide enough to include a claim for rectification of the contract." 
In the Paola D'Alesio (1994) 2 Lloyd's Law Reports 366, a case to which I was referred by counsel for the defendants,. Rix J said at p372:- "In the light of this line of authority (which included Ashville and
Overseas Union Insurance) I believe I will now be entitled to say that the language of `arising under' the contract is narrower than that of `arising out of' the contract and on that basis to doubt whether a tortious claim could so easily give rise to a dispute `under' the contract".

However, his Honour found it unnecessary to reach a definite conclusion.

It is, of course, important to interpret paragraph 113 in the context of the document in which it appears, being the general conditions for sales. In paragraph 1 of the general conditions Coe gives limited, conditional warranties, which are expressed to be exclusive and in lieu of all other warranties, express or implied. In paragraph 5 Coe agrees to indemnify the buyer against claims "in any way arising out of, in the course of or in connection with" the operations of Coe in carrying out the order. Paragraph provides that the terms conditions and covenants "herein", that is in the general conditions, are to be governed by the laws of the State of Oregon and that Multnomah County, Oregon shall be the venue for any actions arising "hereunder", which in my opinion mean actions arising under the general conditions for sales, and particularly paragraphs 1 or 5. The word "under" in paragraph 113 can be contrasted with the wider expressions used elsewhere in the general conditions, for example in paragraph 5.

It was submitted, alternatively, by counsel for the defendants that, even if the express agreement between the parties in paragraph 113 of the general conditions, did not, on its true interpretation, apply to all claims arising out of the relationship between Coe and Laminex, including the claims by
Laminex in tort and under Div1 of Pt5 of the Trade Practices Act, nevertheless
I should hold that such a term should be implied, in accordance with the principles stated by the Privy Council in BP Refinery (Western Port) Pty
Limited versus Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266 at 282-3 and by the High
Court in Codelfa Construction Pty Limited versus State Rail Authority of New
South Wales <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 337] at 347. However, the requirements for the implication of a term are stringent and I do not consider that such requirements as obviousness and necessity to give business efficacy are satisfied.

I accordingly consider that the claim made in paragraph 2(b) of the defendants' notice of motion should be dismissed, on the grounds that Laminex did not agree to submit all disputes arising out of its relations with Coe to the courts of Multnomah County, Oregon and that paragraph 113 of the general conditions for sales has only the limited scope which I have attributed to it.
However, the presence in the contract between Coe and Laminex of paragraph 113 may be a relevant factor in deciding whether the Supreme Court of New South
Wales is an inappropriate forum for the trying of Laminex's claims against
Coe.

That the proceedings be stayed on the grounds that the New South Wales proceedings are vexatious or oppressive.

This claim is made in paragraph 2(c) of the defendants' notice of motion.

In support of this application it was submitted that the institution of the
New South Wales proceedings at the same time as the Oregon proceedings was an abuse of process and that the continuation of the New South Wales proceedings was an abuse of process, even though the Oregon proceedings had now been dismissed. Counsel referred to a passage in Henry versus Henry <case>; [(1996) 185 CLR 571] at 591, where the court stated:- "It is prima facie vexatious and oppressive, in the strict sense of those terms, to commence a second or subsequent action in the courts of this country if an action is already pending with respect to the matter in issue. And although there are cases in which it has been held that it is not prima facie vexatious, in the strict sense of that word, to bring proceedings in different countries, the problems which arise if the identical issue or the same controversy is to be litigated in different countries which have jurisdiction with respect to the matter are such, in our view, that, prima facie, the continuation of one or other should be seen as vexatious or oppressive within the Voth (Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 538)] sense of those words. ... The fact that there are or, even, that there may be simultaneous proceedings in different countries with respect to the same controversy is highly relevant to the question whether the local proceedings are oppressive in the sense of `seriously and unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging', or, vexatious, in the sense of `productive of serious and unjustified trouble and harassment'. And it also follows that the
Court should strive, to the extent that Voth permits to avoid that situation." 
Counsel also referred to the decision of the High Court in CSR Limited v
Cigna Insurance Australia Limited (1997) 146 ALR 402 and particularly the stay of the New South Wales proceedings in that case.

I do not consider that I should stay the New South Wales proceedings on this ground. The proceedings in Oregon have been dismissed and, that being so, there are no longer two co-existing sets of proceedings. I do not consider that the continuation of the New South Wales proceedings, the foreign proceedings having been terminated, should be regarded as "vexatious" or "oppressive", as those terms are used in the judgment of the majority of the
High Court in Voth. As to Cigna, the New South Wales proceeding in that case were stayed as being oppressive for reasons which do not apply in the present case.

The claim that the New South Wales proceedings be stayed on the grounds that this Court is a clearly inappropriate forum. 
In paragraph 2(a) of the defendants' notice of motion the defendants seek an order that these proceedings be stayed permanently on the grounds that the
Supreme Court of New South Wales is a (clearly) inappropriate forum for the trial of these proceedings.

The principles to be applied in determining whether proceedings commenced in this Court should be stayed on the grounds that this Court is a clearly inappropriate forum were stated by the majority of the High Court in their judgment in Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Limited particularly at 564-5.
Amongst other things, the majority said that the principles to be applied were those stated by Deane J in Oceanic Sunline Special Shipping Co Inc versus Fay <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 197] at 247-8 and that valuable assistance was provided by the discussion by Lord Goff in his speech in Spiliada Maritime Corporation versus Cansulex Limited [(1987) AC ] at -478 and 482-484 of "connecting factors" with either the local forum or the foreign forum and of "legitimate personal or juridical advantages" available to the plaintiff in the local forum which would not be available to the plaintiff in the foreign forum. The question of whether the local court is a clearly inappropriate forum focuses upon the inappropriateness of the local court and not the appropriateness of the suggested foreign forum.

In Voth the majority of the High Court said that ordinarily, on an application on inappropriate forum grounds, submissions by counsel, both written and oral, should be short and that ordinarily it will be unnecessary for a primary judge to do more than briefly indicate that, having examined the evidence and having taken into account the competing written and oral submissions, he or she is of the view that the proceedings should or should not be stayed on clearly inappropriate forum grounds. In the present case, the evidence was voluminous and the written and oral submissions I received from counsel were far from brief and out of deference to these submissions I consider it is desirable that I go into some detail in my judgment.

Among the connecting factors relied on by counsel for the defendants in support of the submission that this Court was a clearly inappropriate forum were that:-
None of the defendants resided in Australia or had a place of business or any employees in Australia.
The contract between Coe and Laminex was made outside New South Wales in the State of Oregon in the United Stated of America, was predominantly, if not solely, a contract for the sale of goods, that insofar as it was a contract for the sale of goods, it was to be performed by both parties outside New
South Wales and the contract contained paragraph 113 of the general conditions for sales in which there was an express choice of the laws of the State of
Oregon and which conferred exclusive jurisdiction on the courts of a County in the State of Oregon for all court proceedings falling within the terms of paragraph 113. Even if claims made by Laminex did not fall directly within paragraph 113, nevertheless paragraph 113 remained a relevant and important factor. The structure of the general conditions for sales was that the only claims of any sort which could be brought against Coe would be claims under paragraphs 1 and 5 and that claims under these paragraphs had to be brought in
Multnomah County, Oregon. Even apart from paragraph 113, the proper law of the contract was not New South Wales law, but Oregon law, as being the system of law with which the contract had its closest and most substantial connection.
As regards the Reliance defendants, their allegedly tortious conduct would have occurred wholly outside New South Wales in the United States, even though
Laminex may have suffered consequential damage in New South Wales. The inclusion of Reliance Australia as a defendant was merely an attempt to lend some spurious Australian colour to the proceedings against the Reliance defendants. There were scant references to Reliance Australia, as distinct from the Reliance defendants, in the evidence and there was no evidence that
Reliance Australia, as distinct from the Reliance defendants, had committed any tort.
At any trial both Coe and the Reliance defendants would have to call a large number of witnesses, all of whom would be residents of the United
States.
All the defendants' documents were in the United States.
Laminex had commenced the Oregon proceedings at the same time as it commenced the New South Wales proceedings and had for sometime pursued the
Oregon proceedings, while not even serving the originating process in the New
South Wales proceedings. In acting in the Oregon proceedings the United
States' lawyers for Coe and for the Reliance defendants had acquired substantial knowledge of the facts underlying the dispute, which could be utilised in any further proceedings in Oregon.

Amongst the connecting factors relied on by counsel for Laminex in support of the submission that I should not be satisfied that this Court was a clearly inappropriate forum were that:-
Laminex is resident and carries on business in New South Wales.
The equipment supplied by Coe, incorporating the software provided by the
Reliance defendants, was for upgrading Laminex's plant in New South Wales and had been installed in New South Wales.
The representations upon which the claims in tort and under the Trade
Practices Act were based had been made by fax or telephone to New South Wales.
Damage as a result of the defendants' alleged defaults had been suffered by Laminex in New South Wales.
Employees of the defendants had participated in New South Wales in the commissioning of the equipment supplied.
Laminex's witnesses are residents of New South Wales.

As regards the proceedings which had been brought by Laminex in Oregon, it was submitted on behalf of Laminex that these proceedings were no longer on foot but had been dismissed, on Laminex's application and against the opposition of
Coe and the Reliance defendants, that Laminex had paid some of Coe's costs of the proceedings and that the only proceedings still on foot in Oregon consisted of an appeal by Coe from a decision in proceedings instituted by it.

It was submitted on behalf of Laminex that, if the proceedings in this Court were stayed, Laminex would be deprived of a legitimate personal or juridical advantage, in that the claims made by Laminex included claims under the Trade
Practices Act, that there was no doubt that this Court would apply the Trade
Practices Act but that it was at least doubtful whether a court in Oregon would apply the Australian Trade Practices Act. Laminex's solicitors had asked the defendants' solicitors whether the defendants would consent to a court in
Oregon applying the Trade Practices Act but the defendants' solicitors had replied that their clients would not so consent. It was submitted that there was no equivalent in the law of Oregon to the Australian Trade Practices Act.

I have already held that service of the amended statement of claim outside
Australia, insofar as it contained the claims based on alleged breaches of implied conditions or warranties under Div2 of Pt5 of the Trade Practices Act was not authorised. However, no application was made by Coe to set aside service of the amended statement of claim, insofar as it contained the claims based on Div1 of Pt5 of the Trade Practices Act.

It is the case that when in May 1996 Laminex's solicitors asked whether the defendants would consent to a court in Oregon applying the Australian Trade
Practices Act, the defendants' solicitors replied that the defendants were not prepared so to consent.

On the evidence it is not clear that an Oregon court would not apply the
Australian Trade Practices Act. Indeed in a letter of 14 May 1996 from
Laminex's United States attorneys to Laminex's Australian lawyers the United
States attorneys said:- "(a) whether there will be any impediment to running the Trade Practices claim in Oregon 
We believe it is more likely than not that the Trade Practices Act claim could be plead in Oregon and that any impediments could be overcome. To reach this conclusion, we made the following assumptions:- - the Trade Practices Act otherwise applies (that is, for example, it applies to misrepresentations made by one outside Australia to a listener inside
Australia in a purely commercial context); - the Act is regarded by Australian courts as remedial rather than punitive; and, - neither the Act itself nor Australian case law limits its extraterritorial applicability".

In a later letter of 20 May 1996 the U.S attorneys said inter alia:- "It seems to us that the Oregon courts will not enforce the Trade Practices
Act unless they first make certain favourable decisions about Australian public policy; it would seem preferable to present those issues to the court in NSW".

In an affidavit by Mr Murphy, Laminex's Australian solicitor, Mr Murphy says that he has been informed by Laminex's United States attorneys that "although the issue is not beyond argument, there is a substantial risk that a court hearing the Oregon proceedings would be unable to grant relief to the plaintiff based upon any breach by the defendants of the Trade Practices Act".
No written advices from Laminex's United States attorneys were produced, apart from the two letters of 14 May 1996 and 20 May 1996 to which I have already referred.

It seems to me on the evidence before me that it is more likely than not that a court in Oregon would apply the Australian Trade Practices Act. It has certainly not been shown that a court in Oregon would not apply the Trade
Practices Act. The present case is different from other cases which were cited to me, including Akai Pty Limited versus The People's Insurance Co Limited and
CE Heath Underwriting & Insurance (Australia) Pty Limited versus Barden (unreported Rolfe J Commercial Division 19 October 1994), in which there was no issue but that the foreign court would not apply some Australian law which would be applied by a local court.

In regard to whether there is any equivalent to the Australian Trade Practices
Act in the law of Oregon, Mr Kester, an attorney practising in Oregon, gave evidence in an affidavit about certain provisions of the Oregon Unlawful Trade
Practices Act (ORS 646605 to 646656) including the following:- (1) `A person engages in an unlawful practice when, in the course of the person's business, vocation or occupation the person employs any unconscionable tactic in connection with sale ... of ... goods or services...' (1) (e) `A person engages in an unlawful practice when, in the course of the person's business, vocation or occupation the person represents that ... goods or services have ... characteristics ... that they do not have ...' (1) (g) `A person engages in an unlawful practice when, in the course of the person's business, vocation or occupation the person represents that ... goods or services are of a particular standard, quality or grade ...
if they are of another.'" 
If a court in Oregon did not apply the Australian Trade Practices Act, it could apply these provisions of the Oregon Unlawful Trade Practices Act.

It was submitted by counsel for the defendants that in deciding whether
Laminex would be deprived of any legitimate personal or juridical advantage, if the proceedings in this Court were stayed because of a risk that a court in
Oregon would not apply Div1 of Pt5 of the Trade Practices Act, I could take into account what, it was submitted, could be seen to be the weakness of these claims. The representations which Laminex alleged Coe had made were representations with respect to future matters, to the general effect that the equipment which would be supplied by Coe would be suitable for Laminex's requirements, would function properly, would be compatible with other equipment, would improve the efficiency of Laminex's plant and, would be competently designed, assembled and made and would be free from defects. It was submitted that, even allowing for s51A and the reversal of the onus of proof effected by s51A(2), Laminex could not succeed unless, inter alia, Coe did not have reasonable grounds for making such representations and, it was submitted, there was no evidence of any absence of reasonable grounds on the part of Coe for making such representations. However, the evidence before me on these applications is necessarily limited and I do not consider that
Laminex's claims can so clearly be seen to be weak, that I should let any assessment of the strength or weakness of the claims under the Trade Practices
Act enter into my determination of the application.

Having examined the evidence and having taken into account the competing written and oral submissions, I am of the view that the proceedings on the claims in tort against Coe, the claims in tort against the Reliance defendants and Reliance Australia and the claims against Coe based on Div1 of Pt5 of the
Trade Practices Act should be stayed, on the grounds that New South Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum. I give particular weight to the factors connecting the contract between Coe and Laminex and the alleged tortious conduct of the Reliance defendants with the United States and not New South
Wales. I do not consider that, if the New South Wales proceedings are stayed,
Laminex would be deprived of a legitimate advantage, in that it would be unable in proceedings in a court in Oregon to rely on the Australian Trade
Practices Act.

It is true that the proceedings brought by Laminex in Oregon were dismissed but they were dismissed without prejudice to the validity of the claims and without prejudice to Laminex refiling a complaint at any time in Oregon or any other United States court. Nothing was said before me on behalf of Laminex that Laminex would not bring fresh proceedings in Oregon. If any fresh proceedings were brought in Oregon, it might be that they could be defeated by
Coe invoking par91 of the general conditions for sales. When a stay of proceedings in a local court is granted on inappropriate forum grounds, it can be made a condition of the stay that the defendant should waive a time bar which would be available in the foreign jurisdiction (see Spiliada p484 per Lord Goff). In the present case, I consider that I should make it a condition of the stay that in any fresh proceedings brought by Laminex in the
United States, Coe will not seek to rely on paragraph 91 of the general conditions for sales.

The orders I would propose making are:- 
On the defendants' motion:- 
I set aside service of the amended statement of claim insofar as it contains pars23-30 and pars38-45.

I stay proceedings on the rest of the amended statement of claim, conditionally upon the first defendant in any fresh proceedings brought by
Laminex in the United States not seeking to rely on paragraph 91 of the general conditions for sales, a copy of which is part of Exhibit X to Mr
Kelly's affidavit of 1 July 1996.

On the plaintiff's motion:- 
I dismiss the plaintiff's motion.

I order the plaintiff to pay the defendants' costs of both motions.
 * * * 
