

Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited (Formerly Known As Chemplex
Australia Pty Limited) and Anor versus International Pools Australia Pty
Limited and Ors Nos Ca 40513/94, Ca 40514/94 and Comm D 50016/93 Evidence -
Precedent - Costs [1995] NSWSC 26 (4 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), MAHONEY JA(2) AND ROLFE AJA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY 13 February #DATE 16:3:1995 #ADD 4:9:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant (Huntsman):  A R Emmett QC with J Graves 
Solicitor for the
Appellant (Huntsman): McCabe Brown 
Counsel for the Appellant (Ferro):   M Walton 
Solicitor for the Appellant (Ferro):
Marshall Marks Kennedy 
Counsel for the Respondent (International Pools):
J C Campbell
QC with
L McCallum 
Solicitor for the Respondent (International Pools): 
Ian E Duffield
ORDER
Appeals by Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited (formerly known as
Chemplex (Sales) Australia Pty Limited) and by Ferro Corporation (Aust) Pty
Limited dismissed with costs; and
The proceedings remitted to the Commercial Division for assessment of damages.
JUDGE1
KIRBY P:  Before the Court are a number of appeals, all but one of them abandoned, and a motion for an indemnity costs order.
 
Appeal: implicit finding of reliance is sustained by the evidence
In the remaining appeal as between Huntsman Chemical Company Australia
Limited, the successor to Chemplex (Sales) Australia Pty
Limited (Chemplex), and Ferro Corporation (Aust) Pty Limited (Ferro), I am in entire agreement with Rolfe AJA.
It is clear (and was conceded) that Cole J, at first instance, omitted expressly to find that Ferro relied on the representations made to it by
Chemplex concerning the qualities of the chemical compound Aropol. But it is equally clear (and was also conceded) that his Honour, by implication, made such a finding. He stated the issues. His conclusion, and orders, could not in law, have followed without such a finding. In every way, save for this slip, his Honour's reasons are more than adequate to meet the standards established by this
Court in Soulemezis versus Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR (CA).] Therefore, the question is not whether there was an omission from the findings or a defect in the reasons but whether, to secure a reversal in this Court, there was no evidence to sustain the implied finding.
Rolfe AJA has demonstrated, in terms which
I fully accept, that the evidence was there. Not only was reliance adequately expressed in the evidence of Mr Young, the relevant officer of Ferro (extracted in Rolfe AJA's reasons).
It was also implied in: the very nature of the product; the secrecy of its chemical composition; the limits thereby imposed upon any independent intermediate analysis of it by Ferro; the clear knowledge in Chemplex that the product was being acquired for sale to users such as the International Pools group without the possibility of effective intermediate testing; and the common cause which Chemplex had with Ferro to secure such on sale, with the inevitable use of the product in precisely the way that occurred.
Thus, direct evidence and available inference powerfully supported the implied finding of Cole J. They sustain his Honour's orders.
That is really enough to dispose of the remaining appeal. But Chemplex urged that, reliance being specifically in contest, referred to in the pleadings and in the submissions at trial, the failure of the officer(s) of
Ferro to state in terms their reliance gave rise to an inference that the omission was significant. In short, it was put that the well known process of reasoning explained in Jones versus Dunkell <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298], 319 resulted in a conclusion that if the relevant officer, whose knowledge was that of the company, forbore from expressing reliance, he did so because reliance was missing and he could not truthfully assert it. The reasoning of Handley JA in
Commercial Union Assurance
Co of Australia Limited versus Ferrcom Pty Limited and
Anor  <case>; [(1993) 176 CLR 332] without express consideration of this point.
I agree with Rolfe AJA, and with the Full Federal Court, that Ferrcom was there concerned with quite a different case. But even if it were not, Rolfe
AJA has explained the very strong reasons of policy why this
Court should adopt the same approach to the meaning and operation of [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade
Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) (Cth) as has been adopted by the Full Federal Court. In that Court, it has been found (in the face of an argument identical to that now urged upon this Court) that the principles of proof of reliance accepted in a claim of deceit by the High Court's decision in
Gould versus Vagellas [(1985) CLR 215], 236 apply to analogous claims under [s 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the Act. Logic and commonsense would seem to dictate that result. There is now high authority supporting it. This Court should apply that authority unless it is convinced that it is clearly wrong. I am far from being so convinced.
That being the case, in light of the evidence which was before Cole J, it was Chemplex which bore the evidentiary onus of rebutting the inference that
Ferro had relied upon the inducements which Chemplex made and which have been shown to have been false.
Thus, alike with Rolfe
AJA, I reach the same conclusion. There was direct evidence. There were powerful inferences. And there was a legally established inference which Chemplex failed to rebut. All of this fully supports the implied finding of Cole J. It sustains his Honour's orders which rested upon that implied finding, combined with the others expressly stated.
 
Motion for indemnity costs - supporting considerations
This conclusion results in the dismissal of the remaining appeal. But there remains the motion by International Pools Australia
Pty Limited seeking indemnity costs against both Chemplex and Ferro who had involved it (and associated companies and individuals) in appeals; but then abandoned the contest at the last minute. The facts are stated by Rolfe
AJA.
A number of considerations support the provision of a costs order beyond the usual order which would require the unsuccessful parties to pay the costs of the successful party on a party and party basis:
The Court may take notice of the fact that a party and party costs order will not fully cover the costs necessarily incurred by
International in defending the appeals. See Gundry versus Sainsbury [(1910) 1 KB 645 (CA)], 649. Such an order would ordinarily entitle
International (at least in this case before statutory amendments) only to recover the amounts provided by the Rules and, in case of dispute, as assessed by a taxing officer of the Supreme Court. This would leave International with a considerable burden in costs for the appeals, probably running into several thousand dollars. Cf 
Worth versus Wildt and Co [(1943) ALR(CN) 436.] That burden would have to be borne by International's shareholders, and possibly, by the individual respondents in the International
Pools group;
Whatever may be the case in other litigation, for the companies and individuals engaged in the present dispute, the costs incurred are an expense of their commercial operations. This Court may infer that they would be so regarded by
Chemplex and Ferro, as well as by
International. By the abandonment of the appeals, International has wholly succeeded on appeal as at trial. From a commercial point of view, there are strong commercial reasons for shifting the costs of the abandoned appeals effectively from the shareholders of international to the shareholders of Chemplex and Ferro whose companies occasioned the unnecessary expense;
The belated abandonment of the appeals represents a complete vindication of the legal stance taken for International both at the trial and in this Court. In the absence of some other explanation, the abandonment suggests that those advising Chemplex and Ferro ultimately, but belatedly, acknowledged the impossibility of succeeding in their appeals against the orders of Cole J in favour of International. Had there been even a small chance of success, it may be inferred (costs already having been incurred) that the appeals would have been presented. If this was apparent on the morning of the hearing of the appeal, it would have been a conclusion available to those advising Chemplex and Ferro well in advance of that date. Allowing some time for consideration of the reasons for judgment of the primary judge, the provision of counsel's advice and time for the necessary corporate decisions, recognition of the hopelessness of the appeal could properly have been arrived at much earlier - certainly before International was forced, in its already difficult economic circumstances, to find the fuds to defend itself against the appeals. An indemnity costs order would send a salutary message as a consequence of its being made in a case such as the present. That message would be that litigants, at least in commercial cases such as the present, run the risk, in hopeless appeals, that the full commercial costs of their litigious adventure will be transferred, by order of the court, to the party or parties bringing such a hopeless appeal (or an appeal on grounds which are hopeless).
The Court is entitled, in modem circumstances of enlarged attention to the efficient administration of justice, to keep in mind the consequence of an indemnity cost order not only for the particular parties before it but for the signal which it sends about the due administration of justice in like cases. Cf Milosevic versus Government Insurance Office of New South Wales [(1993) 31 NSWLR 323 (CA)], 328; and
The reason for the abandonment of the appeals in the present instance is discernible from the grounds of appeal, such written arguments as were presented by the parties and a consideration of the reasons for judgment of the primary judge.
A factor which must always now be taken into account in deciding the utility and wisdom of an appeal, where primary findings may be affected by the impression and assessment of the primary judge of the witnesses presented at trial, is the recent and repeated instruction of the
High Court of Australia controlling the disturbance of such findings. See eg Abalos versus Australian
Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171
CLR 167], 479. It may be inferred that, in the present case, recognition of this consideration was the major reason for the abandonment of the appeals affecting International. But this reason would have been available to Chemplex and Ferro immediately after the judgment was delivered. Delaying the proper decision until all of International's legal costs had been incurred was unwarranted.
Chemplex and Ferro might for all the Court knows, have brought the appeals for commercial reasons or in the hope of securing a compromise in the commercial dispute to which all of the parties would contribute, This is speculation. In the absence of evidence to show that, notwithstanding the inferences available from the last-minute abandonment, the bringing of the appeals was proper and reasonable in the circumstances, the Court should infer that the hopelessness of the appeals was as clear soon after they were lodged as it became on the morning on which the proceedings were listed for hearing.
 
Indemnity costs should not be ordered in the circumstances
Having conceded that the case is a powerful one for a cost Order beyond the ordinary party and party order, a number of reasons have persuaded me that
I should not accede to the motion in this case:
Although the provision of indemnity costs has become more common in recent times, including on appeal, most of the orders made follow the application of the amendments to the Rules which allow for indemnity costs in cases of unreasonable refusal of offers of compromise. In my experience, it is extremely unusual for indemnity costs to be ordered in this Court, even on the late abandonment of an appeal. It is true that a special order was made in Premier
Woodworking Co Pty Limited versus Siganisucu Court of Appeal, unreported, 30 November 1989; (1989) NSWJB 215. But the point was not fully argued in that case. The appeal in that case bordered on vexation. Costs were not ordered on an indemnity basis. But a special order was made that the appellant pay costs on a solicitor and client basis. It is true that indemnity costs were ordered by the Court in Baltic Shipping Co versus Dillon [(1991) 22 NSWLR 1 (CA).]
But that was a special proceeding involving a test case in grouped actions fought under the Admiralty Rules. The determination of Mrs
Dillon's case was critical to the liability of the appellant in many other Australian claims arising out of the sinking of the
Mikhail Lermontov in New Zealand waters. The special consideration which applied in that case has no relevance to the present proceedings. A significant proportion of the business of this Court involves appeals in commercial cases. It has not previously been decided that cost orders should be made to distribute the economic burden of litigation and to assign it, as a commercial risk, to those found responsible following the outcome of the proceedings;
Considerable store was placed upon the late abandonment of the appeals and the acknowledgment that this was said to provide that the appeals were always hopeless. Whilst that argument has force, it would be undesirable for the Court by its cost orders, to discourage the proper, but late, abandonment of unwinnable appeals or points. Yet this might occur if there were a suggestion that such an act of responsible advocacy would be penalised by the making of a special costs order. Although it is proper for the
Court, in providing for the costs of these appeals, to concentrate its attention on the justice of the order as it affects the immediate parties, it is impossible to overlook the general significance of the making of the orders sought. See Maitland
Hospital v Fisher (No 2) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 721 (CA)] 724, Inevitably, inferences would be drawn from such an action on the part of the
Court. This would be so simply because it would be inferred by those advising clients, that the Court, in future analogous circumstances, would act in a consistent way;
If the Court is entitled to take notice of the reality that party and party costs cover only a proportion of the actual costs charged to clients in proceedings such as the present (as I think it can), it can surely also take notice of the reality that it is only shortly before the hearing of proceedings that parties and their lawyers typically give them full attention. This may be undesirable. Costs orders can to some extent help to discourage procrastination and postponement of serious consideration of a case. But it seems scarcely likely that any such orders will ever be able fully to remove the realism that tends, especially in large cases, to accompany the proximity of the hearing date. That may have been a consideration in the present proceedings. On the other hand, the joinder of International in the appeals may have been made for tactical or other reasons upon which the Court can only speculate;
The fact that a party and party cost order leaves some burden of costs upon a successful party may seem unjust. But in highly developed legal systems of the world it is not unknown to have a general regime whereby each party to litigation bears its own costs. This, for example, is the ordinary position in courts in the
United States of America. It was, as Mahoney JA has explained, the original position of the common law of England.
The ordinary rule in this Court (as in most courts of Australia) is that a successful party usually secures no more than an order that its costs should be paid on a party and party basis. See Milosevic versus Government
Insurance Office of New South
Wales [(1993) 31 NSWLR 323 (CA)], 333.
Doubtless behind these rules lies a social judgment that dispute resolution in the courts is expensive but, to ensure access to the courts, full indemnity costs are not ordinarily ordered. Some costs are borne even by successful parties as an incident to the curial arrangements which we accept as generally just. There is no rule that in commercial or any other class of case save those specifically provided for by Rules, special costs orders are made.
Any shift to such a general or common rule is one which should be made by the legislature or by the rule-maker. It should not be fashioned by the courts for application to particular commercial litigation;
If a general rule of indemnity costs were adopted in commercial litigation, it could present a risk that cost recovery entitlements would be abused. Of course, in the event of an indemnity cost order, this Court would retain supervision of the conduct of legal practitioners. However, the ordinary rule of party and party costs imposes a degree of restraint in the accumulation of costs of litigation. Recent experience in the Court suggests that more attention may be needed to the control of excessive expenditure on legal costs in particular cases which a general or common regime of indemnity costs might not so successfully ensure. See eg Law
Society of New South Wales versus Foreman [(1994) 34 NSWLR 408 (CA)], f; cf New, South Wales Crime Commission versus Fleming and Heal [(1991) 24 NSWLR 116 (CA)], 126;
Although in the present case it was suggested that the appeals against the judgment of Cole J in favour of International were self-evidently hopeless from the start, the case involved far greater complexities than existed in Premier Woodworking where this
Court made a special order. The Court has not, for the purpose of disposing of this motion, proceeded to examine seriatim the grounds of appeal and issues that would have been raised. What may have been readily apparent in Premier Woodworking is not so obvious in the present case. Chemplex and Ferro pointed to the extensive written submissions (more than 20 pages) advanced out of prudence on behalf of International to defend the judgments of Cole J in its favour. Whilst these submissions were offered in a proper defence of International's interests, they do indicate that, had it been necessary to do so, International was ready to argue its case in full; and
In the law, the application of a retrospective rule is always undesirable.
Sometimes it is unavoidable. Inevitably, an order of indemnity costs in the present litigation, would involve the acceptance of a new approach by this Court. True, in form, the order would be limited to the present parties. But just as Premier
Woodworking was invoked to support the course urged in these appeals, it would be inescapable that an order for indemnity costs in the present case would be invoked in future appeals involving commercial litigants where either the appeal was belatedly abandoned or was found to be without merit, e.g. by reference to the Abalos principles. It is probably fair to say that when Ferro and Chemplex made their late decision to abandon the appeals against International, they did not anticipate that a possible price of doing so would be an indemnity costs order. Whilst it was always a theoretical possibility, the making of such an order in such a case would accurately have been described as extremely rare.
In the past, such orders have generally been made (outside the circumstances provided by the Rules) only in case where the bringing of the proceedings was, or bordered on, vexation or oppression of a litigant or a misuse of the Court's process. It was not suggested that the appeals against the judgment in favour of
International fell into that class. Thus, had Chemplex or Ferro asked their legal advisers immediately before abandoning the appeals about the cost consequences of doing so, it would have been reasonable for them to have been told that they would be ordered to pay costs, but on a party and party basis.
The merit of the present motion is that it calls attention to the distinct possibility that, in some circumstances, a special cost order will be made, including for indemnity costs. If such an order is to be made, it would be preferable that it should follow due and timely warning by the successful party to the unsuccessful that indemnity costs will be sought. Cf. Insurers'
Guarantee Fund NEM General Insurance Association Ltd (in liq v Baker and Ors,
Court of Appeal , unreported, 10 February 1995. In short, if the legal representatives of parties to an appeal (particularly perhaps in commercial litigation such as the present) consider that the appeal, or points in it, are obviously hopeless and doomed to fail, they would be well advised to warn their opponents that continued prosecution of the appeal, or of the hopeless points, will result in an application to the Court for a special costs order.
This is the practice which is uniformly followed by this Court in respect of applications for dismissal of an appeal for want of prosecution. It alerts the opposing party. It activates the provision of advice by that party's legal representatives. Properly proved to the Court, it affords the occasion for making the special order in full knowledge that the risk has been appreciated and the party has pressed on regardless. No such warning was given in the present case.
 
Orders
I therefore agree with the orders proposed by Rolfe AJA with the exception that I would limit order 2 to an order that Chemplex and Ferro pay
International's costs, ie on a party and party basis.
It may be hoped that the Commercial Division will be able to give the assessment of International's damages due expedition.
JUDGE2
MAHONEY JA:  Subject to what I shall say, I agree with the orders proposed by
Rolfe AJA and generally with his Honour's reasons.
As his Honour has indicated. the essential matter argued on this appeal was whether (I shall use the descriptions adopted by his Honour) the representations made by Chemplex to Ferro were, in the manner pleaded by
Ferro, relied upon by Ferro to its detriment. In my opinion there was direct evidence that Ferro relied upon the false representations made by Chemplex.
There was evidence from which arguably it could be inferred that Ferro itself examined whether the substance Aropol could be used in pool building. But the inference which I would draw from the primary facts accepted by the trial judge is that, if and insofar as Ferro made investigations of its own, it did so against the background of what it had been told by Chemplex and upon the assumption that what it was told should be relied upon.
Rolfe
AJA is of opinion that Chemplex should be ordered to pay the costs of International upon an indemnity basis. With some hesitation,
I have come to a different conclusion.
The costs in question are the costs of the appeal to this Court and are, of course, the costs payable between the parties to the litigation, Chemplex and International, and not the costs payable by those parties to their own solicitors.
Until recent times, costs would not, I think, have been ordered upon an indemnity basis in circumstances such as the present. Costs upon an indemnity basis were ordered only in restricted circumstances: see generally Degmar v
Wright [(1983) 2 NSWLR 354] at 64. However, there has been, in my opinion, a change in the practice of this and, I believe, other courts in this regard. Costs on an indemnity basis are becoming more frequently available: cf Singleton versus Macquarie
Broadcasting Holdings Ltd [(1991) 24 NSWLR 103.]
It is, I believe, right that such a change be made. The costs customarily awarded did not achieve what, I think, are the main purposes for which costs are in principle given. It is not necessary for present purposes to enter upon a detailed examination of the rationale for the award of legal costs or of the way in which the rules as to costs evolved. Stated generally, the position originally at common law was that neither the plaintiff nor the defendant was entitled to costs. However, as the result of the Statute of Gloucester, E 1, ch 1, plaintiffs were entitled to costs in the circumstances there referred to "and since that statute the costs are allowed and awarded as parcel of the damages": see, eg, Chitty's Archbold Practice, 11th ed (1862) Vol 1, p 470. To the extent that it has been necessary for a plaintiff in order to recover that to which it is entitled to incur legal costs, there is justification in the award of such legal costs as will indemnify it for what it has been required to expend.
For a long time, the costs ordered to be paid by one party to litigation to another have been less than the costs which the successful party ordinarily was required to pay to its own solicitors. In more recent times, at least in commercial litigation, the gap between the costs payable by one party to the other and the costs payable by a party to its own solicitor has, in ordinary cases, increased. The court is, I think, entitled to know that this gap, ordinarily or at least often, is substantial. This, I believe, is one of the factors which has led this Court to reconsider the circumstances in which indemnity costs should be awarded.
The court is aware also that the gap between costs ordinarily awarded and the costs payable by a party to its own solicitor has been used as a factor in bargaining for commercial advantage.
In referring to this, I do not confine what I say to the illegitimate use of legal proceedings, steps taken in them, or the gap between costs recovered and paid. I am concerned with the use which may legitimately be made of such matters in the commercial bargaining processes which take place between parties who are or may potentially become parties to commercial litigation. It is, I undesirable that such a gap be available to be so used.
No evidence has been adduced in the present application to establish by how much the costs recoverable by International from Chemplex upon a conventional order for costs will be less than the costs it must pay to its own solicitors. But it is in my opinion proper to infer that such a gap will exist.
The central consideration, or at least an important consideration relied on by International in seeking indemnity costs in this case is that referred to by Rolfe
AJA, namely, that International was informed of the decision of
Chemplex not to pursue the appeal against it only very shortly before the hearing. Chemplex has not advanced a satisfactory reason why that decision was not made earlier or why it did not inform International of the decision at a time when International's costs of the appeal might have been considerably less. I am conscious of the danger of drawing inferences from inadequate evidence or lack of evidence. But it is, in my opinion, proper to infer that, whilst Chemplex opted to pursue the proceedings against Ferro, it decided not to pursue them against International because the appeal against International was hopeless. If this be so, that would have been apparent at or about the time of the filing of the appeal, or at least, shortly after. I am appreciative of the practicalities of litigation: decisions in litigation are not all made at the earliest time and parties do not, and perhaps cannot be expected to, manage their affairs in the most efficient way. But, even if the matter be approached on such a basis, the fact that International was obliged to incur costs up to the day of the hearing or shortly before is a factor which must weigh heavily in support of the award of indemnity costs.
However, the present application was made by International initially at the commencement of the hearing of the appeal proceedings between Chemplex and
Ferro. The court does not have before it evidence which in terms explains what happened in the present matter. There is no formal evidence as to the course of dealings, if any, between Chemplex and International prior to the date fixed for the hearing of the appeal and, subject to what I have said, the court must speculate as to what, if any discussions took place. My mind has wavered but, in the end, notwithstanding the considerations to which Rolfe AJA has referred, I am not satisfied that the case is one in which indemnity costs should be awarded. I therefore concur in the order as to costs proposed by
Kirby P.
JUDGE3
Introduction
ROLFE AJA: Huntsman Chemical Company Australia Limited, which was formerly known as Chemplex Sales (Australia) Pty Limited and to which I shall refer as "Chemplex", was, at all material times, the manufacturer of a chemical compound known as Aropol 7000, ("Aropol"). It sold Aropol, which was used in the manufacture of the waterproof fibre glass shells or skins of swimming pools in a way to which I shall refer, to Ferro Corporation (Aust) Pty
Limited, ("Ferro"). Ferro on-sold to manufacturers. The defendants are various companies within the International Pools Group and two of their directors, Mr and Mrs Kahler. International Pools Aust Pty Limited purchased Aropol from
Ferro, as agent for Gabron
Pty Limited, ("Gabron"), which was the manufacturer of the shells within the International Pools Group. International Pools Pty
Limited sold the shells and ancillary and auxiliary equipment to members of the public. The defendant companies and Mr and Mrs Kahler, were guarantors of the liability of International Pools Aust Pty Limited to Ferro for goods sold and delivered. It is convenient to refer to the defendants, including Mr and
Mrs Kahler, save where it is necessary to distinguish between them, as "International".
 .
Prior to April 1991 International had a history of successfully producing fibre glass swimming pool shells. It now being understood that what is being discussed is the waterproof fibreglass container of the swimming pool, I shall refer to it as "the swimming pool".
The swimming pool is constructed of three layers, which are formed over an inverted mould. The first layer, which becomes the exposed surface of the swimming pool, is a substance known as gelcoat. The second is called the tie layer because it ties together the gelcoat layer and the third layer, which is the fibreglass structural layer.
The chemical composition of each of the three layers must be compatible so there is no adverse inter-reaction between them, such as to produce disconformities within the layers.
Aropol was manufactured and sold as a tie layer. For some time prior to its being marketed the swimming pool industry used vinyl ester resin as the tie laver, which was produced by a competitor of Chemplex. A particular problem with swimming pools manufactured in this way was the incidence of blistering, which occurred when the gelcoat did not adhere adequately or sufficiently to the fibreglass because of a problem within the tie layer.
Blistering allows the gelcoat surface to become distorted and fall. Ths points up the significance of the tie laver and the necessity for it to be compatible with the gelcoat and fibreglass layers. International used vinyl ester resin for some years prior to April 1991 and had not experienced a blistering problem arising from manufacture.
In April 1991
International purchased Aropol and manufactured eighteen swimming pools as a trial. None had blistering problems. Between 16 August and 3 September 1992 it manufactured a large number of swimming pools using Aropol in combination with three types of fibreglass and several types of gelcoat. A significant number of these failed or are known to have defects arising from blistering. It is anticipated the failures will increase.
International has replaced or repaired five at a cost in excess of $100,000.
It is not suggested International is not required to make good the loss to its customers and, on the basis that the average cost of doing so is about $20,000 and there are approximately a further 250 swimming pools to be replaced or repaired, at least, the potential liability is in the order of $5m.
 
The Present Proceedings
Ferro commenced these proceedings in the Commercial Division by suing
International for $131,357.48 for Aropol sold and delivered, to which claim there was no defence. However International cross-claimed, the causes of action pleaded being based upon the allegation that Aropol was defective in the sense that it either did not prevent or actually caused blistering in the swimming pools which have or which are failing or have defects. It was alleged
Ferro breached [ss.19(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/s19.html) and (2) of the [Sale of Goods Act 1923](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/) and corresponding provisions of [s.19](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ga195876/s19.html) of the [Goods Act 1958](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/consolact/ga195876/) (Vic). International's cross-claim also alleged negligence, negligent misrepresentation and breaches of ss.51A, [52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html), [53](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s53.html)(a) and (c) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).
Ferro put in issue these claims and sought to rely on certain exemption clauses in its contract of sale. It brought a second cross claim against
Chemplex alleging, in effect, that if it is liable to International, Chemplex is liable to it. Its cross-claim repeated, essentially, the allegations made against it by International. Chemplex has denied any liability to Ferro.
Mr Kahler brought to the attention of the Court that International did not have the resources to proceed with further repairs or replacements, although it accepted it has given warranties which will require it to repair or replace defective pools. Cole J made an order, pursuant to [Part 31](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p31) [rule 2](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s2.html), for the hearing of the issue of liability prior to the hearing of the question of damages "with the hope, and expectation, that once that issue is resolved, the party or parties responsible will by agreement arrange necessary inspections, rectifications or replacements". His Honour appreciated the commercial ramifications of the determination of the proceedings to all parties and took steps for resolving them as quickly as possible. The Summons was issued on 20
January 1993. The Amended Defences and Cross-Claims were filed on 21 June 1993 and a technical question was referred to a Referee, Professor George. He reported to the Court on 6 December and, after a contested hearing, his report was adopted. The principal proceedings were heard by Cole J on 18 to 21 and 25 July and his Honour gave judgment on 8 August 1994. Notices of
Appeal were filed by Chemplex and Ferro on 7 and 8 September 1994 respectively seeking to have the judgment in favour of International set aside.
In the proceedings between Ferro and International his Honour found, and there was no dispute about this, that Ferro is entitled to judgment in the sum of $155,530.85, being the principal amount claimed and interest thereon. His
Honour found that Ferro is liable to pay damages to International and he stayed enforcement of the judgment Ferro obtained against International pending a determination of the amount of damages payable by Ferro to
International, which he ordered to be assessed. It is unnecessary to consider the bases on which his Honour found International was entitled to succeed against Ferro as its appeal and the consequential appeal brought by Chemplex, were withdrawn.
On the cross-claim between
Ferro and Chemplex his Honour ordered judgment for Ferro "in the same amount as that assessed as being payable by" Ferro to
International.
His Honour found that various representations were admittedly made by Chemplex, that some of them were false, and that other representations, the making of which was denied by Chemplex on the pleadings, were made. He found Chemplex was not able to rely upon exclusionary terms of trade to negate the effect of false representations made contrary to the provisions of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). His Honour found it unnecessary to consider negligence or negligent misrepresentation.
 
The Appeals
On the appeals being called on Mr Emmett of Queen's Counsel for Chemplex, with whom Mr Graves of Counsel appeared, and Mr Walton of Counsel for Ferro announced that their clients' appeals against International were not being pursued. Mr Campbell of Queen's Counsel, with whom Miss McCallum of Counsel appeared, for International informed the Court International and its legal representatives had only been advised of this decision earlier that morning and, in due course, International would be seeking an order for indemnity costs of the appeal. The appeal then proceeded as between Chemplex and Ferro on the grounds of appeal set forth in paragraphs 8 and 9 of Chemplex's Notice of Appeal, namely:- "8. His Honour erred to find that, in trade or commerce with Ferro,
Chemplex engaged in conduct done in contravention of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).
Alternatively to 8 above, his Honour erred to find that damage suffered by Ferro was damage that resulted from conduct of Chemplex done in contravention of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act 1974](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/)."
The bases upon which the appeal was fought were:- that his Honour did not make a finding that Ferro relied on the representations he found Chemplex made to Ferro in advising
International of the suitability of Aropol; and that if his Honour did make such a finding he was in error, because there was no evidence upon which he could have done so and, further, that his Honour should have found that Ferro carried out its own tests.
Chemplex did not dispute his Honour's findings that it made the representations, nor that the representations he found to be false were false.
There was no issue between the parties that Chemplex put reliance in issue and that the ultimate onus of proving it was on Ferro.
 
The Trial Judge's Reasoning
In considering the case brought by Ferro against Chemplex based on a breach of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) his Honour said, AB 907:- "Regarding the [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) claim, it is alleged that Chemplex made certain representations to Ferro which were false and which, in turn, Ferro relied upon in making the representations to International Pools which I have found were made and were false."
His Honour set out six representations alleged to have been made and noted Chemplex did not dispute they had been made. He repeated his finding that representations 4, 5 and 6 were false. His Honour set out a further six representations allegedly made, which Chemplex denied making and, save for the last as to which he made no finding, he found the representations were made, that one of them was false and that two of them proved to be false.
The admitted representations spoke of the quality and capacity of Aropol in providing consistent resistance to blistering when used in the manufacturing process to which I have referred. Representations 4, 5 and 6, which his Honour found to be false, were:- "4. Aropol was a tie coat epoxy polyester resin with improved resistance and blister resistance specifically developed for the pool industry.
Aropol gave outstanding resistance to blistering.
Aropol created a better pool."
Those representations were alleged to have been made between June 1989 and April 1991. The further representations, which were denied, were alleged to have been made between May 1991 and December 1991. They were:- "9. Aropol was an epoxy modified polyester resin.
Aropol was a product that works.
Aropol gave excellent resistance on a consistent basis in the field."
His Honour said, AB 909:- "It is undoubted that Chemplex provided information to Ferro, both at the joint marketing meeting and in the form of technical information and data sheets, for the purpose of such information being used by Ferro, as distributor of Aropol, in marketing endeavours. Representations 4, 5, 6, 10 and 11 being false, for the reasons previously given, Chemplex is not able to rely upon exclusionary terms of trade to negate the effect of false representations made contrary to the provisions of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) [Trade
Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). It follows, in my view, that Chemplex is liable to
Ferro in damages for those breaches. The damages equate to such sums as Ferro may be obliged to pay to International pools."
Mr Emmett submitted there was no express finding that Ferro relied upon or was induced by any false misrepresentations made by Chemplex in making representations to International of the same type as Chemplex made to it, and that as reliance was an essential element of Ferro's cause of action, it had failed to prove its case.
Mr Walton conceded there was no express finding by his Honour, although he submitted it was clearly implied. Mr Emmett agreed it could be said his Honour impliedly made the finding, but, he submitted, the matter of reliance being in issue, his Honour was obliged to make an express finding on an issue on which Ferro carried the ultimate onus. He referred to well known authorities dealing with the necessity for a Judicial officer to give reasons.
 
Did His Honour Make A Necessary Finding?
In considering whether his
Honour made the necessary finding it is desirable to have regard to various matters which were either not in issue or were found and are not the subject of challenge. Firstly, Chemplex was anxious to market Aropol and obtain a greater market share for it. Secondly,
Chemplex was not prepared to reveal the composition of Aropol. Independent tests of
Aropol would not disclose this and Ferro was thus dependent upon Chemplex for its knowledge of the capacity of Aropol. Thirdly, Chemplex and Ferro agreed it was desirable they should institute a joint marketing campaign promoting
Aropol and products produced or sold by Ferro. Fourthly, it was agreed
Chemplex would provide information to Ferro about the qualities and capacity of Aropol for the purpose of the joint marketing campaign. Fifthly, the sale of Aropol would only be made to Ferro to enable Ferro to on-sell to manufacturers. Chemplex could not have thought that
Ferro would purchase
Aropol from it unless it, in turn, was able to on-sell it.
Against this evidentiary background one can return to his Honour's reasons. The portion of his judgment at AB 907, which I have quoted, makes it clear his Honour understood a matter in issue was whether Ferro relied on the representations made by Chemplex. One may ask rhetorically upon who else Ferro could have relied for information about Aropol other than Chemplex. The answer is no-one. At AB 909 his Honour found it was undoubted that Chemplex provided information to Ferro in the course of a joint marketing meeting and in other ways, "for the purpose of such information being used by Ferro". The only relevant use Ferro could make of the information was to pass it on to potential purchasers of Aropol and his Honour found that was the purpose for which it was supplied by Chemplex to Ferro. It was clearly not intended that
Ferro should question the information or carry out its own tests. In these circumstances the only responsible way in which Ferro could "use" the information was if it relied on the veracity and accuracy of the statements made by Chemplex. It is not suggested there was any evidence to alert it that it should not take that attitude. Accordingly I think it is bordering on the fanciful to say that Cole J did not find, albeit perhaps only impliedly, that
Ferro acted in the way it did in reliance on the false misrepresentations made to it by Chemplex.
 
The Need For Reasons
The need for a Court to give reasons is recognised as part of the incidence of the Judicial process. This is not to "require of trial Judges a tedious examination of detailed evidence or a minute explanation of every step in the reasoning process that leads to the Judge's conclusion": Soulemezis v
Dudley (Holdings) Pty Limited [(1987) 10 NSWLR 247] per Kirby P at p.259. His
Honour continued:- "But the judicial obligation to give reasons, and not to frustrate the legislative facility of appeal on questions of law, at least obliges a Judge to state generally and briefly the grounds which have led him or her to the conclusions reached concerning disputed factual questions and to list the findings on the principal contested issues. Only if this is done can this Court discharge its functions, if an appeal is brought to it. Where nothing exists but an assertion of satisfaction on undifferentiated evidence the judicial obligation has not been discharged. Justice has not been done and it has not been seen to be done."
Mahoney JA, after refering to the decision of Gibbs CJ in Public Service
Board of New South Wales versus Osmond [(1986) 159 CLR 656] at 666-667 said, at p.269:- "Three things may be taken from what was said by Gibbs CJ. First, the reasons given must be sufficient, where there is a right of appeal, to allow that right to be exercised. Secondly, the giving of reasons is not limited to cases where there is a right of appeal: there are reasons in the nature of the judicial process which may require that reasons be given as an incident of the decision in question. And, thirdly, the giving of reasons is a normal but not a universal incident of the judicial process: there are some cases, or kinds of cases, where they need not be given. In so far as it may be relevant for me to do so, I would agree with each of these and see them as applicable in determining what reasoning of fact a Judge is under pain of error of law, required to set forth in his judgment."
After a detailed consideration of further decisions his Honour said, at p.271, and, after quoting from his decision in Housing Commission of New South
Wales versus Tatmar
Pastoral Co Pty Limited [(1983) 3 NSWLR 378], as is recorded at p.271:- "But subject to matters such as these, the basis of the decision of a trial Judge or an intermediate
Court of Appeal should be made apparent. This does not mean that the reasons given need be elaborate: an elaborate argument may not require an elaborate answer. Reasons need be given only so far as is necessary to indicate to the parties why the decision was made and to allow them to exercise such rights as may be available to them in respect of it."
His Honour continued in Soulemezis at p.271:- "In my opinion, the law does not require that a Judge make an express finding in respect of every fact leading to, or relevant to, his final conclusion of fact; nor is it necessary that he reason, and be seen to reason, from one fact to the next along the chain of reasoning to that conclusion."
At p.273 his Honour said:- "There is, I think, no formula the application of which to the instant case will indicate what, in that case, the Judge must do.

Where, in the decision of an ordinary dispute, reasons are necessary, they are necessary because of the expectation that, being a judicial decision, a sufficient explanation will be given of why the order was made. And, in my opinion, it will ordinarily be sufficient if - to adopt the formula used in a different part of the law: see R versus Associated Northern Collieries <case>; [(1910) 11 CLR 738] at 740 - by his reasons the Judge apprises the parties of the broad outline and constituent facts of the reasoning on which he has acted.

To require that a Judge detail the way in which he has reasoned step by step to his conclusion is, in my opinion, to mistake the nature of the reasoning process."
McHugh JA agreed generally in his Honour's reasons.
 .
In Yates Property Corporation Pty Limited (In Liquidation) versus Darling
Harbour Authority [(1991) 24 NSWLR 156] the necessity for the tribunal of fact "to give some indication of the basis of his decision" was adopted by Handley
JA at p.189.
The principles are clear and, as I have said, it is not in dispute that his Honour impliedly found reliance. As I have noted his Honour was aware, and expressly recorded at AB 907, that it was alleged Ferro relied upon the representations of Chemplex in making representations to International. He found information was provided for the purpose of being used by Ferro as a distributor of Aropol in its marketing endeavours. The words "for the purpose of such information being used by Ferro" encapsulate, in my opinion, the concept that Ferro would necessarily rely upon the information in communicating the information to International and other purchasers particularly as it was directly liable, subject to any exception clauses and other defences, to purchasers from it. Unless that were the finding it is difficult to understand what his Honour meant by the words I have just quoted.
The evidence to which I have referred enabled the inference to be drawn that Ferro relied on what was represented by Chemplex to Ferro. The words his
Honour used in the overall context of that part of his reasons make it clear that was the matter he was deciding. The appeal has been conducted on the substantive basis on which Chemplex elected to proceed, namely that there was no evidence of reliance. Nothing his Honour said or failed to say has, in any way, impeded the full hearing of the appeal. It is not suggested his Honour failed to make any findings of disputed fact necessary for the determination of the issue. This was highlighted by Mr Emmett's submissions that no new trial point is involved, but that the Court should be satisfied there is no evidence of reliance and, rather than ordering a new trial on that issue, it should hold there has been a failure by Ferro to prove an essential element of its case. There was no attempt, nor in my opinion could there have been, to submit that it was necessary for findings to be made on credibility which, of necessity, would have to be made by the trial Judge on the basis of all that was before him on the hearing. For these reasons I am satisfied his Honour gave sufficient reasons to indicate to the parties his finding and to enable that finding, in the particular context and circumstances of this case, to be sufficiently and properly scrutinised by this Court on appeal.
 
No Evidence That Ferro Relied
Mr Emmett submitted there was no evidence to support any finding of reliance.
In its cross-claim against Chemplex, Ferro alleged that between June 1989 and April 1991 Chemplex represented to it that:- "(d) Aropol was tie coat epoxy polyester resin with improved resistance and blister resistance specifically developed for the pool industry.
Aropol gave outstanding resistance to blistering.
Aropol created a better pool."
The particulars (AB 96) asserted these representations were oral and made by Mr Murphy on behalf of Chemplex to representatives of Ferro at a meeting held on 5 October 1989.
Ferro also alleged that between May 1991 and December 1991 Chemplex represented to it that:- "(d) Aropol was a product that works.

Aropol gave excellent blister resistance on a consistent basis in the field." (AB 97)
These representations were said to be enclosed in a document entitled "The Aropol Epoxy Polyester Resin Story".
In paragraph 3.18.2 (AB 98) Ferro pleaded that in making the representations to which I have just referred:- "Chemplex intended that Ferro would rely on the representations and knew or ought reasonably to have known that Ferro would rely on the representations and convey the substance of same to purchasers of
Aropol in circumstances where Chemplex knew or ought reasonably to have known that if the representations proved not to be true Ferro would suffer loss and damage."
In its Defence to the Cross-Claim Chemplex denied paragraph .18.2 so that reliance was in issue.
Consideration was given to the meeting of 5 October 1989. In paragraphs and 21 of his witness statement of 5 July 1994 Mr Geoffrey Frederick Young, the general manager of the Synthetics Resin Division of Ferro, said he attended a seminar for Chemplex and Ferro representatives held at the Airport
Hilton Hotel on 5 October 1989 at which Mr
Murphy presented the meeting with test results achieved by Chemplex, including tests resulting from the use of
Ferro and Chemplex products, and he recalled Mr Murphy saying words to the effect:- "Aropol 7000 is designed to give the necessary properties for a tie coat in swimming pool construction. This is supported by our test results with Ferro gelcoat."
He continued:- "Later the marketing prospects were discussed. Representatives of both Ferro and Chemplex made contributions to the discussion.
The outcome of the meeting included a decision to market Aropol 7000 with Ferro Silicone Modified V Series Gelcoat as a "Matched
System". The minutes of the meeting of 5 October 1989 which were prepared by Chemplex, a copy of which is annexed and marked 'C', accurately record the business transacted at that meeting."
The statement continued that after the meeting of 5 October Mr Young had a number of discussions and exchanged correspondence with Mr Geoff
Houghton of Chemplex in connection with the preparation of materials to be used to promote a matched system using Ferro V Series Gelcoat and Aropol, and he annexed certain facimile transmissions to his statement. He said the brochure "Matched Performance", which appears at AB 457, "was prepared in conjunction with the swimming pool manufacturer, Aqua Technics of Perth,
Western Australia and became available for use from July 1990".
 .
The minutes, AB 441, under the heading "Promotional Literature", make reference to Messrs Young and Houghton organising "a joint glossy literature publication directed towards the swimming pool fabricator and not his end customer".
On 2 November 1989
Mr Houghton sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Young,
AB 446, stating:- "Regarding the Chemplex/Ferro article, it may be a good idea to present a schematic diagram of the recommended laminate structure - a simplified version of the Aqua Technics report.

Hope you're not having too many problems with the article."
On 13 November 1989 Mr Young sent to Mr Houghton, AB 447, a draft article to be published and stated his comments would be appreciated and, on 13
November 1989, Mr Houghton advised Mr Young the proposed document was "looking good". There were further communications between them about it and, on 29 June , AB 456, Mr
Houghton sent a facsimile transmission to Mr Young thanking him for a copy of the "Matched Performance" brochure and commending him on its presentation. After making several suggestions he concluded:- "Apart from these minor points, the brochure concisely presents the right message in a very readable manner. I was impressed so much that I wonder if you could send some spare copies to me to circulate within Chemplex and to our overseas' licensors."
The brochure appears at AB 457 and, in stating the virtues of Aropol, it notes it has "improved resilience and blister resistance", "outstanding resistance to blistering" and will provide "in other words, a Better Pool".
The question arises whether the evidence establishes that Ferro relied upon the representations made at the meeting.
In a supplementary statement made on 11 July 1994, AB 469, Mr Young said paragraphs 6, 7 and 8:- "6. A decision was made to market Aropol 7000 resin and Ferro
Silicone Modified V Series Gelcoat in combination at the joint marketing meeting with representatives of Chemplex held on 5
October 1989, which is referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 of my statement. I was involved in this decision on behalf of Ferro. The decision was made by Ferro based on the information given to that meeting about the performance of Aropol 7000, and the longstanding arrangement between Ferro and Chemplex under which Ferro has referred the issue of the performance of resins to Chemplex.
In preparing the document 'Matched Performance', which is part of the document annexed to my statement of 5 July 1994 and marked 'I', I relied on the facsimile from Geoff
Houghton dated 12
February 1990 which is Annexure 'H' to that statement.
Ferro did not independently assess any of the information regarding Aropol 7000 in any of the documents provided to it by
Chemplex but relied on the contents of those documents being correct, having come from Chemplex." (My emphasis.)
It was submitted on behalf of Chemplex that in the meantime Ferro was carrying out its own testing procedures, and reference was made to an internal memorandum from Mr Lewis of
Ferro, AB 680, dated 20 June 1990, in which the results of the reaction of certain gelcoats with certain tie layers was set out, the memorandum concluding:- "Please refer to this table when recommending laminate systems to customers."
Mr Young was cross-examined about the testing of Aropol carried out by Mr
Lewis, it being suggested Mr Lewis was carrying out independent tests on the qualities of Aropol. He said he took no step to withdraw the recommendation or direction Mr Lewis conveyed in the memorandum as it was consistent with the recommendation Ferro already had from the conference, meaning the conference held on 5 October 1989.
He was cross-examined about paragraph 21 of his statement of 5 July 1994, and he agreed the minutes of the meeting correctly reflected what took place. At AB 342 he said:- "Q. Was the situation this, Mr Young, that as at 5 October 1989
Ferro was ready, in a position to immediately commence marketing of the matched system? 
A. I think the information supplied to us at that meeting was strong enough, yes.

Q. But there was further testing work to be done, you will agree? 
A. I wouldn't say that. As far as I am aware Chemplex started direct sale of that product almost immediately thereafter, before we started to sell it as a distributor to a customer that we sold the V Series gelcoat to.

Q. You agree that the outcome of the meeting was that
Chemplex and
Ferro would continue their testing programmes? 
A. Oh, yes, sure." (My emphasis.)
At AB 343 Mr Young gave the following evidence:- "Q. The document 'Matched Performance' to which you refer was a document that was generated within Ferro, was it not? 
A. We got an outside agent to put it in advertising form, for the benefit of the pool company, the information supplied by Huntsman to us, as well as what we had in our own records to make up the brochure, yes, that's correct.

Q. But the matched performance document that you referred to in draft went to Mr Houghton for his consideration and blessing rather than come any other way, didn't it? 
A. Yes, that's correct."
When cross-examined by Mr Campbell,
AB 347, Mr Young said:- "Q. You say in your statement that Ferro didn't independently assess any of the information about
Aropol 7000 that it had got from Chemplex but relied on the content of those documents being correct. Don't you think, in retrospect, it would have been a good idea to check? 
A. In retrospect it is quite impossible for us, Mr Campbell, to check: we distribute an extensive range of products from Chemplex, that are sold to an extensive range of industries, and for us to validate the information, it is just not an option for us."
Mr Lewis was questioned about the testing and his memorandum and, at AB , he said:- "Q. That testing over four or five months using Aropol 7000 led you, did it, to the position of the results published in your memorandum of 20 June 1990 were results that you were prepared to have Ferro salesmen act upon and speak about when referring to
Ferro's customers about the performance characteristics of Aropol , is that right? 
A. That's right."
Mr Lewis was cross-examined by Mr Campbell about the testing and recommendations made and, at AB 315, he was asked why the systems set out in his memorandum were recommended by him and said:- "Because of the performance of the material in terms of blister resistance, in the case of the swimming pool and the V-series gelcoat and the Aropol 7000 because it was decided at the marketing meeting.

Q. Which marketing meeting was that? 
A. That was in - the date I have to get it off this now, - 89, between Chemplex anyway.

Q. Was that the meeting at the Hilton on 5 October 1989? 
A. That's correct, so what came out of that, we decided between the two companies to market V-series and Aropol 7000 to the industry.

Q. You were asked whether you were seeking to overcome a marketing advantage of vinyl ester and you answered 'That was not the only reason, but yes', what were the other reasons? 
A. Well commercial, in commercial terms we didn't have as much of the market as we wanted either ourselves or Chemplex, being we didn't have an alternative product to supply at that stage, particularly when we started our testing we found a weakness, it can produce very low results as well as very high results, so we attempted to develop a system that was consistent."
The submission on behalf of Chemplex is that neither Mr Young nor Mr
Lewis said anything about relying on any statements made at the meeting, which led to the production of the "Matched Performance" brochure, to make representations in the same terms to International.
I do not agree. In my opinion the proper inference is, it not being in issue the representations were made, and it not being in issue that the components of Aropol were not disclosed by
Chemplex to Ferro, that officers of
Ferro and, therefore, Ferro relied upon the representations made to it by
Chemplex about Aropol in bringing the brochure into existence and in making the representations to International. I consider that inference is open from the paragraphs in Mr Young's statement of 5 July 1994 to which I have referred. However any doubt in my mind is removed by paragraph of his supplementary statement of 11 July 1994 and the evidence he gave at AB 347.
The uncontradicted evidence in paragraph 6 is that the decision to market
Aropol in combination with a product of Ferro was "based on the information given to" the meeting of October 1989. That means in my opinion, in the context of this case, reliance was placed upon the information given at that meeting for what was done subsequently in marketing Aropol.
I should also note it was suggested in Mr Emmett's submissions that the statement that the decision "was made by Ferro" could only refer to the decision having been made by Mr Young, However no objection was taken to the statement on the ground that Mr Young was unable to speak as to the intention and purpose of Ferro and, having regard to his position in Ferro, it would be difficult for any such objection to have been sustained.
The submissions turned to the representations contained in the document entitled "The Aropol Epoxy Polyester Resin Story" they being, relevantly for present purposes, that "Aropol was a product that worked", and that "Aropol gave excellent blister resistance on a consistent basis in the field".
It was not in issue that this document, AB 513, emanated from Chemplex and was received by International. The representation is stated 'in that document thus:- "The key thing to know about Aropol 7000 is that it works. This resin gives excellent blister resistance on a consistent basis in the field. It is comparatively easy for the fabricator to use and at a relatively low cost." .
The document bears date 13 December 1991. It was not, in any event ultimately, in issue that the document was received by Ferro and, subsequently, by International from Ferro. Once that was established the precise way it happened, save to the extent that one assumes it happened in the context of promoting products for sale, ceases to be relevant. However, as
Mr Young said in paragraph of his statement of 11 July 1994, which I have quoted already, Ferro made no independent assessment of Aropol "but relied on the content of those documents being correct, having come from Chemplex". It may be that in the context of the statement the documents are referable back to the "Matched Performance" brochure, although the generality of the statement, when taken with the answer given at AB 347 seems to me to lead to the inference that the same considerations applied relation to the document entitled "Aropol Epoxy
Polyester Resin Story".
Once it is accepted, as in my opinion it should be, that Ferro was not made aware by Chemplex of the composition of Aropol, which Chemplex regarded as a trade secret, and did not carry out any independent testing of Aropol as such, but rather used Aropol in conjunction with certain of its own materials, and was not in a position to make any representations itself as to Aropol, the inference is that in passing on the representations it was relying upon their having been made by Chemplex. To suggest there was no reliance on Chemplex flies in the face of the direct evidence and the inferences which, in my opinion, are properly derivable from it.
For these reasons I am of the opinion that there was ample evidence on which Cole J could find there was reliance by Ferro on the representations made by Chemplex.
Mr Walton accepted that his Honour's finding of reliance was to be implied and he submitted there was express and inferential evidence to support it. The starting point of his submission placed reliance upon the decision of the High Court in Gould and Anor versus Vaggelas and Ors [(1985) 157 CLR 215.]
A consideration of Gould versus Vaggelas in perhaps some more detail than might otherwise be made is needed, because Mr Emmett submitted that where witnesses were called, who could have given direct evidence of reliance, as he characterised evidence from a witness stating that he/she did rely, but failed to do so, the inference should be drawn that there was no reliance, or, alternatively, the inference should not be drawn that there was reliance. In making this submission he reminded the Court Ferro had the ultimate onus of proof. He submitted further that if there was no such direct evidence the defendant was under no obligation to cross-examine to seek to rebut any inference of reliance, because the evidence did not rise to the level of permitting an inference to be drawn.
He called in aid the reasoning of Handley
JA in Commercial Union Assurance Company of Australia Limited versus Ferrcom Pty
Limited and
Anor [(1991) 22 NSWLR 389] at pp.418-419. It is in these circumstances I think it appropriate to re-state what I understand to have been established by Gould v Vaggelas.
That was a case in which the appellants alleged they were induced by misrepresentations to purchase a tourist resort business on behalf of a company. The first question raised for determination by the High Court was whether the conclusion of the trial Judge was influenced by an erroneous view as to the onus of proof. In the High Court "no real challenge" was made to the trial Judge's findings as to the making of fraudulent misrepresentations: per
Wilson J p.235.
At p.236 Wilson J continued:- "Having made those findings" (of fraudulent misrepresentations) "the trial Judge proceeded to deal with the submissions strongly advanced at the trial by Mr Pincus and maintained both before the
Full Court and this Court that a misrepresentation is no ground for relief unless it induces the representee to enter into the contract and that on the evidence the Goulds had failed to establish the fact of inducement. His Honour correctly elucidated the law in this regard."
Wilson J stated the applicable principles thus in a passage which has ever since been accepted as correctly stating the law:-
Notwithstanding that a representation is both false and fraudulent if the representee does not rely upon it he has no case.
If a material representation is made which is calculated to induce the representee to enter into a contract and that person in fact enters into the contract there arises a fair inference of fact that he was induced to do so by the representation.
The inference may be rebutted, for example, by showing that the representee, before he entered into the contract, either was possessed of actual knowledge of the true facts and knew them to be true or alternatively made it plain that whether he knew the true facts or not he did not rely on the representation.
The representation need not be the sole inducement. It is sufficient so long as it plays some part even if only a minor part in contributing to the formation of the contract." (My emphasis.)
His Honour stated these propositions in relation to the entry into a contract after the making of misrepresentations, but
I do not understand them to be confined to that circumstance to which his Honour understandably referred as it was the one he was required to consider. Thus the words used may accommodate any situation in which representations, which are false, have been made and where It appears the representee has acted in reliance on them.
His Honour continued:- "The main thrust of Mr Pincus's submission in this Court is not that the learned trial Judge wrongly evaluated the evidence in his examination of the submission that in truth Mrs Gould did not rely upon the representations of Mr Vaggelas, it was that, the evidence as to inducement being evenly balanced, his Honour wrongly placed the onus of proof on the defendants and so found in favour of the
Goulds.
Connelley J frankly acknowledged the presence of powerful considerations which would go to negative any reliance by the
Goulds on the representations. In particular, he referred to the absence of any complaint by Mrs Gould prior to 2 November 1977 and her oftexpressed suspicion of Mr Vaggelas. On the other hand, his
Honour found those considerations to be opposed by other matters.
Mrs Gould never had any knowledge of the true financial position of the resort, not even knowledge that was partial or fragmentary. She could not have relied on Mr Ingles because she was well aware that he had not facts on which to base a judgment other than the representations of Mr Vaggelas. There was no opportunity for independent investigation or judgment."
In so far as his Honour is speaking of the inference, which was available, his reasons proceed on the basis that there was no direct evidence that the fraudulent misrepresentations had induced the entry into the contract. Thus the evidentiary position was left in the same position as, on one view, it has been in this case.
His Honour considered the question of onus of proof and held that the ultimate onus rested on those to whom the representations were made to prove inducement.
At p.238 he said:- "At the same time, one can readily understand why it is in cases of deceit that a tribunal whose duty it is to find the facts may require a defendant to make some answer to the case that is put against him. Such cases are of a kind where in the general experience of mankind the facts speak for themselves. Where a plaintiff shows that a defendant has made false statements to him intending thereby to induce him to enter into a contract and those statements are of such a nature as would be likely to provide such inducement and the plaintiff did in fact enter into that contract and thereby suffered damage and nothing more appears, commonsense would demand the conclusion that the false representations played at least some part in inducing the plaintiff to enter into the contract. However, it is open to the defendant to obstruct the drawing of that natural inference of fact by showing that there were other relevant circumstances. ... It is entirely accurate to speak of an onus resting on a defendant to draw attention to the presence of circumstances such as those I have described in order to show that the inference of the fact of inducement which would ordinarily be drawn from the fraudulent making of a false statement calculated to induce a person to enter into a contract followed by entry into that contract should not in all the circumstances be drawn.
And it is no more than an evidentiary onus - an obligation to point to the existence of circumstances which tend to rebut the inference which would ordinarily be drawn from the primary facts.
When all the facts are in, the factfinding tribunal must determine whether or not it is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the misrepresentations in question contributed to the plaintiff's entry into the contract. The onus to show that they did is a condition precedent to relief and rests at all times on the plaintiff." (My emphasis.)
A passage at p.239 of his Honour's judgment reinforces that there was no direct evidence of inducement. He said:- "On the contrary, in the course of that section of the reasons which concludes with the passage I have quoted, the learned trial
Judge, after referring to the inference of fact of inducement which would ordinarily be drawn from the conjunction of what I have called the primary facts, proceeds to say: 'but that being an inference of fact only, it is liable in a proper case to be displaced by other evidence. In this connection it would appear that the evidentiary burden shifts to the representor'."
At p.250 Brennan J said:- "An inference of inducement may be drawn when a party enters into a contract after a material representation has been made to him, but it is no more than an inference of fact and it is settled law that such an inference may be rebutted by the facts of the case: Holmes v Jones; Smith versus Chadwick. The tribunal of fact may infer that such a material misrepresentation induced the representee to enter into the contract and the fact that there were other inducements to him to do so does not necessarily preclude the drawing of that inference. The relevant question for the tribunal of fact to answer on all the evidence is whether the misrepresentation alone, or with or notwithstanding other things that accompany it, was a real inducement, or one of the real inducements to the plaintiff to do whatever caused his loss ...."
This reasoning, in my opinion, is directly opposed to the main thrust of
Mr Emmett's submissions. There does not have to be "direct evidence" of reliance and, if the evidence otherwise supports the drawing of the inference that there was reliance, an evidentiary onus is placed on the representor.
But, at the end of the litigious day the ultimate onus rests on the representee.
In my opinion, essentially for the reasons I have stated, a consideration of the evidence leads to the conclusion that Ferro made the representations to
International in reliance upon the representations made to it by Chemplex.
There is not only direct evidence of such reliance but the facts give rise to a compelling inference for the reasons I have given.
It was submitted by Mr Emmett that the statements in Gould versus Vaggelas should be confined to actions in deceit and that the principles do not apply to actions under [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). In my opinion Gould v
Vaggelas establishes the correct approach by which the Court may determine, as a matter of fact, claims for false misrepresentations and reliance upon them.
It was referred to in the context of a claim under the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/):
Gates versus The City Mutual Life Assurance Society Limited (1985-1986) 160 CLR 1 and, so far as it determined the correct measure of damages, it was applied.
Gates was distinguished in Poseidon Limited versus Adelaide Petroleum NL <case>; [(1994) 68
ALJR 313] in which it was held that damages for deprivation of a commercial opportunity, whether occurring by reason of breach of contract, tort or contravention or [s.52(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) should be ascertained by reference to the High
Court's assessment of the prospects of success of that opportunity had it been pursued.
Relevantly, for present purposes, it seems to me significant the High
Court drew no distinction between claims in tort and under the [Trade Practices
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/).
I have noted Mr Emmett's submission that it was incumbent on Ferro to adduce direct evidence of reliance and, it having called certain witnesses who could have spoken about reliance but who gave no direct evidence of it, that the inference should be drawn, apparently conformably with the reasoning of the High Court in Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298], that the witnesses could have said nothing to assist Ferro's case and, therefore, reliance was not proved. He relied in this respect on the reasoning of Handley JA in Ferrcom.
At pp.418419 his Honour said:- "As I have already said the insured made no attempt to prove that it could and would have obtained cover for this mobile crane without the endorsement by pursuing the course that Mr Hughes said would alone have achieved that result.

In my opinion the Court should not draw inferences favourable to the insured on these matters when no attempt was made to prove them by direct evidence and in particular when no relevant questions were asked of Mr Ferrarese. Rather it seems appropriate to apply the principles of Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298.] 
There appears to be no Australian authority which extends the principles of Jones versus Dunkel to a case where a party fails to ask questions of a witness in chief. However I can see no reason why those principles should not apply when a party by failing to examine a witness in chief on some topic, indicates 'as the most natural inference that the party fears to do so'. This fear is then 'some evidence' that such examination in chief 'would have exposed facts unfavourable to the party': see Jones versus Dunkel (at 320321) per Windeyer J. Moreover in Ex parte Harper; re Rosenfield [(1964-5)
NSWR 58] at 218, held that inferences could not be drawn in favour of a party that called a witness who could have given direct evidence when that party refrained from asking the crucial questions."
Jones versus Dunkel allows, but does not compel, the
Court to draw an inference if certain matters are established. I do not understand Handley JA to be doing more than stating a further inference, which may be available on the proof of certain facts.
This decision was considered by the Full Court of the Federal
Court, (Beaumont, Foster and Hill JJ) in Dominelli Ford (Hurstville) Pty Limited and
Anor versus Karmot Auto Spares Pty Limited <case>; [(1992) 38 FCR 471.] Dominelli, in my respectful opinion, provides guidance in the resolution of this appeal.
In a joint judgment their Honours quoted, at pp.480-481, from the judgment of the trial Judge:- "In my opinion Dominelli Ford's conduct was such as to induce a belief in Karmot that CMC was a manufacturer of the required reliability. As the correspondence clearly shows, that conduct was misleading and deceptive. Fifty per cent of the goods supplied had been unsaleable. There had been a history of unsatisfactory and frustrating performance by CMC resulting in a loss of confidence both by Dominelli Ford's customers and by that company itself.

I draw the inference that had the true position been disclosed
Karmot would not have entered into the transaction at all: cf Gould v Vaggelas [(1985) 157 CLR 215] at 236. There was no compelling need for it to do so. It was a willing but not anxious purchaser.
Confidence in the reliability of the supplier was of fundamental importance."
Their Honours referred to the principal attack on these findings being related to the trial Judge's drawing the inference that "had the true position been disclosed Karmot would not have entered into the transaction at all....".
They continued, at p.481:- "Ultimately, this submission was based upon the absence of any direct evidence in the case of Hutchins as to what he would have done had the course of dealings between Dominelli Ford and CMC in relation to the defective pumps in fact been disclosed to him in the course of negotiations. It was submitted that the Court could not infer, in the absence of such evidence, that Hutchins would not have gone ahead with the purchase."
The submission mirrors Mr Emmett's in the present appeal.
Their Honours noted it had been conceded Mr Hutchins had not been asked and gave no evidence as to what his attitude would have been had he been informed, and that he gave no evidence that he would not have gone ahead with the transaction had he been apprised of those matters. At p.482 their Honours said:- "On behalf of the appellants it was submitted that this omission was fatal to the drawing of the inference. The fact that Hutchins could have given this evidence but did not, it was contended, should, in the circumstances of the case, have precluded the drawing of such an inference.
It was pointed out that his Honour, in declining to find reliance upon the representations referred to above as to monthly sales figures and the existence of an exclusive dealing arrangement with the Chinese manufacturer, was influenced by the fact that Hutchins gave no direct evidence of such reliance.
It was submitted that similar considerations should have militated against the drawing of the inference of reliance in the area of the case now under consideration. However, we do not consider that much weight can be placed upon this submission. It is clear that other matters to which he makes reference inclined his Honour against the drawing of the inferences of reliance on the representations as to exclusive agreement and sales figures.
Whether or not he drew those inferences was particularly a matter for his Honour. We are satisfied that failure to draw those inferences sheds no significant light on his decision to draw the present inference."
Their Honours referred to other evidence being available to his Honour from which the inference could have been drawn and then stated they were satisfied his Honour was entitled to rely upon the reasoning of Wilson J in
Gould versus Vaggelas. They set out his Honour's four propositions at p.236 to which I have referred already.
They continued:- "Although Gould was a case involving the tort of deceit, we are of the opinion that these principles have equal relevance in cases based upon alleged breaches of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) and equivalent State legislation. Notwithstanding a submission to the contrary made on behalf of the appellants, we do not consider that an intention to mislead on the part of the representor is an essential requirement for the bringing into play of these principles. Accepting, as we do, that the relevant representations as to reliability of supplying quality of product were made in the present case, then the inference of inducement and reliance could readily be drawn by his Honour and by this Court in accordance with the second and fourth of the principles enunciated by Wilson J.

Although direct evidence of reliance might have been obtained by the appropriate questioning of Hutchins, we do not regard the absence of this evidence as fatal in the sense that it necessarily precludes the finding of reliance. Indeed, as the information as to the prior problems with the supplier had been withheld from
Hutchins, any question as to what he would have done had it been disclosed to him, would necessarily be hypothetical. As such, the answer, in itself, might well be regarded as carrying little weight and being essentially self-serving. In this regard the case appears to be essentially different from that considered in Commercial 
Union Assurance Co of Australia Limited versus Ferrcom Pty Limited ...
In any event we are satisfied that Gould provides clear authority for the course taken by the trial Judge. We concur in the inference that he drew." (My emphasis.)
In my opinion Gould v Vaggelas provides an evidentiary basis, which
Courts may apply in deciding whether, as a matter of fact, reliance on fraudulent misrepresentations has been proved. Whether the Court will draw the inference, in the absence of direct evidence of reliance from witnesses called, will be a matter for decision having regard to the facts of each case.
However Gould versus Vaggelas establishes that the inference may be drawn by the tribunal of fact notwithstanding that witnesses have been called and direct evidence of reliance has not been led from them.
In Dominelli, accordingly, their Honours found it unnecessary to consider whether the extension of the principle in Jones versus Dunkel suggested in Ferrcom was required. They were dealing with a factual situation which is, in all relevant respects, similar to that presented by this case, particularly as the breaches are alleged to be breaches of [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). In these circumstances I consider it appropriate to apply the principles referred to in Dominelli, which incorporate, of course, what was said in Gould v
Vaggelas, which is binding on me.
I also think, even if I had discerned a difference between the decisions in Ferrcom and Dominelli, it would have been appropriate to have applied the decision of the Full Court in relation to the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/), which is national legislation. In Australian Securities Commission versus Marlborough Gold
Mines Limited <case>; [(1992-1993) 177 CLR 485] at 492 Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ said:- "It is somewhat surprising that the decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Western Australia, and more particularly that of Mr Commissioner Ng declined to follow what was said by the Full
Court of the Federal Court in Windsor. Although the considerations applying are somewhat different from those applying in the case of
Commonwealth legislation, uniformity of decision in the interpretation of uniform national legislation such as the Law is a sufficiently important consideration to require that an intermediate appellate Court - and all the more so a single
Judge - should not depart from an interpretation placed on such legislation by another Australian intermediate appellate Court unless convinced that that interpretation is plainly wrong."
I appreciate that the interpretation of legislation is not here in issue but it seems to me to be drawing a distinction without a difference to suggest that it is not appropriate for this Court to approach the determination of matters thrown up by [s.52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s52.html) in the manner decided by a joint decision of the
Full Court of the Federal Court in reliance upon the decision of the High
Court in Gould versus Vaggelas.
In all these circumstances I am satisfied there is evidence, both direct and inferential, from which his Honour was entitled to find that Ferro relied upon the false misrepresentations made by Chemplex.
In the context of this appeal it becomes unnecessary, in my view, to explore the further extension of the principles in Jones versus Dunkel suggested in
Ferrcom.
The application of those principles can be productive of difficulty and qualification: R versus Besevich [(1992) 30 NSWLR 510] at 532 and Smith versus The
Nominal Defendant (Court of Appeal - 17 February 1994 - unreported). Those are problems with which I do not think I have to wrestle in the context of this appeal having regard to the authorities I consider to be directly in point.
 
Application
By International For Indemnity Costs
International has submitted it is entitled to an order for indemnity costs of the appeal.
This stems from the withdrawal of the appeal on the morning of the hearing and the failure by Chemplex to furnish written submissions in support of the appeal. Mr Campbell submitted that whilst there may be Justification for bringing or defending proceedings at first instance at a time when the parties are not fully aware how contested facts and issues of law will work out and be determined, the effect of a hearing at first instance and the furnishing of a detailed judgment refines the issues and enables the parties, giving due consideration to the way in which they have been determined, to decide, with an appropriate degree of knowledge, whether an appeal has some reasonable chance of success. He submitted that after the hearing at first instance the full ambit of the factual material is fixed and determined. This, so he submitted, is of particular significance because the grounds of appeal against the judgment in favour of International related essentially to issues of fact, the determination of which by the trial Judge would be most difficult to overcome in the light of the decisions of the High
Court in Abalos versus Australian Postal Commission <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 167]
For my [part I](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p1) find it unnecessary to comb through the grounds of appeal for the purpose of determining the present application. I think the appropriate starting point is that the appellants chose to abandon their appeals against International. In the absence of any evidence to suggest that this was brought about as a result of some other reason, I infer the reason was that after due consideration of all the relevant material, in which I include the relevant legal principles, it was decided the appeals had no hope of success.
All material on which that decision could have been made was available as at the date the Notices of Appeal were filed, namely 7 and 8 September ,
and, in my opinion, it is a very serious matter that the appellants then failed to consider their position and to take the decision ultimately reached until, I am prepared to assume, the morning the appeal was listed for hearing.
In the meantime International has been subjected to the cost of preparing the appeal for hearing and, bearing in mind there are four appeal books with a total of 928 pages of pleadings, exhibits, transcript of evidence and judgments, that was not considerable task, nor, I am prepared to assume, an inexpensive one.
The appellants are both, I infer, reasonably large commercial entities well able to receive proper advice at reasonably short notice as to their rights.
There is no evidence, and I would certainly not draw an inference, that the appellants used the Notices of Appeal and the appellate process as a bargaining lever in the hope of obtaining some commercial advantage in the particular circumstances of this case.
The simple facts are that they left on foot appeals, which, I infer, they finally decided had no hope of success. But they remained on foot from
September 1994 until 13 February 1995, something which must have been done in the knowledge that International was incurring costs. The question is whether leaving on foot appeals bound to fall, or perhaps failing to decide whether or not the appeals had any merit at an earlier point of time, in circumstances where
International was incurring costs or, must, to the knowledge of the appellants have been incurring costs, constitutes improper conduct sufficient to give rise to an order for indemnity costs.
I think this has to also be considered against the light of the fact that the litigation was commercial litigation and parties who and which engage in it are taken, generally speaking, to be aware of the commercial ramifications of what they are doing.
In Fountain Selected Meats (Sales) Pty Limited versus International Produce
Merchants Pty Limited and Ors <case>; [(1988) 81 ALR 397] Woodward J examined at some length the circumstances in which indemnity costs will be awarded. In that case proceedings had been taken against a director of a company pursuant to s.75B of the [Trade Practices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) prior to the decision of the High Court in
Yorke versus Lucas <case>; [(1985) 158 CLR 661.] However, during the pendency of the proceedings, the High Court gave judgment in that matter and his Honour was satisfied the judgment made it clear the action against the director must fail. His Honour decided that from the time that decision was given the action against the director:- "... was vexatious, in the Shorter Oxford Dictionary sense of a legal action instituted 'without sufficient grounds for the purpose of causing trouble or annoyance to the defendant'. In the present case there were no sufficient grounds to continue the case after early 1986, and the applicant's purpose in doing so, if indeed there was a purpose, can only have been to add to any pressures on the respondents generally to settle the action. The other possibility is that the case against the second respondent was pursued for no good purpose at all - due to inertia and carelessness."
Nothing occurred from the time of the filing of the Notices of Appeal until the morning of the hearing of the appeal to change the evidentiary or legal principles that the Court would have to consider. Accordingly if the appeal was hopeless on the morning of the appeal it was hopeless when the
Notices of Appeal were filed. I do not infer that the purpose of maintaining the appeal was to seek to bring about a settlement, but I am satisfied, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, that the appeals were pursued "for no good purpose at all - due to inertia and carelessness". If that be the appropriate test to apply to make an award of indemnity costs I am satisfied such an order should be made. In my respectful opinion carelessness and inertia in the conduct of litigation, particularly commercial litigation where the parties are adequately and properly represented, is sufficient to justify an award of costs on an indemnity basis. In this context the words "intertia" and "carelessness" mean a failure to grapple with the factual and legal issues sufficiently to reach a conclusion about the merits of the appeal.
It was suggested during the hearing that such an approach may lead to hopeless appeals being run so as to avoid the imposition of indemnity costs. I do not think, with respect, that result necessarily follows. An award of indemnity costs in this case may well cause litigants to look with greater care at appeals it is proposed to bring to ensure that only appeals are brought where there is a legitimate expectation of success. If a decision is taken to run what turns out to be a hopeless appeal, the Court has an amplitude of discretion to order costs on an indemnity basis. A firm recognition of these considerations may well lead to appeals, which have no or little prospect of success, not being instituted as a potential holding measure to obtain time. I hasten to add that I am not suggesting the present appellants used the appeal process for that purpose in this case.
The applicability of the rule in this Court was established in Maitland
Hospital versus Fisher (No 2) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 721.] I appreciate in that case consideration was being given to [Part 52](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/index.html#p52) [rule 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s17.html) and the objects of that rule are stated.
In Bailleau Knight Frank versus Ted Manny Real Estate [(1991) 30 NSWLR 359]
Powell J held that an order for indemnity costs was warranted where, in effect, the proceedings had no reasonable prospect of success.
In my view the action of the appellants in abandoning the appeal indicates they had no faith in the possibility of its success and, therefore, it was not an appeal which should have been brought or, having been brought, prosecuted after reasonable time for consideration. To that extent, although it was not fought out to the end, it constituted a form of abuse of process of the Court.
This, in the particular circumstances of the case, warrants, in my view, an order in favour of International that its costs of the appeal be paid on an indemnity basis.
In Colgate Palmolive Co and Anor versus Cussons Pty Limited <case>; [(1993) 118 ALR ] Sheppard J considered the basis upon which indemnity costs may be awarded.
His Honour noted, at p.257, that one category of case which had attracted an award of indemnity costs was where proceedings were commenced in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law. He referred to the decision of Woodward J in Fountain and French J in J-Corp Pty Limited v
Australian Builders Labourers
Federation Union of Workers - Western Australian
Branch (Federal Court of Australia, 19 February 1993, unreported). At p.255 his
Honour quoted from the decision of French J at p.5:- "Although there is said to be a presumption in such cases that the action was commenced or continued for some ulterior motive or in wilful disregard of known facts or clearly established law, it is not a necessary condition of the power to award such costs that a collateral purpose or some species of fraud be established.
It is sufficient, in my opinion, to enliven the discretion to award such costs that, for whatever reason, the party persists in what should on proper consideration be seen to be a hopeless case. The case against the BTA ... was paper thin. The BTA's name was invoked on a sign associated with the picket and appeared in the newspaper advertisement referred to in the evidence.
Two of the union officials involved in the picket had BTA authorisations to inspect premises under the relevant award. But much more than that was necessary to justify proceedings for a contravention of s.45D. In my opinion the order sought by the BTA should be made."
In Premier Woodworking Co Pty Limited versus Siganisucu (Court of Appeal - 30
November 1989 - unreported) an appeal, on being called on, was withdrawn. The consequence was its dismissal with costs. The respondent sought costs on an indemnity basis. Although the Court was of the view the application had "a very frail footing in the costs rules", their Honours were not referred to authority "nor was the point fully argued".
Their Honours considered that a more generous costs order should only be made after a consideration of the grounds of appeal to determine the merits of the proceedings. They examined the grounds of appeal and formed the view none had any real prospect of success.
Their Honours considered a case had been made out for a special costs order, and continued:- "Although some of us, in addition, take the view that appeals of this character - that is to say, with these weaknesses - should be discouraged, we are not satisfied that making special orders for costs is the proper way of bringing about that result, or indeed that it is correct to say that it is part of the function of an appellate court to discourage appeals, it being its job merely to hear and determine."
In the result an order for costs was made on a solicitor and client basis. In the present appeal full argument has been presented and, in my opinion, costs on an indemnity basis should be awarded. This is not to discourage appeals but to indemnity International fully in the particular circumstances. The discussion about discouraging appeals only arose from the suggestion that unmeritorious appeals would be argued out fully if indemnity costs were awarded. However Premier stands as authority for the making of a more expansive order for costs than costs on a party and party basis.
In my opinion the authorities support the proposition that where a party persists in a hopeless case, that justifies, for all the reasons given, the making of an order for costs on an indemnity basis.
It was submitted that there may be good reasons why parties would seek to withdraw an appeal on the hearing, quite unconnected with any acceptance that the appeal was hopeless.
If there are such reasons then evidence should have been placed before the Court to explain them. The Court expressly reserved leave to the appellants to call evidence on the application if they saw fit. No such evidence has been put before the Court. The onus was clearly placed upon the appellants, which were the parties aware of the reason for not pursuing the appeals, to satisfy the Court the reasons were sufficient. They have not sought to discharge it.
 
Proposed Orders
The orders I propose are that:- 
The appeals by Chemplex and Ferro against International be dismissed.
Chemplex and Ferro pay International's costs on an indemnity basis.
The appeal by Chemplex against Ferro be dismissed with costs.
The proceedings be remitted to the Commercial Division for the assessment of damages.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/26.html  
