

Regina versus David Paul Ross [1999] NSWSC 1386 (28 August 1999) 
REGINA versus David Paul ROSS`` ``60190/96 
Monday 7 April 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SIMPSON J, HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on the applicant after he pleaded guilty in the District Court in March 1996 to four charges of breaking, entering and stealing, one charge of break and enter with intent to steal, and one charge of attempt break and enter with intent to steal. The applicant asked his Honour to take into account on a Form 2 five further charges of break enter and steal, and charges of goods in custody and failing to appear.

On each count, and taking into account the Form 2 matters, his Honour sentenced the applicant to penal servitude for five years and four months, comprising a minimum term of four years to date from 28 August 1996, that is at the expiration of a minimum term which the applicant was then serving, and an additional term of one year and four months.

It is unnecessary to detail the facts of the offences. The significant offences were the breaking and entering matters which involved private homes.
On most occasions property of quite considerable value was taken. The offences in the indictment took place over a period of days in August 1995, but the
Form 2 offences range between November 1994 and January 1995.

The applicant co-operated with the police and made full admissions of his involvement. In most cases those admissions were the only evidence against him. He gave evidence before his Honour in which he expressed remorse, which his Honour accepted as genuine. The applicant has a bad record, mainly for offences of dishonesty, and has been sentenced to a number of prior prison terms.

The applicant gave evidence of his background from which it appears that he is now thirty-two years old. He has had an unfortunate upbringing which properly elicits some sympathy for him. His parents divorced when he was two and he and his brother were taken into foster care. Both parents remarried, but it appears that neither of them set about regaining custody of the boys. He was educated to school certificate standard and in his later teens had unskilled jobs.

For a period of years he lived in northern Queensland in a relationship with a woman, and whilst there conducted a business as a gardener. When that relationship ended he returned to Sydney where he had some brief contact with his family. He started using heroin, which led to his involvement in a robbery for which he received his first prison sentence. He has been sentenced to prison on a number of subsequent occasions, and it does appear that his criminality has been related to his drug affected lifestyle.

After his release on parole in 1994 he sought drug rehabilitation at Wisteria
House, where he completed a three week course. Thereafter it appears he spent a brief period at Cumberland Hospital. Subsequently he was unable to get work and he became addicted to heroin again. In 1995 he made further attempts at drug rehabilitation in Odyssey House and the Langton Clinic, but these also were unsuccessful. He sold the property stolen as a result of the present offences and used the proceeds to buy heroin. Since being back in custody he has been on a methadone program and it seems in recent times has not used heroin, a matter which the learned sentencing judge regarded as of some significance.

Mr Strickland of counsel, who appears for the applicant before us but who did not appear in the Court below, has presented no argument against the five and a half year prison term. His only submission is that the learned sentencing judge should have found special circumstances so as to have specified a lesser minimum term and a greater additional term.

We have had available to us a transcript of the address of counsel who appeared for the applicant in the Court below. Counsel made no reference to special circumstances, or indeed to any provision of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). On the other hand, he did urge his Honour to deal with the applicant in such a way as to foster his drug rehabilitation. The learned sentencing judge made no reference to special circumstances in the course of his remarks on sentence and, before us, Mr Strickland has argued that his Honour thereby fell into error as there was abundant material amounting to special circumstances.

I must say that that appears to me to be the case, and I shall turn to that material in a moment. The learned sentencing judge is most experienced in the criminal law and, even if his Honour had considered special circumstances and rejected them, it is a little surprising that no reference at all was made to the issue. The explanation may well be that counsel then appearing for the applicant made no reference to it in submissions.

The material referred to by Mr Strickland, said to be capable of amounting to special circumstances, is the combination of the following matters. Firstly, the sentences imposed by his Honour were made cumulative upon an existing minimum term imposed at Waverley Local Court in August 1995. That of itself is not a matter of great significance. By the time his Honour came to sentence the applicant there was but five months of that minimum term to run, and the additional term thereafter was for only four months. Nonetheless it was a matter properly to be regarded within the principles expressed by the Court in
Simpson (1992) 61 A Crim R at 58.

Secondly, and more importantly, there was the evidence of the applicant's recent steps towards rehabilitation against the background of his unfortunate upbringing and drug-affected lifestyle. Those steps embraced the efforts made outside the prison system to which I have referred, together with his submitting himself to the methadone program since being back in custody. There is every reason to accept the genuineness of those efforts, particularly in the light of his full admissions of his criminality to the police, and a rather telling statement in the course of his recorded interview with the police in which he said of the matters he had admitted: "I am just glad that they are sorted out today and they can't - don't come back to haunt me." 
Allied to the need to foster his rehabilitation is the fact that his criminal record shows that, since the later 1980s, a very large proportion of his time has been spent in custody. For that reason alone, it does appear that he would need a longer than usual period of supervision upon his release; see
Phelan [(1993) 66 A Crim R 446] at .

As I have said, I, for my part, find the totality of this material compelling, such that in my view a proper exercise of discretion required a departure from the usual proportion between minimum and additional terms, so as to provide a longer than usual additional term.

In the event that this Court decided to intervene, we have received in evidence some additional material by way of certificates, from which it appears that the applicant has continued to involve himself in drug rehabilitation by his participation in a drug and alcohol program and has worked within the prison system in such a way as to earn commendation.
Reference was also made from the Bar table to the fact that the applicant may be looking forward to a period on protection, for reasons which I need not elaborate.

Taking all those matters into account, the orders I would propose are as follows: that leave be granted and the appeal allowed; that the sentence imposed in the District Court be quashed; that in respect of each of the matters on the indictment, and taking into account the matters on the Form 2 document, the applicant be sentenced to concurrent terms of five years and four months penal servitude, comprising a minimum term of three years to date from 28 August 1996 and to expire on 27 August 1999, and an additional term of two years and four months to commence on 28 August 1999 and to expire on 27
December 2001.
 
SIMPSON J: I agree. The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Hidden J.
 * * * 
