

Dalysmith Corporation (Aust) Pty Ltd and Anor versus Cray Personnel Pty Ltd and
Ors Matter No 2789/96 [1997] NSWSC 547 (6 November 1997) ` 
Dalysmith Corporation (Aust) Pty Ltd & Anor` `v Cray Personnel Pty Ltd & Ors` ` 2789/96` `6 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /96 DALYSMITH CORPORATION (AUST) PTY LTD & ANOR versus CRAY PERSONNEL PTY LTD & ORS 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I gave judgment in this matter on 14 April 1997 after a hearing that had lasted some four days during February and March this year. On 18 September 1997 I gave a further judgment as to damages following a hearing on 5 August 1997. I found damages which, with interest, will be short of $10,000. 
The matter is in the list today for short minutes to be finalised and the only contentious matter is how the costs should be paid.

The ordinary rule is that costs follow the event and a successful litigant receives costs in the absence of special circumstances justifying some other order; Ritter versus Godfrey [[1920] 2 KB 47]; Hughes v
Western Australia Cricket Association Inc. (1986) 8 ATPR 40-748 at page ,136.

There are some special circumstances in the instant case.

Mr Newlinds for the first and second defendants, who were essentially the unsuccessful parties, has raised a number of factors, some of which I am convinced are special factors. Combining what Mr Newlinds said and what Mr
Cameron for the plaintiffs said, it seems to me that the factors and their evaluation are as follows.
The plaintiffs' case, Mr Newlinds says, was overstated. The plaintiffs failed on the issue as to whether there was a valid covenant under the general law but succeeded because of the [Restraints of Trade Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rota1976216/). The plaintiffs claimed that the defendants had stolen documents. They failed to prove that, but they did establish that some documents had been abstracted from their premises and used by the defendants. The time that was taken in dealing with the issues on which the plaintiffs failed was significant, but I will deal with that under the second heading.
The plaintiffs' case, on Mr Newlinds' submission - and nothing Mr Cameron said told against this - was influenced by what appear to be two factors.
First, the plaintiffs' case did not seem to be completely prepared until shortly before the hearing and then there was a service close to the hearing of three affidavits of defectors from the defendants' camp. That caused a considerable problem to both the court and to the defendants. The problem was overcome, but that took time and extra time in the hearing was spent that might not otherwise have had to be spent. Furthermore, the cross examination on issues on which the plaintiffs failed was quite considerable. I would estimate that about 40 per cent of the time was taken because of overstatement, over cross examination or late filing of material.
Some serious issues were found against the defendants. On the other hand, some serious allegations were not found proved, such as the stealing of the documents.
The total return to the plaintiffs after a five day hearing was under $10,000. Had the matter been in the District Court or the Common Law Division, that factor in itself would mean that the ordinary rule would not apply. This
Division does not encourage people to come to it and get costs where the ordinary courts of the land would not give costs.

Mr Cameron says that his clients really had to come to this Division because they sought an injunction. It is conceded that the District Court could not have given such an injunction. Mr Newlinds said that the Common Law Division could have granted the injunction. That is theoretically right but the time of the Common Law Division duty judge is usually so taken up with other matters that injunction matters are dealt with here.

Mr Cameron, however, says that it is a bit hard to say that his clients received under $10,000. Their losses were far greater, but because the defendants made the plaintiffs prove everything strictly - and these cases are hard to prove - they only ended up with a relatively small amount. That is really a plea ad misericordia, but it really does not affect the judicial determination as to what are proper costs.
Mr Cameron then says that the defendants have been shown to be people who have taken part in a deliberately planned operation to deprive the plaintiffs of their customers. Mr Newlinds' riposte to that is that one does not make an order for costs to penalise people for their conduct. One looks to see the way in which the case was run, who was successful in the proceedings and then one makes an order to compensate for the costs that the successful party has suffered.
Another method of approach is to look at the issues in the proceedings and consider who has been successful on which issues. Mr Newlinds says that there were nine issues. The plaintiffs succeeded on five and the defendants on four.
Mr Cameron does not gainsay this. If, accordingly, one was looking at simply the matter of time, one would say that the plaintiffs should be entitled to 60 per cent of their costs; if one is looking at issues, 55 per cent. Then one must take into account that there needs to be some discount for the small amount that was actually received by the plaintiffs. It is, I think, an odd result if someone gets more for costs than for damages.

Mr Cameron submits that his clients should get the whole of their costs with certain defined exceptions. Mr Newlinds submits that his clients should pay the plaintiffs' costs up to and including the interlocutory hearing. The plaintiffs should pay the defendants' costs for five days and there should be no order for costs otherwise. I think the answer is somewhere in between.

I think, however, that the order that the first and second defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs up to and including the interlocutory hearing is correct.
However, I also think that, because that order will encompass the filing of some of the affidavits which were relied on at the final hearing, it means that some smaller percentage than 55 per cent should be taken for the order for costs of the general suit. When the costs of the interlocutory injunction are taken into consideration, the plaintiffs would in practical terms receive something slightly over 50 per cent of their costs in the proceedings.

Accordingly, I make orders 1 to 9 in the short minutes of order. The only one that I need spell out is costs. 6(a) The first and second defendants pay the plaintiffs' costs up to and including the interlocutory hearing before Cohen J on 30 July 1996.
 (b) Direct that the costs of and incidental to the report and affidavit of
Kim Mark Batcheldor not be allowed.
 (c) Otherwise order the first and second defendants to pay 45 per cent of the plaintiffs' costs.
 * * * 
