

Regina versus Graham Leslie Harvey [1997] NSWSC 9 (24 January 1997) 
REGINA versus GRAHAM LESLIE HARVEY /96 
Wednesday 11 December 1996 
THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
BEAZLEY JA, SMART & JAMES JJ 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - Offence to the person - Indecent Assault - Children - Joint trial - Defence of concoction and suggestion 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - Opinion Evidence - evidence of facial expressions -
Judicial discretion to admit or exclude - Probative Value outweighed by danger of prejudice to accused - [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) [s137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s137.html); s[97](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Application for leave to appeal from decision of trial judge to admit evidence where counsel failed to object - [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/), r4 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Failure to call evidence of good character - miscarriage of justice - Evidence of children verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.

RESULT: Convictions quashed and new trial on all counts 
The appellant, a primary school teacher, was found guilty of 9 charges of indecent assault on 4 female students under the age of 10 years. The charges were tried together. In addition to the evidence of each complainant, the trial judge admitted evidence of two of the appellant's colleagues, A and W.
A's evidence was of an incident she witnessed involving the appellant and the first complainant which occurred about 12 months before the incident subject of the first charge. W's evidence raised the appellant's alleged reputation at the school of touching students. The Crown cross-examined the appellant on the basis of this evidence. The appellant's counsel at the trial did not call any witnesses to attest to the appellant's good character.

The appellant appealed against convictions and sentences on 6 grounds. First, that the trial judge had wrongly admitted A's evidence as evidence of guilty passion. The appellant argued that the evidence was inadmissible as opinion evidence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s76.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) , or alternatively, that it ought to have been excluded by the trial judge under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s137.html)
Secondly, that the cross-examination of the appellant on W's evidence was so unfair as to cause the trial to miscarry. Thirdly, that the failure to call the person who could rebut W's evidence as to the appellant's bad character led to a miscarriage. Pursuant to this ground, the appellant sought leave to adduce such evidence from this person. Fourthly, that the jury were not adequately warned with respect to the possibility of suggestion, contamination and concoction between the complainants. Fifthly, that the evidence of each complainant was such that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory.
Sixthly, that the failure of trial counsel to call witnesses to attest to the appellant's good character, in the circumstances of the case, caused the trial to miscarry.

HELD: 
Appeal allowed. Convictions quashed, new trial on all counts 
The evidence of A should have been excluded under the [s 137](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) as its probative value was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant.

Pfennig versus R <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 461]; DPP versus Boardman [[1975] AC 421]; R versus Duke [(1979) 22 SASR 46] at 48, R versus Masters [(1992) 26 NSWLR 450] at 479 
Leave to raise the second ground of appeal granted with respect to the admission of the cross-examination of the appellant on W's evidence, and ground of appeal allowed, as it's admission was such a departure from the essential requirements of the law as to amount to a miscarriage of justice. 
R versus Tripodina [(1988) 35 A Crim R 183] applied 
The evidence of H sought to be adduced on appeal was not such that the jury would have necessarily arrived at a different verdict, so that its absence at the trial did not constitute a miscarriage of justice. 
R versus Saleam [(1989) 16 NSWLR 14] applied 
The direction of the trial judge in relation to the defence of suggestion, concoction, or contamination was adequate.

Although the defence had a strong case on the credit of the individual complainants, a reading of the children's evidence as a whole did not lead to the conclusion that any of the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

M versus R [(1994) 181 CLR 487] applied 
Failure to call evidence of the appellant's good character did not constitute a miscarriage of justice in the circumstances of the case, where counsel had made a considered decision not to call such evidence.

R versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677] considered and applied 
Observations on the circumstances in which separate trials are required.

ORDERS 
The Court orders that:
The convictions be quashed.
There be a new trial on all counts.
 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: On 8 December 1995, the appellant was found guilty of 9 charges of acts of indecency on 4 young persons, each under the age of 10 years. The appellant was sentenced to 6 months imprisonment commencing on 8 December 1995 on the first charge, and 13 months 16 days imprisonment, also commencing on 8 December 1995 and expiring on 23 January 1997, on the balance of the charges. He was also sentenced to an additional term of 4 months 15 days commencing on 24 January 1997. The appellant appeals against each verdict and seeks leave to appeal against sentence. (It should be noted that the amended notice of grounds of appeal did not seek leave to appeal against sentence. However, as the Crown prosecutor was prepared to deal with the issue, the Court permitted the matter to be argued.) 
Background Facts 
The appellant was a school teacher at a State primary school. Each of the young persons were pupils of the appellant at that school. The first offence charged, in point of time, was in respect of the young person T. She alleged that during a lunchtime in 1993, she went to see the appellant in the classroom and that the appellant put his hand down the back of her school uniform to near her underpants and rubbed her back there.

The second charge involved N, who said that on an occasion in 1994 she was alone in the classroom sitting at her desk, finishing her spelling. The appellant came up to her and touched her groin over her uniform. She said that he squeezed her "privates".

The third, fourth, fifth and sixth charges involved K, who said that on four separate occasions, during the period 31 January 1994 to 25 February 1994, the appellant had touched her between the legs, on each occasion over her uniform.
The incidents were each alleged to have occurred in different circumstances.

The balance of the charges involved S, who said that on 3 separate occasions within the period 31 January 1994 to 25 February 1994, the appellant had touched her in the area of her vagina, over her underpants, but under her uniform.

Issues on Appeal 
Six grounds of appeal were argued. The first two related to admission of evidence, and the third to the trial judge's failure to warn the jury in relation to concoction and contamination. The fourth ground was that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The fifth ground related to the failure of defence counsel to call evidence of good character. The sixth ground related to the failure to call a witness, H. Leave to appeal is required in respect of the second, third, fifth and sixth grounds of appeal: [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s4.html),
Criminal Procedure Rules.

Before dealing with the various grounds of appeal it is convenient to refer to certain remarks of senior counsel for the appellant in opening the appeal.
These remarks were made so as to provide a context for his submission that, due to a combination of the factors raised in the grounds of appeal, the trial miscarried as a whole and the court should direct an acquittal: <case> of the
Criminal Appeal Act.

The first of counsel's remarks was a reference to the High Court decision in
DeJesus versus R [1986] 61 ALJR I as to the circumstances in which separate trials should be held; the second related to the decision taken at trial not to call evidence of good character. In DeJesus, Gibbs CJ, Brennan and Dawson
JJ expressed the opinion that as sexual cases were liable to arouse prejudice, there should be separate trials where an accused is charged with a number of offences. I have deliberately stated this point shortly and in a way which does not give full expression to the statements of principle relating to separate trials as, there was no ground of appeal on this issue and contrary to the submission of senior counsel to this Court, counsel at trial had requested a joint trial of all charges so as to enable the appellant to raise a "defence" of concoction or infection of the evidence of the young claimants. As to the second opening remark, senior counsel disavowed any incompetence on the part of trial counsel. Senior counsel submitted that, because of the evidence of two witnesses, A and W, the importance of calling evidence of good character was the more critical. The overall thrust of these opening remarks was, first, that the evidence of these witnesses was likely to affect the jury's consideration of all charges and secondly, evidence of good character should have been called to meet the bad character inference which was inescapable from W's evidence.

With that background, it is necessary to turn to the individual grounds of appeal.
 
Ground 1: Admission of Evidence of A 
A was a fellow teacher of the appellant at the State public school. She gave evidence that on 13 February 1992 (that is more than 12 months prior to the offence charged in relation to T), she had gone to the Assistant Principal's office and saw the appellant sitting at the desk in the office and that T was standing near the desk a couple of feet away from the appellant. She said that whilst she saw no activity either by the appellant or the child, she observed an expression on the appellant's face which she described as: "a look of like sexual gratification - that's the best way that I can express it." 
She also said that the child "had a glazed look on her face". In his summing up to the jury, the trial judge said that A's evidence was that the appellant had a look of "pure sexual gratification" on his face.
 
The trial judge rejected the evidence as tendency evidence: see <case> [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ea199580/) (the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/)), but admitted it as evidence of guilty passion, or as Hunt CJ at CL preferred to describe such evidence, "the sexual desire or feeling of the accused for the complainant": see R versus Beserick [(1993) 30 NSWLR 503] at 517.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that as the trial judge excluded the evidence as tendency evidence "on the basis that it does not have significant probative value in the sense required by [s (1)(b)"](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), it should have been excluded for all purposes.

I do not agree. Speaking generally for the moment, the relevance of this type of evidence is as to the nature of the relationship between an accused and the complainant (which makes the description given by Hunt CJ at CL to this category of evidence more appropriate than the more intense language in the phrase "guilty passion" - a phrase which could be misunderstood because of the intensity of its language.) As the nature of the relationship may be relevant in an offence of sexual assault, it is admissible: [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s55.html) and [56](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s56.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). If the evidence is opinion evidence, it is excluded from admissibility, unless it falls within [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s78.html)
Whether it is also evidence which satisfies [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) is a separate and further question. If it is admissible under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s97.html) then the purpose to which the evidence can be put goes beyond its relevance as relationship evidence.

Counsel for the appellant further submitted that this evidence, even if relevant as relationship evidence was, nonetheless, inadmissible opinion evidence and that, in any event, it should have been excluded on discretionary grounds under [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html)
Counsel for the respondent submitted that the evidence was admissible under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s78.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/).

Admissibility as opinion evidence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s78.html) 
As [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s78.html) provides an exception to the opinion rule, it is necessary in the first instance to refer to the opinion rule in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s76.html) which provides: "Evidence of an opinion is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact about the existence of which the opinion was expressed." [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s78.html) provides: "The opinion rule does not apply to evidence of an opinion expressed by a person if: the opinion is based on what the person saw, heard or otherwise perceived about a matter or event; and evidence of the opinion is necessary to obtain an adequate account or understanding of the person's perception of the matter or event.
 
A's evidence satisfies the express terms of [s .](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s78.html)
However, there is a question whether [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s78.html) permits the opinion to be admitted without there being evidence of the primary facts upon which the opinion is based. I consider that it does, although the absence of evidence of the primary facts may affect the weight of the evidence.

Discretionary rejection of evidence 
However, there is another issue and that is whether the probative value of that evidence was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant. In that case, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) provides that the trial judge must refuse to admit the evidence.

Senior counsel for the appellant submitted that as the trial judge had refused to admit the evidence as tendency evidence under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s101.html), on the ground that its probative value was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the defendant, it was not admissible at all. This does not necessarily follow, as the probative value of particular evidence must be relative to the matter sought to be proved by that evidence. However, in this case, the prejudicial effect of this evidence was very high, whilst its probative value was slight. Accordingly, [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s137.html) required the exclusion of the evidence: see Pfennig versus R <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 461]; DPP versus Boardman [[1975] AC 421]; R versus Duke [(1979) 22 SASR 46] at 48; R versus Masters [(1992) 26 NSWLR 450] at 479.

Ground 2: Admission of evidence of W 
W was a support teacher within the Department of Education which involved "[providing] support of a range of types for students who needed assistance".
She worked, from time to time at the school at which the appellant taught.
She gave evidence that in April 1994 (after the appellant had left the school), N, the complainant subject of the second charge, had informed her that she knew "what happened to [the appellant] because he did it to me". W was cross examined to the effect that she was aware at this time, that is, in
April, of "talk about Mr Harvey and the touching of girls", and was asked by the appellant's counsel at the trial whether this took "the form of conversations in the staff room". She gave the following evidence: "A: The first time that I became aware of it, the only time that a staff member told me, I had a review meeting about the little boy that was on my case load the previous year in about December and .. one of the members of that meeting, said, or one of the results of the meeting was that I work in the classroom the following year doing a whole class program to try and integrate [the child] as best as we possibly could, into the classroom, and they suggested that I might like to do some Child Protection Type stuff, using the Skills for Growing program. . .
 
Q: And? 
A: And [H], the Deputy Principal, said to me that I would have to tell
Grahame to keep his hands off the kids and I said to him, that I didn't quite understand what he was saying, and he said, ". . .you will have to tell
Grahame to keep his hands off the kids.
 
Q: This is, as you are saying, this is in 1993? 
A: Yes.
 
Q: So in 1994, when you went into this classroom you obviously had that in your mind? 
A: Well, I try and keep objectively [sic] about it." 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that whilst, on its own, the evidence of what was said by H was quite damaging, its damaging effect was exacerbated by the way that evidence was used by the Crown Prosecutor in the following cross examination of the appellant: "Q: Were you ever spoken to by your superiors at [the] school about inappropriate behaviour with students?" 
This question was objected to, but the objection was overruled by Coleman
DCJ. The cross examination continued: "Q: Were you told to keep your hands off the kids? 
A: No.
 
Q: Do you recall evidence in this Court of [W]? 
A: Yes, I do.
 
Q: She gave evidence that she was told by [H] that it was said to her, ". .
.you'll have to tell . . ." - that's you - "to keep his hands off the kids".
Do you recall her saying that? 
A: Yes, I do.
 
Q: Why do you think she was told that? 
A: No idea.
 
Q: You think there might have been a gross misunderstanding by [H], do you? 
A: No idea.
 
Q: This is December `93, wasn't it? 
A: According to the evidence that was tendered, yes.
 
Q: It wasn't challenged, was it? 
A: I don't recall.
 
Q: You don't recall that? Are you serious? 
A: I don't know what Mr Taylor did.
 
Q: You weren't listening? 
A: Mr Crown, I was listening. I don't recall it being challenged." 
Counsel for the appellant submitted this evidence should have been rejected as the gist of the cross examination was that the appellant was lying in his denial of having been told to keep his hands off the children. Further, it was submitted that the failure to challenge W's evidence was put forward "as a matter leading to disbelief of the appellant". It was submitted that the cross examination was so unfair as to cause the trial to miscarry.

The first four questions in this series of questions were admissible questions on cross examination. However, the question, "Why do you think that?" was inadmissible. It contained the vice that it sought the appellant's response to a matter which was in the mind of another. On its own, I do not consider this question would have been sufficient to cause the trial to miscarry. However, had the question been rejected, it is unlikely that the following question, "You think there might have been a gross misunderstanding by Mr [H] do you", would have been asked. The combination of the two questions involved the suggestion that Mr [H] had not only given such direction, but that there was an underlying basis for his having done so. The questioning must also be seen in the further context that Mr [H] was not called by the Crown (and was not called at all in the trial).

As has been said, trial counsel objected to the first question which introduced this issue. He did not thereafter object. In general terms, this topic was material upon which the Crown Prosecutor could properly cross examine and the trial judge correctly ruled on the objection to the question which introduced this issue. However, the fact that a trial judge overrules one objection does not relieve counsel from the obligation of objecting to other inadmissible questions, even if the questions are directed to the same topic: see R versus Meier unreported, NSW Court of Criminal Appeal, 28 May 1996 per Gleeson CJ at 10. Counsel's failure to object to any other question in the cross examination means that leave of the court is required to raise this ground of appeal: [Rule ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s4.html), [Criminal Appeal
Rules](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/car186/).
 "[L]eave will be granted where an error made at the trial is of such a nature that, notwithstanding the failure to seek such a direction, it is necessary to grant leave in order to avoid a miscarriage of justice": R versus Clarke [(1995) A Crim R 226] per Hunt CJ at CL at 230. In R versus Tripodina [(1988) 35
A Crim R 183], Yeldham J, at 191-195, reviewed the authorities which emphasised that the leave required by r 4 is not to be lightly granted. At 195 his Honour concluded that: "Generally speaking such leave will only be granted where an irregularity has occurred which is such a departure from the essential requirements of the law that it goes to the root of the proceedings: see R versus Wilde <case>; [(1988) 164 CLR 365] at 369." 
See also Abusafiah [(1991) 24 NSWLR 531] at 536.

The "essential requirement of the law" relevant here is the requirement which is at the very heart of the criminal justice system, namely, that an accused person "have a fair trial according to law": R versus Pemble (1971) 124
CCR 107 per Barwick CJ at 117. See also Stirland versus DPP [[1944] AC 315] at 327. That requirement operates, where necessary, even in the face of deliberate decisions taken at trial: see Meier per Gleeson CJ at 19-20. This case could not be described as a strong Crown case. It depended very much on the jury's acceptance of the children's evidence. It is not apparent whether counsel's failure to object to this evidence was deliberate. It may have been that counsel, having been overruled on the objection taken earlier, felt constrained not to object further. It may be that he considered it was preferable to be as "low-key" as possible on any questions that went to this issue, for fear of emphasising evidence which was adverse to his client.
However, it is neither necessary to speculate as to the reason for counsel's failure nor to excuse him for the failure. The point at issue is different. It is whether the admission of the evidence was such as to amount to a miscarriage of justice such that, first, leave to raise the ground of appeal should be granted and, secondly, the ground should be upheld.

In dealing with this ground of appeal thus far, I have focused on the two inadmissible questions which I have identified. Counsel's submission went further, it being contended that the whole of this cross examination was prejudicial. In my opinion, the cross examination following the two offending questions may have been reasonable had the two offending questions not been asked. However, the further cross examination takes on a different hue when asked in that context and in the further context to which I have referred, where [H] was not called to give evidence. In my opinion, notwithstanding that no objection was taken and therefore the trial judge did not receive the appropriate assistance from counsel, he should have intervened in the questioning. His Honour's failure to do so meant that there was a "departure from the essential requirements of the law that. . .goes to the root of the proceedings: see Tripodina per Yeldham J at 195. Leave to raise this ground of appeal should be granted, and the ground of appeal should be allowed.

Ground 6: Failure to call H as a witness 
It is convenient to deal with ground 6 at this point as it relates to the same evidence. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the trial miscarried by reason of the failure to lead evidence from H to the effect that he had not made any such statement to W. For this purpose, the appellant sought leave to adduce evidence from H to that effect.

Three things are to be noted in respect of this ground. First, leave of the court is required. Secondly, it is not clear whether it was being asserted that the Crown should have called H or whether the trial miscarried because the defence should have called him. If it was alleged the Crown should have called him, the principles in R versus Apostilidis <case>; [(1984) 154 CLR 563] at 575 apply, namely, a decision not to call a witness "will only constitute setting aside a conviction if, when reviewed against the conduct of the trial taken as a whole, it is seen to give rise to a miscarriage of justice". However, if senior counsel for the appellant meant that the defence should have called H, it will still need to be first established that leave to appeal should be granted. Thirdly, the evidence of H was not "fresh evidence" as such: see Ratten versus R <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 510] at 520. Rather it was evidence available at trial, but which was not called. It is not known why the Crown did not call the evidence. The defence did not adduce this evidence because the lawyers did not seek H out and ask him about it, although the appellant's lawyers knew H was available to give evidence of good character. In R versus Saleam [(1989) 16 NSWLR 14], Hunt J, at 20-21, dealing with the principles governing the admission, on appeal, of evidence not adduced at trial stated: "The availability of new material, whether or not it falls within the accepted definition of fresh evidence, will lead to the quashing of a conviction in criminal cases where this Court is convinced by its own view of that material that there has been a miscarriage of justice, in the sense that the verdict of guilty should not be allowed to stand: Ratten versus The Queen <case>; [(1974) 131 CLR 510] at 520. 
Even if the material cannot be described as new, its availability may persuade the Court that there has been a miscarriage of justice leading to a new trial if three further conditions are fulfilled: if the additional material is of such a significance that a reasonable jury may regard it as having a real bearing upon its decision; if, although its existence was known to the accused, its significance was not realised by him at the time; and if its existence was not made known to the accused's legal advisers at the trial: R versus Harris (Court of Criminal Appeal, 13/12/85, unreported, at -10)." 
See also R versus Goodwin [(1990) 51 A Crim R 328.] 
The evidence which H stated he would give on this issue, namely that he had never given such a direction to W, was clearly capable of acceptance by a jury. Had that evidence been given, it would have provided evidence contrary to that given by W, leaving it to the jury to determine which evidence, if any, to accept. Without the evidence of H, it was still open to the jury to reject W's evidence, although as a matter of common experience, it is less likely that they would do so. However, H's evidence was not such that the jury would have arrived at a different verdict. Accordingly, as H's evidence does not meet the test in Saleam, I do not consider that leave should be granted to raise this ground of appeal.

Ground 3: The trial judge failed to warn and adequately direct the jury in relation to suggestion, contamination and concoction 
As with ground 2, this ground may only be raised with the leave of the
Court.

Senior counsel for the appellant submitted that this case was aptly described as a case of infection, rather than of concoction, but that, howsoever described, his Honour failed to give adequate directions to the jury on the possibility that the evidence given by the complainants had been concocted or infected or suggested by the promptings of other children. In order to understand the submission, it is necessary to refer to the manner in which counsel dealt with this issue in their addresses to the jury. The issue of concoction or infection was clearly in issue. Each of the complainants had been cross examined to that effect. The Crown Prosecutor said: "It's been suggested, as I understand the Defence case, that these children in some way, back in February 1994, got their heads together and decided to make up lies about the accused. You might think in the first place, what possible reason would they have to do that? There's nothing in this trial, not a shred of evidence which has arisen which would give any suggestion that that might be the case." 
This statement might be seen as containing a suggestion that the appellant bore an onus to establish some reason or motive for the complainants to lie.
This is not permissible: see Davies versus R (unreported CCA, 8/12/94); F versus R (unreported 2/11/95), B versus R <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 599] at 616, G versus R [(1994) 1 Qld R 540.] The Crown
Prosecutor then directed attention as to why the evidence of each of the complainants was not likely to have been concocted.

The appellant's counsel also directed attention to specific aspects of the evidence and of the relationship between the complainants which pointed to concoction, and concluded: "Now, just ask yourselves about that, ladies and gentlemen, as to whether in that context, that you could be confident beyond reasonable doubt that this really isn't the result either of a combined activity between the children or through just the individual children coming to conclusions about what may have been a touch unintended. In other words, either made up as part of the overall atmosphere or accidental or imagined in the sense of misunderstanding something altogether." 
The trial judge dealt with the matter in his summing up as follows: "The Crown submitted that there was not a shred of evidence, that was the
Crown's words, to support concoction. The Crown said that generally the children were reliable and truthful . . . . . 
He said they were questioned in great detail and during the course of the cross-examination it was not surprising that they could not give all the details which were sought. He said that so far as the suggestion that they got their heads together to make up events is concerned, there is not a shred of evidence to support it, and that you should take into account that the events involving [T], occurred many months before those involving the other girls who were in any event reluctant to talk about it until it was dragged out of them.
. . . 
The defence case was that - and remember ladies and gentlemen I say the defence case, there is no obligation on the accused to prove anything. First of all that the allegation [sic] were untrue. Secondly, that there are to the extent that the circumstances of the offences as they are alleged can be recalled, perfectly reasonable alternative explanations for a number of the alleged complaints. And thirdly, that there is a real possibility in the matter, the complainants either putting their heads together, or imagining a number of things and being swept up in some sort of general discussion, something which you heard counsel for the accused refer to as atmosphere, at the time, concerning Mr Harvey and the touching of girls. He said it was also part of the defence case that some of the allegations could be explained on the basis of misunderstanding." 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that, having regard to the address of the
Crown Prosecutor, this direction was inadequate - that the trial judge did not disabuse the jury of the notion that there was any onus on the defence to establish concoction or infection. I do not agree. The trial judge had carefully dealt with the issues of reliability and directed that evidence in respect of one charge could not be used in respect of other charges (except for the limited use which could be made of evidence given by the same complainant, in respect of which no complaint is made). His Honour then, when introducing the issue of the appellant's "defence", including that of concoction, stated that there was "no obligation on the accused to prove anything". This was not a case, as occurred in F, and in R versus Elsworthy (unreported CCA 24/5/96) where "the trial judge endorsed the legitimacy" of the way in which the issue was dealt with by the Crown Prosecutor in the summing up. Rather, it was a case where the trial judge, in reviewing counsels' addresses, repeated the Crown's statement without comment, and then in a contextually proximate passage, informed the jury that there was no obligation on the accused to prove anything.

As I am of the opinion that the direction was adequate, leave to raise this ground of appeal should be refused.

Ground 4: Verdict Unsafe and Unsatisfactory 
Counsel for the appellant analysed the evidence of each complainant and submitted that in each case, the evidence was such that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory. I do not propose to set out in any detail the evidence relied upon in support of the written submissions. It is set out in full in the written submissions with transcript references to which I have had regard, and the court also had the benefit of oral submissions. It is necessary, however, to refer to the bases relied upon in support of this submission in respect of each complainant. Before doing so it is convenient to refer to the principles governing the quashing of a verdict as unsafe and unsatisfactory.

In M versus R [(1994) 181 CLR 487], Mason CJ,
Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ (Gaudron J agreeing with the majority's statement of principle) stated at 493: "Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is asked to conclude that their verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty. (see
Whitehorn versus The Queen (1983) 152 CLR at 686; Chamberlain versus The Queen [No.2] CLR at 532; Knight versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 495] at pp 504-5, 511) But in answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen or heard the witnesses. On the contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations".
 and further at 494: "In most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced. It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a court of criminal appeal that the court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence." 
Challenge to T's Evidence 
In the case of T, the alleged inadequacies of the evidence were said to be:
That the alleged manner of assault was physically impossible.
That the complainant had not alleged in any of her complaints (eg., to her mother or brother) that the appellant rubbed her back "near her knickers".
There was a strong element of suggestion in the questioning by the complainant's mother and brother.
That it was not possible to determine on the evidence whether the complaint to E was contemporaneous.
The two girls who were in the classroom with the complainant did not give any evidence of the assault, although they gave evidence of being in the classroom on the occasion in question.

The evidence of this complainant, as of all witnesses, has to be considered as a whole and in conjunction with the evidence of other relevant witnesses. In dealing with each of the matters raised by the appellant, I will adopt the same numbering as I have in identifying the alleged inadequacies.
In relation to the uniform, the complainant's mother gave evidence that at the time of the offence with which the appellant was charged, T's uniform was loose-fitting, it having been purchased to last her for a couple of years.
This was evidence which was capable of satisfying the jury that the offence could have occurred in the manner alleged by the complainant.
It is correct that the complainant had not initially alleged in her evidence or in her initial complaints that the appellant had touched her "down near my knickers". When first questioned about the incident by the
Crown Prosecutor in terms of: "what happened on this occasion", she had responded "Mr Harvey put his hand down the back of me dress". Later, however, in response to specific questioning by the Crown Prosecutor as to where the complainant had felt the appellant's hand, the complainant gave the more specific answer that it was "down near [her] knickers". When one reads the whole of the complainant's evidence, it does not have the flavour of embellishment which the submission would suggest.
Both the complainant's mother and brother asked her directly about the appellant putting his hand down her back. Her mother asked: "[S] told me that you told him that Mr Harvey had his [sic] put his hand down your back . . . [h]ow did he put his hand down your back, did you [sic] touch you on the bottom or anything" .

The brother's question was: "Has Mr Harvey rubbed you on the back or touched you on the bum, or things like that".

Notwithstanding the direct nature of these questions, I do not consider that they were of a kind to make the complainant's responses suspect. It was the type of questioning which would be expected from a person such as a mother or brother. Neither were persons in the position of an outside authority where direct questions of that nature are inappropriate. Nor was the questioning repetitious. Further, the complainant's response was almost immediate and her reaction of starting to cry before she gave the answer was understandable.
Again, counsel's point is properly made, but it seems to me that nothing turns on it. The complainant gave evidence approximately two years after the incident. A child of that age would not necessarily be expected to be able to provide a precise time frame even of significant events.
This issue, namely, the fact that children admittedly in the proximity of the complainant at the time of the offence charged, did not see the appellant do anything untoward, arises in the case of each of the complainants. The fact that no other child witnessed the actual touching does not, however, make the verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory. Indeed, it might be thought that a person intending to touch a young child in the manner claimed here, would not do so in such a way that he would be observed by other children. It is also relevant to keep in mind that, in each case, the touching was brief. These were matters which the jury would have had to consider as part of their overall assessment of the evidence.

Accordingly, I do not consider the verdict on the first charge was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Challenge to the evidence of N 
Before dealing with the specific bases upon which it was submitted the verdict in respect of the charge involving N was unsafe and unsatisfactory, it is necessary to refer briefly, to some further facts. I have referred earlier to the essential allegation in this charge. At about the time of the alleged incident, N's mother had observed, whilst her daughter was in the bath, that N was "a bit red around the privates". When questioned about it, N told her mother that she had "hurt it on the monkey bars". Her father observed the redness and swelling as well as bruising on her arm and legs. Her father gave evidence that he had spoken to the complainant on a number of occasions, asking her "what had happened", and that "she tried to, she started to say what was happening". However, on a later occasion: " . . . she told me straight out at the kitchen table there. I sat her down,
I was having a conversation to her as I was told by Mr Moss. And she just come straight out and told me, so I just rang Phil.

Q: What was said? 
A: It was just that she'd been grabbed by the legs and arms, and squeezed very tight and it hurt." 
Her parents contacted a district officer with the Department of Community
Services, who spoke to N on at least two occasions.

N also told her father she had hurt herself on the monkey bars. The complainant's evidence was that when asked about the monkey bar incident by her mother, she told her, "I hurt it on the monkey bars", and that "I told
Mum that, but she didn't listen". In his summing up, the trial judge dealt with the matter in these terms: "Attention was directed to bruising and swelling which was noticed by both of her parents, and ladies and gentlemen it is a matter for you, but she said that she had hurt herself on the monkey bars, that she told her mother that she had hurt herself on the monkey bars and that her mother did not believe her. It is again a matter for you ladies and gentlemen, but it would appear that the bruising and the swelling which she refers to, relates to an incident which does not involve the accused".

Three reasons were advanced as to why this complainant's "evidence was unsatisfactory":
That "[a]lthough an attempt was made to separate the monkey bar incident and the alleged offence, they were inextricably related".
"The allegation of sexual assault contained ... false allegations of associated bruising to the complainant's bottom"
The complaint was made at the "height of the rumours about [the appellant]" and only after another child, C, told the complainant to "watch out for" the appellant.
 
Again, using the same numbering system:
I do not agree that this part of N's evidence establishes the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. On the contrary, the evidence in relation to the monkey bars was material which could have been used to attack N's credit. That is how it was sought to be used by defence counsel. The trial judge gave a very clear direction and appropriate guidance on this point.
In her evidence N admitted, both that she had made such a statement to W and that the statement was not true. Again, this meant that a substantial attack could be made on N's credit. That attack was made. I have already referred to the issues for the jury where such a witness's evidence is challenged. There is nothing in this submission which takes it outside the fact that there was material available which allowed a strong attack on credit.
The incident involving this complainant occurred in February 1994. It appears at this time that there were rumours in relation to the appellant - those rumours having infiltrated the school yard as one of the children in the class, C, told this complainant, as well as K and S to "watch out for" the appellant. This submission raises the same considerations as are raised in respect of ground 3 - concoction. The trial judge dealt with that issue appropriately. On a fair reading of the evidence, the evidence of this complainant (and of K and S) was not so inherently improbable that proper rulings by the trial judge were insufficient to allow the verdicts to stand.
This evidence raises another question, namely, the inherent unlikelihood of the appellant engaging in such behaviour at a time when rumours were circulating about him in the school. However, it is apparent from the appellant's evidence that he was not aware of these rumours. It follows that this basis for the challenge that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory has not been made out.

I have referred to the three specific bases relied upon by senior counsel for the appellant in support of the ground of appeal in relation to the charge involving N. It should not be overlooked, however, that by the end of her evidence, this complainant professed to have no memory of the incident. This was undoubtedly a significant forensic moment for the appellant. However, it was a matter which, at the end of the day, went to N's credit. There was no application to have this charge withdrawn from the jury. In my opinion, the jury was entitled to consider that the "loss of memory" was consistent with her succumbing to the stress of giving evidence, just as much as it was entitled to consider that it so undermined her credibility that she should not be believed.

Challenge to K's evidence 
It was submitted that, in respect of each of the charges involving this complainant:
They were marked by "complete vagueness of detail";
Each allegation was uncorroborated;
The complaints were only made after C had also told this complainant to watch out for [the appellant];
It was highly unlikely that the appellant would assault the complainant "in the circumstances in which he found himself in early 1994";
The incidents concerning K involved a high degree of infection;
Generally, there was nothing upon a reading of the complainant's evidence which would give any confidence in the allegations.

Using the same numbering system:
K was not able to give specific details of certain aspects of the incidents. The vagueness of detail was sometimes in respect of significant aspects of the attack, e.g., in relation to the first incident, she could not remember how the appellant "touched her with his hand". On other occasions, it related to the more peripheral aspects of the allegations. However, other parts of her evidence were given directly, without any undue hesitation, and without embellishment. In my opinion, K's inability to be specific about certain matters, whilst highly relevant to her credit, was not such as to render the convictions unsafe or unsatisfactory.
It is true that the evidence was uncorroborated. That of itself does not make the verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory. The relevance of corroboration in a sexual assault case, and in particular, in the case of a child's complaint of sexual assault was discussed by Mahoney P in R versus RMM (unreported CCA ). The starting point is that corroboration of the complainant's evidence is not required: <case> [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), and a trial judge is not required to give any warning to the jury as to reliance of such uncorroborated evidence. However, as Mahoney P stated at 5-6: "[This does] not mean that the absence of corroboration in the case of a sexual offence against a young person where the only evidence of substance is that of a young person is not of importance. The provisions remove any requirement that, for a conviction, there must be corroboration or a warning of its absence. But, in my opinion, where such a charge is made upon the uncorroborated evidence of a young person, the court will bear firmly in mind both the possibility of error or misstatement in evidence generally and, in particular, in the evidence of such a witness who is both a complainant and a young person.
 
I do not mean by this that the court should assume that there is necessary or inherent weakness in the evidence of every young girl of eleven-twelve years.
Views have differed as to the reliability of the evidence of children of various ages. Differing views have been expressed as to whether such children are apt to be truthful or untruthful, accurate or inaccurate. . . . But, in my opinion, a judge or jury called upon to determine whether the uncorroborated evidence of a young complainant is to be accepted as proving a serious charge of this kind will consider carefully whether the particular child is likely to be both accurate and truthful." 
In making such assessment in this case, the jury was required to consider the whole of the evidence in relation to the charges involving this complainant.
This involved assessing the evidence of the complainant herself, the other witnesses called by the Crown and also the evidence of the appellant, who gave evidence, in circumstances where the very matter at issue was whether the incidents alleged, occurred. The jury was entitled, on the whole of the evidence, to accept or reject the evidence of the complainant. This may have, but did not necessarily, involve accepting the appellant's evidence. However, the guilty verdicts mean that the jury did accept the complainant. It was entitled to do so. Her evidence was not so inherently improbable as to render that acceptance unsafe and unsatisfactory.
 .&4. This complaint raises the same issue as discussed in relation to N.
For the same reasons, the challenges to the verdicts do not render them unsafe and unsatisfactory.
This is best described as a "catch all" ground, involving a consideration of this complainant's evidence as a whole. It will be apparent, however, from what I have already said that it was open to the jury to accept this complainant as a credible witness and to thereby accept that the assaults in question occurred.

S 
The particular challenges to S's evidence were as follows:
The circumstances in which the complaint was elicited make the allegations extremely suspect.
Her evidence was uncorroborated, nor was it confirmed.
The assaults were alleged to have occurred when other children were present.
The incidents were said to have occurred during the period when the appellant was the subject of extensive rumours.

Conclusion on the Unsafe and Unsatisfactory Grounds
The circumstances of S's complaint are set out in the appellant's written submissions. In brief, S did not make any complaint until after K's mother had spoken to S's mother. S, after directly being asked by her mother on two occasions whether "something had happened", said the appellant had "touched [her] under my uniform on the fanny".

I have already dealt with the circumstances of a complaint being elicited by direct questioning by a parent. The same comments are to be made in respect of
S. The jury had the opportunity to hear and observe both S and her mother give evidence. The circumstances of the complaint, as well as S's initial and restricted complaint, were all matters which the jury was required to access in light of the later detailed complaints which became the subject of the three charges relating to S. In assessing these matters, the jury was required to use its common sense and everyday experience of life. It was open to them to accept that a child of 8 years may have found it difficult to disclose or discuss such matters, either at all or in detail. They were entitled to take into account, as a matter of common sense and experience that, for example, a child might have felt embarrassed or even blameworthy in relation to such conduct. Once having heard all the evidence relating to these charges, including the appellant's evidence, it was a matter for their determination whether they were satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty of the offences charged.
The circumstances of the complaint and the inaccurate initial version given by this complainant to her mother were matters relevant to the jury's assessment of her evidence, and in particular, her credit. It is clear that, notwithstanding these matters, the jury accepted her evidence. For the same reasons which I have given in relation to the absence of corroboration in respect of N's and K's complaints, I do not consider that the verdicts are unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Having regard to what I have said in respect of the matters raised in respect of the other complainants under this ground of appeal, it is not necessary to deal with the other bases relied upon in support of this ground.

I have, to this point, approached this ground of appeal upon a consideration of the individual matters in respect of the evidence of each complainant, upon which the ground was based. It may be that in a particular case a number of factors, when taken singly, may not be sufficient to establish that a conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory, but when taken in various combinations or in total, do establish the ground. I do not consider, however, that this ground has been made out in respect of any of the convictions.
Although the defence had a strong case on the credit of the individual complainants, a reading of the children's evidence as a whole does not lead to the conclusion that any inadequacies give rise to "a significant possibility that an innocent [person] has been convicted".

It follows from what I have said that I do not agree that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

Ground 5: Failure of defence counsel to introduce evidence of good character 
Senior counsel for the appellant submitted that the Crown case against the appellant involved, in a substantial way, an attack on his credit.
Accordingly, it was submitted, the need to adduce evidence of good character was very important. However, no witnesses were called to give evidence of the appellant's good character.

The appellant gave evidence on the appeal that he had available a number of persons who were willing to give character evidence on his behalf at the trial, including [H], and other teachers, parents, family members and friends.
He had informed his solicitors that such witnesses were available. However, his legal representatives gave him certain advice in relation to calling such evidence. First, they advised he should reduce the number of character witnesses to be called "as they will take on a sameness and result in overkill". Secondly, they were concerned that if the appellant raised good character, the Crown was entitled to adduce evidence of a prior conviction for possession, cultivation and use of cannabis. Thirdly, that the Crown could also introduce evidence from the school principal, a former deputy principal of infants at the school and a teacher at the school to the effect that over a period of years, commencing in 1987, concerns had been raised in the school in respect of the appellant's interaction with female students and his placing himself in a vulnerable position on a number of occasions, including on an occasion after he had been informed of the dangers in his practice of having children in his classroom at times when it was not necessary. And fourthly, because after speaking to two of the proposed character witnesses, including
H, the appellant's solicitor formed the opinion they were "not very supportive". (Other evidence indicates the lawyers spoke to three witnesses.
However, this difference is not relevant to the present consideration). The appellant gave evidence that this was not the case and that both those witnesses were willing to give evidence. The appellant said that he gave instructions not to call character evidence strictly on the basis of the legal advice he was given. The appellant was not cross examined on this evidence.

A number of affidavits, including one by H were filed in support of this application. The deponents stated that, had they been called, they would have given evidence of the appellant's good character. H said that he would also have given evidence that he had no such conversation of which W had given evidence. One deponent stated that although she was willing to give character evidence, the appellant told her he had not wanted to call her as he did not wish to cause conflict between her and her young daughter, who did give evidence in the trial. A number of the witnesses said they had advised the appellant they were prepared and available to give evidence, but had not been contacted by his lawyers. It appears that three of the witnesses, including H, spoke with the appellant's lawyers. Of these, two, including H, were not further contacted, and the third was told by the lawyers that he would not be called as "they wanted to confine the issues as much as possible." 
A statement by the appellant's counsel at trial was filed. Although it is lengthy, it should be set out in full: "The issue of character witnesses was raised in discussions between Mr
Harvey, Mr MacMahon his solicitor, and myself well before the trial commenced.
 
It was then a matter of ongoing consideration. It is to be remembered that Mr
MacMahon had done one of the committals and I had done the other and that we brought that experience to the discussions.
 
In the pre-trial meeting or meetings several issues on character were canvassed. Mr Harvey made it clear that his relationship with. . .the principal, was not a good one. Secondly, there was a concern about criticisms that may be put forward by some others of Mr Harvey's behaviour on other occasions with students. A concern was that such people would, if called by the Crown, give evidence that could reflect adversely on Mr Harvey. It is my experience over 20 years of industrial advocacy for teachers and eights years of criminal defence work for teachers that evidence by a principal is given considerable credibility. The other side of the coin is that it is my experience that teachers are regarded by the community as being of good character until someone proves otherwise. These matters were all considered.
 
At both committal and trial a major concern was to keep out allegations, including incidental reference in statements, that commented adversely on Mr
Harvey. On the issue of character, it simply added to the general concern about opening the whole matter up and whether that was a sensible thing to do.
This concern was reinforced by the provision of further statements by the
Crown a few days before the trial. The Crown also indicated that a certain statement, which the Crown had formerly said it would not rely upon, would now be relied upon. That statement was made by [A]. At least three of those statements were from teachers, including an additional statement from the principal who gave evidence in due course.
 
The material in the statements which the Crown provided shortly before the trial was, in my view, prejudicial and damaging for Mr Harvey, extremely difficult to confront by cross-examination with the risk of further prejudicial comment and issues arising, and I objected to it at the commencement of the trial. [A's] evidence was allowed into the trial. I then dealt with it, by questioning [A] in cross-examination as best I could to avoid her expressing her animus to the accused.
 
The issue of calling character evidence of our own was canvassed during the trial. I remained concerned that if character was raised by the defence then attempts would be made to introduce evidence which damaged Mr Harvey's character and case. I was aware that some of the teacher witnesses we could call were of the view that whatever positive thing they said about Harvey, they also held critical views about how they believed he had on occasions interacted with the children and had said they were aware of others who held similar critical views.
 
I did not want this to become an issue and I did not want further attempts made by the Crown to attack Mr Harvey's character.
 
The issues of character evidence were discussed with Mr Harvey both before and during the trial. Mr MacMahon, his solicitor, was at the discussions before the trial and Mr Bell, a solicitor in the employ of Mr MacMahon, was at the discussions during the trial. Mr Bell had further discussions with at least two of our potential character witnesses during the trial. Nothing he informed me they would say changed my view that character was not an issue we should consciously raise. Mr Harvey was involved in all decision making on this matter. The decision was, thus, made before and during the trial to fight the issues on the merits and to deal with issues as they arose. When the evidence of [A] and [W] was given, I did not consider that the decision not to raise character should be changed. At times, particularly during my cross- examination, witnesses made comments not responsive to my questions and critical of Harvey. I did not ask for these to be struck out since that would have emphasised the prejudice." 
In the present case, counsel for the appellant repeatedly disavowed incompetence by trial counsel. Rather, he relied upon the fact that having regard to the evidence which was elicited at trial, particularly that of A and
W, the calling of evidence of good character was critical to the appellant's case. The failure to do so caused the trial to miscarry. In R versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677], Gleeson CJ dealt with the principles which govern a court's interference with a conviction allegedly due to the incompetence of an accused's legal representatives. In doing so, he also referred to the principles which are relevant when a trial counsel makes a considered decision as to the manner in which the trial is conducted, stated at 685: "1. A Court of Criminal Appeal has a power and a duty to intervene in the case of a miscarriage of justice, but what amounts to a miscarriage of justice is something that has to be considered in the light of the way in which the system of criminal justice operates.
As a general rule an accused person is bound by the way the trial is conducted by counsel, regardless of whether that was in accordance with the wishes of the client, and it is not a ground for setting aside a conviction that decisions made by counsel were made without, or contrary to, instructions, involve errors of judgment or even negligence.
However, there may arise cases where something has occurred in the running of a trial, perhaps from some other cause, which will be recognised as involving, or causing, a miscarriage of justice. It is impossible, and undesirable, to attempt to define such cases with precision. When they arise they will attract appellate intervention." 
The material before the court indicates that the appellant's lawyers made an assessment of the nature and extent of the character evidence and its possible consequences, namely, that it thereby opened up the right of the Crown to adduce evidence of bad character and the nature and possible effect of the evidence of bad character that was likely to be called. It is evident from the fact that the evidence of good character was not called that the legal representatives considered that the risk in calling such evidence outweighed the detriment in not calling it. Such an assessment was reasonable, even if, as a matter of hindsight, the reverse decision may have proved to be the better tactical course. I should state, however, that it is far from certain in this case that the evidence of good character would have overcome, or even neutralised, the effect of the evidence of bad character, and in particular, the evidence relating to the appellant's conduct with the students, which was available to be adduced if character became an issue in the trial. Because there were such competing considerations in the case, counsel's submission, that the need to call evidence of good character was critical, must be rejected. As the appellant's trial lawyers clearly recognised, there were good reasons not to call such evidence just as there were reasons why such evidence might have been called.

It follows from what I have said that there was no "cause...involving a miscarriage of justice" justifying appellate intervention on this ground.

Conclusion 
In my opinion, the appellant should succeed on the first two grounds of appeal which relate to the first and second charges respectively. However, as
I have indicated earlier, counsel for the appellant has submitted that the evidence of A and W was so prejudicial as to cause the whole trial to miscarry. It was submitted that the prejudice was not cured by the trial judge's direction to the jury that the evidence in one case was not to be used as evidence in the other cases.

A number of factors are relevant to the determination of this issue. First, the evidence in question was brief and within a small compass. However, it should not have been admitted. Secondly, the Crown Prosecutor, in his address to the jury, isolated the charges and referred to the evidence of A and W within the context of the relevant charge. Thirdly, the trial judge, after giving a number of general directions, dealt with each charge separately and gave clear directions to the jury in respect of the evidence of A and W.
However, fourthly, and critically, the question must be asked whether the effect of the evidence, which could be viewed as powerful, would have flowed through to the other charges to which it did not relate. It is difficult to conceive that it would not. The underlying text of the evidence of both witnesses was that the appellant was a person who could not be trusted around young girls. In my opinion, a jury with that subtext in their minds in respect of the first two charges would not, or at least may not, have approached the determination of the balance of the changes with a fresh and independent mind.

It follows from this that all convictions should be set aside. I would add one further comment. There is no doubt that the jury verdicts in this case are flawed because the charges were heard together. I have referred to this issue earlier in my judgment. This case serves as a salient reminder, both to the court and crown prosecutors (and for that matter to defence counsel) of the dangers inherent in doing so and of the need to give careful consideration to whether there should be separate trials in circumstances such as the present.

The Court orders that:
The convictions be quashed.
There be a new trial on all counts.

SMART J: I agree with Beazley JA.

JAMES J: I also agree with Beazley JA.
 * * * 
