

A P Mortimer versus J R Burgess [2004] NSWSC 1327 (30 June 2004) 
ANDREW PETER MORTIMER v. JOHN IRVING BURGESS & ANOR /90 
FRIDAY 1 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On 27 April 1989, the plaintiff Andrew Peter Mortimer, was a member of the New South Wales Police Service with the rank of Constable First Class. In the very early morning of that day, he was a passenger in a police vehicle which came into collision with a semi-trailer at an intersection. The plaintiff has sued the drivers of both vehicles for damages in respect of the injuries which he sustained. Liability was admitted prior to the hearing and the matter proceeded to trial for the assessment of damages. Damages are to be assessed in accordance with the provisions of the [Motor Accidents Act 1988](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/).

The plaintiff was taken from the scene of the accident to the nearby Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital where he was admitted. It is common ground that he had suffered fractures of the transverse processes of the second and third lumbar vertebrae; a fracture of the upper left first molar; a fracture of the cheekbone and a dislocation of the temporo mandibular joint; an injury (never precisely diagnosed) to both feet; together with other local injuries of no continuing significance.

It is not disputed that the plaintiff sustained severe facial injuries of the kind that I have described. The dislocation of the temporo mandibular joint was apparently reduced at the scene of the accident and was not the subject of specific treatment in hospital. The fractured tooth was extracted at the hospital. The fractured facial bones have apparently united without significant deformity or disability attributable to them. He has required a great deal of dental and orthodontic treatment since the accident, his bite having shifted due to the trauma of the accident. Another tooth had to be extracted by reason of a vertical root fracture, and extensive and expensive bridge work was required.

He has continued to experience clicking in the right temporo mandibular joint, especially on chewing, with difficulty in closing his teeth and for that he was referred to a specialist, Dr. Sykes. It was his opinion that the plaintiff had sustained a traumatic injury to the right temporo mandibular joint leading to articular disc deformation in that joint. As well, there was an uneven occlusal contact pattern and a considerable grinding habit had developed which had caused "marked attrition of the remaining molar teeth". Dr. Sykes thought that the deformation of the disc in the joint was unlikely to respond to treatment and constituted a permanent disability, so that he was likely to continue to experience clicking and discomfort in the joint. Treatment should be directed to establishing a comfortable bite position, and to try to reduce the bruxing habit. An occlusal splint was prescribed and has been worn since.
It requires to be adjusted from time to time in order to maintain his bite in good position.

The plaintiff has been reviewed from time to time by Professor Norman who confirms the diagnosis of bilateral internal derangement of the temporo mandibular joints, for which he also recommended conservative treatment by way of occlusal splint. His most recent report dated 1 November 1995 contemplates, as I understand it, that the splint treatment should continue at least for another two years or so, requiring replacement two or three times during that period. He has proposed as a possibility the need for surgical intervention but has not expressed the opinion that such is currently indicated nor that there is any probability that it will be required in the future. The treating dentist, Dr. Chan, has also referred to the possibility of such surgery, but the state of the evidence is such that it is not possible to say that there is any probability that treatment of that kind would be required. Nor does the evidence show whether the performance of such surgery as has been referred to would or would not obviate the need for the continuing regime of conservative management by way of splint and analgesics. There is some ambiguity in Dr.
Norman's report as to whether that treatment would continue for only two years, and in that regard I prefer the very clear statement by Dr. Chan that the splint therapy will continue indefinitely requiring a new splint every three to five years.

I think the appropriate approach to the assessment of future treatment costs is to allow for the future treatment of the teeth themselves as itemised by
Dr. Chan, and to allow replacement of splints throughout the plaintiff's life, but discounted very heavily against the strong possibility that the treatment duration will be less than that. The evidence does not justify the making of any provision for future surgery to the jaw. I allow for the cost of future treatment to the jaw and teeth the sum of $36,194.40 which is calculated substantially as in the plaintiff's schedule of damages submitted at trial but adjusted as follows:- multiplier is 910 therefore the cost of splints is reduced to $9,618.70, cost of scale and clean is reduced to $2,793.70; allow two only post and core crowns, ie. at approximately 13 year intervals at a total cost each of $28,000.00 which is discounted, using five percent tables, to $22,722.00.

It appears to be the case that the spinal fractures, which healed in the ordinary course, are not themselves productive of any continuing disability.
As I would understand it, the significance of the fact that those bones were fractured is as evidence of the fact of significant trauma to the low back.
The plaintiff complains of continuing disability arising from that area, which he describes as soreness generally over the area of the spine with a particularly sensitive spot in the low back and sciatica extending down the right leg to the calf. His pain is exacerbated by standing for long periods and some relatively minor physical activities. He is by no means totally disabled, nor does he claim to be so.

The reports of the treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr. Barrett, do not offer any diagnosis in respect of the plaintiff's continuing complaints of back related pain. However, he was seen on 8 December 1994 by Dr. R.G. Smith who diagnosed a probable "mechanical derangement" and possible 'intra-discal injury" above and below the site of the fractures. Dr. Smith said:- "His ongoing back complaints are associated with chronic pain from mechanical malfunction which would certainly restrict his activities." 
Dr. Smith did not anticipate either any spontaneous improvement or any attributable deterioration and thought that the then present situation could reasonably be regarded as permanent. The plaintiff would remain capable of a wide range of duties provided that heavy, repetitive or provocative lifting and prolonged or repetitive bending could be avoided, and he could change posture at reasonable intervals. In Dr. Smith's opinion, the back disability would be sufficient to prevent him from resuming normal police duties; but would not affect his employability in other fields except to the extent noted.
The defendant tendered a report from Dr. D. Maxwell, an orthopaedic surgeon who examined the plaintiff on 20 September 1991, but no other orthopaedic evidence. Dr. Maxwell found little abnormality and seemed disposed to attribute most of the plaintiff's disability to an anxiety state; but offers no comment on Dr. Smith's diagnosis. In the absence of any contrary medical evidence, I am satisfied that there does exist in the plaintiff's back such pathology as Dr. Smith describes, which provides an adequate medical foundation for the plaintiff's complaints of continuing disability arising from his back.

The plaintiff claims to have some continuing pain in his neck ranging in degree, and sometimes associated with difficulty in turning fully from side to side. He did not seek to make much of it. There is not much doubt that the nature of the trauma sustained by the plaintiff in the accident was such as could have caused injury to his neck, and indeed he was complaining of pain in that region very soon after the accident, and it was a subject of physiotherapy treatment prescribed for him by Dr. Barrett during 1989. Dr.
Maxwell found some stiffness of the neck. When Dr. Smith saw the plaintiff in
December 1994, he was satisfied that there was a continuing and permanent disability in the neck attributable to the accident, which he assessed as equivalent to 15% of loss of function. Thus again, there is medical support for the plaintiff's continuing complaints.

I accept that the plaintiff has a continuing disability in the neck and back affecting him in the manner in which he describes, although I think it is likely that he has somewhat overstated the severity of his back symptoms, having regard to the generally free movement which he reveals on some occasions and the range of the activities which he is still prepared to undertake, for example his fishing. I am satisfied, however, that there is a significant degree of discomfort, amounting to disability on some occasions and limiting his working capacity in the way in which Dr. Smith has outlined.
He deals with the back and neck problem by way of frequent visits to chiropractors and I think it is appropriate to make provision in the verdict for continuing treatment of that kind. His evidence is that he attends the chiropractor two to three times per month. I allow for 30 attendances per annum at $32 per attendance, $960 per annum equivalent to a cost of $18.46 per week, which over an anticipated remaining life span of 39 years (Australian
Life Table 1980-82, date of birth 30 October 1961) has a present value of $16,798.60 (multiplier on the five percent tables, 910).

The plaintiff gave evidence of a problem with his feet, noticed only since the accident - I take it, after he commenced weight bearing, having been initially discharged from hospital on crutches. His complaint is of pain in the feet on or after much walking. There is no medical evidence in relation to this complaint but it seems that this part of the plaintiff's claim is not contested. He had sought the assistance of a podiatrist, Mr. Perry, whose report is part of Exhibit G. Shoe supports have been prescribes and he finds them of some benefit. It is appropriate to take this matter into account in assessing damages for non-economic loss, and to allow the continuing cost of the supports, which is set out in Mr. Perry's report as amounting to $365.00, approximately every second year, which represents $3.51 per week. It does not appear to me that the evidence justifies any allowance for the cost of special footwear, also referred to in the same report. Again using a multiplier of , I allow in respect of the future cost of shoe supports $3,194.10.

The main element in the plaintiff's claim for damages is a claim that he sustained in the accident a closed head injury which has produced organic brain damage in the frontal lobe with consequent diminution in cognitive function and significant effects upon his personality and behaviour. It is this aspect of the plaintiff's claim that has been the subject of the principal contest.

Within a short time after the accident, the plaintiff was complaining to his general practitioner, Dr. Ow Yang of difficulty in concentration, amnesia and aggressive mood changes. Dr. Ow Yang was sufficiently concerned to refer him for psychiatric treatment and he was seen by Professor Leslie Kiloh who was particularly concerned about the plaintiff's report to him of extreme irritability "with severe daily exacerbations lasting 10 minutes or so in which he comes close to violence". Professor Kiloh prescribed Tegretol but thought that the plaintiff was in urgent need of psychotherapy and on 31
August 1989, referred him to another psychiatrist, Dr. Peter Whetton for that purpose. The plaintiff first saw Dr. Whetton on 8 September 1989 and has seen him regularly since, right up to the time of trial. Dr. Whetton's initial opinion, confirmed in subsequent reports was as follows:- "I consider that he has suffered from a significant head injury and that there is a significant degree of organic brain damage which has given rise to difficulties in his memory and concentration and also particularly to his emotional control. He has some signs of excessive emotionality with being very easily moved to tears, anger and sometimes hilarity. This is most likely related to damage to the frontal lobe areas of the brain. There is also a strong psychological factor here in that he has always been an extremely energetic and busy man who has enjoyed his work very much and his sports and physical activity. Because of his back injury he has been unable to gain the satisfaction in these areas of his life. His relationships have suffered and he finds himself in a situation of great uncertainty. It is unsure at the moment whether he will continue to improve. His back injury is such, I suspect, that it will not allow him to confidently pursue his sports nor his active police work." 
That opinion appears to have been based upon the history given by the plaintiff and his wife as to changes in his personality and behaviour following the accident; as well as on Dr. Whetton's own assessment in the course of several consultations. It does not appear to have been an opinion based, at least initially, on any psychological testing that may have been carried out.

There has in fact been psychological testing of the plaintiff carried out on at least four occasions. He was seen by Ms. Jill Farrelly on 24 October 1989 and again on 9 January 1995, evidently at the instigation of the police medical officer; on 27 June 1995 by Mr. Sam Borenstein at the request of the plaintiff's solicitors; and on 6 March 1990, by Mr. Nigel Walton as part of an assessment by the Hurstville Acquired Brain Improvement Team, apparently at the request of the police medical officer. Both Ms. Farrelly and Mr.
Borenstein gave oral evidence. The results of testing by Ms. Farrelly were inconsistent and confusing but reveal some signs of a sort which might be related to a frontal lobe injury. On the other hand he performed well on some tests thought to be sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction. She also found evidence of a mild degree of anxiety. Her conclusion at the time was expressed as follows:- "It is possible that there is some mild frontal lobe dysfunction which is having the effect of disrupting the organisation of data so that it is not being encoded in memory as efficiently as it should be. Frontal lobe deficit would also partly account for the problems he has had controlling his rage and would also partly explain his inappropriate and excessive laughter during the assessment. I say `partly' for it is quite possible that Andrew's pre-accident personality was aggressive and compulsive. However it is known that frontal lobe damage, even mild, can have disinhibiting effects, and can result in the `coarsening' of the previous personality; the previous personality traits writ large. In addition he is an action oriented person who now cannot work in the field, and has set great importance on physical prowess and sport. His back disability has precluded these outlets and he is probably temperamentally ill equipped to cope with these restrictions and develop other interests. This frustration, combined with pain, is a further source of distraction in his current duties, to which he is probably temperamentally well suited. So there are factors confounding in the psychological presentation." 
His "current duties" to which she referred were office duties at Sutherland
Police Station involving filing and indexing. The plaintiff claimed to Ms.
Farrelly that he found that work boring and frustrating; but he also complained of difficulties with memory and/or with the organisation of material. To that complaint I will return when I come to consider the plaintiff's own evidence on this issue.

By the time she gave oral evidence, Ms. Farrelly seemed inclined to reinterpret the results of her first tests, influenced, I suspect, by the conclusion that she came to in her second testing of the plaintiff that he "stood in the way of accurate assessment of his neuropsychological functioning": a phrase which in the context of her report seem to indicate that her opinion was that in carrying out the tests he was not genuinely endeavouring to do his best, and an opinion which she expressed very much more strongly in oral evidence, namely that he was deliberately falsifying the results or that is to say malingering. In oral evidence she said, in relation to the results of the first tests:- "A couple of poor performances need not necessarily mean that there is frontal lobe dysfunction." 
This does seem to me, as I indicated, to represent a change in emphasis, a slanting of her opinion adversely to the plaintiff, an unwillingness now to give him the benefit of the doubt, which benefit she was evidently prepared to extend to him in 1989. At the time of her second test she took a detailed history from him including a history of his attempts to work and his lack of success in that regard, his persistent mood swings, aggression and lack of control and his problems of memory and concentration. She found some differences in the test results as compared with the earlier occasion, in particular deterioration in his performance on certain sub-tests which she was unable to explain on the basis of any cerebral pathology. In one respect in particular (his performance on a memory sub-test called "delayed recall") her opinion was that his test performance signified the existence of a deficit of massive proportions which would, if genuine, have been evident in his history and in his presentation but which in her opinion was not. Nevertheless, in her written report she did not express the opinion that he malingering and she offered an explanation of his reported behavioural changes in terms of frontal lobe damage. She said:- "The significantly poorer performances as reported do not make neuropsychological sense unless there is progressive cerebral pathology, which there is no reason to suppose is the case. At the time of the last assessment
I expressed the opinion that there were possibly some mild neuropsychological deficits ... I would have expected to have seen some residual signs of these or some improvement, but Mr. Mortimer effectively stood in the way of accurate assessment of his neuropsychological functioning. However it is sometimes the case the behavioural functioning provides a clearer indication of frontal lobe damage than neuropsychological assessment, and the marked discontrol manifested by rage and assaultive behaviour and generally poor impulse control is highly suggestive, in Mr. Mortimer's case, of frontal lobe damage, as it would seem, it was not a feature of his pre-morbid functioning." 
As I have indicated, I would have read her report as suggesting that her opinion at the time was that the plaintiff was not fully co-operating, rather than an opinion that he was deliberately trying to mislead. However, by the time she gave oral evidence she had clearly reached a firm conclusion that the latter was the case. She thought he was "putting on an act for [her] benefit" and "was deliberately falsifying his test results". She said he did not deliberately falsify each and every of the tests results "because that is not what malingerers do". Mr. Borenstein on the other hand was satisfied that at least on the occasion when he saw the plaintiff the plaintiff was not attempting to cheat or deceive. His opinion was that the pattern of results of his testing did not suggest cheating. He said:- "Cheats generally don't show average performances on results. They tend to, in my experience, do poorly on all tests. They have to be very selective and pretty clever with respect to the test material to be able to cheat.

Q. He performed pretty poorly on most aspects of the memory test didn't he? A.
No, actually an average result on the visual test for me. He gave an average result for that; he did very well on verbal fluency, okay on certain coding tests and there were some average results throughout the tests." 
He thought that the variability of the plaintiff's performance on successive neuropsychological testing, while it could be due to malingering, was typical of patients with frontal lobe impairment whose performance on testing is variable but who can and do sometimes function quite well cognitively.

A neuropsychologist, Nigel Walton, reported in March 1990. In his opinion, based on the assessment that he carried out, the plaintiff was "capable of new learning and adequate retention of novel material but his capacity to accomplish tasks is compromised by personality factors such as impulsiveness and anxiety. His presentation is consistent with that commonly seen following motor vehicle accidents in which there is bilateral frontal lobe damage".

The plaintiff denied having attempted to deceive any of the psychologists on the occasions when he was tested.

I do not believe that the plaintiff was malingering in the sense that he was deliberately attempting to give a false result on any occasion when he undertook neuropsychological testing. I do think it likely that he was not making a determined effort to do his best at the time when he was tested by
Ms. Farrelly for the second time and possibly also at the time when he was treated by Mr. Borenstein. But that is a response which, as it appears to me, is capable of being explained by reference to possible frontal lobe injury. It may well be the case that his perception of his own disability was such that he saw the testing as futile and for that reason alone did not co-operate. I do not know what the true position is. I think that the tests cannot be relied upon as giving an accurate picture of the plaintiff's level of cognitive functioning; the most that could be said of them is that in some respects they are consistent with a diagnosis of frontal lobe dysfunction.

It seems to me that the only valid assessment of the plaintiff's condition is one which is based upon the history of his pre-accident and post-accident personality and performance, and the assessment of him by experienced clinicians. In that regard it is significant to repeat Ms. Farrelly's comment that:- "It is sometimes the case that behavioural functioning provides a clearer indication of frontal lobe damage than neuropsychological assessment, and the marked discontrol manifested by rage and assaultive behaviour and generally poor impulse control is highly suggestive, in Mr. Mortimer's case, of frontal lobe damage, as it would seem, it was not a feature of his pre-morbid functioning." 
In effect, at trial, she resiled somewhat from that, asserting that she would prefer to rely upon test results than on the observations of a person's actual behaviour. That may be a permissible approach where one is satisfied that the test results are valid. When it is not possible to accept the validity of the test results (for whatever reason, including lack of co-operation, even malingering) one is thrown back to the observed behaviour and the assessment of clinicians. Indeed, when pressed, Ms. Farrelly agreed that if neuropsychological tests did not disclose a condition requiring treatment, a determination of the need for treatment would require her to "rely on the accounts of witnesses"; and that "if there had been no evidence of behaviour discontrol before the injury, I would have to look to the injury", "I wouldn't exclude the trauma if I had evidence that his behaviour was perfectly normal beforehand"; further, that if the appropriate tests did not reveal a likely cause of behavioural discontrol, the first aetiological factor that would require consideration was the pre-morbid personality and only if the patient's behaviour was perfectly normal beforehand would it be reasonable, in her view, to look to the trauma as the likely cause. Ms. Farrelly accepted that many of the features of the plaintiff's behaviour (for example disinhibition, aggressive behaviour, short attention span, inability to organise simple tasks) were features frequently found in persons with frontal lobe damage, although she was at pains to point out that they were also common in people with personality disorders.

Dr. Whetton was clear as to his opinion that the plaintiff's cognitive and behavioural problems are traceable to the accident, principally by way of probable frontal lobe damage.

The plaintiff was reviewed on behalf of the defendant by a psychiatrist, Dr.
James Maguire who reported on 15 December 1995. Dr. Maguire agreed that frontal lobe brain damage can certainly lead to an element of loss of impulse control which can result in spontaneous acts of aggression, but thought the plaintiff's description of an awareness of a slow build up of anger then violently released was more likely due to a problem with the temporal lobes rather than the frontal lobe, if indeed due to organic brain damage at all; it could also be related to a person's basic personality if they are not coping or feeling frustrated for some reason. He thought that the plaintiff's response to alcohol (as relaxing him rather than releasing aggression) and the absence of any increased sensitivity to the effects of alcohol rendered less likely the diagnosis of frontal lobe damage, and he was critical of the readiness of Dr. Whetton and "the psychologists" to accept the presence of organic brain damage on the basis of what was, in his view, inadequate evidence. Dr. Maguire identified some elements in the plaintiff's post- accident history suggestive of a post-traumatic stress disorder, although the criteria for such a diagnosis were not fully established; he was prepared to diagnose an "adjustment disorder of moderate severity" on the basis that his irritability and impulsive acting on aggressive impulses might be a reaction to his altered lifestyle dictated by his physical problems. I find Dr.
Maguire's opinion of assistance in identifying some of the questions that need to be answered, but of little assistance in providing the answers which, for the purposes of this judgment, need to be provided.

Clearly, the question ultimately comes down to the lay evidence of the plaintiff's pre-injury personality, behaviour and cognitive capacity, and the evidence of alleged changes in the plaintiff in those respects.

To some extent the plaintiff's claim that he has been significantly changed in terms of his behaviour, personality and cognitive capacity is dependent on his own evidence and that of his wife and his father-in-law who might, as the defendant's counsel suggested, be thought to have an interest in seeing the plaintiff achieve a successful outcome of this litigation. I acknowledge that that is a matter that requires consideration, but I have to say that it was not my impression that either the plaintiff, his wife or his father-in-law exaggerated the extent of the change in the plaintiff since the accident. I am very much assisted in reaching that conclusion by reference to additional parts of the evidence, as to which the same criticism can scarcely be made. I refer in particular to Exhibit F which is a bundle of internal Police Service assessments of the plaintiff by his superiors over a period from February 1982 to February 1988; to the evidence of Sergeant McNamara who had some association with the plaintiff through a police football team prior to the accident; and to the evidence of Mr. Keenan by whom the plaintiff was employed for a time in the business known as Engadine Electrics.

The assessments of the plaintiff recorded in Exhibit F appear to have been made as part of an ongoing process of appraisal to which all police officers are regularly subjected, at least during the early years of their police service. Some record slight deficiencies in his work performance related to his youth, immaturity and lack of experience; and his impatience with paperwork; but each contains favourable comments directly relevant to the matters in issue in this case. For example, the appraisal made in February describes him as having "... a very friendly approach in all cases. Well liked by other members. Is becoming increasingly more confident." And that he, "... gets along exceptionally well with other members ... has an excellent approach to the public, relates well". The same appraisal describes him as keen to learn and "... satisfactory in mastering new procedures. Occasionally has to be re-instructed. Grasps most relevant points with an average amount of explanation. He requests detailed explanations in order to fully understand each new subject. Has an enquiring mind and seems to be gaining ability at an average rate." In December 1982 it was recorded that he was very enthusiastic, anxious to learn and "masters new routines to learn fast. Need only be shown something once." It was recorded that he was popular among his fellow workers "because of a good personality and his willingness to assist both senior and junior members - expresses himself very clearly - excellent liaison with public" and it was recorded that he "can take charge of a situation confidently and always complete a signed task". Specific comment was made on his patience and on the fact that he was adaptable.

In October 1984 he was seeking a transfer to a criminal investigation role and the appraisal included these comments:- "Has an adequate understanding of present duties, continues to improve in this regard. However, has a cavalier approach on occasions."; "Settles down quickly to the more serious issues, tends to treat the more mundane tasks with less enthusiasm. An excellent approach to the public. Can generally be relied upon to complete tasks satisfactorily."; "Intelligent approach, able to converse well with people. Has a retentive memory. Has some difficulty with paper work but continues to improve in this regard."; "Displays leadership qualities. Continues to improve in this regard." 
In July 1987, he was appraised with a view particularly to his interest in transfer to a plain clothes unit and there was reference to his being "very keen and active"; "friendly and cheerful", a man who was popular with his peers and supervisors and who related well to and communicated well with the public. He was described as one who "copes well in stressful situations keeping a cool head taking charge as required". In February 1988, the appraisal included these comments: "performs his duties in an enthusiastic and competent manner"; is co-operative at all times, can be relied upon for assistance and readily offers same without being asked"; "has reflected a good image on the public"; "is a good orator, communicates well when speaking to the public and attending court"; "he remains calm under pressure and gets the job done"; "he has a jovial nature and his good humour is generated amongst his fellow workers". He was thought to be suitable for promotion. Sergeant
McNamara described the plaintiff as being (before the accident was when he knew him) "happy go lucky, easy going, likeable, one who seemed to `mix very well with people generally and was good team member" and had never observed him to be aggressive, angry or irritable.

I accept that the plaintiff was genuinely enthusiastic about his police career and displayed personal qualities of a kind which would make almost certain his successful progress through the ranks to at least senior non-commissioned level. I am satisfied that he was so keen to progress in the Police Service that it is highly unlikely that he would not have done his very best to perform successfully the tasks which were assigned to him when he returned to light duty following the accident, even though those tasks were themselves of a nature which was distasteful to him. I specifically reject the suggestion which was put to the plaintiff and which he himself rejected, that he did not make a genuine effort at that work because it was work which he did not enjoy because it kept him indoors. The appraisals in Exhibit F and the evidence of
Mr. McNamara adequately corroborate the evidence of Mr. James, the plaintiff's father-in-law who described the plaintiff before the accident as "very nice, happy go lucky guy" and the evidence of Mrs. Donna Mortimer, to whom the plaintiff was married in January 1988 but who had known him for seven years before that, who described him as "happy, outgoing and reliable" and a good husband.

Following the accident, according to the plaintiff, he experienced the problems of memory, concentration and aggression which led to his referral eventually to Professor Kiloh and Dr. Whetton. In his own terms, at that stage he "thought I was going nuts". Asked what made him think that, he said, "I don't know, I just couldn't remember anything, to retain anything, didn't know anyone" and he noticed those problems shortly after coming home possibly even while he was in hospital. He experienced "mood swings, aggression; if someone did something I would more or less stalk them, to get vengeance I suppose".
His sleep was disturbed by nightmares. He could not think clearly and he reacted unusually emotionally to, for example, television programmes.

He was returned to work on restricted duties which involved clerical work at
Sutherland Police Station of a most routine and mechanical kind, requiring him to number crime reports sequentially. He says that he could not do it, "I just kept jumping numbers all over the place; I would write numbers and they would go from say 23 to 87, 35". He said he concentrated on the work but "I seemed like an idiot". He was aware that he was not doing well and he found that embarrassing. He was eventually discharged from the Police Service on 17
October 1990. I am satisfied on the whole of the evidence that that was not as a result of his own wish but a consequence of his ability to function effectively in the Police Service.

I accept the plaintiff's evidence that he was distressed to be discharged from the Police Service and his loss of the career which he had chosen even before leaving school represents in my view a significant contribution to his general damages.

According to him, his mental state deteriorated after his discharge from the
Police Service - "it was bizarre". He said:- "I didn't recognise anybody that come up to say hello. I couldn't remember people being there or seeing them the day before or anything. I had bad mood swings; it's just - I don't know - it was just, just reality which seemed to be something different completely." 
He was aggressive towards people including his wife. She kept him under control to some extent in relation to his dealings with third persons but in consequence herself bore the brunt of his behaviour. His evidence in that regard is confirmed by hers.

A major feature of the plaintiff's complaint about his post-accident condition is poor memory and/or inability to concentrate; and it is his evidence that that was displayed, as well as on other occasions, by his inability to perform adequately the duties of a security guard in the business operated by his father-in-law, Mr. James. He was required to check premises during the night and he said, "I tried to do it but kept missing suburbs and things ... I'd just think I was finished and just go home". That evidence was thoroughly tested in cross-examination of the plaintiff and might have been thought to be incredible; but in fact it was clearly corroborated by the evidence of Mr.
James and I accept that the plaintiff was in fact unable to perform in that work. Having been shown the route and the premises to which he was required to go and being equipped with a list of the places to which he was required to go he was simply not able to follow that routine thoroughly and efficiently.
There is no reason to think that he was malingering in that regard. I accept the evidence of the plaintiff himself and of Mr. James that he was not able to do the job; and the only explanation for that inability (having regard to the evidence of his competence as a police officer before the accident) is some effect of the accident upon his mental capacity.

After the cessation of his work with Mr. James, the plaintiff found work with a business called Engadine Elements run by a Mr. Michael Keenan, a former police officer, and a partner. Mr. Keenan's evidence (Exhibit K) is that the plaintiff was introduced to him back in 1991 by Keenan's then partner, Mr.
Fuller, also a former police officer. He said:- "He came to work for us on a very casual basis just helping Robert Fuller on small tasks such as taking phone messages when we were absent from the office.
... It was obvious that Andrew couldn't do much work. He was unskilled and exhibited a short attention span. ... On a number of occasions I was aware that he had forgotten to do the jobs I had requested him to do. ... Because of our knowledge of him he would only be assigned limited tasks which we believed he would be able to carry out. However if he did have one flaw it was his forgetfulness. He would forget to pass on messages. He appeared to be willing to work and give the job a try. He was always punctual and if he was asked to do a job he would be more than willing to do it and give of his best." 
The plaintiff himself described his work as involving answering the telephone and taking and placing orders, and the problem, he said, was "wrong orders, wrong phone numbers, wrong times". Again, given his performance before the accident as evidenced by the series of appraisals in Exhibit F, and accepting as I do the evidence of the plaintiff, thus corroborated by Mr. Keenan, of his poor performance in that work, I am satisfied that it is a consequence of the injury sustained in the accident.

Part of the plaintiff's case that he had sustained a significant head injury with brain damage was based on the plaintiff's assertion that he had lost consciousness in the accident and was unconscious thereafter for a considerable time, which on some occasions he has estimated as having been as long as six hours. That evidence was challenged, and I think successfully, because there is ample evidence that he was conscious when the ambulance arrived at the scene and that no history of loss of consciousness was recorded on his admission to hospital. I accept that the plaintiff genuinely believes that he was unconscious and that that belief stems from his inability to remember anything from the moment of impact (or shortly before it) until some considerable time later when he was at the hospital, other than information which has since been communicated to him by others. I do not think the plaintiff was attempting to mislead anybody when he referred to himself as having lost consciousness; I simply think that the fact is other then what he believes. There is, however, no medical evidence to suggest that it is not possible that the plaintiff sustained frontal lobe damage notwithstanding the absence of any definite history of loss of consciousness. Without objection,
Mr. Borenstein, the only expert witness called to give oral evidence in the plaintiff's case, related his diagnosis of frontal lobe damage to what he described as a contracoup-type injury, and did not depart from that opinion (nor was he invited to) after making clear that when he spoke of a period of unconsciousness he was intending more precisely to refer to a period of post- traumatic amnesia. Dr. Geoffrey Coffey in his report of 5 December 1995 referred to "a significant head injury ... with brief loss of consciousness" but does not suggest that the conclusion that there was some brief period of unconsciousness was essential to the conclusion that brain damage was sustained in the accident. As I read his report he, like Mr. Borenstein, attributed more significance to the long period of post-traumatic amnesia and confusion.

The plaintiff's evidence of aggressive behaviour after the accident is also adequately corroborated from other sources. His wife spoke of two particular incidents, but I would not understand her evidence to suggest that only those particular occasions were the occasions on which to her knowledge he has acted aggressively towards persons other than herself; and I accept also that he is aggressive towards her. One of the incidents of aggression of which she spoke occurred at the premises at Engadine and is the subject of evidence also from the plaintiff himself and from Mr. Keenan. Their accounts differ in detail, but what is clear is that in an unprovoked outburst of aggression towards Mr.
Keenan, the plaintiff deliberately punched with his clenched fist at a plate glass door. This does not seem to have been a blow aimed at Mr. Keenan or somebody else but misdirected, but rather an expression of rage and frustration. It has been described in the history to one of the doctors as an accidental injury, but I would understand that to mean no more than that the consequences of the deliberate act were accidental, in the sense that the plaintiff did not intend to cause injury to himself. In fact he caused a quite significant injury to his right arm, and I am satisfied that that injury is probably to be regarded as a consequence of the head injury which he sustained in the accident, so that the consequences of the arm injury (to which I will later refer) are themselves compensable.

She described another incident which occurred at a football club social function where he intervened in a dispute between one of his friends and a third party. Mrs. Mortimer intervened to restrain him.

Mr. Barry James gave evidence of a quite bizarre episode when, after the termination of their business/employment relationship the plaintiff met him casually in the street and acted towards him in an abusive and threatening manner. The episode was so bizarre that counsel for the defendant suggested that I would not be satisfied that it occurred; but I am satisfied by the evidence of Mr. James, and I accept, that the plaintiff did behave in the manner described. It was bizarre behaviour, it was behaviour entirely different from anything that had been experienced before the accident; and I have little difficulty in concluding that it was a manifestation of disinhibition attributable to frontal lobe injury.

The testing conducted by the clinical psychologists does not demonstrate any definite cognitive impairment attributable to organic brain damage but is consistent with the opinion expressed by Mr. Walton that the plaintiff's ability to accomplish tasks is adversely affected by the personality change attributable to frontal lobe damage. That view is entirely consistent with that expressed by Mr. Borenstein that:- "Those who suffer frontal lobe impairment often can have intact intelligence.
It is what they are able to do with that intelligence that becomes the crucial factor. Mr. Mortimer is a man who is easily derailed from a task ..." 
I accept that, whether or not he has suffered organic impairment of his cognitive functions, his cognitive functions, in particular in relation to memory and the ability to organise himself, are adversely affected through the influence thereon of frontal lobe damage. His forgetfulness was attested to by
Mr. James and Mr. Keenan in evidence to which I have already referred; it is also the subject of evidence which I find particular convincing from Mrs.
Donna Mortimer. She gave evidence of his inability, on a shopping expedition, to return with the listed items which he was to have purchased and of confusion which he manifests in the supermarket. She gave evidence also of incidents where his forgetfulness was productive of actual danger: one occasion when he was left in care of their first child when she was a baby and left her "for a few hours" - "it wasn't until somebody asked him how his little girl was going and he remembered - `Oh no, she's home in bed' and he raced home"; an occasion when she had left him at home alone and returned home to find the house full of smoke because of a pizza box left in the oven when he turned the oven on to grill; and a similar occasion when he put food in the oven and forgot about it. The plaintiff himself gave a history to Dr. Whetton of major incidents of forgetfulness including, for example, lighting a barbecue, going away and leaving it and returning to find the barbecue utensils melted, and also less serious incidents, such as losing his wallet or his keys, forgetting where he had parked his car, and losing his way even in locations familiar to him.

In my view the evidence is overwhelming that the plaintiff has suffered a frontal lobe injury which affects his functioning in all of the various ways I have described. It does not appear that his condition is amenable to treatment. To some extent his aggressiveness could be controlled by medication; but there is a real problem in getting the plaintiff to comply diligently with any medication regime (per Dr. Whetton). In general, I accept the proposition advanced by counsel for the plaintiff that it is only his regular attendances on Dr. Whetton for psychiatric support, and the patient restraining influence of his wife, which have limited the plaintiff's aberrant behaviour to the extent which the evidence reveals. I am satisfied that he is in need of continuing psychiatric support in the form of regular and relatively frequent attendances on Dr. Whetton or some similarly qualified colleague.

The plaintiff claims for the cost of future psychiatric care one consultation every four weeks at $174.00 per consultation. It does not appear to me that the evidence supports that. I propose to allow for future psychiatric care on the basis of one consultation every four weeks for two years and thereafter four consultations per year for the rest of the plaintiff's life. That represents a weekly cost over two years of $43.50, the present value of which on the five percent tables is $4,306.50 (multiplier 99). The allowance thereafter for a period of 37 years commencing two years hence amounts to $13.38 per week and using a multiplier of 811 (910 for 39 years less 99 for two years) comes to $10,851.18. I therefore allow for future psychiatric care the sum of $15,157.68.

He is in need also of personal support and supervision such as is currently provided by his wife and, in the absence of provision of such support from his wife, would require some paid assistance. I do not accept that the need is for full time care. It appears to me that the need would be adequately met by having a person who would call on the plaintiff daily for a short period of time to lay out a routine for him and to check that he is not in any major difficulty. I do not think it is appropriate to make any provision for such care in respect of any past period nor for such period into the future during which it can reasonably be anticipated that the plaintiff will continue to live in the marital relationship. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the Act provides that no compensation is to be awarded under this head if the services would have been provided to the person even if the person had not been injured by the motor accident. The need which the plaintiff has for services of a domestic nature relate to supervision and guidance of his activity and psychological and emotional support, but they require no special activity in that regard other than the presence of the person by whom the services are supplied. The plaintiff's wife by her presence as his wife adequately fulfils the need but does so in circumstances which, in my understanding of [s.72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html), do not entitle the plaintiff to compensation. The fact that the plaintiff is in need of such support and that that is provided by his wife is, however, in my view a matter of significance to the plaintiff himself who is conscious of the pressure to which his wife is subject by reason of his disabilities and the difficulties which he creates for her and that is, in my view, a significant detriment to him which is to be taken into account in the assessment of general damages for non-economic loss.

The evidence does not enable me to determine as a matter of probability that a time will ever occur when the plaintiff will be deprived of his wife's companionship and support, and deprived of his wife as the source of satisfaction of his need for domestic supervision and companionship. But for the provisions of [s.72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) of the Act, it would be appropriate to provide in a global way a sum of money to compensate the plaintiff against the eventuality in the future that he would be compelled to pay for such services. However, the evidence does not permit the court to make findings which would satisfy the requirements of [s.72](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s72.html) and enable any award of compensation under this head to be made. It is not possible to say that a time will come when, more probably than not, the plaintiff would require to obtain services of a domestic nature which would not have been provided to him in any event.

I have referred earlier to the incident where the plaintiff apparently in an unprovoked outburst of aggression punched with his clenched fist at a plate glass door causing a substantial injury to his right arm. First aid treatment was rendered by a police officer from a passing patrol car and the plaintiff was taken by ambulance to St. George Hospital where he came under the care of
Dr. Bencsik. Dr. Bencsik found complete division of the ulnar nerve and damage to the flexor muscle, and those defects were repaired. Dr. Bencsik reviewed him for the purpose of this litigation in September 1995. The plaintiff complained of persisting numbness over the distribution of the ulnar nerve and hypersensitivity of the right forearm in the same area with some limitation of finger movements and forearm movements; and some weakness in the ulnar two fingers. Dr. Bencsik found objective support for such complaints; he thought the condition stationary; and he thought that it represented a disability amounting to the loss of 18% of the use of the right arm below the elbow. The injury would disable him from work which might endanger his anaesthetic fingers, such as work with sharp or hot objects; but would not otherwise affect his ability to work in the kinds of employment that might otherwise have been open to him. No further treatment was likely to be of benefit.

The plaintiff is entitled to compensation for his loss of earnings in the past and his loss of earning capacity in the future. The amount which he would have earned to date and in the future as a police officer has been calculated by
Messrs. Ernst & Young, retained by the plaintiff's solicitors for that purpose. Strictly, as counsel for the defendant pointed out, it cannot be said to be a certainty that the plaintiff would have earned the amounts thus calculated. Although the calculations themselves are accepted, the true position is that the plaintiff is to be compensated for the loss of the chance that he would have earned such money, and some recognition has to be made of the possibility that he would not in fact have secured the successive promotions and associated benefits which those calculations assume. It is common ground that, but for other vicissitudes, the plaintiff would have progressed to the level of Senior Constable Level 5 by 1995. It is common ground that he would probably have progressed on a yearly basis to the rank of
Sergeant Level 3, attaining that rank in the year 2004. Notwithstanding those common assumptions, the two firms of accountants, Ernst & Young engaged on behalf of the plaintiff and McDonald Ross engaged on behalf of the defendant calculate the amount of his probable earnings, (a) to the date of trial; (b) to and including the year 2004, on a slightly different basis. The evidence does not enable me to make any logical determination as to the validity of one methodology rather than the other, and I think that the only proper course in those circumstances is to take the approximate average of figures derived from each report. On that basis I find that the plaintiff, had he not been injured, would have earned up to 30 June 1996 in the employment as a police officer a sum of $198,552.00 net and during the period from 1 July 1996 to 30 June 2004, and progressing through the ranks to the level of Sergeant Level 3 would have earned a sum the present value of which is $.199,082.00.

Messrs. Ernst & Young have calculated the plaintiff's potential earnings thereafter on the basis that he would have progressed automatically through the ranks to attain the rank of Senior Sergeant Fourth Year in the year ended June 2006 and have remained at that rank until retirement at the age of 60.
McDonald Ross & Co. engaged on behalf of the defendant have assumed that from 2004 to the date of his retirement the plaintiff would continue at the rank of Sergeant Level 3. The difference in earnings between the two sets of assumptions over the whole period to the date of his attaining the age of 60 is $33,280.00. It appears to me that it is proper to award damages on the basis that his potential earnings would have been those of a Sergeant Level 3 throughout the period from 2004 to 2021 and thereafter to his 60th birthday but to allow also an additional amount compensating for the loss of the chance of further promotion namely to Senior Sergeant Level 4. Again differences in the method and results of the calculation appear as between the two accountants. I propose to allow the sum of $236,087.00 derived from the calculation made by McDonald Ross as the potential earnings on the basis that the plaintiff at Sergeant Level 3 and to allow 25% of the difference between that figure and the earnings which the plaintiff would have achieved had he attained a rank of Senior Sergeant Level 4. The result of that approach is that I proceed on the basis that his potential earnings to his 60th birthday from 1 July 1996 have a present value of $244,407.00 
The plaintiff is entitled by way of compensation for loss of earning capacity to the difference between that figure and such figure as the evidence shows fairly represents his residual earning capacity. It seems to me that that figure is necessarily very low. He attempted the work of a security guard in the business operated by his father-in-law, and demonstrated his incapacity to do even very routine work. His attempt to work in the business of Engadine
Electrics had a similar fate. The evidence reveals an attempt, equally unsuccessful, to participate in a business developing certain products invented by the plaintiff for friends and relatives. The most that can be said is that the plaintiff in that activity did not demonstrate much in the way of residual earning capacity.

The plaintiff's actual net earnings between the date of the accident and 30
June 1992, in the various employments and business activities in which he engaged, totalled $41,492.00, an average of just over $250.00 per week. Since the 1991-92 financial year he has earned nothing. I do not regard either figure as truly representing the value of his residual earning capacity. Of course, for the period during which he was earning, into the 1991-92 year, his damages must be assessed on the basis that his residual earning capacity was worth at least the sum which he in fact earned. It seems to me that the most that he could have expected to earn had he actively pursued employment in the past four years and the most that he can expect to earn in the future, having regard not only to his physical disabilities which represent some though not a very great restriction but particularly to his mental or personality incapacities resulting from the accident, has been and will be limited to what he may derive from casual engagement in relatively unskilled activities interspersed with very lengthy periods of employment. I think it unlikely that he would on a year in year out basis have achieved in the past four years earnings exceeding on average $10,000 per annum. On that basis I treat the value of his residual earning capacity from the date of the accident to 30
June 1996 as amounting to $81,492.00 and on the basis of the notional earnings determined earlier, I allow in respect of loss of earnings during that period the sum of $117,060.00.

Similarly, I think it is unlikely that during the rest of what would have been his working life he will on a year in year out basis achieve earnings exceeding on average $10,000 per annum net. I assess his residual earning capacity on that basis. Expressed as a weekly figure it comes to $192.30. The present value of that capacity calculated over a period of 25 years on the five percent tables (multiplier 754) is $144,994.00. That sum, compared with his probable earnings had he not been injured, determined as set out above ($443,499.00) reveals a future loss of earnings of approximately $298,500.00.
That sum ought be discounted by the conventional 15% to reflect the ordinary vicissitudes of life, resulting in a net award for future loss of earnings of $253,725.00.

The plaintiff is entitled to compensation also in respect of loss of superannuation, and the defendant accepts the method of calculation adopted by
Ernst & Young in their several reports. However, counsel agreed that to the extent that I should assess the plaintiff's likely future earnings but for the accident at a figure below that assessed by Ernst & Young, I should make a proportionate adjustment to the figure of $79,113.00 calculated by them in respect of the loss of superannuation. I therefore allow in respect of loss of superannuation benefits 92.8% of $79,113.00, that is $73,417.00.

The plaintiff makes a substantial claim for future out of pocket expenses. I have indicated above the basis upon which certain of those claims should be assessed. To the extent that the plaintiff claimed a more generous provision or for expenses of a different kind, the claim is rejected - the total allowance for future care is $71,344.71.

Past out of pocket expenses were agreed as to amount but not as to need. In particular there was a challenge to so much thereof as related to treatment arising from the injury to the plaintiff's arm but that was on the basis that the arm injury was not a consequence of the accident. In view of the finding that I have made adverse to the defendant on that issue, I allow the whole of the past out of pocket expenses set out in the plaintiff's schedule of damages and totalling $73,764.42.

Taking account of all of the detriments which the plaintiff has suffered as a result of the injury, including both its physical and its psychological consequences and including what in my view is for this plaintiff a devastating loss, the loss of the career which he had always wished to pursue in the
Police Service, a loss not offset by the acquisition of any other fulfilling lifetime occupation, I am of opinion that the plaintiff's non-economic loss is to be assessed as equivalent to 65% of a most extreme case and I allow damages for non-economic loss $152,750.00.

The remaining matter is a claim for the cost of the management of the fund created by this award in the plaintiff's favour. Dr. Whetton has expressed the opinion that the plaintiff is not capable of managing large sums of money for investment and it seems to me that that is a realistic view. It is not so much the impairment of his cognitive functions that produces that result as it is the convincing evidence of the adverse effect upon his cognitive functions of his frontal lobe damage. His forgetfulness and his disinhibition create, in my judgment, a need for assistance in the management of this very large sum of money which is now to come his way. The claim advanced on behalf of the plaintiff is for the cost of management of the fund by Westpac Investment
Management, an independently operated subsidiary of Westpac Banking
Corporation. Exhibit G includes documentation from Westpac Investment
Management Pty. Limited on the basis of which I am satisfied that the service of it by that organisation would be entirely appropriate to the plaintiff's needs. Engagement of the Westpac organisation involves no additional service charge but payment of a single management fee calculated monthly and charged quarterly which, relevantly, is at the rate of 1.25% per annum, that is 1.25% of the value of the fund. There is a minimum charge of $10,000 per annum.

The fund in question here represents the whole of the damages as thus far assessed, $668,644.20 less the past out of pocket expenses $73,764.42, creating a net fund for investment of $594,879.78. That would attract the minimum fee of $10,000 per annum. The claim as formulated on behalf of the plaintiff is thus for $10,000 per annum for 39 years which, using a multiplier of 910 has a present value of $175,000.00.

The defendant disputed the need but, as I have indicated, I am satisfied that the need exists and is created by the plaintiff's injury. Alternatively, the defendant submitted that a more economical way of providing for the plaintiff's need for assistance in fund management would be to utilise the services of the Protective Commissioner and to allow for the cost of fund management in the manner explained by Meagher, JA. in GIO v. Rosniak [(1991-92) 27 NSWLR 665] at
On a fund calculated to be $594,879.78, engagement of the services of the
Protective Commissioner would incur an establishment fee of $11,950.00 and, applying the Rosniak methodology, annual fees calculated as follows: annual investment return five percent - $29,744.00; management fee 5.25% per annum, $1,561.56 which equals $30.03 per week; present value of $30.03 per week for 39 years multiplier on the five percent tables 910 - $27,327.30 
This produces a total cost somewhat less than would be incurred by engaging the services of Westpac. There is no doubt that funds to be invested and managed by the Protective Commissioner are well handled in the interests of the client; and I see no reason therefore why the allowance for fund management in the present case should exceed the amount for which such services could be obtained from the Protective Commissioner. I add a nominal allowance of $1,000 for the cost of application to appoint the Protective
Commissioner and in the result allow a total figure of the cost of fund management of $40,277.30.

The result of the foregoing is that there will be a judgment for the plaintiff in the sum of $708,921.50.

ANDREW PETER MORTIMER v. JOHN IRVING BURGESS & ANOR /90 
FRIDAY 13 DECEMBER 1996 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER J 
JUDGMENT (On application relating to the slip rule and costs) 
HIS HONOUR: 
Under the slip rule, noting that I had overlooked the indexation of the figure allowed under [s.79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) for the most extreme case, I correct the figure on p.28 of my judgment from $152,750 to $160,550; and consequentially, I correct the amount of the plaintiff's judgment from $708,920.50 to $790,138.43.

I delivered judgment in this matter on 1 November 1996. Apart from the mathematical error, which I have already dealt with, the parties have raised two matters before the court this morning. It is convenient to deal with the second one first. On the second day of the hearing the defendant proposed to call a psychologist, Miss Farrelly, and she was in attendance at court to give evidence and the hearing of the evidence would have been expected to finish that day. However, on that day the plaintiff served on the defendant a further report of Dr. Coffey based on an MRI scan, which the defendant required time to investigate, and in order to give that time, the taking of the evidence of
Miss Farrelly and the completion of submissions was postponed until what was the third day of the trial.

As it turned out, the additional material from Dr. Coffey made no substantial difference to the evidence in the case. The adjournment to the third day was in the event in fact unnecessary and in those circumstances I think it appropriate that whatever the eventual outcome of these proceedings, I order that the plaintiff not recover the costs of the third day of the proceedings.

The second matter on which I am asked to rule is a question of costs. The matter came to me by way of a re-hearing on the plaintiff's application following an arbitration. The award of the arbitrator made on 27 February 1996 in favour of the plaintiff was in the sum of $861,095 plus costs. The judgment as amended today was I found the plaintiff was entitled to the sum of $790,138.43 plus costs.
 [Part
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/index.html#p52a)
Rule 30 makes provision for costs in certain eventualities following a re- hearing after an arbitration. Sub-rule (4) provides:- "Subject to sub-rule (5), where proceedings are heard and determined under s.18(3)(b) of the Arbitration Act, and the determination of the court is not substantially more favourable to the applicant than is the determination of the arbitrator, the court:- shall not make any order for the payment by any other party of the applicant's costs incurred by reason of the re-hearing; and shall order the applicant to pay the costs of every other party incurred by reason of the re-hearing." 
Sub-rule (5) provides:- "The court may in respect of a re-hearing certify that the special circumstances of the case require the court:- to make an order referred to in sub-rule (4)(a), in which case the court may make that order; or to refrain from making an order referred to in sub-rule (4)(b), in which case the court may refrain from making that order." 
It is submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that there are special circumstances which should lead me to refrain from making an order that the plaintiff pay the defendant's costs incurred by reason of the re-hearing. What is relied upon as a special circumstance is that substantially the difference between the two figures reflects my disallowance of a claim for the costs of personal support and supervision provided by his wife in the past and likely to be provided in the future.

As I construed s.72 of the Act, the evidence did not support such a claim. My decision in that regard is raised in the notice of appeal and I think that the appropriate way to deal with it in these circumstances is to refuse the plaintiff's application for the application of Rule 30(5)(b), and instead, to make an order that the plaintiff pay the costs of the defendant incurred by reason of the hearing, but to order that the enforcement of that order be stayed pending the hearing of the appeal and that the question of its enforcement abide the decision of the Court of Appeal. Those are the orders I make.

The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
