

Suiga Pty Ltd versus Hamden Properties Pty Ltd [1997] NSWSC 104 (2 April 1997) `SUIGA PTY LTD versus HAMDEN PROPERTIES PTY LTD ` `2806/96` `WEDNESDAY 2 APRIL 1997` `THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION` `YOUNG J` `` `JUDGMENT` `` `HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff was granted lease W390451 in April 1986. That was a lease for five years of premises Unit 5/95 Belmont Road, Mosman, which are business premises. The lease contained an option to renew for a further five years. No fresh lease was granted, but it is clear that there was an agreement which may be enforced in equity for five years from April 1991, which agreement contained the following:` ``"7.01 OPTION: If the Tenant shall desire to take a renewed Lease of the demised premises for a further term of years being the term stipulated in Item from the termination of this Lease and shall give to the Landlord notice in writing of such desire not less than three (3) months nor more than six (6) months before the termination of this Lease and provided the Tenant is not then or on the date of termination of this Lease in default in the performance of the provisions of this Lease whether expressed or implied the Landlord will at the costs of the Tenant grant to the Tenant a renewal of this Lease for such further term subject to the same covenants provisions and agreements as are contained in this Lease." 
On 11 October 1995 Mrs Agius, controlling director of the plaintiff, sent to the defendant's real estate agent (Real Estate Works) a letter which is set out in appendix 1 to these reasons. On 19 January 1996, she sent a letter which is set out in appendix 2.

It is quite clear that the letter in appendix 1 was not a valid exercise of the option under cl 7.01. It was premature - see Diakogiannis versus Johnson
NSW Conveyancing Reports 55-472.

The question then is whether the letter set out in appendix 2 is a sufficient exercise of the option.

I should backtrack a little. The case originally came into my list as a short notice list matter on Friday 21 February 1997. Mr Whittle, who appears with Mr
Burke, for the plaintiff both then and today, had come into the matter recently, as is often the case with short notice matters. Mr Carnovale appeared then as he does today for the defendant. When the argument advanced it was clear that a main point being made by Mr Carnovale was that, whatever the merits of the case, there was insufficient evidentiary material for me to find that the letter in appendix 2 had been received within the period laid down for the exercise of the option by cl 7.01. The problem was that, if one applied the presumption in the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/), [s 160](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s160.html), the letter must be held to have been received too late. Mr Whittle applied for an adjournment, which was opposed, but I granted it and stood the matter over to today.

The plaintiff today has filed further evidence which did establish when in the ordinary course of the post the letter in appendix 2 would have been received by the defendant and the question of whether that letter had been received in time no longer became a live one for me to decide.

There was also no point taken that the letter addressed to Real Estate Works was in a notice given to the defendant.

Accordingly, the matter that I have to decide today is simply whether the letter in appendix 2 amounts to an exercise of the option.

It is to be noted that under cl 7.01 the matter which triggers the exercise of the option is the tenant giving the landlord a notice in writing of its desire to take a renewed lease. This means that, first, the tenant has to form the desire to take a renewed lease and then, having formed that desire, give notice of it. The letters in the appendices do not mention the word "desire", but rather "intention". It does not seem to me that this matters very much, because a person who voluntarily intends to take a new lease desires to take a renewed lease. Furthermore, ordinarily once one desires something there is a presumption, in fact, that that desire continues until circumstances have shown that the desire has come to an end - see in a completely different context Lyle & Scott Ltd versus Scott's Trustees [[1959] AC 763], 765.

Accordingly, once the desire was formulated on 11 October 1995 the court would assume that that desire continued and was still a desire of the tenant as of January 1996. Does then the letter in appendix 2 constitute a notice in writing of such desire? 
There is no quarrel between counsel as to the principles that are applied to notices exercising options. In Prudential Assurance Co Ltd versus Health Minders
Pty Ltd [(1987) 9 NSWLR 673] at 677,
Kirby P stated the rules that courts apply in this sort of case and one also finds them discussed by the High Court of Australia in Ballas versus Theopholos (No 2) <case>; [(1957) 98 CLR 193], especially at 196 and 205.

What one looks for is a document which clearly and unequivocally indicates to the recipient in all the circumstances of its receipt the lessee's intention to exercise the option. I note the words "in all the circumstances" are important. They stem from words of Romer, J in `Jones versus Daniel ` [[1894] 2
Ch 332], , taken up by Isaacs J in Carter versus Hyde <case>; [(1923) 33 CLR 115] at 126 indicating that one must not just construe the actual words used, but construe them in the background of the dealings between the parties.

There is not, as far as I know, any case which has examined this particular problem in the context of options to renew or options to purchase. The closest analogy for this sort of notice is notice of discontinuance in respect of which there are a considerable number of authorities. Most rules of court provide that to discontinue an action a notice must be served on the opposing party giving notice of a discontinuance. The cases show that relatively informal indications are sufficient. In The Pommerania [(1879) 4 PD ] the plaintiff's solicitors merely wrote: "We are instructed to proceed no further with this action. We presume you do not require a formal order dismissing it." 
That was held by Phillimore J to be a sufficient notice of discontinuance.

In Spincer versus Watts [(1889) 23 QBD 350] the plaintiff's solicitors informed the defendant that they did not propose to prosecute the action any further against him. The English Court of Appeal held that was a sufficient notice.

In The Salybia [[1910] P 25] the plaintiff sent a telegram, "We are not proceeding with the action." That was held to be sufficient notice.

Not all the cases are reconcilable. For instance, in Moon versus Dickinson [(1890) 63 LT 371] the words "We shall discontinue this action ... we will send formal notice tomorrow" were held insufficient. The cases generally are discussed by the Full Federal Court in B & J Engineering Pty Ltd v
Daroczy [(1984) 4 FCR 524] at 529. They indicate that a notice is sufficiently given even though it uses the word such as "intention" or sets out in a practical form what the giver of the notice has in mind.

Applying both what Kirby P said in the Prudential case and by analogy what was said in the notice of discontinuance cases, I return to the question as to whether the letter in appendix 2 is a sufficient notice of desire within cl .01.

There is no reason why the notice of desire should not refer to some other document. It would be sufficient if a notice was given on 19 January attaching another letter which exercised the option and likewise if the notice of 19
January sufficiently referred to an earlier document which, although it may not have been sufficient to exercise the option itself, would clearly show that the desire continued. One can draw the analogy with the cases where for the purposes of the Statute of Frauds two or more documents may be read together so as to constitute a sufficient memorandum in writing. Those cases are discussed by the Full Federal Court in ANZ Banking Group versus Widin <case>; [(1990) 26 FCR 21] at 29. There is no need to repeat them here.

Mr Carnovale says that that line of decisions is of no assistance because the first paragraph of the letter set out in appendix 2 does not refer to a previous letter as being still the intention of the plaintiff. He says that, first of all, one sees that the letter referred to is, in fact, the letter of October, whereas the letter in appendix 1 is dated 11 October.

However, even if that point is not decisive (I think from the way Mr Carnovale put his argument he and I both knew it would not be) all that the reference does is not to incorporate the letter in appendix 1 into appendix 2, but merely refer to something which was past and gone.

Mr Carnovale put that the proper construction of the letter in appendix 2 is merely to refer to something which had been (invalidly) done in October 1995 and then focussed on what is said in the second paragraph of appendix 2. The real purpose of the letter of 19 January 1996 is, according to Mr Carnovale, concern about the submission by the landlord of a development application to the local council. The matter which the letter is directed to is that, in view of the exercise of the option in October 1995, it is necessary for there to be some dialogue to seek "an accommodation satisfactory to both parties". The letter assumes that the option has already been exercised and wishes to arrange a meeting to discuss what is happening with the development application.

Mr Whittle says that the letter urgently draws attention to the letter in appendix 1. There is no need to urgently draw attention unless the tenant is repeating its desire that the option is to be exercised and that the second paragraph of the letter emphasises this, because the only way in which the development application would affect the tenant is if it had a right to a new five year lease.

The matter is really one of construction of the letter of 19 January. The matter was well argued on both sides and everything was put that could be put and really the question is resolved by the way in which the letter affects the mind of the reader. I have tried to read it in a dispassionate but commercial way.

I consider that the proper construction of the letter is more as Mr Carnovale has it than Mr Whittle has it. The writer of the letter in appendix 2 is, to my mind, doing two things: one, urgently drawing attention to a previous exercise of the option and, secondly, expressing the wish to discuss the development application.

The letter in appendix 1 shows that the tenant expected that the process of preparing a new lease would take some time, because the previous exercise of the option had not even been perfected after five years.

Although it would be possible for a letter such as that of 19 January to give notice of a desire by words other than a reference to cl 7.01, or the words used therein, it seems to me on its proper construction that the letter of 19
January does not go far enough to clearly and unequivocally express a desire to take a new lease. Moreover, on its true construction I agree with Mr
Carnovale's submission, that it indicates a reference to the fact that the tenant had already considered she had given such a notice. Unfortunately that "notice" was premature and invalid.

The plaintiff in this suit asks for specific performance of the agreement, the grant of the lease consequent upon the exercise of the option. It follows from what I have said that the suit must be dismissed.

I dismiss the suit with costs.

The exhibits should remain.
 * * * 
