

Jennings versus Jennings [2015] NSWSC 1826 (1 December 2015) 
Last Updated: 3 December 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
See paragraph [32]  
Catchwords: 
CONTRACT - Masters versus Cameron - fourth category - agreement to settle litigation following court supervised mediation  
JUDGMENT
This is an application by the plaintiff for specific performance of a settlement agreement said to have been reached on 1 June 2015. The application arises in the context of proceedings which were commenced between the plaintiff and the defendant in 2013. The underlying facts reveal an exceedingly unpleasant relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant. He is the plaintiff's adult son.
In 1973 the plaintiff and her late exhusband purchased certain property at Greystanes. In 1996 the plaintiff's exhusband died. And since December 2007 the plaintiff has been the primary carer for her brother, who lives with her in the Greystanes property. Her daughter Christine also lives with her in that property. The statement of claim alleges that since 1986 the defendant has suffered addiction to body building drugs such as anabolic steroids, marijuana and methamphetamine; represented that he suffered the effects of schizophrenia and depression; and made numerous violent threats to the plaintiff.
In 2009 a number of events occurred which led to the transfer of the Greystanes property from the plaintiff to the defendant. The plaintiff alleges that the transfer was made to the defendant as a result of threats made by him. She seeks to set aside the transfer to the defendant. On 1 June 2015 the plaintiff, the defendant and their legal representatives attended a court supervised mediation. It started at 9am and concluded about 1 or 2pm. The plaintiff was represented by Mr Casimatis of counsel and by Ms Linda Needham, her solicitor. The defendant had two male legal representatives. One was Mr Herbert Weller of Herbert Weller solicitors and the other was said to be a barrister whose name no one can recall.
During the mediation a number of offers and counter offers were made. The defendant's offer contained the following elements. He proposed that the property be put half into his name and half into Christine's name. He suggested that the plaintiff should be able to remain in the property for the rest of her life. He added that the property could be rented so that money can be used if needed to go to a nursing home. He also proposed that he should not be able to borrow against the house.
The plaintiff was prepared to accept the proposal that the property be put in the names of her son and daughter, with her having a life tenancy, subject to the qualification that in the event that she goes into an aged care facility, the home could be rented. She also proposed that the defendant pay her $100,000. This was said to be part of the promised consideration of $390,000 for the original transfer of the land to the defendant, which was apparently never paid. The defendant's response to this proposal was to reject the offer to pay $100,000. He then made a counter offer, with the property to be sold and split 50:50 with the plaintiff.
The proposals and counter proposals included this exchange, of which the evidence was uncontradicted: * (a) Mr Casimatis had a conversation with the two legal representatives of the defendant and said, 'We are instructed to accept the defendant's offer that the property be put under the defendant and Christine's names; that she has life tenancy; that the home be rented out in the event she goes into an aged care facility; and that the defendant pay her $100,000.' * (b) One of the defendant's legal representatives then said to Mr Casimatis, 'We reject that offer, and I'm instructed to offer that the property be half in Christine's name and half in the defendant's name, and that the plaintiff remain in the property for the remainder of her life.'
There was then a period of approximately 30 minutes when both the legal representatives of the defendant left the room, before returning. Mr Casimatis then said to them, 'We are instructed to reject that offer, and make a counter offer that the property be put under the defendant and Christine's names; that she has life tenancy; that the home be rented out in the event she goes into an aged care facility; and that the defendant pay her $20,000.'
The two legal representatives of the defendant then left the room again and returned approximately 30 minutes later. One of them said to Mr Casimatis, 'We accept that offer. Can you record this agreement in the deed of release and we will execute it today.'
Neither said anything to the effect that there would be no binding agreement until the parties had executed a deed of release. As I mentioned, the legal representatives of the defendant included Mr Weller and a barrister. There was no evidence from either of them. Mr Weller was in court during the hearing. There was no attempt by the defendant to contradict the evidence which I have set out and summarised above.
Mr Casimatis then went back to his chambers and drafted a deed of release. When he returned, the legal representatives of the defendant took it to another room in the Court. After they had had time to consider the draft deed, they returned and one of them said to Mr Casimatis, 'We want some amendments.' They handed over a copy of the draft deed which had been marked in pen. The amendments which were marked on the deed contained no indication of any difficulty or objection with any of the substantive provisions of it. They were grammatical and insubstantial, other than the suggestion that all reference to the solicitor, who was apparently the subject of a crossclaim, should be removed. Mr Casimatis agreed to make the amendments proposed by the defendant's legal representatives.
The lawyers then parted company. Mr Weller said, as he was leaving the Court, 'Once you've made those changes, could you please send me the amended draft for my client to execute.' At 2.31pm on 1 June, the plaintiff's solicitor sent an email to Mr Weller in which she said: 
We refer to the mediation between the parties earlier today and confirm that the parties reached settlement on the following broad terms: (1) Paul Jennings must transfer 50% of the property located at 24 Crystal Street, Greystanes, within 14 days of the parties executing a deed of release; (2) Paul to consent to Eileen leasing the property in place of her occupation for the remainder of her life in the event necessary for her care; (3) Paul must pay Eileen $20,000 by 29 January 2016 and; (4) Paul will sign a consent judgment for $20,000 and consent to the plaintiff filing it if Paul fails to pay Eileen by 29 January.
The plaintiff's solicitor then attached a draft deed of release and annexed consent orders which she said she believed recorded the agreement between the parties. She also added, 'We would appreciate if you could let us know if your client is content with the terms as a matter of urgency, so that we can finalise the matter before the next directions hearing on 12 June.'
On 9 June, Ms Needham sent a follow-up email to Mr Weller asking for his response to her email sent on 1 June after the conclusion of the mediation. On 11 June she received a reply from a solicitor employed by Mr Weller, who said: 
Mr Weller has a few minor amendments to the deed to propose, however he has not had a chance to attend to the same. I note the matter is listed tomorrow at 9am. We kindly ask if you are agreeable to the matter being stood over for one month so the parties can discuss amendments and finalise the deed.
There are a number of things to note about this email. First, there was no contention that there was no agreement. And second, the only amendments suggested were said to be 'a few minor amendments'. On 23 June, Mr Weller sent a letter setting out the 'minor amendments' adverted to in the previous email. They were entirely inconsequential and consisted only of formatting and grammatical suggestions. There was no statement or hint of any suggestion that there was not a binding agreement between the parties.
On 12 June the proceedings were stood over by the Court to 13 July, apparently to allow for the defendant's execution of the deed of release. On 10 July, a solicitor in the employ of Mr Weller wrote to say that he was sick for a week and that 'the client has an appointment to see Mr Weller on Monday to execute the deed'. (emphasis added) Once again, there was no dispute, no hint and no suggestion of any disagreement about the parties' agreement.
On 17 July, Mr Weller wrote to say that he was unable to obtain Mr Jennings' instructions to execute the deed. This was the first indication of some hesitation by the defendant or his legal representatives. On 20 August, Mr Mitry, the plaintiff's solicitor for whom Ms Needham worked, wrote to the defendant's solicitor to say: 
We have been informed by our client that your client, since agreement was reached to resolve this matter, has been constantly harassing her indicating that she should not press the agreement and that she should sack her legal representatives. We are instructed to demand that this communication cease immediately. We require that the executed deed be provided to this office within seven days, failing which we will take instructions on seeking to enforce the agreement.
From that point, it seems that the defendant had decided to renege on the agreement made through his legal representatives on 1 June and subsequently recorded in the deed of release which contained the various minor amendments proposed by his solicitor Mr Weller.
In Howe versus Connell (unreported; Supreme Court of NSW, Young J, 25 September 1997), Young J (as he then was) made this observation: 
Generally speaking, settlements in litigation are intended to be final as soon as the barristers or solicitors involved shake hands - whether they do that physically or notionally over the telephone. The reasonable litigator on the Bondi bus would think that as soon as the legal representatives have reached an agreement as to the principle on which the matter is to be settled then the cause of action has been converted into the new contractual right.
Accordingly the situation is one where the first category of Masters versus Cameron applies, that is that there has been final mutual assent but the people who are to draw up the formal agreement have power to set it down but not alter its terms. However, the present case is more like the fourth category of
Masters versus Cameron, which was enunciated by McClelland CJ in Eq in Baulkham
Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd versus G R Securities Pty Ltd [(1986) 40 NSWLR ]
at 628, that there is an immediate binding of the parties by the terms upon which they have agreed, whilst they expect that a further contract will be made in substitution for that first contract.
I do not suggest that there is a general rule. Each case will depend on its own facts. But it is reasonable to say that the approach described by Young J is one which often applies. This is all the more so in this case, where the agreement has arisen out of a Court supervised mediation at which the parties were represented by lawyers and which was attended with a degree of formality and structure. The purpose of the mediation was to bring about a concluded agreement between the parties.
The principles which govern the determination of an issue as to the formation of a contract in circumstances such as this were summarised comprehensively in Pavlovic versus Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd <case> at <case> - [69]: [64] Where parties have reached agreement as to all the terms of a contract, but have also agreed that a further, formal agreement is to be executed the question for determination is whether the parties intend to be immediately bound. That is to be determined objectively from the "outward manifestations" of the parties' in­tentions: Electricity Generation Corporation versus Woodside
Energy Ltd  <case> ; <case>;
Mushroom Composters Pty Ltd versus IS & DE Robertson Pty Ltd  <case> at <case>- <case> per
Sackville AJA (with whom Macfarlan and Gleeson JJA agreed); Taylor versus Johnson <case> ; [151 CLR 422] at 428 per Mason ACJ, Murphy and Deane JJ.  [65] The question, therefore, is "what each party by words and conduct would have led a reasonable person in the position of the other party to believe": see also Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd versus Alphapharm Pty Ltd  <case> ; <case> (per curiam); Pacific Carriers Ltd versus BNP Paribas  <case> ; <case> (per curiam); Brambles Holdings Ltd versus Bathurst City Council  <case> ; <case> per
Heydon JA An agreement that is incomplete will not give rise to an enforceable contract: Booker Indus­tries Pty Ltd versus Wilson Parking (Qld) Pty Ltd  <case> ; [149 CLR 600] at per Gibbs CJ, Murphy and Wilson JJ.  [66] It is apparent that by 24 December 2014 the parties had finalised their negotiations. The question in is­sue is whether they intended to be immediately bound once each party had given assent to the terms of the
Proposed Deed or whether their intention, objectively ascertained, was that they would not be bound until all aspects of a formal agreement and, in particular, execution of the relevant documentation, had been final­ised.  [67] The starting point of his Honour's consideration of this issue was
Masters versus Cameron  <case> ; [91 CLR 353], where
Dixon CJ, McTieman and Kitto JJ identified, at 360-362, three categories within which cases, where the parties' agreement was to be or was to be recorded in writing, may fall as follows: 
Where parties who have been in negotiation reach agreement upon terms of a contractual nature and also agree that the matter of their negotiation shall be dealt with by a formal contract, the case may belong to any of three classes It may be one in which the parties have reached finality in arranging all the terms of their bargain and intend to be imme­diately bound to the performance of those terms, but at the same time propose to have the terms restated in a form which will be fuller or more precise but not different in effect. Or, secondly, it may be a case in which the parties have completely agreed upon all the terms of their bargain and intend no departure from or addition to that which their agreed terms express or imply, but nevertheless have made performance of one or more of the terms conditional upon the execution of a formal document. Or, thirdly, the case may be one in which the intention of the parties is not to make a concluded bargain at all, unless and until they execute a formal contract.
 [68] In Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty Ltd versus GR Securities Pty Ltd [(1986) 40 NSWLR 622] at 628, McLelland J identified a fourth category: ... one in which the parties were content to be bound immediately and exclusively by the terms which they had agreed upon whilst expecting to make a further contract in substitution for the first contract, containing, by consent, additional terms [69] However, as his Honour's review of the case law demonstrated, the
Masters versus Cameron classifications are no longer, if ever they were, applied as strict categories into which such cases must fall: see Ermogenous versus Greek
Orthodox Community of SA Inc [[2002] HCA 8] at 105. Rather, as McHugh JA stated in GR Securities versus Baulkham Hills Private Hospital Pty
Ltd [(1986) 40 NSWLR 631] at 634-635: ... the decisive issue is always the intention of the parties which must be objectively ascertained from the terms of the document when read in the light of the surrounding circumstances Godecke versus Kirwan <case>; [(1973) 129 CLR 629] at 638, Air Great Lakes Pty Ltd versus K S Easter (Holdings) Pty
Ltd [(1985) 2 NSWLR 309] at 332-334, 337.
In this case the facts which I have described suggest that this is a case where the fourth category identified by McClelland CJ in Eq is applicable. The evidence supports the conclusion that the objective intention of the parties was that they would be bound immediately and exclusively by the terms which they had agreed, while expecting to make a further contract in substitution for the first, containing by consent additional terms. That is precisely what happened until the defendant had a change of heart.
The sequence of events (including those after 1 June 2015), the uncontradicted evidence of the conversations, the absence of any suggestion of unwillingness to be bound, the absence of hesitation by the defendant, the willing agreement of the defendant's solicitors to embrace the draft deed of release and to make only inconsequential suggestions for amendments relating to grammatical and formatting matters, and the apparent reasonableness of the compromise between the plaintiff and the defendant, all indicate that they intended to be bound immediately by the essential obligations of their agreement. They proposed to substitute their agreement with a written document containing by consent additional terms, which would be executed by the defendant as soon as possible. This would have happened until the deliberate and regrettable decision of the defendant, approximately six weeks later, to renege on the agreement that had been made.
I have referred to the fact that there was no evidence from the defendant's legal representatives. It goes without saying that there was no evidence from the defendant. I should add there was no crossexamination by his counsel of the deponents of the affidavits read in support of the plaintiff's case. In the absence of evidence from the defendant or any of his legal representatives, I am unwilling to draw any inferences favourable to the defendant which are inconsistent with the inferences that otherwise emerge out of the proved facts.
I do not think that anything turns on the fact that cl 3.1 of the draft deed, which appears to have been unhesitatingly agreed to without qualification, provided for the defendant to transfer to Christine 50% of the title to the property as tenants in common 'within 14 days of this deed'. The defendant's counsel submitted that this was an indication that the parties did not intend to be immediately bound. I do not think so. It merely indicated that they intended that that obligation would operate 14 days after the execution of the deed, which was in turn contemplated by their immediately binding agreement made on 1 June.
The defendant's counsel also addressed submissions to the effect that the involvement of the plaintiff's daughter Christine in some way added a fatal complication to the defendant's application for specific performance. I do not think so. Christine was named in the draft deed but was specifically excluded from the definition of 'Party'. She undertook no obligation under the draft deed and was merely the recipient of a benefit. That benefit was the defendant's obligation to transfer to her 50% of the title to the property and to indemnify her for stamp duty payable in connection with the conveyance. Because Christine was excluded from the definition of the parties to the deed, she did not undertake the obligations set out in cl 6, if that matters.
The defendant's counsel also pointed to the fact that the proceedings continued from July onwards and that a hearing date was fixed and left open. But this is neutral. It is entirely consistent with the plaintiff's legal representatives adopting the course that it was prudent to keep the pressure on the defendant. I do not construe that fact as indicating that there was no intention to be immediately bound by the agreement reached on 1 June.
I do not think that this is a case within the third category of Masters versus Cameron [(1954) 91 CLR 353] It is not one where, on the facts of this case, the objective intention of the parties was not to make a concluded bargain at all, unless and until they executed a formal contract. This was a domestic arrangement in which it appears that all parties at the mediation had a genuine willingness to resolve the proceedings. As I said, both parties were represented by legal representatives and they appear to have done their best at the mediation to bring about a conclusion to the litigation. They did so in a manner to which both parties should be taken to have agreed, subject only to recording their agreement in a written deed of release which would be substituted for their original agreement made at the mediation, and would contain by consent additional terms.
I should not leave these reasons without mentioning that the uncontradicted evidence of Christine Jennings was that she was prepared to sign any document that is required to effect the transfer of 50% of the title to the property to herself. She lives with her mother on a disability pension and is supported by her. There is no reason to think that her involvement in the settlement agreement represents any complication whatsoever. The agreement was made between the plaintiff and the defendant. Among other things it obliged the defendant to transfer 50% of the property to Christine Jennings.
In addition, I should mention [Section 54A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/s54a.html) of the [Conveyancing Act 1919](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca1919141/) . The defendant did not rely on it. Even if he did, it would not have availed him on the particular facts of this case, for the reasons explained in Ciaglia versus Ciaglia [(2010) 269 ALR 175]; [2001] NSWCA 0451 at [160].
I have already ordered that the plaintiff should pay the defendant's costs thrown away by the adjournment of the hearing of her notice of motion yesterday morning. This resulted in delay in finalising her application. The plaintiff is however entitled to all of the costs incurred by her in connection with the hearing of the notice of motion and the amended notice of motion, other than those costs which were thrown away or wasted by reason of yesterday's adjournment. The assessor will determine how much that represents.
The crossdefendant appeared by its solicitor. I had earlier specifically informed the crossdefendant that he need not attend if it chose to do so. Having chosen to attend but not participate, or contribute in any meaningful way, I do not think the crossdefendant should have his costs. I therefore make no order for the costs of the crossdefendant on the hearing of the amended notice of motion.
The orders I therefore make are as follows: * (a) The defendant should within 7 days of the date of this order execute the deed of release in the form annexed to the amended notice of motion.
* (b) The defendant should also execute within 7 days of the date of this order such other documents, including any transfer under the [Real Property Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/rpa1900178/) , as may be necessary to give effect to his obligations under the deed of release.
* (c) In the event of the failure of the defendant, within 7 days of the date of this order, to execute the documents referred to in (a) or (b) above, a Registrar of this court be authorised to execute them on his behalf.
* (d) The defendant should pay the plaintiff's costs of the notice of motion and the amended notice of motion, except those costs thrown away that are the subject of my previous order.
* (e) The proceedings should be listed before the Registrar in Equity on Tuesday, 15 December 2015 for the purpose of monitoring the defendant's compliance with these orders and making any orders that may be necessary for the final disposition of these proceedings.
 * * * 
