

Regina versus Eishauer Matter No 60593/96 [1997] NSWSC 419 (19 September 1997) 
Regina versus Bernd Eishauer /96 September 1997 
Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against Conviction (O'Reilly DCJ) 
FILE NO/S: 60593/96 
DELIVERED: Friday, 19 September 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: Wednesday, 3 September 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Bernd EISHAUER 
JUDGMENT OF: Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
COUNSEL: * APPELLANT - P M Strickland * RESPONDENT - L M B Lamprati 
SOLICITORS: * APPELLANT - T A Murphy * RESPONDENT - S E O'Connor 
RESULT: APPEAL ALLOWED 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - conviction unsafe and unsatisfactory - sexual offences against a child - whether complainant's evidence of ostensible memory of abuse was a case of true, recovered memory or a case of honestly experienced, false memory - no common knowledge available to aid resolution of that issue. 
M [(1994) 181 CLR 487] 
F (CCA 2 November 1995, unreported) 
C <case>; [(1993) 60 SASR 467] 
No. of pages 30 
REGINA versus Bernd EISHAUER 
HEADNOTE 
E was tried and convicted by a judge without a jury of three counts of sexually assaulting his step-daughter MH who was 17 at the trial in 1996. The alleged offences included placing drinking straws and fingers in MH's vagina when she was 5 years old and penile anal and vaginal intercourse when she was years old. In 1988, E had pleaded guilty to charges relating to touching
MH's vagina and encouraging her to touch his penis when she was 10. At that time MH said nothing to anyone of the earlier alleged assaults. She did not remember the straw and finger offences until 1993, around the same time that her younger sister RH (the daughter of E) made complaints of sexual abuse against E. She did not remember the penile offences until shortly before E stood trial in 1995 on charges involving RH. E was acquitted of the alleged offences against RH. There was medical evidence of serious injuries to MH's anus consistent with penile penetration on several occasions at a young age.
In accepting MH's evidence of her revived memory, the judge took account of the "common sense" principle that children adopt defence mechanisms such as "blocking out" to deal with unbearable situations.

HELD: Per Sperling J (Smart J agreeing): It is not a matter of either common sense or common knowledge that children put in place some defence mechanism to deal with unbearable situations, whether by denial or blocking out. The courts do not know that children are more prone than adults to the process of suppressing the memory of things that they do not wish to remember. 
Having found that the process of denial was subconscious the judge erred in finding that MH's own evidence that "I had put out of all my mind about him" was relevant, let alone important.

The choice in this case is between a true, recovered memory, and an honestly experienced, false memory (that is, a memory which the subject believes is correct but which is, in fact, incorrect). Common experience does not enable one to say that the memory of a painful event, absent for a long time and later experienced, is more likely to be a revived, true memory than an honestly experienced, false memory. It is not common knowledge that, in the case of children, memory of abuse is frequently lost and later reliably recovered. The content of ostensible memories in this case is beyond common experience.

As it is equally possible that MH's memories were true recovered memories or honestly experienced false memories, there must be a reasonable doubt concerning the appellant's guilt.

SIMPSON J (dissenting): Little, it seems, is known in a scientific sense, of the phenomenon by which, the trial judge concluded, the complainant had buried and then recovered her memories of these alleged events. If the complainant's newly retrieved consciousness of them were unsupported by independent corroborative evidence I would share the concerns of the majority about the safety of the verdict. But the complainant's recollection was not unsupported. The medical evidence was critical and compelling. 
ORDERS made on 3 September 1997: 
Appeal allowed
Convictions quashed
Judgment of acquittal entered on all counts.

REGINA versus Bernd EISHAUER 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: On 3 September 1997 this Court made orders, by majority, allowing the appeal on the ground that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. The Court also ordered that the convictions be quashed and that a judgment of acquittal be entered on all counts. The Court stated that reasons would be given later. 
I agree with the reasons given by Sperling J for the orders made. In these circumstances it is unnecessary to deal with the other points raised by the appellant.

REGINA versus Bernd EISHAUER 
SIMPSON J: I have read in draft the judgment prepared by Sperling J. 
The chronology is a matter of some importance. The complainant was born on 11
July 1978. From December 1981 until 1989 her mother was married to the appellant. On 22 June 1983 the complainant's half sister, R, was born to her mother and the appellant. Late in 1987 or early in 1988 the appellant confided in his wife that he was sexually attracted to the complainant and that he wished to avoid circumstances in which he might see the complainant naked. He sought to avoid being alone with the complainant or R and suggested, despite the financial hardships it would cause, that his wife cease work in order to protect the girls.

During 1988 when the complainant was nine years of age, on three separate occasions, the appellant committed acts on indecency upon her. In July of that year the complainant made a statement to police concerning these matters. The appellant was charged with three counts of committing an act of indecency upon a person under the age of sixteen years. The allegations were that the appellant compelled the complainant to hold his erect penis, that he placed his hand on, and rubbed the complainant's vagina outside her clothing, and that he placed his fingers on her vagina inside her underclothing. The appellant entered pleas of guilty to each of these charges and was released on a recognisance to be of good behaviour for three years.

For a period following her allegations the complainant attended counselling, but this ceased in November 1989. One of her counsellors was a Ms Janet
Patterson.

In May 1988 the appellant and the complainant's mother separated, and in
February 1989 the complainant, her mother and sister left Sydney and moved to
Melbourne to live. In May 1989 the complainant was medically examined by Dr
Deborah Small, a paediatrician with wide experience in child abuse. Her examination disclosed extensive damage to the complainant's anus. She excluded constipation as the cause of the damage, which she considered consistent with the insertion of an erect penis at a time when the complainant was seven or eight years of age. In cross-examination she agreed that she had raised with the complainant during the consultation the fact that she thought "someone had hurt her (that is, the complainant) down below", and that she would pass on the information to the complainant's counsellor. Although without any direct recollection, she was reasonably confident that she would in fact have communicated that fact to the counsellor.

By 1993 the complainant was living with her mother and R in Melbourne. In
April R, then almost ten years of age, made complaints of sexual misconduct against her father which dated back to a time when the family had been living together in Sydney, that is when R was five years of age and under. She alleged that, on many occasions, the appellant had placed his erect penis in her mouth, had removed her clothes and rubbed his penis over her body and had attempted, unsuccessfully, to insert it in her vagina. For present purposes, the most significant of the allegations were that the appellant developed a practice of inserting drinking straws and pencils into her anus. The appellant was charged with offences of a sexual nature with respect to R, and was acquitted by a jury.

In 1993 the complainant made a further statement to the police, making fresh allegations of serious sexual impropriety against the appellant. She reported an occasion on which the appellant called her into her bedroom, where he had placed straws on her bed, told her to lie down, pulled down her pants, put his fingers in her vagina, then placed a straw in her vagina, then joined two straws together and inserted them into her vagina. She said that this sort of conduct had occurred more than once, probably every couple of months until she was eight or nine years of age. She fixed the date of one such event by relation to an occasion when she had observed blood in her faeces. Medical records showed that this occurred in November 1983. The complainant was then five years of age.

In March 1995 the complainant made yet another statement, containing two further allegations. The first of these was that, on an occasion when her mother was absent from the home, the complainant was in the bed used by her mother and the appellant when the appellant came into the room naked, joined her in the bed, and inserted his erect penis into her anus.

The next allegation was that, later in the same year, when she was in the cubby house in the back yard, the appellant pulled down the tracksuit pants she was wearing and inserted his erect penis into her vagina.

These later two incidents she fixed in time by reference to the hospitalisation of R, which occurred in July 1986. The complainant was therefore just eight years of age.

These allegations were the foundation of the charges the appellant faced in and of which he was convicted by O'Reilly DCJ sitting without a jury. It was common ground that the complainant first mentioned the allegation concerning the straws in her statement to police in 1993, and the allegations giving rise to the second and third charges in March 1995. In explanation of having said nothing about the straw incident earlier than 1993, the complainant said: "I don't know, I couldn't remember, I don't know why I didn't know those things back when I made the first statement, I really can't explain it, I just didn't know at the time." 
In cross-examination she said, of the same incident: "Back prior to when I made the '93 statement I recalled that, and I don't know why I didn't remember it back in 1988, I can't explain that. And I can't explain why I couldn't in '93 the things that I said in '95, I can't explain that either." 
She could not recall any event in 1993 that prompted her memory.

Of the anal and vaginal penetration, she said in answer to a question about why she had said nothing until March 1995: "I don't know, I just didn't - I couldn't remember, I didn't remember it till then" and in cross-examination she said: "Yeah well it just brought - I had put out of all my mind about him and everything about my past and my childhood and it just all came back." 
She said that: "Probably throughout my life I'd put it at the back of my head and not thought about it. There's still things that I remember, you know, just when things happened I remember." 
She acknowledged that her 1995 recollections might have been prompted by the fact that R had made her statement and that she (the complainant) had to think about it. She agreed that she had been unhappy when a non-custodial penalty was imposed upon the appellant in 1989, following his pleas of guilty to the offences against her, and "most distressed" when he was acquitted on the charges relating to R. She agreed that she was determined to have the appellant put behind bars. She maintained that she had not read the statements made by her sister, and denied any awareness of the detail of R's allegations.
This denial was suspect. A file note made on 13 November 1995 by the solicitor employed in the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions engaged in the trial contained the following passage: "The reason she did not tell the police the first time about the straw, anal and penile incidents is because she blocked them out of her mind. When she read [R's] statement they came back to her." 
The complainant agreed that one of her counsellors, Ms Patterson, had mentioned the anal scarring and had sought to have the complainant recall any possible cause of that damage, and that she had then told Ms Patterson that she would have remembered "if that would have happened", as she knew the things the appellant had done to her. This amounted to a clear denial to Mr
Patterson of any anal penetration by the appellant or, indeed, anybody else.
It will be remembered that counselling with Ms Patterson ceased in November
The complainant agreed that she had not recalled any of the incidents she alleged during the course of the counselling sessions. She claimed that her recollection of the straw incident was sudden and unprompted by anything R may or may not have said, or by any conversation with her mother. Her recollection occurred during the preparation of R for the trial arising out of her allegations.

The appellant, in his sworn evidence, denied all the allegations. The trial judge found him an unimpressive witness.

The issue in this Court is whether it was open to the trial judge, sitting as a tribunal of fact, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the recollections the complainant claimed to have accurately reflected what had occurred between herself and her stepfather. The question this Court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it is open to the judge, as the tribunal of fact, to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty: M versus R [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] 
A majority of this Court concluded that the convictions were unsafe and unsatisfactory, and entered verdicts of acquittal. Having reflected upon the evidence and the argument addressed to this Court I respectfully disagree with their conclusions.

The most significant feature of the case is the absence of any memory in the complainant, until 1993, when she was fifteen, and 1995, when she was seventeen, of these very serious events that she alleged. Such a circumstance plainly calls for a most careful scrutiny of the evidence. There are some aspects of the evidence that raise to an even higher level the need for close examination. These include the complainant's acknowledged hostility to the appellant, her resentment of the decisions of the courts on the two prior occasions, her conviction that he should be in prison, her denial (upon which doubt was cast) of knowledge of the detail of R's complaints about the appellant.

Little, it seems, is known in a scientific sense, of the phenomenon by which, the trial judge concluded, the complainant had buried and then uncovered her memories of these alleged events. If the complainant's newly retrieved consciousness of them were unsupported by independent corroborative evidence I would share the concerns of the majority about the safety of the verdict. But the complainant's recollection was not unsupported. The evidence of Dr Small was, in my view, critical and compelling. It supports unreservedly that part of the complainant's allegation that incorporated an event of major significance having occurred to her anus at about the relevant time. Dr
Small's evidence did not limit that event to sexual penetration, but, once the effects of constipation were excluded, there was no alternative hypothesis, and nothing in the realms of ordinary knowledge presents as an alternative explanation. It could, in the ordinary course, be expected that the complainant's mother would have been aware of an occurrence of such significance as to cause that degree of damage. She was not aware of any such occurrence. Clearly, something caused the damage. The damage was such that, in the ordinary course, it would be expected that the complainant would remember its occurrence. Until 1995 she did not. That fact alone is significant in supporting her claim that her memory had returned. Dr Small's evidence does not and cannot implicate the appellant. But once it was accepted that the appellant had suffered damage to her anus, and that that damage was caused by sexual penetration, as she alleged, it was entirely open to the judge, as the tribunal of fact, to accept the complainant's evidence that it was the appellant who was responsible. The reliability of one facet of her evidence had been established. This had clear implications for the reliability of other facets of her evidence.

Further support for the reliability of the complaint's evidence is to be gained from the appellant's own evidence about his sexual attraction to the complainant, which was of such a strength that he feared to be left alone with her.

In coming to the view I have, I have not overlooked the importance of two matters. The first is the possibility, or even likelihood, that the complainant was, prior to her 1995 statement, aware that she was said to have anal scarring, and that this might have implications relevant to matters of sexual misconduct. The second is the content of R's allegations, which may well have been known to the complainant, and which were, to a significant extent and in a significant manner, echoed in her own complaints. Each could have suggested consciously or unconsciously, a false account to the complainant. The impact of these matters was very much a matter for the assessment of the trial judge - they are matters of credibility, not objective reliability - and his conclusions on the acceptability of the complainant's evidence in this regard should not be disturbed. The coincidence between the account given by the complainant and by R about the use of straws by the appellant may be seen in two lights. It is an unusual allegation to make. On the one hand, it may be seen as evidence that the complainant picked up and copied the allegations made by R. On the one hand, it may be seen on reflection of a particular kind of conduct engage in by the appellant. In the end, it has to be seen as a neutral circumstance.

I would, accordingly, reject the ground of appeal that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The remaining grounds of appeal seemed to me to be no more than variations, or particular aspects of, the principal ground that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory. Having regard to that, and to the contrary view taken of the principal ground by the majority, it is unnecessary to deal with them.

I would dismiss the appeal.

REGINA versus Bernd EISHAUER 
JUDGMENT 
SPERLING J: 
This appellant was charged with one count of assault and committing an act of indecency, and two counts of sexual intercourse, the three counts being in relation to his stepdaughter to whom I shall refer as MH.

Following a trial in the District Court without a jury, the appellant was, on July 1996, convicted of the three offences.

On 13 September 1996, he was sentenced on the second count to a minimum term of four years penal servitude commencing on 31 July 1996 and an additional term of three years. On counts 1 and 3 he was sentenced to concurrent fixed terms of four years commencing on 31 July 1996.

The appeal is against conviction.

The first alleged offence consisted of placing the fingers in the vagina, followed by placing first one and then two drinking straws in the vagina. That was allegedly in 1983 when MH was five years of age. The second alleged offence consisted of penile, anal intercourse. That was allegedly in 1986 when
MH was seven or eight years of age. The third alleged offence consisted of penile, vaginal intercourse. That was allegedly in 1986 or 1987 when MH was eight years of age.

A feature of the case is that MH said, in her evidence, that she had not remembered the first offence until 1993, that is, about ten years after the event, and that she had not remembered the second and third offences until , that is, about eight years after those events.

The following facts appear to have been common ground at the trial. In May , the appellant and MH's mother separated. In July 1988, MH made allegations that sexual assault by the accused had occurred earlier that year.
The allegations were of being encouraged to touch the appellant's penis and of the appellant touching MH's vagina. At that time, MH said nothing to the police or to her mother about the earlier alleged instances of abuse which became the subject of the present proceedings. The appellant pleaded guilty to those offences. On sentence, on 17 November 1988, they were dealt with by way of a recognisance. (I will refer to these offences as "the initial complaint").

Between February 1989 and November 1989, MH saw child abuse counsellors every week or fortnight. She said nothing to them about abuse other than the initial complaint. During that period, namely, on 12 May 1989, MH was examined by a Dr
Small who found signs of extensive damage to the anus, consistent with penile penetration and not reasonably consistent with any endogenous cause such as constipation. The damage to the anus was such that, in Dr Small's opinion, it could not all have happened at the same time.

There was another child RH. She was born to MH's mother and the appellant. She was younger than MH. Between April and May 1993, RH made five statements to the police. In those made on 23 April 1993 and 5 May 1993 she said the appellant had placed straws and pencils in her vagina. On 14 May 1993, MH made a statement to the police alleging that the appellant had placed straws in her vagina also. No police action was taken on MH's complaint at that time. It later became the subject of count 1 in the present proceedings.

In March 1995, the appellant was tried in the District Court in relation to
RH's complaints. On 13 March 1995, he was acquitted of those charges. Shortly before the appellant went to trial on those charges, namely, on 1 March 1995,
MH made a statement to the police complaining of the episodes of anal and vaginal intercourse which became the subject of counts 2 and 3 in the present proceedings.

At the appellant's trial for the offences presently under consideration, evidence was given by MH. She was seventeen years of age at the time of the trial. She gave evidence in relation to the offences involved in the initial complaint. She also gave evidence of the alleged episode involving straws which was the subject of count 1 in the present proceedings, saying that this had occurred a few days before her mother took her to the doctor because she had passed blood with her faeces. That nexus enabled the approximate date of the alleged offence to be fixed. (There was no reason to suppose, on the evidence, that the blood was related to the episode involving straws, and it was earlier than the episode of anal intercourse which had become the subject of count 2. It could, of course, have been due to damage to the anus at that earlier time but MH gave no evidence of any such episode having occurred at that time.) MH said in her evidence that episodes similar to that involving straws occurred every couple of months until she was eight or nine. (That would have been over a period of three or four years from 1983 to 1986-7 or thereabouts.) 
MH gave evidence of the alleged instances of anal and vaginal intercourse which were the subject of counts 2 and 3. The alleged episodes were related to other events which again enabled the approximate dates to be fixed.

Under cross-examination, MH gave evidence of ill will towards her stepfather.
She considered him to be a cruel man and said why. She agreed that her mother had taken her complaints seriously and had received them sympathetically. She agreed that, at the time she made her statements in 1993 and 1995, her stepsister was receiving a lot of attention from her mother and from the police over the complaints which her stepsister had made. Asked whether she was angry that the appellant had not gone to gaol in relation to the initial complaint (which involved her), she said at first "a little bit" and then that she "didn't care". However, she agreed she had expressed anger to the child abuse counsellors that her stepfather had not gone to gaol. She later agreed in cross-examination that she was not happy about the appellant not having been sent to gaol in relation to the initial complaint (which involved her) and that she was most distressed when he was acquitted of the offences relating to her stepsister RH. She agreed that she was now determined to have the appellant put behind bars and that she would do whatever she could to achieve that.

MH said she could not recall what had prompted her memory about the episode involving the straws when she first remembered that episode in 1993. That was at the time when RH was making her complaint against the appellant. She conceded that she knew at that time that her stepsister was providing a statement to the police but she denied that she then knew anything of what
RH's allegations were. She said she did not learn of what they were until the content of those allegations was communicated to her in cross-examination at this trial. However, evidence was tendered that MH told the Crown Prosecutor and his instructing officer, in the course of a conference preceding the trial, that she had read her stepsister's statement in 1993 and that she first remembered a straws episode involving herself after she had read that statement. She said that, at that time, that is, at the time of making her statement in 1993, she had no memory of the episodes of anal and vaginal intercourse, which she first recalled in 1995 and which became the subject of counts 2 and 3.

MH said in her evidence that she first remembered the episodes of anal and vaginal intercourse a couple of days before making her statement about those episodes on 1 March 1995. She had told her mother she now remembered other things and her mother had contacted the police. This was shortly before the appellant went to trial on RH's complaints when, MH agreed, RH "was being prepared for her trial".

MH said in her evidence that, apart from the episodes of anal and vaginal intercourse which were the subject of counts 2 and 3, she could not recall "any other time of penis or anus penetration". (That was evidence that MH had no memory of multiple episodes of anal penetration which Dr Small said must have occurred prior to her examination in 1989.) 
MH's mother gave evidence. She said there had been no injury to MH's anus by accident or anything of that kind.

She also said that in 1987 the accused had expressed concern about seeing MH naked, saying he was afraid he might be tempted to do something to her.

The Crown sought to call expert evidence by Dr H I Driscoll, psychiatrist, for the purpose of explaining how late disclosure and serial (or piecemeal) disclosure by a child could occur consistently with the reliability of the complaint. Dr Driscoll and Dr B J H Waters (for the accused) gave evidence on the voir dire. In the result, the trial judge ruled that Dr Driscoll's evidence was inadmissible.

The accused gave evidence. He admitted the offences involved in the initial complaint. He denied the offences with which he was now charged. He conceded that he had been physically attracted to MH.

In his judgment convicting the appellant, the trial judge recognised the evidence of ill will and resentment borne MH against her stepfather and the secondary gain which she derived from her mother's sympathy and support in relation to the complaints which she made.

The trial judge considered whether there was anything that may have prompted
MH's memory in 1993 and again 1995. When first asked whether her memory had been prompted by anything in 1995, MH had said that was when her sister had given her statement. As the judge observed, MH was mistaken in that regard. MR had made her statements in 1993 not 1995. His Honour went on, however, to say that, to his mind, it was important that, in this connection, MH had given what his Honour described as an unsolicited answer, namely, "I had put out of all my mind about him (sic)". His Honour went on to say: "You see a small child is in a very difficult position if the allegations are true. Little children do not commit suicide, they have to adopt some other stratagems to deal with a totally unbearable situation and one of those, and this is a matter of common sense not psychiatric lore, they must try to put in place some sort of defence mechanism whether that is by way of denial or blocking out one does not know." 
I have to say that, so far as my own experiences goes, this is not a matter of common sense or of common knowledge. I am aware that adults are known to suppress the memory of things they do not want to remember. I would assume that that would include the memory of painful experiences. I do not know that children are more prone to such a subconscious mental process. I would not hold that the trial judge or this court would be entitled to take judicial knowledge of any such particular tendency in small children.

The learned trial judge appears to have gone one step further in attaching importance to MH's answer, "I had put out of all my mind about him". His
Honour appears to have taken the answer as tending to establish that MH had engaged in a subconscious process of denial, which his Honour took to be well known and understood. The ostensible process being subconscious, it is difficult to see how anything said by MH about her own mental processes could be of relevance in that regard let alone of importance (as his Honour thought to be).

As I have indicated, his Honour considered whether anything might have occurred to prompt MH's memory. I think that, in this regard, what his Honour had under consideration was whether anything might have happened to cause MH to form a false memory, albeit honestly. As I have mentioned, he observed that nothing in particular happened in 1995 that could have prompted her memory other than the forthcoming trial involving her stepsister's complaint. His
Honour did not appear to regard it as being a matter of significance that MH's complaint was made when her stepsister was very much the centre of attention.

His Honour also minimised the possible effect of the stepsister's allegations, as at 1993, in possibly precipitating MH's complaint about an episode which also involved straws. His Honour found, contrary to MH's sworn testimony, that she had in fact been aware of the content of her stepsister's complaints in
But his Honour went on to characterise the stepsister's statements as concentrating mainly on allegations of fellatio, although (as he recognised) they also included episodes involving the insertion of straws. His Honour apparently thought it significant that MH's complaint, made at that time, was not of precisely the same kind of sexual abuse as predominated in RH's statements.

His Honour found that MH was an honest witness and that there was no malicious basis for her complaints. Notwithstanding that MH had given evidence which his
Honour found to be incorrect concerning her knowledge in 1993 of the content of RH's statements and notwithstanding MH's evidence of ill will towards her stepfather and of secondary gain from the attention and sympathy of her mother, his Honour had the advantage of seeing and hearing MH give her evidence. I would accordingly not interfere with his Honour's finding that MH was an honest witness in relation to the memories which she said she had and as to when those memories had come to her. However, the trial then turned, not on MH's honesty but on the reliability of her ostensibly delayed memory of events.

As to the accused, his Honour observed that he is "an admitted paedophile".
This was a fair comment. The accused had admitted being sexually stimulated by the sight of his stepdaughter when she was as young as five and he had pleaded guilty to the offences in relation to her involved in the initial complaint.
This evidence made plausible conduct which one would think to be highly unlikely absent such a disposition.

His Honour went on to discuss the evidence of Dr Small. He noted a submission by the Crown, that, but for the evidence of Dr Small, there would have to be a reasonable doubt concerning the accused's guilt. His Honour went on to say, in relation to Dr Small's evidence: "She (counsel for the accused) submits there is only one anal incident relied on and, on Dr Small's evidence, it is plain that all of this damage just could not, as a matter of common sense, have happened on the one occasion. It is not one of those cases where the evidence of the complainant is that this sort of thing happened many times but I just cannot remember the particular times it happened. But I do not think I can move from that to an affirmative position that there was no anal damage on other occasions. That may be so, it may be. I do not know. It may be that the only window of recollection that the complainant has about anal assault is the particular one she has spoken of. In saying that I am not drawing any inference against the accused that he must have perpetrated other assaults on her. I just do not know. The evidence is silent. There is nothing. There is no material before me. There is evidence in denial both from the complainant and the mother as to any other cause of anal damage and the finding, particularly the 12 o'clock finding, by Dr Small is completely consistent with the complainant's evidence." (The finding at 12 o'clock was of "a huge split in the anus", but there was also damage to other parts of the anus, including old tears which had healed, and as to the totality of which Dr Small said that the damage could not have been done at the one time.) 
His Honour could not and did not find, on the evidence, that the accused had been the perpetrator of all of the damage to the anus. The corollary of that finding was that it was reasonably possible that much of the damage had been done by some other person. As to the consistency mentioned by his Honour between MH's complaint and Dr Small's findings, it is true that Dr Small's evidence established that the complainant had suffered anal penetration by some person or persons. That was consistent with MH's evidence of one episode of anal intercourse involving the accused, but the evidence went no further than that.

His Honour then said that he had enormous difficulty arising from features of the case which he identified earlier in his judgment, but that the ultimate question was whether he had a firm conviction beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused.

It was at this point in his judgment that his Honour mentioned that there was no direct corroboration of MH's evidence as to the facts charged in the three counts. There was evidence of the availability of MH to the accused and there was the evidence of Dr Small which, however, his Honour correctly observed, went only to the consistency of the physical examination with MH's evidence.

Concerning the accused, his Honour said that he gave his evidence in a very curious way, betraying no emotion. When asked whether he had committed the offences charged, all he had said, in effect, was that it didn't happen. His
Honour said he did not find the accused an impressive witness, quite the contrary. His Honour had the advantage of seeing and hearing the accused give his evidence. Accordingly, I would not disturb that finding, notwithstanding that his Honour's adverse view of the accused appears to have been based on no more than the absence of any expression of emotion and on the accused offering no more than a direct denial when asked about the alleged offences. The case, therefore, turned on the reliability of MH's evidence without any weight (I would assume) being imputed to the accused's denial on oath that he had committed the alleged offences.

There are three grounds of appeal. For the reasons which follow, it is necessary only to have regard to one of them. That is the third ground of appeal, namely, that the verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The principles relating to this ground of appeal were stated by the High Court in a seminal passage to be found in M [(1994) 181 CLR 487.] The principles were stated there by reference to a jury determination. I will restate them by reference to a judge, where the trial is held, as here, without a jury.

The question for the appellate court is one of fact which the court must decide by making its own independent assessment of the evidence.

The ultimate question is whether it was open to the trial judge to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty.

In most cases, a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt which the trial judge ought also to have experienced.

It is only where the trial judge's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable or resolving a doubt experienced by a court of criminal appeal that the court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred.

If the evidence lacks probative force in such a way as to leave the court of criminal appeal to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the trial judge, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to set aside the verdict.

I take from the principles that in most cases - and there is nothing relevantly exceptional about the present case - the court is first required to ask itself whether, on a reading of a record of the trial, it experiences a doubt as to guilt. If it does, the court is then required to consider whether the difference between its state of mind and the determination of the tribunal of fact is reasonably explicable by the advantage enjoyed by the tribunal of fact in seeing and hearing the evidence being given. If it is not, the conviction must be quashed.

In the present case, this court must proceed on the basis that MH's evidence concerning her memory of events was honestly given and that the accused's evidence does not count in the balance.

A distinction is to be drawn between honest evidence and reliable evidence.
There may be instances where the tribunal of fact is in a better position to assess the reliability as distinct from the honesty of a witness. The witness might, for example, give the appearance of difficulty in recalling events. In such a case and others, demeanour might indicate unreliability or, for that matter, reliability. But, in the present case, the question of reliability arises in a more abstract way, namely, the degree of reliability or unreliability to be accorded to honestly experienced memories which, according to the subject, were not experienced for a long time after the event and which came to be experienced in circumstances which are not contentious. It is difficult to see what role demeanour could have in resolving the reliability of such evidence.

Accordingly, if this court has a doubt about the reliability of MH's account of what occurred, notwithstanding an assumption that it was an account she honestly believed to be true, the convictions would have to be quashed.

Ostensible memories may be characterised as true memories, false memories and fabricated memories. By true memories, I mean memories that are correct. They would include memories which may have been lost and which have later been recovered. By false memories I mean memories which the subject believes to be correct but which are incorrect. By fabricated memories I mean purported memories which are not memories at all. They are knowingly false. Fabricated memory in this sense is not an option in the present case because findings which should not be disturbed are against it.

As to false memory, it is common experience that people remember things in ways that suit them. False memories are common knowledge. (If all the narrative accounts of motor accidents, honestly given in social discourse, were true, there would have been very few motor accidents because very few people would ever have caused one.) The corollary is that the mere fact that someone honestly experiences the memory of an event is no guarantee that the event occurred that way or even that it occurred at all. This is particularly so when motivations for having such a memory are apparent.

The contrast for the present case is with true memories, which (as I have said) would include a memory lost for a time and later recovered. That too is common knowledge. People may have forgotten altogether about something until the memory is triggered by a thought or an experience or by something someone says. The fact that, at one point in time, the subject would say, if asked, that they did not remember the event and, at a later point in time, would say honestly that they did, does not mean the memory is a false memory. It may be a true memory, dormant for a time and later revived.

The difficulty in the present case is the choice between a true, recovered memory and an honestly experienced, false memory. There is no compelling consideration either way.

Common experience does not enable one to say that the memory of a painful event, absent for a long time and later experienced, is more likely to be a revived, true memory than an honestly experienced, false memory. I do not accept as common knowledge that, in the case of children, memory of abuse is frequently lost and later reliably recovered. The content of the ostensible memories in this case is beyond common experience. There is no common knowledge on which to draw for guidance. To generate false memories of this kind is not commonplace. To lose memories of this kind for ten years or so and then to recover them is not commonplace. The case is remote from common experience. There is no common knowledge which is applicable to such a case as this.

Cases such as F (CCA , 2 November 1995, unreported) and C <case>; [(1993) 60 SASR 467] recognise common knowledge explanations for delay by children in complaining about abuse and for serial disclosure of instances of abuse by children, notwithstanding that the child knows of and remembers the abuse. These cases do not bear on the present case. Nor do other decisions dealing with the admissibility of expert evidence as to how children behave or might plausibly behave. There is no issue concerning the admissibility of such evidence in the present case.

It is reasonably possible that MH's memories were true, recovered memories.
But it is also reasonably possible that they were honestly experienced, false memories. The corollary is that there is, necessarily, a reasonable doubt concerning the appellant's guilt on a reading of the record of the proceedings.

That doubt is not capable of being explained by taking into account the advantage which the trial judge had in seeing and hearing the witnesses. I have accepted the trial judge's findings - as I believe this court should - in relation to MH's honesty, and I have put the appellant's denials out of account. But the point in the appeal then turns on the reliability of MH's evidence as distinct from her honesty. That, in the circumstances of the present case, this court is as well able to assess as the trial judge.

For these reasons, the trial judge ought to have had a reasonable doubt concerning the appellant's guilt. I would therefore uphold the third ground of appeal. It is unnecessary to consider the other two grounds.

It does not follow that a case of sexual abuse of a child can never be made out where a memory of events is absent for some time and later comes to be experienced. Every case must turn on its own facts.

Orders 
I propose the following orders.
Appeal allowed.
Convictions quashed.
Judgment of acquittal entered on all counts.
 * * * 
