

Ho versus Director of Public Prosecutions and Another Nos. Ca 40565/95; Dc /62/0159 Criminal Law and Procedure - Sentencing [1995] NSWSC 165 (18
November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
GLEESON CJ(1), KIRBY P(2) AND SHELLER JA(3)
HRNG
SYDNEY, 9 and 12 September #DATE 19:9:1995 #ADD 27:10:1995 
Counsel for the Claimant:      T Molomby/P Kintominas/ 
R Rasmussen 
Counsel for the First Opponent:   A M Blackmore 
Counsel for the Second Opponent: (District
Court)            Submitting appearance 
Solicitors for the Claimant     Brezniak Neil-Smith and Co.
 
Solicitors for the First Opponent:  S E O'Connor (Solicitor for Public 
Prosecutions) 
Solicitors for the Second Opponent: (District Court)            I V Knight (State Crown Solicitor)
ORDER
Summons dismissed with costs.
JUDGE1
GLEESON CJ: I have read in draft form the judgment of Kirby P.
I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour, and with his reasons for those orders.
JUDGE2
KIRBY
P: Mr Henry Kim Yum Ho, otherwise known as Laurence Ho (the claimant) has issued a summons for judicial review, returnable in this
Court. He claims relief against the Director of Public Prosecutions for New South Wales (DPP) (first opponent) and the District Court of New South Wales (second opponent).
That Court has submitted to the orders which we make.
The summons raises, once again, the application of the authority of this
Court in Parker versus Director of Public Prosecutions and Anor [(1992) 28 NSWLR 282 .] Upon the basis of a breach of the rules of fair procedure laid down in
Parker, the claimant has sought relief in the nature of an order of certiorari or declarations addressed to the validity of orders made in the District Court by Saunders DCJ. Under those orders, the claimant has been committed to serve a sentence of imprisonment.
The Court granted expedition to the hearing of the claimant's summons.
In my view the summons should be dismissed. 
A disqualified driver re-offends.
The basic facts were not disputed.
On 14 October 1993, the claimant was convicted before Mr K C Flack LCM in the Local Court at Orange in respect of two offences of driving whilst disqualified. The offences were alleged to have taken place at Kemp's Creek on 30 June 1993. Mr Flack sentenced the claimant to three months' fixed term of imprisonment. He disqualified him from driving for two years from that date. The claimant remained in custody from 14 October until 19 October 1993. On the last mentioned date, he was released on bail pending an appeal to the District Court against the alleged severity of the custodial sentence.
The appeal to the District Court was heard by
Dent DCJ on 14 April 1994.
His Honour allowed the appeal. In lieu of the sentence of imprisonment, he imposed upon the claimant a different sentence, namely, a fine of $500 in respect of each of two of the charges; an order that the claimant serve 100 hours of community service; and he imposed a recognizance in the sum of $500 upon condition that the claimant be of good behaviour for two years from the date of the magistrate's sentence, ie, until 13 October 1995. Dent DCJ imposed a further condition that the claimant should attend and complete a driving course as recommended by the NRMA (motorists' association) before reapplying for a driving licence.
As appears from the extract included in the reasons of Saunders DCJ, Dent
DCJ reached the foregoing conclusions upon the following basis: "Laurence Ho is, clearly on the evidence, a distinguished and generous contributor to this society and a man held in the highest regard. Unfortunately, in the course of his very heavy driving commitment in the management of his five restaurants, he built up a driving record for speeding and inevitably lead to a points cancellation of his licence, but despite that cancellation on five occasions he elected to take the risk of breaking the law and driving his motor vehicle. The learned Magistrate, understandably in this case, imposed the final sanction of the law as far as motorists are concerned and imposed a short period of imprisonment. The realities of the situation, as I see it, no doubt not placed as carefully and as skilfully before the court as they have been today, is that Mr Ho is simply a man whose merit points in society are such that a court would only impose the final sanction of fulltime imprisonment upon him as a last resort.

The appellant has given evidence and
I believe that, in giving that evidence he has attempted as best he could, to tell the truth and explain how this all came about. But whichever way one looks at it, the reality is that he took a risk, possibly without appreciating the gravity of the views of Parliament and the courts in relation to the offence of this nature. .... "
During the period of disqualification and of the recognizance which he entered on 14 April 1994, the claimant, on 6 May 1995 was detained for driving whilst disqualified in Cobra Street, Dubbo. The offence was fairly brazen. It appears that the motor vehicle ordinarily driven (and driven on this occasion) by the claimant, is a blue Rolls Royce sedan. Perhaps unsurprisingly, it attracted the attention of police. They recognised the driver as a disqualified driver. They immediately arrested the claimant.
The claimant was taken before the Local Court in Dubbo. The presiding magistrate, Mr R Clugston LCM, convicted the claimant of a further offence of driving whilst disqualified. He imposed upon him a sentence of a fixed term of four months' imprisonment to commence on the day of conviction, 24 May 1995.
The magistrate also disqualified the claimant from driving for a further period of two years commencing 14 October 1995.
The claimant remained in custody until 30 May 1995, ie, six days. On the last-mentioned date he was released on bail pending an appeal to the District
Court against the alleged severity of Mr Clugston's sentence.
On 14 July 1995, the claimant was called up for the breach of the recognizance ordered by Dent DCJ. The DPP requested that the claimant's severity appeal to the District Court and the call up following the breach of the recognizance should be heard together. This was duly done.
On 18 August 1995 both proceedings were heard by Saunders DCJ in the
District Court at Dubbo. 
Sentence and reasons of the District Court.
Saunders DCJ set out the substance of the foregoing facts. He recounted the excuse given for the claimant's driving on the day of his last offence. He rejected the proffered explanation as completely unacceptable. He drew the inference that the claimant had "driven on other occasions".
He then concluded his reasons in the following passage leading to his orders: "I am highly unimpressed with the appellant's attitude in this case.
He has been shown a great deal of mercy from Judge Dent and his Honour was completely let down by the appellant's conduct. In other words, he thumbed his nose at the generosity of Judge Dent when he gave him a chance to mend his ways.

He will be dealt with in respect of the breach. I see no reason why that penalty imposed by the Magistrate should not be imposed, that is the penalty of three months to commence on 18 March 1995 (sic) and to expire on 17 November .

In respect of the appeal now before me of driving whilst disqualified, he will be sentenced to four months and that sentence will be imposed upon him also, but also cumulative to the other sentence, and to date from 18 November 1995, and expiring on 17 March. His prior custody has already been taken into account in the sentence I have imposed.

I dismiss the appeal. I dismiss the appeal and I confirm the order of the Magistrate for disqualification from 14 October 1994." .
The summons now before this Court, challenging the orders of Saunders
DCJ, was taken out on 7 September 1995, i.e. more than two weeks after
Saunders DCJ's sentences were imposed. The summons was returned on 8 September when short service was ordered. It was heard, in the presence of the claimant, on 12 September 1995. 
The arguments of the parties.
In support of the summons for judicial review, the claimant addressed the following submissions to the Court: 
The sentence imposed by Saunders DCJ constituted, apparently deliberately, an increase in the custodial sentence earlier imposed by Mr
Clugston LCM. Whereas the latter had sentenced the appellant to four months imprisonment, the effect of the sentence imposed by Saunders DO in respect of the last offence was equivalent to a sentence of imprisonment of four months and six days. His Honour had not indicated in any way, before effectively increasing the sentence, that he was contemplating any intention to do so. By failing to signal that intention he offended against the principles established by this Court in Parker. This error vitiated the sentence which he imposed. It authorised this Court to set aside the sentence and to require the matter to be re-determined according to law; 
By stating that the claimant would be 'dealt with in respect of the breach', Saunders DCJ had effectively punished the claimant for breaching the recognizance earlier ordered by Dent
DCJ. This was impermissible. Breach of the recognizance was merely the occasion for attracting the jurisdiction of the District Court.
It was not a separate offence; nor a reason for punishing the claimant for the breach of the trust reposed in him by Dent DCJ. The words of Saunders DCJ's reasons immediately prior to his reference to the breach indicated, so it was put, that his Honour had dealt with the claimant for his disappointment with his conduct in that he 'thumbed his nose at the generosity' of Dent DCJ. This was an extraneous consideration. It also vitiated the lawfulness of the sentence imposed; 
In imposing the sentence which he did,
Saunders DCJ also failed to act lawfully in that: 
He failed to take into account the fact that Dent DCJ had imposed upon him two fines, each of $500, and an order for community service of 100 hours which, it was suggested, the claimant had discharged. In the proper application of s556B of the [Crimes Act, 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), it was the duty of Saunders DCJ to put himself in the position in which Dent DCJ had been. This required him to take the fines and community service into account. But the record showed that he had not done so; and 
He had also failed to take into account the principle of totality in considering the total sentence of imprisonment which resulted from the way in which he had dealt with the breach of recognizance (confirming the sentence of three months' imprisonment) and dismissing the appeal (confirming the sentence of four months imprisonment). He ought to have taken into account that the cumulation which he ordered would amount to seven months' imprisonment and then to have asked whether this total sentence was excessive to a consideration of the entirety of the claimant's criminality; and 
This Court should exercise its discretion to provide the relief sought to the claimant because, unless it did so, quashing the orders of Saunders
DCJ, the result would be that no relief could be afforded to the claimant against the combined sentences of imprisonment and especially the effective increase of six days imprisonment which resulted from the order which Saunders
DCJ had made without hearing the claimant upon it and without giving reasons for it.
The DPP contested the application of
Parker to the facts of the case. He also contested the interpretation of the reference by Saunders DCJ to the breach of the recognizance.
He disputed the construction of s556B of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and the suggested failure of Saunders DCJ to consider the totality of the sentences imposed by cumulating the two terms of imprisonment.
In any case, the DPP urged that the Court would refuse relief to the claimant on discretionary grounds either: 
Because the claimant had omitted, although legally represented before
Saunders DCJ , to point immediately to the suggested error in the effect of his Honour's sentence and to seek, either then, or subsequently, relief from his Honour from what was claimed to be a "slip".
It was common ground that there was at least one slip in the uncorrected transcript of Saunders DCJ's reasons in which he commenced the "three months" imprisonment resulting from the breach of the recognizance "on 18 March 1995 ". Clearly this should have read " 18 August 1995 ", the date that the matter was before Saunders DCJ.
This slip was obvious on the face of the record. Three months expiring on 17
November 1995 would have to commence on 18 August 1995. But the slip was not picked up in the corrected version of
Saunders DCJ's judgment, proving once again how easy it is for busy judges to miss errors of this kind; or 
Because the correct course for the claimant to take was either to apply immediately for correction of the sentence by Saunders DCJ rectifying the "slip" (assuming that to be possible), or to apply to the District Court for the correction of an error in sentencing as permitted by s24 of the Criminal
Procedure Act 1988 (formerly s19 of that Act: see Statute Law (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1989). The claimant did not accept that the last mentioned statutory provision was wide enough to permit the correction of the sentence imposed by Saunders
DCJ . The absence of such an avenue for relief was advanced as a still further reason to encourage this Court to provide an appropriate order of judicial review. Absent the statutory power to correct the several errors complained of, the claimant argued that this Court would quash the sentence imposed, order his release from imprisonment and require the sentencing proceedings to be re-determined by the District Court, according to law. 
Proper indication of an increase in a contemplated penalty.
The principle established by this Court in Parker is not rigid. It is one of fair procedure. It is designed to avoid, in appropriate cases in the
District
Court, unnecessary exposure of an appellant to a risk of a form of double jeopardy. It is established to ensure that, in proper cases, such an appellant is alerted by the judge to the risk that proceeding with an appeal may result, not in relief from the sentence under appeal as sought, but in an increase of the sentence. Once so alerted, the appellant may then seek the leave of the District
Court to withdraw the appeal before it is too late to do so.
The principle in Parker has been followed in other States. It has been applied by this Court with a realistic understanding of what may properly and reasonably be expected of District Court judges hearing appeals from magistrates. See, eg, Hughes versus Director of Public Prosecutions, Court of
Appeal , unreported, 15 March ; (1994) NSWJB 28. Being a rule of fairness, it is applied in a way that takes into account the entirety of the proceedings and the exceptional and discretionary nature of the relief which is necessary to uphold the Parker principle.
There are two possible explanations of the course which Saunders DCJ followed in effectively increasing the sentence imposed on the claimant by confirming the four months imprisonment for his last offence, without reducing that sentence for the period already spent in custody in respect of that offence. The interpretations are: 
That his Honour intended deliberately to increase the sentence by a period of six days, by inference upon the footing that he regarded the sentence imposed by the magistrate as unduly lenient; or 
That the failure to allow for the time already spent in custody was a slip, or an oversight on his Honour's part, not an intentional action.
The principle in Parker is addressed to curing increases in sentences of which no warning has been given to the accused. Naturally enough, the claimant urged that the effective increase in Saunders DCJ's sentence was a deliberate and unsignalled act on the part of his Honour. The DPP submitted that the better interpretation of what had occurred was that his Honour had made a slip, for the correction of which s24 of the Criminal Procedure Act now provided. The claimant contested this interpretation and disputed the availability of such relief.
In support of the assertion that what Saunders DCJ had done was a deliberate act, the claimant pointed out that his Honour had expressly stated that the claimant's prior custody "had been taken into account in the sentence
I have imposed".
This sufficiently stated, in plain terms, what Saunders DCJ had done. It was inconsistent with a mere oversight. The period of four months was a simple one, easy to calculate. The failure to order, in effect, that time served should count, and to calculate the sentence accordingly, indicated deliberate conduct.
On a number of grounds, I cannot accept this interpretation of Saunders
DCJ's actions: 
His Honour would have known of the principle in Parker which is now regularly applied as normal practice in the District Court. It seems most unlikely that he would have deliberately increased the claimant's sentence without giving a warning of a contemplation of doing so; 
Nowhere in his reasons does Saunders DCJ address the justification of an increase in the sentence as might have been expected if it had been a deliberate act; 
To add six days deliberately to a four month sentence involved the judge in condescending to such a level of particularity that it appears unlikely to have been an intentional act; and 
The reference to the prior custody having been taken into account could be explained by reference to the slip already made, viz ostensibly dating the three months term of imprisonment to commence on 18 March 1995, instead of 18
August 1995. The "six days prior custody" fell within that nominated period.
This mistake could help to explain a mistaken belief that prior custody had indeed been taken into account.
The better view is that the effective increase of the custodial sentence by the six days already served was a slip. It was not intended by Saunders DCJ
The relief sought in the summons should be considered on that footing. 
No punishment for the breach.
So far as the claimant's submission that Saunders DCJ punished him for his breach of the recognizance earlier ordered by Dent DCJ , it is clear that where such a breach is established, it is not the function of a sentencing judge to sentence the offender for the breach itself. See, eg, R versus Champion [(1992) 64 A Crim. R 244 (NSW] CCA), 248; R versus Kerr, unreported, CCA , 12
November 1993. The breach is simply the occasion which brings the matter back before the court to resentence the offender in the way that s556B of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) contemplates.
Lest there be any doubt, it is important to say that the principle in
Parker does not apply to a case where a person is before a District Court upon call up for breach of recognizance. Essential to the Parker rule is that the appellant should be given the opportunity to consider whether or not to seek leave to withdraw an appeal. But once an appeal to the District Court has been disposed of, as in this case the claimants first appeal was by Dent DCJ , there is no occasion for seeking leave to withdraw the appeal. It is not a matter of the claimant's seeking relief from his own act in appealing to the
District Court and thereby exposing himself to the risk of double jeopardy.
Where he is dealt with following a breach of the terms of recognizance, he has no privilege to withdraw from the situation. He is no longer in the position he was in when he first appeared before the District Court. He did not initiate the process by which he was called up for sentence following the breach of recognizance. He had no entitlement, retrospectively, to withdraw his appeal to the District Court, for this had already been finally disposed of by Dent DCJ.
The claimant, nonetheless, asserted that Saunders DCJ had effectively punished him for the breach and that this amounted to a misconception of the purpose of the breach proceedings which were before him. It was argued that this was the only proper construction of his Honour's immediately proceeding comments about the way in which the claimant had allegedly "let down" the
Court and "thumbed his nose" at its generosity.
It is important once again to emphasise that it would a basal error of sentencing to punish a person for breach of a recognizance.
I repeat: such breach merely reactivates the offence(s) in respect of which the recognizance was granted. That is the sanction which the law allowed. It does not permit additional punishment for disappointment and breach of trust or of leniency on the part of the judge.
But I do not read the passage cited in Saunders DCJ's reasons as indicating that his Honour was doing any more than recounting the circumstances that led to the matter being back before the District Court and the reason why it was appropriate to deal with the case as one of breach, as distinct from waiving the breach or affording the claimant a further chance.
Sometimes a lenient approach will be appropriate in the Court's discretion notwithstanding the breach of recognizance. See Champion (above),
On call up, the Court may waive the breaches, vary terms found to have been unsuitable, imposed new or more stringent terms, admonish the offender, provide a fresh warning, or proceed to sentence the offender upon the basis that the attempt to deal with the matter leniently has failed. All that
Saunders DCJ was at pains to do was to explain why the last mentioned course was the only appropriate one in this case.
Nor do I consider that error has been shown, for which this Court can provide any relief, in the suggested failure of Saunders DCJ to take into account the fines paid and community service already performed by the claimant, or the general sentencing principle of totality. So far as the fines and community service are concerned, they were part of the sentence imposed by
Dent DCJ in addition to the recognizance. Those parts of the sentence have been lawfully imposed upon the claimant and he was obliged to serve them. The call up on the recognizance related solely to that part of Dent DCJ's sentence. The recognizance was in addition to the fines and community service which, together, constituted the sentence which Dent DCJ considered was appropriate in disposing of the appeal leniently as he did.
Saunders DCJ did not expressly take into account the principle of totality in sentencing. At least, his Honour did not refer to that principle in terms. He did, however, make it clear that he considered that the sentences should be cumulative. As they related to entirely different incidents and involved repeated offences of the same serious character, it would have been open to his Honour to reach the conclusion which he did. However that may be, there is no appeal to this Court (or to the Court of Criminal Appeal) from the sentence imposed by his Honour. It is important that attempts to turn proceedings for judicial review, such as this, into effective merits appeals against sentence should be firmly resisted by this Court. Judicial review is concerned, relevantly, with jurisdictional error. None of the last-mentioned complaints would fall into that category.
Accordingly, the claimant's arguments that the sentence imposed "in respect of the breach" of recognizance evidenced error, must all be dismissed.
 
Availability of Criminal Procedure Act.
The foregoing conclusion really terminates this summons. The two foundations for the intervention of this Court are not made out.
But the DPP asserted that, even had the Court been of the view that one or other, or both, of the complaints about the sentence were established, the
Court would refrain from providing relief upon the discretionary grounds stated above.
Because of the possible general importance of the points argued, and in deference to the arguments of the parties, I will deal with those submissions.
I would not consider that the failure of the claimant to explain the delay between the sentence by Saunders DCJ and the commencing of proceedings in this Court on 7 September , being unexplained, amounted to a reason for refusing to provide relief if otherwise it were appropriate to afford relief.
It is true that undue delay can sometimes provide a reason for withholding relief prerogative in nature. See Ex Parte Thomas; re Arnold and Ors (1966) 84
WN Pt 1, 493 (CA), 495. However, where a person goes into custody it must be contemplated that taking instructions, securing affidavits and moving the Court, particularly from the country, will take a little time.
Nor would I refuse relief on the footing that the legal representatives of the claimant failed immediately to call the suggested error to Saunders
DCJ's notice.
Vigilance on the part of legal practitioners can be expected.
However, as his Honour twice failed to correct the slip of "18 March ", it cannot easily be complained, on this occasion, that the claimant's representatives were unduly neglectful in failing to pick up the mistake later complained of.
That leaves the suggested availability of the Criminal Procedure Act 1988 s24. The section states: "24(1) If a court has, in or in connection with any criminal proceedings (including proceedings on appeal) -
 imposed a penalty that is contrary to law; or failed to appropriately impose a penalty that is required to be imposed by law, the court (whether or not differently constituted) may reopen the proceedings and, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, impose a penalty that is in accordance with the law (and, if necessary, amend any relevant conviction or order).

The court may reopen the proceedings on its own motion or on the application of a party to. the proceedings.

In this section - 'Court' means - the District Court; 'Penalty' includes a sentence of imprisonment, an order for periodic detention, a fine, a community service order, a forfeiture, a disqualification, a loss or suspension of a licence or privilege and an order to pay costs or compensation."
For the claimant it was submitted that the section had no application.
The relevant "penalty" which Saunders DCJ imposed was not "contrary to law".
In may have been misconceived or mistaken. But the penalty was perfectly lawful. The DPP contested this construction.
Certain observations may be made about s24: 
The section appears in remedial legislation designed to permit, as Part of the Act makes clear, "Correction of sentencing errors". Given the remedial purposes of the section, it should not be subjected to a narrow construction. See R versus Petrou,
Court of Criminal Appeal , unreported, 13
February 1990; 
That a broad interpretation of the section was intended by Parliament is confirmed, not only by the general purpose of the section and the broad definition of terms provided in s24(7) of the Act. It is also confirmed by the
Second Reading Speech of the Attorney General introducing the measure. See New
South Wales Parliamentary
Debates (Legislative Assembly), 21 September 1988,
He stated that its object was to provide "a simple procedure to correct sentencing errors in criminal proceedings". He went on to explain: "The availability of this procedure will enable matters to be dealt with expeditiously. It will relieve appellate courts of unnecessary work, and is a further step in the implementation of the
Government's undertaking to reduce court delays ... It is an important and practical step and savings to the Government and the administration of Justice will be substantial." 
These considerations are not irrelevant given the limitations upon the facility of appeal in criminal matters such as the present, and the limitations upon (and technical requirements of) judicial review as well as the public and private costs that are involved in correcting mistakes of a simple character by such procedures.
Reinforced by the Minister's explanation of the legislation to Parliament, this Court should afford the language of the section the broadest available construction so as to achieve its stated objects; 
There are limits relevantly derived from the requirement that the penalty must be "contrary to law". Such limitations have been revealed in earlier cases. See, eg, Boyd versus Sandercock [(1989) 46 A Crim. R 206 (SCQ)], where the Queensland Full Court analysed the equivalent provisions of [s147A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/ja1886119/s147a.html) of the [Justices Act 1886](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/ja1886119/) (Qld). In the end, the Court must adhere to the requirements of Parliament as expressed in the statutory language. Ex Parte Beane; re
Bolton and Anor <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 514], 518. It must do so even if this results in a conflict with the stated intentions of the Minister; 
It is to be noted that the phrase used in [s24(1)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/ja1886119/s24.html) is not "imposed a penalty that is not provided by law". A broader adjectival phrase is used to describe the "penalty" which authorizes the application of the section. It is enough that that penalty is "contrary to law". It is a part of the law of sentencing that where a person has, in respect of an event of which that person is convicted and stands for sentence, already served some time in custody, the sentencing judge should take such period into account.
Ordinarily, the judge should give credit to the offender for time already served. To fail to consider this is an error of law in the exercise of the sentencing discretion. The resulting penalty is then one "contrary to law"; 
Differing views have been expressed by judges concerning the breadth of the phrase "contrary to law" in [s24.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/qld/consolact/ja1886119/s24.html) Certainly, the section is not intended to permit a general rehearing of sentencing proceedings on the merits. See, eg,
Shortland v Heath [(1977) WAR 61], 597. Differences were also expressed by the members of the Court of
Criminal Appeal in R versus Tolmie [(1994) 72 A Crim R 416 (NSW], CCA), 420, 421.
However, whilst avoiding a rehearing of the merits of the penalty, it is common ground that the purpose of the section is to permit the correction of mistakes where "such correction would have saved the cost, delay and expense involved in having to institute an appeal" (see Tolmie, 420) or, I would add, in being obliged to seek judicial review. For the correction of arguable mistakes in sentencing, the section should be given the widest possible operation; and 
The existence of the remedial provision in the Act may be-relevant to relief in the nature of the prerogative writs or in the provision of leave to appeal, where that is in question. See, eg, Roos versus Director of Public
Prosecution [(1994) 68 ALJR 632 (HC] - Toohey J), 633. However, the mere existence of the section and its arguable availability in a particular case may not necessarily persuade a court, otherwise convinced that judicial review is appropriate, to withhold that relief. See, eg, Anderson versus Judges of the
District Court of New South Wales and Anor (1992) 27 
NSWLR 701 (CA), 709. It is a matter to be considered, whilst not being "conclusive". It did not prevent the provision of relief in Anderson. See ibid .
In my view it is open to the claimant to make an application to the
District Court under the [Criminal Procedure Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) [s24.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s24.html) In the light of the conclusion which I have earlier reached, this facility does not determine the outcome of the summons which, I have already decided, should be dismissed. It merely means that the relief sought can be rejected in the comfortable knowledge that the claimant has at least one other remedy available to him to secure credit for the time served which appears to have been overlooked in the orders made by Saunders DCJ.
The possible availability of the slip-rule in the District Court was raised. However,
I will not explore this as it was not the subject of submissions by the parties. This was suggested as an additional avenue of redress open to the claimant. I refrain from deciding whether this is so. 
Order.
The summons should be dismissed with costs.
JUDGE3
SHELLER JA: I agree with Kirby P.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/165.html  
