

Mahaffy versus Eather t/as Bellevue Pastoral Company (on costs) [2013] NSWSC (19 April 2013) 
Last Updated: 8 May 2013 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Case Title: 
Mahaffy versus Eather t/as Bellevue Pastoral Company (on costs)  
Medium Neutral Citation: <case>  
Decision Date: April 2013  
Jurisdiction: 
Equity Division  
Before: 
Rein J  
Decision: 
The defendants to pay to the plaintiff the filing and hearing fees that have been paid by the plaintiff within 28 days of the defendants being informed by the plaintiff of the amounts paid by the plaintiff for the fees.  
Catchwords: 
COSTS - cost orders in favour of a litigant in person - transport and accommodation  
COSTS - whether costs orders should be made against a successful party for late amendment to summons - whether costs orders should be apportioned.  
JUDGMENT
REIN J: On 14 February 2013 I allowed Mr Mahaffy's appeal from a decision handed down against him in the Local Court of Wee Waa on 28 October 2009. My reasons for judgment were handed down on that day: see Mahaffy versus Eather t/as Bellevue Pastoral Company  <case>
At the time of the judgment, Ms Gordon, counsel for the defendants, indicated that her clients opposed an order that they pay all of Mr Mahaffy's costs. Mr Mahaffy indicated that he would be seeking an order that the defendants pay his costs on an indemnity basis. I pointed out to Mr Mahaffy that as he had acted for himself he would not have any legal costs other than the filing fee but Mr Mahaffy contended that he is entitled to his costs of transport and accommodation and that there are cases which support his claim to such expenses.
It was agreed that I should determine the costs issues on the papers and I made orders for the service of affidavits by the parties and submissions in the following terms: 
Direct the defendants' counsel to provide written submissions on costs by 15 February 2013.

Direct the plaintiff to provide written submissions in reply to the defendants' submissions and to provide the plaintiff's own submissions on costs by 8 March 2013.

Direct the defendants' counsel to provide any affidavits that the defendants seeks to rely on by 15 March 2013.

Direct the plaintiff to respond to the affidavit provided by the defendants and to provide any affidavit in response by the 22 March 2013.

Direct the defendants to respond to the plaintiff's further affidavit by March 2013.

Direct the parties to provide all documents set out in paragraph 6 to 10 above to his Honour's Associate by 28 March 2013.
The defendants provided submissions on 18 February 2013, i.e. 3 days late. By email to my Associate, Mr Mahaffy queried whether I would have regard to those submissions. He was informed that I would have regard to them but that the time for his submissions in reply would be extended to the 11 March 2013. 
No submissions have been received from Mr Mahaffy. As of 4 April 2013, the defendants' solicitors advised my Associate via email that the plaintiff has not served or filed or served any submissions or affidavits in compliance with the orders. Further, my Associate was informed today by Mr Russell Booby, the solicitor for the defendants, that there has been no submissions or affidavits served on the defendants since that earlier email.
Ms Gordon accepts that a successful party is entitled to his costs even if there is a reason for departing from that position and she notes that the Court has "a very broad discretion to award costs" pursuant to <case> of the [Civil Procedure Act 2005](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa2005167/) and rule 42.1 of the Civil Procedure Rules 2005 and may order the successful party to pay some of the costs of the unsuccessful party.
Ms Gordon asserts that Mr Mahaffy was successful only on the basis of an amendment to his summons that Mr Mahaffy was allowed to make on 30 November 2012. Ms Gordon refers to Beoco Ltd versus Alfa Laval Co Ltd [1995] QB 137 and Stuart-Smith LJ's statement of principle at [154]: [a]s a general rule, where a plaintiff makes a late amendment as here, which substantially alters the case the defendant has to meet and without which the action will fail, the defendant is entitled to the costs of the action down to the date of the amendment.
 a principle approved and applied in NSW: see Murrihy versus Radio 2UE Sydney Pty
Ltd  <case> at <case>- <case> per
Studdert J, Leading Edge Events Australia Pty Ltd versus Kiri Te Kanawa (No 2)  <case> at <case> per
Bergin J.
Ms Gordon also submits that a court can have regard to the fact a party, although successful on one basis has failed on many others, making it reasonable to require the successful party to bear the expenses of litigation relating to that portion upon which he or she failed: see Waters versus P C Henderson (Australia) Pty Ltd [(1994) 254 ALR 328] and Hughes versus Western Australian Cricket Association Inc (1986) ATPR 40-748 per Toohey J. Ms Gordon claims that Mr Mahaffy failed on all of the grounds in his original summons and amended summons and that this is a case in which it is reasonable and appropriate to make the order sought by the defendants either on the first basis or the second basis.
In relation to the late amendment point, it is it is true that Mr Mahaffy by his summons and amended summons did not adequately identify the grounds upon which he ultimately succeeded but his written submissions did so (see paras 94-99 of Mr Mahaffy's submissions) and those contentions were closely connected with the questions of fact which Mr Mahaffy raised in his appeal, and whether the Magistrate erred in applying basic principles of contract law. The late amendment which was permitted was not so much to permit some new matter, not previously canvassed, to be agitated but to require the amended summons to reflect the effective point that emerged from Mr Mahaffy's written submissions. It was necessary to canvass all of the material considered by the Local Court, including the oral evidence, to form a view on the point on which Mr Mahaffy ultimately succeeded. I do not think that the late amendment substantially altered the case which the defendants were required to meet and I am not satisfied that had Mr Mahaffy advanced his case solely on the basis on which he was successful that there would have been any significant difference in what the Court would have been required to consider. It is not suggested that the defendants would have conceded that there should be a new trial had the case been properly articulated, indeed they continued to resist his appeal (as they were entitled to do) once the amendment was foreshadowed. 
In relation to the specific issues point, it has been said that the Court should not too readily exclude from the successful parties an order for costs relating to a specific issue: see Cretazzo versus Lombardi [(1975) 13 SASR 4] at 156 per Kaye J with whom McGarvie J concurred and see the reference to "exceptional circumstances": pp 154-156. The type of cases in which such orders have been made are, for example where the defendant held back information which the plaintiff did not know or misconduct of some kind which has lengthened the proceedings, are discussed in Verna Trading Pty Ltd versus New India Assurance Co Ltd, and see also Dal Pont, The Law of Costs, 2nd ed, 2009, LexisNexis, [8.48]. This case does not fall into any of the types of cases discussed and there are no compelling or exceptional circumstances which could justify the order sought.
As Mr Mahaffy has not incurred any costs of representation, any costs order in his favour is extremely limited. The High Court of Australia in Cachia versus Hanes [(1994) 179 CLR 403] to permit the conclusion that any of Mr Mahaffy's costs (were he to have any) should be reduced.

Conclusion
The appropriate order is that the defendants pay Mr Mahaffy's filing and hearing fees (if any) in respect of the summons. I will direct that the following order be entered: "the defendants to pay to the plaintiff the filing and hearing fees that have been paid by the plaintiff within 28 days of the defendants being informed by the plaintiff of the amounts paid by the plaintiff for the fees".
 * * * 
