

Partridge versus Partridge Matter No 4843/97 [1998] NSWSC 137 (28 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 22 May 1998 `ANITA LYN PARTRIDGE versus AMANDA LYN PARTRIDGE` ` 4843/97` `28 April 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: I gave reasons in this matter on 24 March 1998 and the matter is in the list this morning for short minutes of order. Some of the orders have been agreed. The principal dispute is how costs should be borne and paid. 
The case was one between mother and daughter. Essentially, the mother had availed herself of the fact that the daughter had moneys from a common law verdict and the mother used these moneys for her purposes. The daughter wanted the moneys back. She lodged a meaningless caveat on her mother's property and, when the mother wanted to sell the property, it was necessary for her to move to remove the caveat. The parties actually agreed at an early stage of the proceedings that the caveat be removed, the property be sold and the moneys retained in a way that they could answer the daughter's claim.

The daughter's caveat was bad, but there was really no other way in which she could make sure that there were some moneys available to meet her just claim.
The daughter's counter-claim succeeded, though not for the full amount for which she sued.

I cannot see in any real sense how the mother was the successful party, even though the caveat was bad. If there had not been a restraint by caveat there would have been a restraint by injunction of a Mareva-type that the mother was essentially without funds, except for this property and perhaps another property.

The parties kept making offers to one another, they got very close, but not close enough. However, an offer of compromise in accordance with the Rules was given by the mother to the daughter on 10 March 1998. This was close enough and normally would mean that the mother would be entitled to costs after 10
March. However, in all the circumstances of the case it does not seem to me that that would be an appropriate result and thus I should "otherwise order".

I believe the proper order for costs is that there be no costs of the action or of either party after 10 March 1998, but otherwise I make orders 1, 2 and 4 in the short minutes which I have initialled.
 * * * 
