

Regina versus Bigic Matter No 71644/98 [1998] NSWSC 726 (23 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 
REGINA versus BOGDAN BIGIC /98 April 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application for bail by Mr. Bigic pending committal which I am informed is listed for hearing on 20 and 21 May at the Central Local Court. 
Mr. Bigic was arrested on 3 March 1998 and is charged with having been knowingly concerned in the importation of a trafficable quantity of a drug called methorphan. I have been provided with a report by Professor Starmer in relation to that drug. It is a drug which constitutes the active ingredient of numerous proprietary cough medicines. Those medicines however are prepared under controlled circumstances for controlled dosages and contain various other substances.

The allegation here is that some 15,000 tablets, comprising 1.95 kilos pure of the substance, some seven kilos gross, were found strapped to the legs of two couriers on their arrival at Kingsford Smith Airport and that the applicant was knowingly concerned in the importation they effected.

I am informed that the couriers have provided statements to the prosecution, will be pleading guilty to the importations, or to some appropriate charge in respect thereof, and have undertaken to give evidence against the applicant.

I am further informed that an application under the relevant provisions of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/) having succeeded, oral evidence of the couriers will be taken during the committal proceedings. Mr. Fraser, who appears on behalf of the applicant, has made it perfectly clear that a direct challenge to the credibility of the couriers will be made in the cross-examination to be expected at the committal.

In the evidence that is to be expected from the couriers are statements that the couriers met the co-accused, Marchando and another male identified as Bob in rooms at the Beverly Carlton Hotel, Beverly Hills, Los Angeles on 7
February where it was said a trial packaging occurred, this being an occasion in which Marchando and the man Bob strapped the packaging to the legs and thighs of the couriers and discussions ensued as to the use of baggy pants and tights to avoid detection, the rewards to be provided to the couriers and various statements were made by Bob concerning the nature of the expectations the couriers might have. This was not the occasion on which the material was strapped to the couriers for importation to Australia. That occasion was 13
February.

The couriers have nominated the defendant as having a great resemblance or similarities to the man Bob.

In the personal effects of the co-accused were a filofax diary with entries marked Bob Bigic and telephone numbers that have been confirmed as used by the defendant. One of the courier's diary records Bob and a mobile telephone number that is the same as that in the co-accused's filofax diary under the name Bob Bigic. In that filofax diary of the co-accused were also the telephone numbers used by the couriers and there are entries in the diaries of the couriers with the name Tommy and a telephone number which is that of the co-accused.

Further, a travel agent who apparently previously knew the applicant has confirmed that the applicant gave him a piece of paper with the details of the couriers for visa applications for travel to Australia and requested airline tickets be booked for himself, the couriers and the co-accused, paying for those tickets or at least the deposit for the flight on 13 February, nominating another person to pick up the tickets and to pay the outstanding balance and that shortly thereafter it was the co-accused who did so.

The applicant was spoken to on 3 March by the Australian Federal Police at
Melbourne International Airport as he was passing through departure checks for travel to the United States. In a later record of interview, he admitted his association with Marchando whom he asserted was a friend whom he had intended to meet at Sydney on 14 February and expected and Marchando would ring the defendant on his arrival in Australia. He had driven about seeking to find
Marchando but because of Marchando's failure to ring him had not done so. He had had problems with Marchando previously when he was going to Melbourne
Airport to pick him up and found out that Marchando had been detained by
Customs officers and had "flushed the things down the toilet and had pleaded guilty to the importation of steroids". He had agreed that the number recorded in Marchando's personal documents was the defendant's mobile telephone number.
He denied purchasing tickets for the couriers, he denied knowledge of the importation but he admitted his association with the travel agent.

The applicant is a single self-employed businessman who has travelled extensively between the United States and Australia.

In the material provided to me there is reference to what I have been told from the bar table is a previous conviction. It does not relate to the present matter, nor has it been asserted as any basis of disqualification in relation to this application. I propose to ignore it.

Similarly, there were located in his home, on execution of a search warrant, a
New Jersey driver's licence with a picture of the defendant and what is said to be a false name, as is also said to be the case with a Midwest Bank Visa card. Again, for the purposes of this application little turns on the existence of this material.

That is because the real issue in this application is whether or not, no matter how one puts the legal test, the application is capable of surviving the impediment presented by s.8A of the [Bail
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/). The Crown case in relation to Mr Bigic is a circumstantial case, based upon the material I have referred to and which can only be tested when the couriers give evidence.
It has been put by Mr. Fraser on behalf of the applicant that there is no evidence which would permit a jury to conclude that the applicant was knowingly concerned in the importation because there is no direct evidence as to his activities on the day. That is in my view to ignore the cumulative effect of the various circumstances on which the Crown would rely to produce a case based on circumstantial evidence which would enable the jury, if it wished, to conclude that it was satisfied that there was no rational hypothesis to explain that evidence which it accepted but that the applicant was so knowingly concerned.

Although the matter has been put most forcefully by Mr. Fraser, and although he has put to me arguments which no doubt are arguments that might be put most forcefully to a jury, it does not seem to me that I am able to conclude that there is a high probability, a real chance, on the material as it stands that the applicant will be acquitted.

I should say that this position may change in the light of what might be forthcoming on a cross-examination of the couriers, but as to that we cannot at present speculate. The committal is set down for 21 to 22 May to enable that testing to occur.

In all the circumstances bail is refused.
 * * * 
