

Galipienzo versus Solution 6 Holdings Limited Matter No 1651/98 [1998] NSWSC (21 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 August 1998 
GALIPIENZO versus SOLUTION 6 HOLDINGS LIMITED /98 May 1998 
Young J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a dispute between the shareholders of a computer software company. 
The first defendant is a company of which the plaintiffs have about an 18 per cent interest. The plaintiffs (Mr Galipienzo and a company controlled by him,
Cabs-Computer Automated Business Systems Pty Ltd) formerly operated a complementary computer software business to that being conducted by the first defendant. On 30 June 1997, the first defendant purchased the plaintiffs' previous business.

There were three significant agreements which governed the relationship between the parties and their associated companies. The first of these is what
I will call "the Assets Purchase Agreement" which was executed on 30 June,
On the same day, the first defendant and Mr Galipienzo entered into a further agreement which I will call the "Service Agreement". Disputes soon arose between the parties, and, on 11 September 1997, a document whose cover sheet expressed the words "Escrow Deed in Respect of Adjustments to the Asset
Purchase Agreement dated 30 June 1997" which I will call the "Escrow Deed" was entered into by Solution 6 Pty Ltd (the second defendant) which is a subsidiary of the first defendant, the corporate plaintiff and a company CCW
Nominees Pty Ltd ("CCW") which was described as "agent".
Unfortunately it was never said for whom it was agent. I have assumed from its name that CCW is a nominee company controlled by the defendants' solicitors
Messrs Corrs Chambers Westgarth. It has submitted to any order the court might make in these proceedings.

For simplicity, I have from time to time referred to the various parties in the interests of the defendants as "Solution 6" and have sometimes referred to one or other or both plaintiffs as "the plaintiffs".

The Escrow Deed required CCW to hold $800,000 for three years subject to the terms of that deed.

Clause 4. 3 of the Escrow Deed provides as follows: "4.3 Release of Escrow Amount on termination of employment of 
Mr Guy Galipienzo 
If at any time during the term of this agreement Mr Guy Galipienzo's employment with Solution 6 Holdings Limited is terminated by 
Solution 6 Holdings Limited with due cause or Mr Guy Galipienzo hands in his resignation as an employee of Solution 6 Holdings 
Limited and hence terminates his employment, Solution 6 
Holdings Limited may by notice to every other party terminate this document. Upon receipt of such a notice the Agent shall withdraw the Escrow Amount from the Escrow Account and pay the Escrow Amount to the Depositor." 
The defendants allege, and the plaintiffs deny, that the employment of Mr
Galipienzo was terminated with due cause on 11 March 1998. The plaintiffs seek a declaration that that termination was in breach of the Service Agreement and was contrary to the Escrow Deed and that the agent CCW is liable to pay $800,000 and the first defendant is liable to pay $150,000 damages for breach.

There is no doubt at all that the first defendant did give the first plaintiff a notice of termination of employment on 11 March 1998. It purportedly gave that notice pursuant to clause 6(e)(ii) of the Service Agreement "on the grounds that Guy Galipienzo has committed a grave misconduct or dishonesty which in the opinion of the Board has injured or tended to injure the reputation of [the first defendant]." Particulars were given that Mr
Galipienzo had communicated with the first defendant's principal lender, a company called in evidence "IBF" which communication was influential in the decision by IBF to recover money it lent to the first defendant, if necessary, by the appointment of a receiver.

The Service Agreement provides that the employment of the Executive (that is
Mr Galipienzo) by the first defendant shall be terminated by whatever of various events first occurs. The events stated include those mentioned in clause 6 (e)(ii) viz "that the Executive: is charged with any criminal offence (involving moral turpitude) or commence any grave misconduct or dishonesty in either case which may injure or tend to injure the reputation of Solution 6 or its related corporations or which in the reasonable opinion of the Board brings the Executive and 
Solution 6 or any of its related companies into serious disrepute; ...".

The Board of the relevant company resolved at its meeting of 11 March 1998, "to give a notice of dismissal to Guy Galipienzo pursuant to clause 6(e)(ii) of his service agreement dated 30 June 1997 on the grounds that Guy Galipienzo has committed a grave misconduct or dishonesty which in the opinion of the
Board has injured or tendered to injure the reputation of Solution 6 and has exacerbated Solution 6's serious dispute, by virtue of communications between
Guy Galipienzo and/or his lawyers on the one hand and Integral Business
Finance Pty Ltd (IBF), principal lender to Solution 6 on the other hand. The
Board was satisfied that his actions led to IBF's threat to appoint a receiver which became public requiring suspension of public trading of shares in
Solution 6 and required the incurring of public notoriety through the bringing of proceedings by Solution 6 in the Supreme Court of New South Wales." 
I have set out this concatenation of words verbatim. I assume the drafter of the resolution meant "tended" rather than "tendered". It will be noted that the words do not follow either of the limbs enabling the Board to dismiss for grave misconduct.

A significant part of the argument before me was whether Mr Galipienzo had committed "grave misconduct" within the meaning of this clause. However, Mr
Hutley SC and Mr Dubler for the defendants put that this was not necessarily the correct way of approaching the matter. They submitted that the proper approach was to construe the Escrow Deed which was the source of Mr
Galipienzo's right to be paid the monies held by CCW and determine what was "due cause" under that deed. The Service Agreement, which was between different parties, was only one factor that might lead to a solution as to what the parties meant by "due cause" in the Escrow Deed. On the other hand,
Mr Ashhurst for the plaintiffs submitted that "due cause" in the Escrow Deed harks back to clause 6(e)(ii) of the Service Agreement which refers to dismissal for, inter alia, grave misconduct which may injure or tend to injure the reputation of the first defendant.

In my view, the submission of Mr Hutley SC and Mr Dubler is correct. The two basic indicators that this is so are, first, that the parties are completely different in the two deeds. Secondly, the Escrow Deed itself bears on its cover sheet, as I have already indicated, that it is supplemental not to the
Service Agreement, but to the Assets Purchase Agreement. However, when one is looking to see the words "just cause" one of course looks at the contractual employment relationship both expressed in the contract and under the general law as well as under any relevant awards.

I believe the first question to consider is whether Mr Galipienzo has committed grave misconduct which might tend to injure the reputation of the first defendant. I will thus first consider the construction of clause (e)(ii) of the Service Agreement.

The word "misconduct" of an employee covers a wider field than just dishonesty. It may include breach of the duty of fidelity which makes the continuing relationship impossible. It may include also conduct away from the work place which is of such a nature that it disqualifies the employee of credibility in the eyes of the employer or its customers. An illustration from a former age is where a midwife who was living in a de facto relationship with a man not her husband was held to have been guilty of misconduct even though the matter went to her character and not her skill; see Stock versus Central
Midwives Board [[1915] 3 KB 756 (Mrs] Stock was actually acquitted on the facts on appeal and it may be that the social structure of present day New South Wales would produce a different result anyway, but the case is illustrative of the basal proposition). Likewise, a stockbroker's clerk or even a solicitor's clerk who is constantly seen gambling heavily may be guilty of misconduct. Again, conviction of a crime committed outside the work place may be sufficient, such as in Hussein v
Westpac Banking Corp [(1995) 59 IR 103], where a bank employed the applicant as a migrant service officer and he had been convicted of fraud in a matter completely unconnected with his work, nonetheless it was held that the bank was entitled to dismiss him for misconduct.

However, the instant clause does not just use the word "misconduct" or even the usual "wilful and serious misconduct", but rather the expression "grave misconduct". So far as my researches and the researches of counsel have been able to discover, there has only been one reported case where this particular term has been considered judicially. The case is Poad versus Scarborough
Guardians [[1914] 3 KB 959.] 
In that case a relieving collector of moneys for several years had been using money paid to him for his own purposes and then at the end of each quarter paying what was due to his employers into their account. He also demonstrated irregularities in his accounts in that he charged his employers with welfare payments made to people who were in fact dead. Section 7 of the English Poor
Law Officers Superannuation Act 1896 provided that an officer who "ceases to hold office in consequence of any offence of a fraudulent character, or of grave misconduct, shall forfeit all claim to any superannuation allowance ...". The argument before the Court of Appeal was whether the words "fraudulent character" also gave flavour to the words "grave misconduct". The
Court of Appeal held that they did not. Lord Reading CJ with whom Phillimore
LJ and Lush J agreed, said at 968, "But we have to give a meaning to the words `grave misconduct,' and I come to the conclusion that those words mean that if a person has been guilty of misconduct alone to which one would not apply the adjective `grave,' that is not sufficient to disentitle him to his superannuation. The misconduct must be of a higher standard than that which would be applied, for example, in the test of whether an employer was justified in dismissing his servant for misconduct. I think we must come to the conclusion that when Parliament introduced the word `grave' before the word `misconduct' it meant that the misconduct must be not only of a character which could properly be described as misconduct, but also that the misconduct must be such as would amount to misconduct of a grave - that is serious and even very serious - character." 
In Attorney-General for Ceylon versus Perera [[1953] AC 200], the Privy
Council held, in a criminal case, that the word "grave" when used as qualifying provocation was a relative term which needed to be assessed in the light of the facts of the relevant case.

It is useful to spend a little time looking at the authorities which deal with serious misconduct to see at what sort of level the decisions have been pitched.

The Australian Industrial Court considered the question in North v
Television Corporation Ltd [(1976) 11 ALR 599.] In that case a journalist was entitled under the award to 12 weeks' notice or pay in lieu unless dismissed for wilful and serious misconduct. The facts were unusual. The employee was charged with putting together the television news bulletin. He needed to use the telex machine at 6 pm to put the final touches to the bulletin. However, at that time the Department of the Media chose to send a memorandum to all television stations which tied up the machines for a quarter of an hour. It then asked for acknowledgement from each media outlet in turn which was expending even more time and the employee sent a response that anyone with any sense would not be tying up the telex machines at that time of night and to go away. As the employer had been having unpleasant discussions with the Minister for the Media at that time, it dismissed the employee for serious misconduct. The employee succeeded in recovering his 12 weeks' pay before the Full Court. At pp 608-609, Smithers and Evatt, JJ said that in order to find out whether there had been misconduct the court had to consider what work the employee was retained to do and what obligations the parties had agreed upon as important or even vital and that misconduct must refer to conduct so seriously in breach of the contract that the employer should not be bound to continue the employment.

This test was again used by Wilcox, CJ of the Commonwealth Industrial
Relations Court in Gooley versus Westpac Banking Corp <case>; [(1995) 59 IR 262.] In that case, Mr Gooley was employed in the consulting and advisory services department of the bank whose duty was to give advice to corporations. Whilst he was employed he established his own company. He used information which the bank said was confidential in advising clients of his own business and was dismissed for serious misconduct. At p 269, Wilcox, CJ said, "The question whether Mr Gooley was guilty of serious misconduct requires an examination, not only of his actions, but also his mental processes relative to them." The information that was used by Mr Gooley was held by the Judge not to be information which Mr Gooley believed was confidential; accordingly the most he had done was to make an error of judgment and he was not guilty of serious misconduct.

In the same volume in Hussein versus Westpac Banking Corp (supra), the question of serious misconduct where the employee has been convicted of a criminal matter unconnected with the employment is discussed. The discussion seems to suggest that there is only serious misconduct in such a situation where the conduct behind the conviction has a relevant connection with the performance of the work of the employee. Thus where a migrant adviser of a bank was convicted of obtaining property by deception arising out of the operation of bank accounts of his aunt, the court thought that there were sufficient grounds to terminate the contract of employment.

In Johnson versus Marshall Sons & Co Ltd [[1906] AC 409], Lord Loreburn,
LC said at 412 that "serious misconduct" meant that the misconduct itself had to be serious not just the consequences of that misconduct. At 413, Lord James said that the words "serious misconduct" "represent a higher standard of misconduct than that would justify immediate dismissal." All the law lords thought in that case that in each case the question was one of fact to be considered in all the circumstances.

I think I only need mention two other cases. In Laws versus London Chronicle (Indicator Newspapers) Ltd [[1959] 2 All ER 285], a woman had accompanied her superior into the managing director's office. There was a dressing down of the superior who said he was not taking any more of that and would go taking his staff with him. He left the office and the woman turned to follow him. The managing director told her to stay where she was but the woman followed her superior out of the room. She was then dismissed for disobedience of a lawful command constituting misconduct. The Court of Appeal held that not every act of disobedience of a lawful order would entitle an employer to dismiss. There had to be a disobedience showing that there had been breach of an essential condition of the contract of service. In all the circumstances the disobedience did not amount to misconduct.

Finally, in Jackson versus Invicta Plastics Ltd [[1987] BCLC 329], a chief executive of the defendant company was dismissed after a power struggle in the board. The reason given for dismissal was that he had acted in his own interest in voting for an extension of the service contracts to executives including himself. The company relied on a passage in Gower, Principles of
Modern Company Law (Sweet & Maxwell London), which, in the 6th edition appears at p 601 in a slightly different form, viz: "Without the informed consent of the company, (directors) must not place themselves in a position in which their personal interests or duties to other persons are liable to conflict with their duties to the company." 
Peter Pain, J said that the proposition in its stark form, that is, that there was a duty that a director should not put himself in a position where there was a conflict of interest could not be right "as it is common for directors also to be employed under a service agreement, which means that there must inevitably be at least a possibility of conflict between their personal interests and the interests of the company." His Lordship said that the vital words in the statement are "without the consent of the company". To do this, one looks to see the articles of association and other relevant documents and if there has been consent, then the director may act notwithstanding conflict, though he or she must still act bona fide in the interests of the company when casting a vote. Thus, in Jackson's case as the director acted with the motive that it was necessary to ensure that the management team was held together in a time of uncertainty, he was not guilty of any misconduct.

In the instant case, the word "wilful" is not used in connection with "grave misconduct" so that it may be that one does not go into the state of mind of the executive director concerned to the same extent as one might have done so had the word "wilful" been present. However, the Jackson case shows that one must take very deeply into consideration the fact that a person is both a director and an executive before making an assessment as to whether he or she has been guilty of misconduct as an executive. The corollary is that one also takes into account the person's role as an executive when assessing compliance with duties as a director.

With this background, I now turn to consider the facts of the instant case.

The defendants' principal contention was that Mr Galipienzo had disobeyed a lawful direction given to him not to approach IBF. There were various versions given of this direction. Four of these need to be considered.

The first allegedly took place at the directors' meeting of 25 February 1998 the Chairman, Mr Redden, uttered the words "The negotiations with IBF are difficult and need to be handled very carefully and the number of people who have contact with them has to be limited. So only CEO and I should be dealing with IBF." I will call this "the Redden Command". It is clear that the Redden
Command was not made the subject of any resolution of the board, but it is put that where the Chairman of the Board at a board meeting makes such a statement and there is no dissent, then the board must be taken to have acquiesced in it and given authority to it.

The second statement was that during the board meeting of 25 February 1998, the Managing Director, Mr Tyler, had given Mr Galipienzo a direct instruction not to approach IBF. I will call this "the Board's Command".

Thirdly, immediately after the meeting of 25 February, Mr Tyler said to Mr
Galipienzo, "Remember Guy, the IBF matter is very sensitive and could have significant consequences for the Company and remember you have explicit instructions not to make contact with them." I will call this the "Tyler
Command".

Fourthly, Mr Stovold, one of the directors of the Solution 6 companies, who impressed me as being a pleasant, competent and believable witness, unaffected by cross examination, put the matter of command on a different basis and this must now be examined. He said in cross examination, "I believe ... it is totally inappropriate for an executive to go outside of his area of responsibility without reference to the Managing Director, whether that be
Board policy or not." Mr Stovold acknowledged that a director had a duty to appraise himself of matters such as a notice of demand, but that primarily the board could only function if there was confidence in the managing director and that until confidence in the managing director had been shattered, it was incumbent on board members and executive directors not to act in such a way as might undermine the managing director's authority.

I will examine this fourth way of approaching the case in due course. I will first consider whether the evidence supports any of the first three.

The trouble about all these three statements is that there is virtually no contemporaneous documentary evidence to support any of them. Furthermore, there is a real question concerning the ability of one or more of the members of the board to prevent another member of the board of a company that is listed on one of the Australian Stock Exchanges to do anything that the latter conscientiously considers to be his or her duty. I will deal with this matter after considering the basic question of fact.

Some background needs to be stated. At all material times IBF was the principal financier of the first defendant, though it would appear to some extent that IBF was merely an intermediary for the real lenders including the
AMP Society or one of its subsidiaries. When the first defendant was acquiring the plaintiffs' business, it sought to borrow the purchase price from IBF who refused to lend it. Another method was found of managing the funds to buy the plaintiffs' business, but this left the first defendant abysmally short of cash resources. It was using all its Chief Executive's negotiating skills to induce IBF or the AMP or both to make further advances. Just what success these negotiations were having is unclear because the affidavit evidence of Mr
Tyler and the affidavit of Mr Carden, the negotiator for IBF conflict and Mr
Carden's material was only read as part of the documentary evidence in this case; he was not cross examined. Mr Tyler was cross examined. He did not make a very good impression on me. He was one of those witnesses who, whenever asked a direct question, would answer in a long, mostly unresponsive speech, and appeared to be a person of supreme optimism often without much to support such optimism.

It may be that the proper assessment of the first defendant's financial position in mid-February 1998 was that it was experiencing liquidity problems or had a temporary cash shortage, or it may be that it was insolvent. I do not need to make a finding on this and I will not do so. One of the reasons why it is both difficult to make a finding and why no finding should be made is that proceedings between the first defendant and IBF were subsequently settled on the basis that IBF would not appoint a receiver and that the first defendant would pay it a substantial sum of money. Mr Tyler kept saying in the witness box that the first defendant had a good case against IBF. When asked why it was that the directors carrying out their duties settled a very good case by paying a large sum of money to the person with the poor case, there was merely an unresponsive set of words uttered by Mr Tyler.

However, whatever the situation was, the first defendant was in dire financial straits in mid-February. Moreover, the board was being continually pressed by speeches by Mr Tyler, Mr Saunders (the defendants' financial controller) and others purportedly supported by masses of documentation that the company was in good shape. Mr Galipienzo says, and I accept what he says, that he overheard Mr Tyler in a conversation on the telephone say that unless the company had more money, it could not pay its staff. Although this was denied and it was put to me that if Mr Galipienzo had actually overheard such a conversation he would have reported it to the board, it is actually reinforced by Mr Carden's evidence that he was told by Mr Tyler something similar when Mr
Tyler was urging further cash advances.

I now turn to the basic question of fact.

The evidence is that at the board meeting on 25 February 1998, the Chairman,
Mr Redden, was at the head of the table: immediately to his right was the
Company Secretary, Mr Cianciolo. Next to him was Mr Tyler and then Mr
Galipienzo. On the other side of the table Mr Stovold was immediately to the
Chairman's left, then Mr Clarkin and Mr Ashman.

Mr Stovold said that after the meeting he did not observe any discussion between Mr Galipienzo and Mr Tyler. Indeed, apart from the fact that the two men were sitting next to each other during the meeting, he cannot recall seeing them together. Mr Stovold remembered that Mr Galipienzo left the meeting before he, Mr Stovold left, and that when Mr Stovold got to the lift,
Mr Galipienzo was standing by the lift. They got into the lift and travelled down to the carpark where they had a conversation for about quarter of an hour.

Mr Clarkin said that he thought that Mr Galipienzo was the first director to leave the room followed by Mr Stovold. He could not be certain of Mr
Galipienzo talking to Mr Tyler after the meeting, but he believes that there was a very short, about half a minute, discussion between the two of them, but he does not know what it was about. Mr Tyler says that he had given two previous instructions to Mr Galipienzo, but on 25 February, after the meeting finished, he was sitting next to Mr Galipienzo and turned to him and said, "Guy, look, this is very critical, make sure you don't contact IBF." Both men were standing at the time. Mr Tyler thinks he walked back to his office in front of Mr Galipienzo. He would have had this conversation when Mr Redden was about four metres away and Mr Cianciolo was about a metre away. Mr Redden couldn't recall who left the meeting first, but it was either Mr Galipienzo or
Mr Tyler, or perhaps Mr Cianciolo. He knew he left the meeting about 15 minutes after Mr Galipienzo and met him downstairs. He had no recollection of
Mr Tyler speaking to Mr Galipienzo after the meeting.

The first plaintiff said in cross examination that he certainly had the impression that there was a delicate relationship between the first defendant and IBF which was under the active consideration of the executives of the first defendant responsible for it. He cannot recall Mr Redden saying that the negotiations were difficult, but he could have done so. He denies, however, that he was told at the meeting that negotiations with IBF were difficult and needed to be handled very carefully. It was later put to Mr Galipienzo in cross examination - 
Q. "I suggest to you it was made clear to you at that meeting that you were not to contact IBF the lender to the company?" 
A. "That is absurdly untrue." 
Q. "I suggest to you it was stated quite clearly that, in substance, because of the delicate state of the negotiations those who should be involved on behalf of Solution 6 should be limited to Mr Tyler and the Chairman, Mr Redden?" 
A. "That is absurdly incorrect." 
Q. "Why do you say that is absurdly incorrect?" 
A. "Because I would have heard such an instruction and I would not have gone above the board on such instructions." 
Q. "You would not have objected to such instructions?" 
A. "If I was given such instructions I would have accepted them." 
There was nothing in the original minutes prepared by Mr Cianciolo to refer to the Board Command, or indeed, the Tyler Command, or the Redden Command. Mr
Cianciolo says that he circulated a draft of the minutes of the meeting of 25
February on 4 March to Mr Tyler and Mr Redden. A day or two afterwards, Mr
Tyler said, "Do you recall me telling Guy Galipienzo at he meeting of 25
February 1998, that in view of the seriousness of the dispute between IBF and his personal conflict of interest, that he was not to contact IBF?" Mr
Cianciolo says it was then he recalled that there was such a conversation. Mr
Cianciolo then prepared minutes which were then annexed to an affidavit which
Mr Tyler swore that very same day, 6 March. The first page of these minutes are as follows: "The Managing Director summarised in detail the recent developments concerning the company's cash position for the benefit of Mr Galipienzo. Mr Galipienzo had been excluded from board meetings held via teleconference on 19 February and 20 February due to what was considered a material conflict with the company arising from his current dispute.

He was advised about what had taken place during those meetings. He was further advised because of his personal conflict of interest and the seriousness of the dispute with IBF he was not to contact IBF directly in connection with his personal dispute." 
It will be noticed that the terms of this note are different to what Mr Tyler had said was his instruction in that the instruction in the reconstituted minutes was that Mr Galipienzo was not to contact IBF only in connection with his personal dispute.

However, the first paragraph of the advising is itself a significant matter.
There is no dispute that members of the board other than Mr Galipienzo purported to hold a meeting of the board on 19 and 20 February. No notice of these so-called meetings was ever given to Mr Galipienzo. The proffered justification for this was that the company's solicitor had advised that this could be done. No evidence from the solicitor was ever produced. No documentary evidence to the solicitor as to the question he was asked was produced. Furthermore, counsel did not make any submissions to support in any way the view that as a matter of law, if the majority of the members of the board conclude that there may be a conflict of interest with one director that they can hold a board meeting without giving him any notice of the meeting or of its business and meet without him. Mr Tyler and others gave evidence that that's what their solicitor had advised. I am not prepared to take the view that the solicitor deliberately gave wrong advice and the only reasonable conclusion is that the proper information was not given to the solicitor.

The attempts to hold the meetings behind the back of Mr Galipienzo and the attempt to hide behind solicitor's advice which had been obtained without full disclosure are matters which go towards the credibility of the non-Galipienzo forces on the board. The fact that the careful company secretary, well trained in taking notes of meetings, did not record anything that was said at the board in his notes, nor put it in his draft minutes, but only included it after the managing director had suggested something to him immediately before the managing director swore an affidavit which annexed the reconstituted minutes is again something which fills me with no confidence that the reconstituted minutes are accurate. Furthermore, there are not only the four versions of the command which I have set out, but there are at least two other versions where Mr Tyler said that in late January he told Mr Galipienzo not to approach IBF.

I found nothing in Mr Galipienzo's demeanour to make me disbelieve him.
Although there are more witnesses on the other side than on his side, it seems to me with their various discrepancies and the lack of opportunity for Mr
Redden and Mr Tyler to speak to Mr Galipienzo immediately after the board meeting, that it is more likely than not that neither the Redden Command nor the Tyler Command was ever made. I am of the same view as to the Board Command which was never recorded as a resolution and indeed the circumstances of it being recorded merely as an advising are themselves such as to excite particular suspicion.

It follows that I am not able to hold on the balance of probabilities that the commands not to communicate with IBF were given.

It is thus unnecessary to consider whether, if the commands had been made, they were binding on Mr Galipienzo. However, in case the matter goes elsewhere, I will briefly consider that matter.

Had a command been given to Mr Galipienzo by the board or by the Managing
Director it would have been binding on him, at least in his role as an executive.

As far as the Redden Command is concerned, it is agreed that there was no board resolution agreeing to the Redden Command or endorsing it. However, Mr
Hutley SC and Mr Dubler put that where a Chairman of a company makes a pronouncement at a board meeting, and there is no dissent, that the other members of the board must have acquiesced in it, so that it is, in effect, a resolution of the board.

It not infrequently happens at a board meeting that the Chairman makes a suggestion from which there is no dissent, and the board then moves onto the next matter. An instance may be that a particular item of business is discussed, the Chairman suggests that the Chief Executive might have a talk with Mr X and report back to the next meeting and that the matter should be merely placed on the agenda of the next meeting. That situation is really, to my mind, the same as the board passing a resolution. It will not, however, be every comment made by a Chairman at a meeting which, if not the subject of dissent, operates as a quasi resolution of the board.

I was not referred to any authority for this proposition and on first principles I cannot see how it could be correct. The corporate instrument is the board. The board makes its decisions by a standard procedure of making resolutions which are carried or lost depending on the majority vote. I cannot see how there is any room for an informal resolution by acquiescence.

Of course, there are situations where the company may be estopped from asserting that there has been a resolution of the board if something which is not its decision is promulgated as its decision and someone acts on that to his or her detriment, or where there has been a mistaken assumption made as to a decision of the board of a company which has been acted on for many years; see for instance Ho Tung versus Man On Insurance Company Ltd [[1902] AC .] 
Another exception is where there is a closely held corporation and all the corporators endorse a proposal. The proposal will be binding on the corporation in the sense that individual members had waived the right to allege that there was no formal resolution; see Re Duomatic Ltd [[1969] 2
Ch 365] and Herrman versus Simon (1990) 4 ACSR 81, 83.

Again the existence of <case> of the Corporations Law means that people treat many defects as if they had not occurred.

None of those exceptions apply in the instant case.

Again, I cannot see how the Chairman of a board of a public company has authority merely by virtue of his or her office (and no other authority was demonstrated in the instant case) to give a command to another director, even an executive director, that he or she should not do something.

Accordingly, in my view, the Redden Command, even if made, could not operate as a lawful direction of the board to Mr Galipienzo.

I now turn to the fourth way the matter was put in the evidence of Mr Stovold.
This is that an executive or executive director who knows that the board is handling a matter a particular way and it is delicate, and who interferes with the chosen method, may well be guilty of misconduct. Because of the emphasis put on the first three commands in the way the case was presented, this aspect of the case was not as keenly debated in submissions as others. It does not involve any contentious issue of fact.

The duty in the terms suggested by Mr Stovold really should be looked at in its two aspects: (a) loyalty as a director; and (b) loyalty as an executive. I am using the word "loyalty" as a shorthand word to denote the duty not to meddle in matters which are being dealt with by some other appropriate officer of the corporation.

In Marchesi versus Barnes <case>; [[1970] VR 434] at 438, Gowans, J, when referring to the statutory duty to act honestly said, "A breach of the obligation to act bona fide in the interests of the company involves a consciousness that what is being done is not in the interests of the company, and deliberate conduct in disregard of that knowledge." 
In the present case, so far as being a director is concerned, whilst the majority of the board may have considered that what Mr Galipienzo did was not in accordance with the interests of the company, it would seem to me that on the balance of probabilities he believed it was. Accordingly, there is no breach of any duty as a director. I now turn to the question of possible breach of duty as an executive.

As Macken, McCarry & Sappideen say in their Law of Employment 4th ed (LBC 1997) p 138, "Principal among the obligations imposed upon the employee by the common law is the duty of fidelity and good faith. The obligations imposed upon an employee by this duty are not easy to define ... .
.... It would cover many obligations which can be and often are categorised as separate duties, such as attending for work on time and remaining until the end of the allotted period of employment, performing one's work in a competent manner and honestly, and obeying lawful orders." The extent of the duty will depend on many factors including the place where the employee is in the pecking order; see Hivac Ltd versus Park Royal Scientific Instruments Ltd [[1946] Ch 169], 174. Breach of the duty, however, will involve a conflict between the employee's interest and his duty to his or her employer or something which impedes the faithful performance of the employee's obligations to the employer.

However, as the High Court said in Blyth Chemicals Ltd versus Bushnell <case>; [(1933) 49 CLR 66], 82, per Dixon and McTiernan, JJ, in order for there to be a breach of the obligation "... the conduct of the employee must itself involve incompatibility, conflict, or impediment, or be destructive of confidence. An actual repugnance between his acts and his relationship must be found. It is not enough that ground for uneasiness as to its future conduct arises." 
In Initial Services Ltd versus Putterill [[1968] 1 QB 396], 405, Lord
Denning, MR said that counsel "said that in the employment of every servant there is an obligation that he will not, before or after his service, disclose information or documents which he has received in confidence. Now I quite agree that there is such an obligation. It is imposed by law." His Lordship then went on to deal with the exceptions. The "whistle blower" exception has attracted a considerable amount of discussion; see for instance Cripps [(1985) 101 LQR 506] and McCarry [[1981] SydLawRw ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/SydLawRw/1981/4.html "View Case" ); [(1981) 9 Sydney Law Review 333], but for reasons I will consider later, is irrelevant here.

Not everything that is said at a board meeting would come within the class of information which was confidential to the company. Nor can the company improve its position by endorsing on the top of the board papers, as commonly occurs in practice, the words "the information contained in these papers is confidential to members of the board" vide Re Dalrymple's Application [[1957] RPC 449.] However, in the instant case, the confidentiality of the company's position as to its financial crisis would, with respect, be obvious to anybody. An employee who was likely to or actually did confer with persons inimical to the interests of the company and who possessed such information might well be considered to be in breach of the duty of fidelity. After all, the duty of fidelity does not appear to be settled into distinct compartments such as failure to obey lawful and reasonable commands, but rather is an overriding duty of which such matters are mere illustrations.

I would accept the proposition Mr Stovold advances, that an executive who is aware that a particular matter is being handled by another officer of the company and who interferes may well be guilty of misconduct.

In the instant case there is no doubt at all that Mr Galipienzo did in fact confer with IBF who were contemplating proceedings against the company or to put a receiver into the company. Even assuming that none of the Redden
Command, the Board Command nor the Tyler Command was given, the dismissal of
Mr Galipienzo would prima facie appear justified under ordinary principles of industrial law because there was a breach of the duty of fidelity going to the continued confidence of the working relationship. However, one must, before coming to a conclusion, analyse Mr Galipienzo's own evidence.

Mr Galipienzo prepared an affidavit sworn on 11 March, 1998 for use at the
Board meeting to be held that day. The defendants also at various stages prepared affidavits for similar purposes. I must note that this is quite the wrong thing to do. An affidavit is only to be used in court proceedings and is only to be sworn after those proceedings have been instituted or immediately before institution. Indeed in the law of 200 years ago, swearing an affidavit or oath except where required could mean 14 years transportation to New South
Wales. If a solemn statement needs to be made, a statutory declaration must be used.

However, both in that affidavit and also at the board meeting held the same day, Mr Galipienzo told the board that he was concerned that he had not been invited to attend meetings of the board because of an alleged conflict of interest. He had then been disturbed by Mr Tyler shouting on the phone that the company would be insolvent if it could not get any more money, that the "board meetings" to which Mr Galipienzo had not been given notice had considered matters of solvency, that there had been a tirade by Mr Tyler as to how IBF was being unreasonable, dishonest and unethical, together with another tirade as to how he, Galipienzo, was being unreasonable, dishonest and unethical. He saw his solicitor Mr Merlo and was advised that he, Merlo, had contacted IBF to find out what the problem was and had ascertained that IBF had issued default notices. After some detective work Mr Galipienzo found out
Mr Carden's address and spoke to him and was told of all the problems that had occurred.

There is no indication in the conduct of Mr Galipienzo that he was motivated in any way to harm the company or to act other than in its best interests. He was an 18 per cent shareholder in the company and he had a lot to lose by the company's failure.

The cross examination of Mr Galipienzo commenced with the proposition that Mr
Saunders, the financial controller, had given a full presentation at the board meeting of 25 February, 1998. Mr Galipienzo agreed he had indeed done so. It was put to Mr Galipienzo that this was an endeavour to inform him (Galipienzo) about the situation; Mr Galipienzo said that nothing that happened at that meeting in his view had occurred with any intent of giving him information. Mr
Hutley SC then put to Mr Galipienzo that if he had any problems why did he not ring Mr Saunders? Mr Galipienzo explained that there was already conflict between himself and the other members of the board and himself and Mr Saunders and the usual response was that the lawyers would be in touch with each other and accordingly it wasn't much of a suggestion to take that course. Then Mr
Galipienzo made it clear that before he saw Mr Carden he rang Mr Ashman, another member of the board, and one who appears on all accounts to have been a thoroughly reputable person and Mr Ashman agreed to see Mr Carden with Mr
Galipienzo. These are hardly the actions of a "crusader" on the board who is acting in his own interests. Again, Mr Galipienzo was the largest shareholder in the company and had nothing to gain by bringing it down. I accept Mr
Galipienzo's evidence that he found it hard to get information that was accurate about what was happening with IBF and was very concerned about the company's position.

It seems to me that despite his reasons, under the law of employment, Mr
Galipienzo was guilty of misconduct and the Solution 6 companies were entitled to terminate his employment.

However, that does not dispose of the matter for two reasons. First the misconduct must be grave misconduct which may injure or tend to injure the reputation of Solution 6. Secondly, the focus of this present litigation is not just on the dismissal, but rather on the Escrow Deed and the fund of $800,000 whose fate depends on considerations in addition to mere dismissal or termination of employment.

As I mentioned earlier, "grave" misconduct represents a higher standard of misconduct than that which would justify immediate dismissal, Johnson v
Marshall Sons & Co Ltd (supra at p 413).

Does the misconduct in the present circumstances amount to "grave misconduct" and, if it does, what is the demonstrated impact on Solution 6's reputation? 
There is a strong argument that the misconduct must be almost by definition, grave or serious, because the whole functioning of the company depends on people having allotted roles. However, the Court must consider all the relevant circumstances. Particularly relevant is the fact that Mr Galipienzo was in a minority interest, and that the first defendant when "merging" with
Mr Galipienzo's interests, must be taken to have known and consented to Mr
Galipienzo acting to preserve his minority position, at least up to a reasonable point. Were it otherwise, then any minority partner after a merger would be bound to make his or her interest subservient in every respect to the interests of the majority.

Then there is the background fact, which I accept, that Mr Galipienzo honestly felt himself deprived of vital information. There were long speeches made by the majority, but when Mr Galipienzo asked for specific information, he felt himself fobbed off. He was extremely disturbed by the possibility that the company might be insolvent brought about by Mr Tyler's loud telephone conversation. He found out that the major lender had issued default notices and no-one seemed to be doing anything about them. All this was in a generally hostile environment.

In all these circumstances, I could not find that the misconduct was grave misconduct.

I should add that, at one stage, it appeared as if there was the scenario that there was a publicly listed company that may or may not have been insolvent where the majority of the board was providing over-optimistic forecasts to the board meeting. In such a scenario, even if there had been a command for only the Chairman and the Chief Executive Officer to discuss the matters with the lender, would a board member be failing in his or her duty if he or she did not go against such instruction and make appropriate enquiries? 
In the instant case one could say that there was an a fortiori position because the lender had issued a threat to enforce its loan on the basis that interest payments were not made. There was no other immediate source of moneys to the company, yet the Chief Executive formed the view that he should not do anything because he was in Melbourne on the day in question, he thought that the breach was only technical and that the lender would not do anything over the weekend, so that he did not even concern himself with seeing that all other members of the board were acquainted with the threat. This attitude was exacerbated by the fact that the Chairman of the Board did not really seem to me to appreciate the enormity of the situation. He gave his occupation as a merchant banker, and that he was experienced in the finance industry, and tried to give the impression that anybody who thought that a lender could enforce such a technical breach was stupid. This attitude tended to suggest to me that he had not really had that much experience in the cutting edge of the real financial world.

I am sure that if the scenario was one where an individual director of a public company thought that the majority members of the board were paid to give an over-optimistic picture of a company that was really insolvent despite any directions he had been given by the board meeting, it would be his duty to make at least such enquiries as would assist him to evaluate whether he should make any application to the court or to the Stock Exchange or otherwise.
Whether that would entitle him to talk directly to the lender is another matter.

However, when one looks at the instant case, we do not really have that scenario at all. Despite the groundwork that was laid, it was never put to any of the defendants' witnesses that they were hiding the true position from Mr
Galipienzo, or that the company was really insolvent, or that the majority was really trying to keep from the public the fact of insolvency. In the light of this, I do not see how I can take this possible method of excuse from Mr
Galipienzo any further.

In any event, even if the general principle which I have enunciated were applicable to the instant case, there is quite a difference between a person who makes enquiries of neutral sources to check the facts given to him or her at a board meeting on the one hand, and a person who goes out to a corporation with interests opposed to his or her own corporation, on the other.

Had the scenario been as painted, probably the strongest step that could have been justified would have been to make independent enquiries of the Australian
Securities Commission or of other statutory authorities or for Mr Galipienzo to have his solicitor write to the chief executive officer with concerns. It is hard to see how a direct approach to the lender would have been within the situations of conflict to which the company must be taken to have consented and which would override the ordinary duty of loyalty.

The matter of the effect on the reputation of Solution 6 thus becomes academic. Mr Ashhurst argued that no reputation of Solution 6 was ever demonstrated which could be affected by what Mr Galipienzo had done. Mr
Hutley, SC and Mr Dubler put that this was absurd because the evidence clearly showed that the Solution 6 group had international respect as one of the leading groups of companies in this sector of the computer software market.
The evidence tended to show that the defendants' reputation was patchy, being good in some respects, unfavourable in others. However, it had, at least some reputation which might be affected by unauthorised discussions with IBF.

Mr Ashhurst then put that there was no evidence that Mr Galipienzo's act did in fact harm the reputation. I believe that this submission is correct.
Despite what the majority noted in their minutes of meeting, the problem was that IBF was fed up with the attitude of Solution 6 and its perceived obstruction of IBF getting full information rather than anything Mr Galipienzo did. There is material to show that the other directors considered that it may tend to injure such reputation. However, in contrast to the final limb of clause 6(e)(ii) of the Service Agreement, the "tend to injure" must be a matter of objective fact rather than the reasonable opinion of the board.

Although there have been few occasions when the word "tend' has been judicially construed, the cases on the word show that the word has the connotation of something which substantially operates to bring about the proscribed event; see Hunt Transportation Inc versus Yellow Cab Inc [184 NW ](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=184%20NW%20%282d%29%20651 "View LawCiteRecord" ), 652 (1971)(Neb SC) and cf Murphy versus DPP <case>; [(1985) 7 FCR 55], 62.

I cannot see how Mr Galipienzo's conduct tended to injure the reputation of
Solution 6. The misconduct was in his going to see IBF when some other officer was in charge of discussions. That in itself would not objectively be conduct which would tend to injure the reputation of Solution 6. It may be that something Mr Galipienzo said at that meeting influenced IBF's actions towards
Solution 6. However, this is just so much speculation. In any event, it must be remembered that Mr Ashman also attended the meeting with Mr Carden and no complaint is made about that.

As an alternative to an act of grave misconduct which tends to injure the reputation is such misconduct which in the reasonable opinion of the board brings the executive and Solution 6 into serious disrepute. As I have set out earlier, the resolution of the Board dismissing Mr Galipienzo did not rely on this matter.

Accordingly, I do not find that there was a dismissal within the terms of clause 6(e)(ii) of the Service Agreement.

I must thus return to the Escrow Deed. For the purposes of clause 4.3 the employment of Mr Galipienzo has been terminated. It is terminated because even if it was wrongly terminated, that is a termination. It has not however been determined for due cause for the reasons given above, nor was there a resignation. Thus clause 4.3 does not apply. Clause 4.2 also cannot apply as
Mr Galipienzo did not last in his employment until the cancellation date. The only way in which the money can be released from escrow is by both parties executing a release notice.

This makes one consider whose money it is that is in escrow. Both parties say that the money is theirs.

As I understand it, the basic argument put forward by the first defendant is that it paid the money, the money was to be paid to Mr Galipienzo if certain events occurred, those events did not occur therefore the agent must repay the money to it. Mr Galipienzo's submission is that the surrounding facts show that there was a dispute between himself and the first defendant as to the amount that should have been paid for the acquisition of his business. That dispute was settled on the basis that the disputed sum would be placed into escrow and paid out in three years' time and there was an implied condition that both parties would co-operate together so as not to cause anything that would happen to prevent Mr Galipienzo collecting the money at the end of the three years. If there was a dismissal for cause or resignation then the money should go back to the company as per clause 4.3, but otherwise if any event occurred, particularly an event caused by Solution 6, the money should go to
Mr Galipienzo. Alternatively, damages would be payable to Mr Galipienzo of the amount which the breach of the implied condition to co-operate would produce.
In practice this is the same amount.

I first thought that it would be useful to look to see whether there was some general principle as to stakeholders' liabilities. Having looked again at 
Sorrell versus Finch [[1977] AC 728] Similarly, where the contract has failed there may be an action for money had and received against the stakeholder. In the instant case, the stakeholder is, as is the normal case of honourable stakeholders, willing to pay the money over to whomsoever it is due. Accordingly, none of these principles really assist the present case. 
On the true construction of the Escrow Deed, and in the circumstances which have occurred, can it be said who is entitled to the money left with the stakeholder? 
The deed requires that the depositor, the second defendant, Solution 6 Pty
Ltd, is to pay the escrow amount to the Agent. Clause 7 acknowledges that the
Agent is a stakeholder. Clause 12 says that the agreement embodies the entire understanding of the parties. The only part dealing with payment is clause 4 to which I have already referred.

Mr Hutley SC, makes the point that there are a whole series of situations that are not covered by the Escrow Deed. What, for instance, should happen should
Mr Galipienzo die before the three years are up? He says that these sort of considerations make it clear that unless the event happens by virtue of which the plaintiffs are entitled to be paid by the stakeholder they should revert to the person who paid them. There is much sense in this except that the background facts do make me consider that, although the payment was made by the second defendant, it was made to settle a dispute with the plaintiffs and it was paid in consideration of the settlement of the dispute.

There does not appear to be anything in the Escrow Deed expressly or even impliedly which suggests that the money paid to the stakeholder is to result to one or other of the parties if neither of the events in 4.2 or 4.3 take place. In equity the rule is that if A pays B to set up a trust in favour of C and the trust fails, there is a resulting trust to A who made the payment; see
Perpetual Trustee Co Ltd versus Griffin [(1962) 80 WN 266]; [[1963] NSWR 465.] However, resort to this principle does not seem to get one any further because, although the money was paid by the defendants, it was paid in consideration of settling a dispute with the plaintiffs (I use the terms plaintiffs and defendants generically).

Can the problem be solved then, by resort to some principle as to co-operation between the parties? 
There undoubtedly is such a principle. An apposite illustration is Stirling v Maitland <case>; [(1864) 5 B & S 840]; [[1861-73] All ER Rep 358.] There, a company agreed to pay Stirling certain moneys if it displaced Seton from its employment. The company that made the promise was then dissolved. The Court of
Queen's Bench held that this was a displacement but in the course of the judgment, Cochburn, CJ said that it must be implied that the defendants "will do nothing of their own motion to put an end to the company." 
There is no doubt there is such a principle: the question is how far it goes.
In Marshall versus Colonial Bank of Australasia Ltd <case>; [(1904) 1 CLR 632], (a case which has now been overruled on another point in
Commonwealth Trading Bank of Australia versus Sydney Wide Stores Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 148 CLR 304)], the High
Court said, when listing principles of law which were quite free from doubt, "Now, all contractual relations impose upon the parties a mutual obligation that neither shall do anything which is calculated to hamper the other in the performance of the contract on his part." (p 647). However, as Greig and
Davis point out in their Law of Contract (LBC 1987) p 536, because the significance of this principle is relatively weak, it will normally not be sufficient to form the basis of decision. The real problem is whether one can imply a term for each party to use its best endeavours to carry out the contract. These matters have recently been considered in depth by the Court of
Appeal in Australis Media Holdings Pty Ltd versus Telstra Corp Ltd 17 February, , unreported.

There are not many cases where parties to a commercial arrangement do not cover substantial possibilities at least in some general catchall provision.
However, it does happen.

One of the leading cases in which something like this occurred is Dahl v
Nelson, Donkin & Co [(1881) 6 App Cas 38.] In that case a charter provided that it was to conclude when the ship docked in the London
Surrey Commercial Docks. However, without fault of either party, the dock was full and the ship could not get in. The question was who should pay for the demurrage. Lord Watson said at p 59, "I have always understood that, when the parties to a mercantile contract ... have not expressed their intentions in a particular event, but have left these to implication, a Court of Law, in order to ascertain the implied meaning of the contract, must assume that the parties intended to stipulate for that which is fair and reasonable, having regard to their mutual interests and to the main objects of the contract. In some cases that assumption is the only test by which the meaning of the contract can be ascertained." That passage was endorsed and applied by Dixon, J in Bonython v The Commonwealth <case>; [(1948) 75 CLR 589], 625.

The Dahl versus Nelson principle, however, only comes into play where there is no other express or implied term which will deal with the situation,
Trollope & Colls Ltd versus North West Metropolitan Regional Hospital Board [[1973] 1 WLR 601], 613.

I find it impossible to find that there was any other implied term in the nature of co-operation between the parties. The parties would seem, from the background I have, to be at arm's length right from the beginning. They appreciated that circumstances might come up whereby Mr Galipienzo's contract of service would need to be terminated. However, they only provided for termination in one particular class of case which did not occur. It is, I think, almost impossible to say that there was a term that the defendants would keep Mr Galipienzo in their employ despite the fact that he may have committed misconduct if such misconduct did not amount to grave misconduct.

They have not said, however, what would happen in such cases or what would happen if Mr Galipienzo should die. When I say this I, of course, acknowledge that under clause 4.1 of the Escrow Deed the parties were to co-operate in giving a certificate of release to the stakeholder. However, they did not set out in their document who would be paid if the employment came to an end other than on the happening of the specified event.

However, even applying the Dahl versus Nelson principle, there is no answer which is obvious at first sight as to what would fair and reasonable parties have intended. A party in the position of the second defendant may well have said "We paid the money, we should get it back as the event for the plaintiff to obtain the money has not occurred." A fair and reasonable person on the part of the plaintiffs may very well have said that the money was paid as a compromise and it would be quite unconscionable for it all to be paid to the second defendant when the relationship had severed without the degree of blame provided for by the contract. Whilst both positions are understandable, they are really first positions and it would seem to me that fair and reasonable people going beyond their initial shots in negotiations would come to the view that in the case where the parties had to part because of mutual incompatibility or misconduct falling short of grave misconduct, it would be appropriate that they each take half the fund.

Accordingly, it seems to me that the proper solution to the principal problem posed for the court is to declare that each party is bound to join in a release notice to the stakeholder on the basis that they are each entitled to one-half of the fund (including interest) held by the stakeholder.

There is one other aspect of this case which is a discrete matter. Under clause 6 of the Service Agreement, should certain events occur then the "executive", ie Mr Galipienzo, is entitled to what is referred to as the prescribed termination benefit which is to be in full and final settlement of all amounts due to him except for statutory entitlements. The prescribed termination benefit in this case would be $130,000. Mr Galipienzo claims this amount.

In order for Mr Galipienzo to succeed on this claim he must show that his employment has been terminated under clauses 6(d) or 6(f) of the Service
Agreement or wrongfully (clause 7.1 of the Service Agreement). Clauses 6(d) and (f) do not apply. On the reasoning I have provided above, the executive was dismissed for misconduct but not grave misconduct. Accordingly, there was no wrongful termination of the agreement. Thus, Mr Galipienzo is not entitled to the prescribed termination benefit.

Accordingly, there should be a declaration as I have indicated that the parties are each entitled to half the sum held in escrow with the appropriate directions for putting an end to the escrow. In my view both parties have equally succeeded and failed and there should be no order as to costs. The exhibits may be returned after 28 days.
 * * * 
