

Kingsford Smith Transport Pty Limited and Anor versus Dimopoulos Matter No Ca /97 [1998] NSWSC 339 (13 July 1998) 
Last Updated: 9 September 1998 
KINGSFORD SMITH TRANSPORT PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus FIONA DIMOPOULOS 
CA 40368/97 July 1998 
Priestley JA, Meagher JA, Sheppard AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: APPEAL FROM TUPMAN J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40368/97 
DELIVERED: 13 JULY 1998 
HEARING DATE: 13 JULY 1998 
PARTIES: KINGSFORD SMITH TRANSPORT PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus Fiona DIMOPOULOS 
CORAM: PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, SHEPPARD AJA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: J MACONACHIE QC 
Respondent: A LESLIE QC 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: CKB PARTNERS 
Respondent: STEVE MASSELOS & CO 
CATCHWORDS: personal injury - negligence 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES: 5 
KINGSFORD SMITH TRANSPORT PTY LIMITED & ANOR versus Fiona DIMOPOULOS 
JUDGMENT 
MEAGHER JA: This is an appeal by some unsuccessful defendants in an action for negligence brought by the plaintiff, Mrs Fiona Dimopoulos, in relation to an accident which she suffered on 30 March 1991. 
She had been shopping at a butchers on the eastern side of Botany Road early one Saturday morning and was endeavouring to cross that road to the western side where her husband's car was parked. She had a look to the right and to the left and found, remarkably enough, that there was little traffic. She got as far as halfway and on the lines on the halfway point, where she stood for a while and seemed to hesitate.

Meanwhile, the defendant's car was driving in a northerly direction and he saw her at the halfway point and he saw this, it would appear, from a distance of to 100 metres. He further saw that she seemed to be hesitant about whether to go forward or not.

According to her Honour's finding which does not seem to be contested, the defendant driver had also presumed that she had seen him. He could have slowed down if he had wished in case she overcame her hesitation and continued to cross. He did slow down to some extent but not sufficiently to permit her to complete that manoeuvre.

As a consequence, she decided that she would cross the other half of the road and had almost done so when the driver hit her. Her Honour found that the defendant was negligent.

In my view that finding cannot be contested.

The defendant driver drove in such a manner as to be incapable of avoiding a collision which he could reasonably foresee might occur. That finding having been made, nothing else seems to me capable of dislodging it.

Mr Maconachie QC, learned senior counsel for the defendant, drew our attention to the fact that her Honour made certain observations, apparently of fact, as to what assumptions were in the plaintiff's mind. It may be that there is something in his criticisms of her Honour in this regard. Nevertheless, it seems to me that the essential point is that that whole factor is irrelevant.
Once it is clear the defendant could have avoided a collision which he could have foreseen, it does not really matter what was in the plaintiff's mind.

Liability was one of the two matters in contention and on the question of liability, in my view, the appeal should fail.

On the question of contributory negligence which was the only other factor in contention, once liability is found in the manner her Honour did find it, it seems to me that her decision on contributory negligence likewise cannot be disturbed.

In those circumstances I would suggest that the appeal be dismissed with costs.

PRIESTLEY JA: I agree with what has been said by Mr Justice Meagher and with the suggested dismissal of the appeal. 
SHEPPARD AJA: I also agree. I would like however to add a few remarks. 
The attack made by counsel for the appellant upon her Honour's judgement seems to me to centre upon the following statement: "I accept that because she saw the defendant's vehicle slowing down as it approached her, she assumed that he was slowing to let her across the street and that she did not have to wait for the break in the traffic behind. I find that this was a reasonable assumption given the primary obligation of the defendant's driver to avoid collision with pedestrians on the roadway. I accept further that on the basis of that assumption, she continued to cross but that the defendant's driver was not able to control his vehicle so as to avoid the collision." 
Counsel for the appellant has said that there was no evidence to justify the assumptions which her Honour attributed to the respondent. I think there is force in that submission but one has to look at the overall circumstances of the case and as has been said during argument, to make a judgment about the facts of it. Those facts were that the respondent, however unwisely, crossed to the centre of the road on a drizzly morning, after she had been to the butchers. She stood for a time apparently on the centre lines, there was no median strip on the road, and hesitated. Her hesitation was plainly apparent, so it seems to me on the evidence of the appellant of those circumstances I think he was negligent because he failed to make allowances for the fact that she might do as indeed she did and reasonable care on his part indicated that he should have stopped or brought his vehicle almost to a stop to give her an adequate opportunity of crossing the road.

I agree that the appeal should be dismissed. I have nothing to add about contributory negligence.

PRIESTLEY JA: The order of the Court is the appeal is dismissed with costs. 
COUNSEL ADDRESSED ON COSTS 
PRIESTLEY JA: The Court thinks in the circumstances it should make the order for indemnity costs as from the date of the offer of compromise which was not accepted. It seems to be dated this year. That is the order as to indemnity costs. * * * 
