

Regina versus Vawdrey Matter No Cca 60432/97 [1998] NSWSC 124 (16 April 1998) 
Last Updated: 20 May 1998 
REGINA versus JOHN PHILIP VAWDREY /97 April 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Smart J, Dowd J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against Conviction and Sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60432/97 
DELIVERED: Thursday, 16 April 1998 
HEARING DATE: Friday, 27 March 1998 
PARTIES: REGINA versus John Philip VAWDREY 
JUDGMENT OF: GLEESON CJ, SMART J, DOWD J 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: T A Game SC * Respondent: C K Maxwell QC 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: T A Murphy * Respondent: S E O'Connor 
CATCHWORDS: SS 102, 103(1), 164 AND 165 OF [EVIDENCE ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) - NEED FOR MURRAY DIRECTION - CROWN CASE IN REPLY - ADEQUACY OF SUMMING UP 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO. OF PAGES: 29 
HEADNOTE 
V was convicted of sexual offences against his step-daughter. The complaints were first made over 3 years after the first incident and about 21/2 years after she ceased living with him. The Crown's case was based mainly on her evidence.

During cross examination the complainant testified about an incident in which
V pinched her breasts and, when challenged by B, asserted his right as her father to do so. B declined to talk with police. The appellant's application to call B was rejected under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s102.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) on the basis that his evidence went only to credit. (It was anticipated that B would deny witnessing any such incident.) 
Evidence of guilty passion was important to the Crown's case. When V disputed this evidence the Crown was permitted to lead a case in reply. It recalled the mother. Her evidence of guilty passion had bite.

Held per Smart J (with whom Gleeson CJ and Dowd J agreed): - B's evidence was admissible as bearing upon the nature of the relationship between the complainant and V. It would probably have had substantial probative value and may have led to a different result. Considerations of convenience such as cost and delay in the trial and considerations of fairness did not operate in favour of the exclusion of the evidence.
 - [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s102.html) of the [Evidence Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) did not preclude the evidence as it was not merely relevant to credit. The evidence also fell within [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s103.html) so that the credibility rule did not apply.
 - Discussion of common law principles of admissibility of evidence and the need to avoid too rigid an approach to, and distinction between, the credibility rule and probative facts, Dowd J abstaining from commenting.
 - The Crown must have expected that the guilty passion evidence adduced in chief would be denied, thus it should not have been permitted to lead a case in reply. Had the mother's evidence of guilty passion been led in chief she would probably have been cross examined differently and the appellant's case (including his examination in chief) would probably have been conducted differently. Because of this and the fact that the mother's evidence in reply was given immediately prior to the addresses and summing up the effect of the erroneous exercise of discretion was significant.
 - [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s164.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/) does not dispense with the need for a Murray direction, where that direction is appropriate. As a conviction required the acceptance of the complainant's evidence or its substance (and the supporting evidence given in the Crown case in chief related to subsidiary matters) a Murray direction should have been given.
 - A direction that the evidence may be unreliable and that there was need for caution should have been given in accordance with the requirement of [s (2).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s165.html) - Both the delay in complaint and the circumstances in which the complaint had been made necessitated special caution and consideration as such factors could correctly be regarded as reducing the credibility of the complainant. It was important that the jury be expressly so told. The directions given were seriously deficient.
 - As the Crown case was based mainly on the complainant's evidence, the jury had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of its truthfulness. Because of this, the distinction which was drawn between being satisfied that the complainant was probably telling the truth and being satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty was undesirable and confusing.
 - The directions would have left the jury with the impression that they had to choose between the version advanced by the appellant and that advanced by the complainant. This carried the suggestion that they had to apply a lesser standard of proof than the criminal one.
 - The Summing Up did not give an overall and comprehensive view of the defence case.
 - The complainant's performance in the witness box, the lengthy delay in complaint, the fact that the complainant continued to stay overnight with V (sometimes alone) after she and her mother no longer lived with him, the deterioration of relations between the complainant and the appellant in the months before the complaint was made, the circumstances in which complaint was first made, the state of relations between the appellant and the complainant's mother at the time the complaint was made, the evidence of the son, and the appellant's evidence meant that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant. The verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory.

ORDERS 
Appeal against convictions allowed. Convictions quashed.
Judgment of acquittal entered on each count.

JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the reasons for judgment of Smart J. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour, and with his reasons for those orders. 
SMART J: John Charles Philip Vawdrey appeals against his conviction on two counts of sexual intercourse with a person under 16 and under authority, one count of aggravated indecent assault and one count of aggravated sexual intercourse without consent. He also seeks leave to appeal against a minimum term of four years and an additional term of two years.

The appellant contends that the judge erred in rejecting the evidence of
Martin Best, in allowing the Crown to lead a case in reply, in a number of his directions and in not putting the defence case adequately. It was also submitted that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

The Crown case depended mainly on the complainant's evidence. In his Remarks on Sentence the judge said: "... the Complainant's evidence gave me the feeling that it was imagined or invented, particularly as she did not complain until some years later, and particularly as she may have had a real or imagined motive for her complaints." 
Background 
The complainant was born on 16 October 1975 and she and the appellant had known each other since she was 18 months old. The appellant married the complainant's mother on 24 February 1979. Shortly after the marriage the complainant and her mother moved to live with the appellant in a house at
Prospect. The appellant treated the complainant as his daughter and she did not find out that he was but her step-father until she was about 14. The appellant and the mother had a boy and a girl who lived in the family home at
Prospect.

According to the complainant a normal father/daughter relationship existed until she was about 11. She said that a change took place when she was about and that from that time his errant behaviour increased in scope. She gave some general evidence designed to show the relationship which existed from the age of 12 and the appellant's guilty passion. She also gave evidence of two incidents, one in early September 1991 and the other on 27 December 1991, in which the offences were alleged to have occurred.

By the end of 1991 the relationship between the appellant and the mother had soured and become acrimonious. At the beginning of March 1992 the mother left the appellant and the home at Prospect and took with her the complainant and the two children. A little later the daughter of the marriage returned to live at the appellant's home. In the latter half of 1992 there were Family Court proceedings in which the mother obtained custody of the two young children and the appellant was granted access.

During 1992 and 1993 the complainant and the two younger children visited the appellant and stayed with him weekly but not always at the same time. Each stayed overnight. Sometimes the complainant stayed overnight on Tuesday night and sometimes on the weekend. During 1993 the complainant did delivery work for Pizza Hut and used the appellant's Datsun vehicle for that purpose.

On 9 January 1994 the complainant did not attend the appellant's birthday activities as arranged. Instead she turned up late in the evening, after 10.00 pm. This incensed the appellant who told the complainant that she had a hide turning up at that time of the night after all he had done for her and that she just did not care. He told her to get the rest of her stuff out of the bedroom and that he did not want to see her again. She was upset that he said this in front of everybody at the home. She was in tears. She took her belongings and left. She never came back.

Prior to these events, the complainant had had an accident while driving the appellant's vehicle on her Pizza Hut deliveries. The appellant was not satisfied that she had had the vehicle properly repaired. This became a bone of contention. Eventually, in late June 1994, he sued the complainant for a small sum in the Local Court. Ultimately, arrangements were made whereby she paid him for the balance of repairs. For matters to get to that stage relations between the appellant and the complainant must have been very poor.

About 16 October 1994 the complainant was engaged in her 19th birthday celebrations. It was a weekend where the two younger children were to stay with the appellant. The complainant's mother arranged with the appellant that the two younger children would attend a dinner party with her and the complainant. When the mother left the restaurant and went to pick up the children the appellant allegedly refused to let her have them. The daughter had been brought to the restaurant in the meantime. The complainant recalled that her mother telephoned her at the restaurant and stated that she was at the police station. The mother also stated that the appellant required the daughter back at his home. The complainant drove that daughter to the appellant's home. There was a major altercation in the course of which the complainant said to the appellant "This is the second birthday you've fucked up on me. You'll pay for this, you arsehole." (She had also been upset with him over her 18th birthday arrangements). She described herself as "pissed off" and "angry." The complainant then joined her mother at the police station and made allegations of sexual misconduct by her father. This was the first occasion she had made a complaint to the police. She also attended at the police station over the ensuing days and about a week later gave a detailed statement to the police.

The Crown case 
The complainant stated that from the age of about 12 the appellant started touching her, playing, lifting up her shirt and taking it off. He started touching and pinching her breasts. He also started feeling her vagina, sucking on her breasts and giving her oral sex. These activities by him built up gradually over the months and the years. This was in her bedroom after the extensions to the rear of their home. They usually occurred on a weekend and after he had been drinking during the day. She remembered one occasion when she was made to perform oral sex and another occasion when he inserted his finger in her vagina.

The complainant said that in about July/August 1991 her mother left on a ski trip on the Friday and returned on the Sunday evening. Her mother said that it was early September 1991.

The complainant said that on the Saturday night she, the appellant and the two younger children were watching television. Those children went to bed. The complainant continued to watch television with the appellant. When she went to go to bed, he told her not to go to bed as he had something which they should watch. He produced a pornographic movie which they watched. It showed a lot of people having sex. A few times she said that she was going to bed. He insisted that she stay and watch asserting that there was nothing wrong with the activity depicted - it was natural. As she was going to bed he asked her to go into his bedroom and lie down as he just wanted to lie there and cuddle her for a while. She declined. He pulled on her arm and she ended up going into the main bedroom as she felt that she had no real choice. She sat on the edge of the bed and told him that she wanted to go into her bedroom. He replied that he just wanted to lie there and cuddle her and that nothing would happen.
She lay on the bed with her back towards him. She continued to say that she wanted to go to her bed.

She said that he asked her to take her clothes off. She declined. Despite her resistance he removed her track suit pants and pulled them away when she tried to put them back on. He told her that if she got under the blankets she would not be cold. She did so. The appellant got into bed. She had her back to him but he cuddled her. He rolled her over onto his back and pulled her onto his stomach a couple of times. He went down to the end of the bed and he pulled her down by her legs to the end of the bed. He licked her vagina and inserted his finger in her vagina. This continued for a few minutes. This constituted
Count 1 - sexual intercourse with a person under 16 and under authority. She was aged 15.

She stated that the appellant climbed back into bed, put her back on top of him, pushed her head down and placed her hand around his penis, put his erect penis in her mouth and kept pushing her head down. He did this three of four times. She rolled over and went to get up. He apologised and went to sleep.
She remained in his bed until the morning. He was naked. This constituted
Count 2 - sexual intercourse with a person under 16 and under authority.

On 27 December 1991 the mother celebrated her birthday. The appellant was at home and drank during the day. This was the subject of evidence by the complainant and her mother. The mother and the appellant had a torrid argument. She went out with some friends from work. The appellant, the complainant and the two younger children remained at home. That evening they watched television. The complainant went to bed and to sleep. Later, the appellant entered her bedroom carrying an ashtray, her cigarettes, his cigarettes and a glass of port. He was naked. He knelt down beside the bed and lit a cigarette for her. He was smoking a cigarette and drinking his port.
There was some conversation. By this stage she was sitting upright in bed.
After they finished their cigarettes he fondled and pinched her breasts. Then he sucked her breasts. This constituted Count 3 - indecent assault.

She stated that he then moved down to the end of the bed and performed oral sex and inserted his finger into her vagina. He next moved up to the top of the bed, sucked her breasts and played with her vagina. He again moved down to the base of the bed, moved her legs apart and laid on top of her. She rolled over but he pulled her onto her back. He rubbed his penis up and down her vagina and asked if could just have a "little quick one." She refused, stating that intercourse would hurt. She kept pulling away but he kept pulling her towards him. Eventually, he pulled her further down towards the end of the bed and inserted his penis inside her. She tried to pull away but he had hold of her legs. He put his penis inside her again and pulled it out. Then he inserted his penis again. She "just reefed away from him and sat up and rolled over." He seemed " a bit annoyed". She said "He sort of said `Fine' and got up and walked out." This constituted Count 4 - aggravated sexual intercourse without consent.

In cross examination the complainant agreed that she told the police "I can remember when Dad's friend Martin Best and his wife and children were visiting one time. I can't remember how old I was at the time, probably about 15 years old. Dad and Martin were sitting on the back talking when I walked out and Dad pinched me on the breasts again. I can remember Martin saying to Dad `Don't do that, what are you doing that for' and Dad said `Why I'm allowed to do that, she's my daughter.' " She insisted that this was true and that she did not say it to make her story more credible.

There was evidence from the appellant that he borrowed pornographic videos from the video collection at work. He said that he and his wife watched them but that they were not shown to the complainant until she became an adult by attaining the age of 18 years. She wished to view them. He stated that he had ceased drinking port in about 1989.

In the Crown case in chief the mother confirmed the dates of the ski trip as , 7 and 8 or 7, 8 and 9 September 1991 as she went at that time every year.
She confirmed that she had a fight with the appellant, apparently over his drinking, prior to going out on her birthday on 27 December 1991. On both occasions she left the three children at home with the appellant.

Over objection, the Crown was permitted to call the mother in reply who said that on a number of occasions, of which she could not give specific dates, she had seen the appellant touching the complainant on the breasts. She said that he usually grabbed them, shook them and said "Titties". This was from the time when the complainant was 13 or 14 when she was "really developed." She said that, "at the time", she believed that they were just playing and joking and thought nothing of it. The words "at the time" have a certain sting and imply that now the mother knows better.

She agreed in cross examination during her evidence in reply that when she went to the appellant's home on 16 October 1994 and he refused to let her have the younger children she had said to him words to the following effect "I told you, you fucking arsehole, the children are coming to the party." 
Defence Case 
In his evidence the appellant denied each of the incidents asserted by the complainant. He also denied each of the specific acts alleged and that he had ever been guilty of any of the sexual misconduct alleged in more general terms. He denied pulling off her shirt and touching or fondling her breasts.
He denied watching pornographic videos with any person while still a child.

The appellant said that on the Saturday evening of the ski trip the two younger children slept in his bed with him. This was supported by the evidence of his 13 year old son, who stated that when their mother was away for the night he and his sister slept with their father in their parents' bed. The son stated that he recalled his mother going on ski trips occasionally. However, he was only able to remember one particular occasion specifically and that was because of an incident related by his mother of helping a man who had fallen over. He believed that was the weekend the subject of the incident covered by the first and second charges. On that weekend he and his sister slept with their father in their parents' bed. The evidence of the practice of the son and his sister sleeping with their father in their parents' bed when the mother was away was important even if there was some doubt about the accuracy of the son's evidence that he was speaking of the same weekend as the complainant.

The appellant relied on a number of instances in 1997 when there were pleasant meetings and interchanges between himself and the complainant and she behaved in a friendly way.

Ground of Appeal 1 - "The trial judge erred when he rejected the evidence of Mr Best." 
Prior to the Crown opening to the jury the judge dealt with a series of evidentiary problems. He admitted evidence of relationship subject to some limitations. He restricted relationship evidence to events which occurred at the complainant's home. There is no need to examine why the judge took that course. It did not appear to affect the accused adversely. The Best incident which is summarised above was not led in chief. The Crown could not verify it with Mr Best who declined to talk with the police. The matter was elicited in cross examination by the appellant's counsel. It appeared in her statement to the police. The appellant applied to call Mr Best but his evidence was rejected on the basis that it went only to credit and was therefore caught by [s 102](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/s102.html) of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ea199580/). That section provides that evidence that is relevant only to a witness's credibility is not admissible.

It was anticipated that Mr Best would say that the incident did not occur and that the appellant did not make the comment attributed to him by the complainant.

The appellant contends that the evidence of Mr Best was not merely relevant to credit although it was important on that account. The Crown set out to establish that the relationship between the appellant and the complainant was one in which the appellant engaged in sexual misconduct towards the complainant. The Best incident, on her version, was such a case. The Crown was advancing the complainant as a witness of truth. It was not for the Crown to lead only incidents on which an effective attack could not be made. The proposed evidence of Mr Best helped to show that it was less likely that the relationship was one in which there was sexual misconduct on the part of the appellant.

It was also submitted that the statement which she attributed to her father, "Why I'm allowed to do that, she's my daughter" constituted an implied admission that he regarded himself as a father and that as a father he had the right to pinch his daughter's breasts and that, impliedly, he had done so.

In Palmer v. The Queen <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 254] McHugh J undertook a review of the common law principles underlying the restrictions on leading evidence as to credit and the distinction between credit and facts-in-issue. He made these points at 265 - :

If evidence on the issue in question is regarded as going solely to the credit of the complainant, the finality rule applies; answers given in cross examination regarding collateral facts such as credit must be regarded as final. (There are exceptions to this rule.) The "bolster rule" would also apply; evidence is not admissible if it merely bolsters the credibility of a party or a witness.

The line between evidence relevant to credit and evidence relevant to a fact-in-issue is often indistinct and unhelpful. The credibility of a witness may be of such crucial importance that it is decisive of the facts in issue, particularly where the witness is a participant in the very facts-in-issue or is the only eyewitness to them.

The rationale behind the credit and facts-in-issue distinction is "based primarily upon the need to confine the trial process and secondly upon notions of fairness to the witness." 
Accordingly, the evidentiary rules based on the distinction between issues of credit and facts-in-issue should not be regarded as hard and fast rules of law but "as a well established guide to the exercise of judicial regulation of the litigation process." If evidence going to credibility has real probative value with respect to the facts in issue it ought not to be excluded unless the time, convenience and cost of litigating the issue that it raises is disproportionate to the light that it throws on the facts-in-issue.

McHugh J said at 267: "The rigid distinction between credit and facts-in-issue and the rules predicated on that distinction should therefore be minimised by the adoption of a more flexible view as to when matters going to the credibility of a witness should be admitted as evidence probative of the facts-in-issue.
Evidence concerning the credibility of a witness is as relevant to proof of an issue as are the facts deposed to by that witness. There is no distinction, so far as relevance is concerned, between the credibility of the witness and the facts to which he or she deposes. The credibility of evidence is locked to the credibility of its deponent. The truth of that proposition is in reality recognised by the rule that a witness can be cross-examined as to matters of credit. Because that is so, it is irrational to draw a rigid distinction between matters of credit and matters going to the facts-in-issue." 
McHugh J's comments were neither adopted nor rejected by any of the other
Justices and he was in the minority on one of the points. I have found the discussion very helpful and persuasive.

The Best incident, as alleged by the complainant, was a short one and evidence from Mr Best about it was likely to be short as was the accused's evidence on that point. The importance of the incident lay not only in what the appellant allegedly did but also in the privilege which he allegedly claimed to have. If the jury accepted that such a privilege was claimed, such a reprehensible attitude would point to a guilty passion. Conversely, if the incident did not occur, the complainant's assertions on the point were incorrect and this would have severely affected her credit overall and her credit was the linchpin of the Crown case. Mr Best's evidence potentially had real probative value.

The Crown accepted that the Best evidence probably had substantial probative value and that by virtue of <case> of the Evidence Act 1900 the credibility rule did not apply. The Crown's approach was that the incident was cross examined into evidence by the appellant's counsel and that the appellant had received the benefit of a direction that where a party does not call a witness to give evidence the opposing party can suggest in the absence of a reasonable explanation for the absence of the witness that nothing the witness would say would assist the other party's case. The direction was woven into a summary of some of the arguments of the appellant's counsel. The judge stated that the appellant suggested that Best should have been called by the Crown.
The direction given was a relatively tepid Jones v. Dunkel direction and I doubt if it would have conveyed much to the jury. Be that as it may, the benefit of the direction fell far short of the appellant having the value of
Best's evidence.

Best's evidence was admissible. It was not related to credit only but bore upon the nature of the relationship. The Best evidence was strongly linked to the credit of the complainant on the issue of the relationship between the appellant and the complainant as well as her credit generally. Considerations of convenience such as cost and delay in the trial and considerations of fairness to the witness did not operate in favour of the exclusion of the evidence. The evidence of Best probably would have had substantial probative value.

The evidence of Best, if admitted, may have led to a different result.

Appeal Ground 2 - "The trial judge erred when he allowed the Crown to lead a case in reply." 
The evidence in reply of the mother has been summarised earlier. The complainant said in her evidence in chief that the appellant had often pulled off her shirt and touched and pinched her breasts. This was part of the guilty passion evidence which was important to the Crown case. She was cross examined to the effect that that evidence had been made up to make him pay for what he had done in throwing her out, suing her and ruining her 19th birthday (T 39 of /6/97). This and her other evidence has been summarised previously.

In his evidence the appellant denied all her allegations of sexual misconduct.
Amongst other things he specifically denied that he had ever pulled off her shirt, fondled her breasts or touched them in any way.

Detailed submissions were made by counsel for the appellant to the trial judge in support of his objections to the admission of general evidence from the complainant that the appellant on a number of occasions had taken off her shirt and that he had pinched her nipples but the judge had allowed it. The appellant had made general denials of the general allegations. He could not do much more. Counsel strongly submitted that a Crown case in reply was not permissible. The judge, without giving any reasons, ruled that the Crown could lead evidence from the mother in reply. I have earlier summarised that evidence.

The relevant principles are summarised in the judgments in The Queen v. Chin <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 671] at 676 - (per Gibbs CJ & Wilson J) and at 684 - 685 (per Dawson J). In the present case the general evidence of guilty passion was an important part of the Crown case and the Crown resisted the attempts of counsel for the appellant to exclude it. At the start of the trial the Crown must have expected that that evidence would be denied. If the appellant had admitted touching and pinching the complainant's breasts he would not have had much chance of an acquittal. The complainant's evidence as to the appellant's sexual misconduct and in other respects was put very much in issue during her cross examination.

The mother's evidence of guilty passion was rather general but it had a "folksy" touch. Her evidence that she knew now that some of his conduct was not a joke, as she had previously treated it, had bite. Such evidence should have been led in chief. If it had, the cross examination of the mother and the conduct of the appellant's case would probably have been different.

The initial cross examination of the mother was brief and circumscribed. It was limited to her and the complainant possibly buying out the share of another co-owner of the Hill End property in which she and the appellant were co-owners. This is the property at which the appellant, the mother, the complainant and the two younger children had spent weekends. After the mother had given her evidence in reply, the appellant had to and did take a different approach when she was further cross examined. She was cross examined vigorously as to the truth of what she had said. It was also put to her that she was severely biased against the appellant. It is no easy task to persuade a jury that a witness, whose evidence was not challenged on any major point initially, is biased.

The mother's evidence in reply was given on the morning of the third day and immediately prior to the addresses and summing up on that day. At that point the mother's evidence would have had considerable impact. Furthermore, the appellant had not had the opportunity of dealing with it when he gave his evidence in chief.

It was an erroneous exercise of the trial judge's discretion to permit the
Crown to lead a case in reply. In the circumstances of the present case that would lead to a new trial as the effect of the error was significant.

Appeal Ground 3 - "The trial judge failed to direct and warn the jury adequately in relation to the complainant's evidence." 
Appeal Ground 4 - "The trial judge failed to direct the jury adequately and erred in his directions on complaints." 
These grounds should be taken together.

Although the Crown case depended on the complainant's evidence, the judge refused to give the jury any warning or caution as to the assessment of her evidence. It was submitted that, at least, the observations of Lee J in R v.
Murray [(1987) 11 NSWLR 12] at 19 should have been followed: "In all cases of serious crime it is customary for judges to stress that where there is one witness asserting the commission of the crime, the evidence of that witness must be scrutinised with great care before a conclusion is arrived at that a verdict of guilty should be brought in, but a direction of that kind does not of itself imply that the witness' evidence is unreliable." 
As a conviction required the acceptance of her evidence or the substance of it (and the supporting evidence given in the Crown case in chief related to subsidiary matters), a direction along the lines of that envisaged by Lee J in
Murray should have been given. Section 164 of the Evidence Act does not dispense with the need for a Murray direction, where that direction is appropriate. Section 164 provides that it is not necessary for the judge to warn the jury that it is dangerous to act on uncorroborated evidence or to give a warning to the same or similar effect.

The appellant contended that there were other features of the complainant's evidence which required the giving of an appropriately-worded warning. There was the personal animosity of the complainant and her mother towards the appellant and the circumstances of the complaint which was made shortly after there had been ugly confrontations between the appellant and the complainant and her mother. The appellant also relied on other evidence which, he claimed, suggested that the relationship between the appellant and the complainant, years after the offence, was amiable.

Reliance was also placed on the remarks of the trial judge, earlier quoted, that the complainant's evidence gave him the feeling that it was imagined or invented.

The appellant submitted that the combined effect of the factors mentioned, when coupled with the lengthy delay in complaint, meant that the complainant's evidence was, at the least, evidence which may be unreliable and that <case> of the Evidence Act applied. That section applies where evidence may be unreliable. It is not necessary for the evidence to fall into one of the categories mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (g) of <case>.

Counsel also sought a direction that it would be dangerous to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of one person alone and the judge refused. Section 164 of the Evidence Act provided that it was not necessary to give that direction. Counsel did not specifically ask for a direction under <case> of the
Evidence Act nor did he ask the judge to give a warning that the evidence of the complainant may be unreliable and to inform the jury of the matters that may cause it to be unreliable and the need for caution in determining whether to accept the evidence and the weight to be given to it.

The overall effect of counsel's submissions was to seek a warning from the judge about the complainant's evidence. Counsel put it on the basis of being dangerous to convict on the uncorroborated evidence of one person alone. The response to counsel's submission should have been to point out the terms of ss and 165 and treat the submission as a request under <case>.

This was a case where a direction that the evidence may be unreliable and that there was need for caution should have been given in accordance with the requirement of <case> of the Evidence Act.

While the judge in his supplementary directions gave a direction that the jury was entitled to take into account the fact of the delay in assessing or evaluating the complainant and her evidence, I doubt that the economical direction given would have meant much to a jury. The judge did not explain to the jury that where there was delay in making a complaint they were entitled to take into account her failure to make a complaint at the earliest reasonable opportunity as reducing her credibility. I have not overlooked that earlier in his Summing Up the judge gave the conventional direction under s
B of the Crimes Act.

The appellant submitted that the directions did not adequately address the issue of the credibility of the complainant, having regard to both the delay and the circumstances. In Crofts v. The Queen <case>; [(1996) 186 CLR 427] at 448 - 451 the High Court attached much weight to the circumstances. There may be some cases where there has been delay in complaint but the circumstances do not require a warning. A girl may be living on a remote property with younger brothers and sisters and be abused by her father but there maybe no other adult there in whom she can confide. In some cases delay in complaint may be only a few months but the complaint may follow a bitter confrontation between the man and girl over another matter in which the girl does not obtain what she wants or she believes that the man, a father or step father, is treating her harshly or unfairly. In such a case a warning would be required. Complaints made against a background of custody contests or arguments over money or property or other controversial relationships have to be assessed with care as they may affect the credibility of the complainant.

In the present case both the delay in complaint and the circumstances in which the complaint had been made necessitated special caution and consideration as the delay and the circumstances could correctly be regarded as reducing the credibility of the complainant. It was important that the jury be expressly so told.

The directions given were significantly deficient.

Appeal Ground 5 - "The trial judge failed to direct the jury adequately, and erred in his directions, in relation to assessment of the witnesses, and in particular, the complainant and the appellant, (and this in the context of the burden and standard of proof in a criminal trial)." 
On a number of occasions during the Summing Up the judge told the jury that they had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of each of the elements of each offence, before they could bring in a verdict of guilty.

At SU 26 of 4/6/97 the judge correctly said: "You can only find the accused to be guilty if the complainant's evidence satisfies you beyond reasonable doubt that the accused did the things to her of which she claims. If you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt by it, then you cannot find the accused to be guilty." 
However, at SU 21 of 4/6/97 the judge said: "All it is, when it is all boiled down, is considering the witnesses themselves and considering the evidence that each of them gave and deciding within the totality of what is the evidentiary material, who it is that you accept and what it is of what they have said that you accept and you probably find that you do that from time to time in your everyday lives because I expect that there have been times when each of you has been confronted with a situation of different people giving you differing versions about the one thing and you be needed to decide between the two of them which version you accept in order to act upon it and what you do in those circumstances is decide, having regard to the person telling you the version and the version that the person tells you, whether the person is a reliable person giving an accurate and honest version of what occurred and you do that in your minds and you do it pretty quickly and that is what you have got to do in this case although obviously you will not be doing it quite as quickly or in your individual minds because I expect, as I have said already, that you will discuss the evidentiary material among yourselves." 
It was incorrect to tell the jury that they needed to decide which of the two versions they accepted. That carries the suggestion that they had to decide, on balance, whom they preferred. Comparing their task with their everyday lives was unhelpful and a little misleading as people do not conduct their daily affairs on the basis of proof beyond reasonable doubt. In daily living, intuition and a feel for what is likely to be right are not unimportant.

At SU 29 of 4/6/97 the judge said: "You will probably ask yourselves who was to be believed. Let me tell you this members of the Jury, if upon your consideration of the evidentiary material you decide that the complainant is probably telling the truth, then you must decide whether you are satisfied on that evidence beyond reasonable doubt of the accused's guilt and that is because members of the Jury, and I have repeated it a number of times, you cannot find the accused to be guilty of any one of the four offences with which he stands charged unless it be that you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt and that applies equally one of those four offences so even if you say to yourselves having considered all of the evidentiary material that we are satisfied that the complainant is telling the truth, you have still got to ask yourselves the question whether, accepting what she says, you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt about the guilt of the accused. It can only be if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt that you can find him to be guilty and that applies equally to each one of those four counts in the indictment." 
One difficulty with this passage is that this is a case where the jury had to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the truthfulness of the substance of the complainant's evidence. It was not a case where the appellant could be convicted if the jury were satisfied only that she was probably telling the truth. The judge had earlier said at SU 4 of 4/6/97 that when the jury had decided the facts the verdicts would follow as night follows day. The passage also seems to draw a distinction between being satisfied that the complainant was probably telling the truth and being satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was guilty. While in some cases that would be correct the distinction was undesirable and confusing in the present case.

At SU 42-43 of 4/6/97 the judge said: "When I said to you earlier that the case concerns primarily the complainant on the one hand and the accused on the other hand and I told you that you would probably ask yourselves who you believe and I told you that if you believe that the complainant is probably telling the truth you have still got to answer the question whether what you accept of what she has said satisfies you beyond reasonable doubt.

I add this, the fact is that in this trial, not only is there evidence from the complainant and the accused but there is evidence from other witnesses those being Mrs Gilford called by the Prosecution and Matthew and Mr Rome called by the accused. Their evidence is evidence that you do not just put aside. Their evidence is evidence that you consider. Their evidence may assist you in deciding whether to accept or reject the complainant or the accused in whole or in part so when I said to you earlier that the case is primarily the evidence of the complainant and the accused, I did not want you to think that it was only their evidence. There is evidence from the other three witnesses; the evidence that they gave is relevant evidence; it is evidence that you are to take into account; it is evidence which may assist you in deciding whether to accept the complainant in whole or in part or the accused in whole or in part." 
The appellant contended that the judge's directions were likely to confuse the jury as to the approach they should take to the evidence. On the one hand the judge talked about accepting the evidence of the complainant or the appellant in whole or in part and, on the other hand, about proof beyond reasonable doubt.

The terms of the directions used in the present case are undesirable. They run the substantial risk of causing confusion. A jury does not have the opportunity to read and re-read the directions and analyse them. In a Summing
Up extending over 40 pages much depends on the general effect or impression created by the Summing Up. I think that the jury would have been left with the impression that they had to choose between the version advanced by the appellant and that advanced by the complainant. Sandwiched between two passages which involved choosing between the complainant and the appellant was a reference to being satisfied of what she said beyond reasonable doubt.

Overall, the directions were confusing and deflected the jury from the correct approach. The complaint has been established.

Appeal Ground 6 - "The trial judge failed to put adequately the defence case".

At SU 27 the judge said: "The accused has denied having directed any sexual activity towards the complaint and denies the four specific acts of sexual misconduct alleged by the Crown." 
At SU 30 the judge referred to the suggestions in cross examination of the complainant of her motives for making the allegations. I have been unable to find any other references to the defence case. Inadvertently, the Summing Up does not summarise the defence case in a concise yet comprehensive way. It does not summarise, as part of the defence case, the evidence which would throw doubt on the Crown case such as the evidence of the son which, if accepted, would throw doubt on the Crown case based on the first incident and the evidence as to subsequent friendly meetings between the appellant and the complainant. I have not overlooked that the judge mentioned the evidence of the son and Mr Rome. The Summing Up does not summarise the defence case on the significant impact of the delay in complaint and the circumstances of the complaint. However, the judge spent some time rehearsing the Crown's arguments as to why the jury should discount the evidence of the son and Mr Rome.

The judge did deal with a number of areas of dispute and on occasions touched upon the arguments of the defence.

The Summing Up does not give an overall and comprehensive view of the defence case.

Counsel did not take the objection now raised before the judge. However, counsel did make a number of submissions as to matters of law and fact, all of which had substance, in an effort to secure a Summing Up which was correct. I would grant leave under Rule 4 as the point goes to a fundamental aspect of the trial.

This ground is established.

Appeal Ground 7 - "The verdict is unsafe and unsatisfactory." 
Making every allowance for the benefit which the jury had in seeing and hearing the witnesses I am persuaded that the jury ought to have had a reasonable doubt as to the guilt of the appellant. I have such a doubt. I proceed on the basis of the evidence which was admissible. My reasons include: 
The complainant's evidence gave the trial judge the feeling that her evidence was imagined or invented; 
There was a lengthy delay in making a complaint. It was made over 3 years since the first incident and about 2 1/2 years after the appellant and the complainant's mother separated on 1 March 1992; 
Despite the alleged incidents and the complainant living with her mother, the complainant continued to come and stay with the appellant, sometimes alone and sometimes with the 2 younger children; she also used his car in her pizza deliveries; 
Relations became bitter and hostile between the appellant and the complainant after the incident in January 1994 on the appellant's birthday.
They became further embittered when she did not have his car repaired properly when she damaged it. In late June 1994 he sued her in the Local Court.

Relations between the appellant and the complainant became even more hostile on when he did not allow the 2 younger children to join her for her th birthday. She accused him of ruining her birthday and her previous birthday. She went to the police and made allegations of sexual misconduct by the appellant.

Relations between the appellant and the complainant's mother also became embittered and hostile from at least 1991. There were Family Court proceedings. That bitterness gradually increased and came to a head on 16
October 1994, the night of the complainant's 19th birthday, and continued thereafter.

The evidence of the son that whenever his mother went away overnight he and his sister slept in the appellant's bed. The evidence of the general practice was strong. The son also said that this was the position on the night in question. This evidence was noteworthy because the son was living with the complainant's mother.

The appellant's evidence on oath in denial did not appear to be seriously shaken.

The guilty verdict is probably explained by the lack of balance in the Summing
Up, the exclusion of Mr Best's evidence and the deficient directions. There was more than a passing suggestion at the trial that the mother was playing, or attempting to play, an active role in influencing the evidence being adduced. This applied particularly to her son's evidence.

The verdicts were unsafe and unsatisfactory. There is at least a reasonable possibility that an innocent man has been wrongly convicted.

I propose the following orders:
Appeal against convictions allowed. Convictions quashed.
Judgment of acquittal entered on each count.

DOWD J: I have had the advantage of reading the draft judgment of Justice Smart. I agree with the orders proposed and the reasons therefore with the exception of the reference to the judgement of McHugh J in Palmer versus The Queen <case>; [(1998) 72 ALJR 254] about which I do not think it necessary to comment. * * * 
