

Regina versus Turner Matter No 60681/97 [1997] NSWSC 359 (1 September 1997) 
Regina versus Shane Gregory TURNER /97 September 1997 
Smart J, Simpson J, Sperling J 
The Court of Criminal Appeal /97 REGINA versus Shane Gregory TURNER 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Shane Gregory Turner has applied for an extension of time and leave to appeal against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of ninety-seven weeks and an additional term of thirty-two weeks. That sentence resulted from the unexpired portion of a periodic detention order. 
On 27 October 1995 Turner pleaded guilty to one charge of robbery with striking. That offence occurred on 21 March 1995. The victim was robbed of approximately $6,400 by Turner and another young man and assaulted. The victim was seventeen and had a nice car. Turner was envious. Turner made himself scarce after the robbery and was not located until 8 May 1995. Turner had banked on the victim not reporting the matter to the police.

While on bail, Turner, on 12 July 1995, committed the offence of break, enter and steal. Judge H H Bell was asked to take this offence into account when dealing with the robbery with striking.

At the time of sentencing Turner was almost twenty but the judge observed that
Turner looked younger and could pass for seventeen. Life in gaol had obvious dangers for him.

The co-offender had been dealt with in the Children's Court and was ordered to perform one hundred hours community service. Judge Bell thought that if Turner were to go to gaol, a three-year sentence with a minimum term of twenty-seven months was justified. However, the Judge thought that the scale was just tipped in Turner's favour by his youth and youthful appearance. Judge Bell sentenced Turner to imprisonment for two years and six months to be served by periodic detention. The Judge expressly stated that if Turner committed other offences or breaches of the order, the periodic detention could be cancelled and that Turner could be required to serve the sentence of two years and six months full time.

Turner reported to the Periodic Detention Centre on only 3 and 10 November
He went to Queensland, South Australia, Melbourne and to the north coast of New South Wales. An acquaintance reported him to the police and he was arrested on about 9 October 1996 pursuant to a bench warrant.

Turner saw Dr Hayden in December 1995 for depression and Dr Kennedy on 5
January 1996 for severe depression. The report of Dr Hayden of 1 August 1997 states that he saw Mr Turner on 1 December 1995 and found that he was suffering from a depressive syndrome comprising sleeplessness, irritability, diurnal mood variation, epigastric churning, left-sided chest pain, feelings of hopelessness and suicidal thoughts. He thought that Mr Turner had a depressive illness and commenced him on Prozac and Normison. He was also given an off-work certificate for four days. The doctor's review on 8 December 1995 revealed Turner to be still depressed but less so.

Turner told his consultant psychiatrist in August 1997 that he found the atmosphere in gaol very frightening and that on 10 November 1995 he had been threatened by a bigger man who had mistaken Turner for someone else. Turner told the psychiatrist that a combination of his depressive illness, his anxiety about violence at the Periodic Detention Centre and disturbing dreams after working in a slaughterhouse led to his gradually convincing himself that he did not have to attend, and he decided not to do so. Turner stated to the psychiatrist that he was terrified of being sent to the main gaol and attempted suicide by cutting his wrists. He was admitted to the prison hospital for one month before being made a low security prisoner and classified to Goulburn Gaol.

Turner had only one prior matter, which can be safely disregarded as it is of no consequence. Turner had an unfortunate, unstable and deprived upbringing.

The psychiatrist, Dr Nielssen, in his report of 16 August 1997, expressed the view that Turner has a personality disorder characterised by borderline and antisocial traits. The so-called borderline traits are more prominent and include chronic feelings of depression, unstable mood, fear of abandonment and impulsive and self-defeating behaviour.

Dr Nielssen wrote: "His personality disturbance probably made him more susceptible to not fulfilling the conditions of the sentence, as his failure to attend is typical of a pattern of impulsive and self-defeating behaviour. The combination (of) the inconvenience of attending and fear of assault in the periodic detention centre also contributed to his failure to attend.

I believe Mr Turner's psychiatric conditions would have affected his capacity to fulfil the original order and explains in part why he failed to attend." 
The offence of robbery with striking is a serious one and the circumstances of this offence reveal that it was a mean and nasty one. There was the further offence of break, enter and steal. It is not suggested that Turner's mental condition had anything to do with the commission of the offences.

Judge Ducker dealt with this offender before the decision of this court in
Wilson v. The Queen, unreported CCA, 12 February 1997 and 4 April 1997. The judge had very limited material. This was due to the matter being dealt with ex parte. Turner had deliberately absented himself and failed to notify the department, as required, of his current address. The judge would have been assisted by having fuller material to enable him to consider Turner's subjective features. There is usually a risk of a miscarriage if the judge does not have reasonably complete material.

I will not repeat what was said in Wilson versus The Queen or Dargan versus The
Queen, unreported CCA, 4 April 1997.

Counsel for the applicant has submitted that there were special circumstances.
These included the youth of the offender and that he had not previously been to gaol. The remarks of Judge Bell as to the applicant's youthful appearance and the concern which that caused were well merited. The applicant's history is unfortunate and he will certainly need support and supervision upon his release from gaol for more than 32 weeks. I am of the opinion that special circumstances have been shown.

The Crown correctly emphasised that the minimum term as well as the total sentence must reflect the overall criminality which the conduct under consideration evinces.

After weighing all the circumstances I have come to the view that this is a case where this court should intervene having regard to the special circumstances. The applicant's psychiatric condition provides some explanation for his conduct, but, as Dr Nielssen said, only a part explanation.

The appropriate minimum term is one of seventy-two weeks commencing on 9
October 1996 and expiring on 26 February 1998 with an additional term of fifty-seven weeks commencing on 27 February 1998. I propose that the time for making the application for leave be extended until this day, that leave to appeal against the severity of the sentence should be granted, the appeal allowed and the sentence imposed quashed. In lieu thereof the minimum and additional terms which I have nominated should be imposed. An order should be made for the applicant's release on 26 February 1998, being the date on which he is eligible for release on parole.

SIMPSON J: I agree. 
SPERLING J: I agree. 
SMART J: The orders are as proposed. * * * 
