

Regina versus Ali Moussa [1997] NSWSC 240 (15 June 1997) 
REGINA versus ALI MOUSSA /95 
THURSDAY 1 AUGUST 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SULLY J, LEVINE J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I ask Sully J to give the first judgment.

SULLY J: In this matter Mr Ali Moussa seeks leave to appeal against a sentence of imprisonment imposed upon him by Judge Davidson in the District Court, and following a trial without a jury and by his Honour alone.

The applicant had been charged, put shortly, with a supply of a prohibited drug, namely heroin. His Honour found the applicant guilty as charged, and imposed upon him a sentence of imprisonment of twenty-four months, divided between a minimum term of eighteen months and an additional term of six months.

His Honour's published remarks on sentence suggest a typographical error in part of the definition of the sentence thus imposed; and so it is expedient to note that the intended sentence, and the sentence as this Court now deals with it, is a sentence comprising a minimum term of eighteen months' imprisonment to date from 16 June 1995 and to expire on 15 December 1996, and an additional term of six months commencing on 16 December 1996 to expire on 15 June 1997.

In support of the application one point only is taken formally. It is that the learned sentencing Judge failed to give sufficient weight to certain assistance given by the applicant to relevant authorities in mid-1993; and that his Honour ought on that account to have specified a minimum term less than that in fact imposed by his Honour.

Before this Court this morning it is acknowledged with, if I may say so, commendable directness and frankness, that the material to hand does not support the substance of that ground as it is put, formally, in the written submissions filed for the applicant.

That being so, there remains, as I see it, no basis upon which this Court would be justified in interfering with the sentence imposed by Judge Davidson.
It seems to me that given the objective facts as his Honour sets them out in his reasons for judgment, and those matters subjective to the applicant, the sentence was well within the available discretion.

In my opinion the application for leave to appeal should be refused.

LEVINE J: I agree.

GLEESON CJ: I agree. The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Sully J. * * * 
