

Westpac Banking Corporation versus Mervyn Keith Stanley Fine and amp [1996]
NSWSC 458 (30 September 1996) 
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION -v- MERVYN KEITH STANLEY FINE & 2 ORS /96 
Tuesday, 24 September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
HUNTER J 
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In these proceedings judgment has been given in favour of the plaintiff against the first and second defendants (the Fines) in the sum of approximately $640,000 and an order for possession of property at rose Bay (the Rose Bay property), of which the Fines are registered proprietors, has been made in favour of the plaintiff by orders of Rolfe J in reasons for judgment of 19 July 1996. In that judgment his Honour granted a stay of execution in respect of the judgment sum and deferred the issuing of a writ of possession until 2 September 1996.

In the proceedings against the third defendant (Howell), Howell has brought a cross-claim (the amended second cross-claim) against the Fines, Fine Real
Estate Network Pty Ltd (Fine Real Estate) and the plaintiff. In the amended second cross-claim the following orders are sought against the Fines and Fine
Real Estate: "1. An order that the first cross-defendant, Mervyn Keith Stanley Fine (hereinafter "Mr. Fine") and the second cross defendant, Patricia Joan Fine (hereinafter "Mrs. Fine") and the third cross defendant, Fine Real Estate
Network Pty Ltd (hereinafter "the Company") apply any monies in their possession from the proceeds of sale of the property known as 4A Underwood
Street, Paddington or released to them by Order of His Honour Mr. Justice
Bryson on 19 March 1996 in discharge of the Company's debt to the fourth cross-defendant Westpac Banking Corporation (hereinafter "Westpac").
An order that Mr. & Mrs. Fine give Westpac possession of the land comprised in Certificate of Title Folios Identifier 2/SP181279 and known as /104 Onslow Street, Rose Bay NSW.
An Order that the Company give Westpac possession of the property known as
Lots 7 & 8, 120 Bondi Road, Bondi, NSW." 
Consequential orders are sought against the plaintiff as follows: "4. An Order that Westpac apply the proceeds received from the sale of the properties in Orders 2 & 3 above in discharge of the debt owed to it by the Company.
A declaration that upon a compliance with Orders 2, 3 and 4 above (and
Order 1 if applicable), the second cross-claimant. Paul Roch Howell (hereinafter "Howell") be relieved of his liability to Westpac under the Deed of Guarantee executed by him on 23 August 1993 to the extent of his obligation under that Deed and Westpac's monetary realisation from its sale of the properties referred to in Orders 2 & 3 above." 
On 20 September 1996 I directed that the proceedings be placed in the callover list of that day notwithstanding an outstanding motion by the Fines and Fine
Real Estate to strike out the amended second cross-claim against them. I heard that motion late on 20 September 1996 and reserved judgment only for the reason that the Court reporter had been released from attendance having regard to the time of hearing of the motion.

On the hearing of the motion it was agreed that the only allegations in the amended second cross-claim which supported the orders sought against the Fines and Fine Real Estate were to be found in pars 9, 12 and 13 which are in the following terms: "9. On or about 23 August 1993, Howell executed a Deed of Guarantee in which
Howell agreed to guarantee to Westpac all monies advanced to the Company after
Mr. Fine agreed to apply all the nett proceeds from the sale of the assets of the Company and Mr. And Mrs. Fine to Westpac's debt before Howell would be called upon to honour his obligations under the Deed.
 ......................
As at the execution of the Mortgage:- a) The mortgage was arranged by Mr. Andrew Young and took place in front of him at Westpac's Haymarket Branch.
 b) Mr. Young and Howell had developed a personal relationship a relationship of banker and customer and a relationship of specialist knowledge and advice in commercial matters.
 c) Howell received no independent advice nor was he offered the opportunity by
Westpac to receive independent advice and he had no opportunity to take independent advice prior to the same.
 d) The said mortgage was not explained to Howell by Mr Young nor any officer of Westpac.
 e) Howell had no opportunity to negotiate any alterations of the terms of the said mortgage.
 f) the said mortgage was a transaction into which Howell would not have entered if he had known that it secured monetary advances other than the settlement monies for his purchase of 2 Vicar Street, Coogee.
 g) Howell had not seen the form of the said mortgage prior to its introduction by Westpac to him for execution by him.
At a date which Howell cannot ascertain without discovery, Westpac forwarded a letter of offer to Howell which listed all assets including the
Rose Bay and Bondi properties that had been used to secure Westpac's loans to the Company. On receipt of such letter, Howell had a conversation with Mr.
Young who relevantly told Howell to the effect that Howell's Deed of Guarantee would only be acted upon after all of the assets of Mr. & Mrs. Fine and the Company were realised by Westpac." 
In support of the motion, there was read the affidavit of John Graham Tomko sworn 11 September 1996 which annexed a copy of the deed referred to in par 9.
It was stated from the bar table on behalf of Howell that the effect of the deed, as stated in par 9 of the amended second cross-claim, was not to be found in the express terms of the deed, but in those terms and the conversation referred to in par 13 of the cross-claim.

In its original form the second cross-claim came before Giles CJ Comm D on 6
September 1996 for directions. At the conclusion of that directions hearing his Honour made the following observation ion relation to that claim against the Fines and Fine Real Estate: "Mr Manousaridis, at a first glance I must confess I did not understand what your claim was against those cross-defendants. I will have a better look at it between now and next week. Maybe I will need your assistance next week." 
When the matter later came before the court for directions it was stated on behalf of Howell in relation to the cross-claim: "Firstly, we thought it prudent to file an amended cross-claim in view of your
Honour's comments on last week to try and clarify the issues between the third defendant, Howell, and the Fines and the corporation and Fines Real Estate." 
In my opinion, the matters alleged in the paragraphs of the amended second cross-claim relied upon by the cross-claimant disclosed no cause of action against the Fines or Fine Real Estate, nor did they establish any entitlement to relief as is sought in pars 1, 2 and 3 of the amended second cross-claim.
There is no occasion for me to make any observation concerning the entitlement of Howell to relief against the plaintiff based on those allegations in the amended second cross-claim.

Nothing has been put to me from the bar table that would suggest that granting leave to Howell to further amend the second cross-claim would achieve any purpose and no application to that effect has been made. In those circumstances, I think the correct course is to dismiss the amended second cross-claim so far as it seeks relief pursuant to pars 1, 2, and 3 thereof. It will be necessary to amend the remainder of the relief sought against the plaintiff in the amended second cross-claim and I direct that those consequential amendments be filed and served by 30 September 1996. In exercising this discretion I have had regard to the caution that must be exercised in dealing summarily with the claims in question (see General Steel
Industries Inc -v- Commissioner for Railways & Ors <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125] at 129 - 130 and Fancourt -v- Mercantile Credit Ltd (1980 - <case>; [1982) 154 CLR 87] at 99). I order the second cross-claimant to pay the costs of the first and second cross-defendants of this motion and of the amended second cross-claim.
 * * * 
