

Dawnfold Pty Limited versus Buildcorp NSW Pty Limited and Anor Matter No /97 [1997] NSWSC 282 (1 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Dawnfold Pty Limited versus Buildcorp NSW Pty Limited & Anor /97 August 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /97 - Dawnfold Pty Limited versus Buildcorp NSW Pty Limited & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: On 4 January 1996, Deputy Registrar Venczel made an order for costs in proceedings between Dawnfold Pty Limited (the plaintiff) and Buildcorp NSW Pty Limited (the first defendant). She ordered that the costs of a taxation up to and including 6 February 1995 be paid on a party/party basis and from that day, on an indemnity basis (see Exhibit A). 
The plaintiff prepared a bill of costs. The total of the bill was in the order of $50,000. There were disbursements (excluding item 199) in the sum of $22,693.12. There were professional costs (party/party basis) in the sum of $13,593. There were professional costs (indemnity basis) in the sum of $15,295.50.

The plaintiff applied to the Court for an assessment of the costs. The application for assessment was referred to a Costs Assessor (Mr Goodman). He sought information and documents. Objections and submissions were made. The
Costs Assessor made an assessment of the costs and issued a Certificate As To
Determination Of Costs on 10 January 1997.

The first paragraph of the Certificate stated that, "The application is determined by assessing a fair and reasonable amount of costs to be paid to the applicant in the sum of $19,961".

The plaintiff commenced these proceedings by Summons filed on 7 February 1997.
The proceedings are brought by way of appeal pursuant to section 208L of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/), 1987 (the
Act).

The case argued on behalf of the plaintiff may be broadly put in the following terms:- "1. Appeal pursuant to Section 208L of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/) in that the
Cost Assessor made an error of Law in not assessing on an indemnity basis the costs Awarded by the Deputy Registrar of the Supreme Court on an indemnity basis.
Further and in the alternative, the costs assessor made an error of law in not providing sufficient detail (as distinguished from reasons) such that the applicant was denied the opportunity afforded by the Act to appeal under section 208M of the [Legal Profession
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lpa179/)." 
The hearing took place on 26 June 1997. The plaintiff was represented by
Counsel. Neither of the defendants appeared. The first defendant has previously appeared in these proceedings. The Court was led to believe that the appeal would be defended. It was represented on the day that the special fixture was allocated. It was party to the estimate of two hours given for the hearing time of the appeal. It has not bothered to appear on the hearing of the appeal and defend the assessment.

Counsel for the plaintiff presented both oral and written submissions. These submissions were later supplemented by further written submissions. At the outset, the Court was made aware that there was some doubt as to whether or not the Costs Assessor had the correct version of the costs order before him.

The Act establishes a new scheme for the determination of disputes as to costs. The dispute is to be resolved by a process of assessment carried out by a Costs Assessor appointed by the Court. The process is governed by the provisions to be found in Division 6 of the A ct. When the determination is made by the Costs Assessor, he is required to issue a Certificate pursuant to section 208J (see Cachia versus St George Bank Limited, unreported, 26 October ).

Division 6 contains provisions which deal with the assessment of bills generally. When considering an application, the Costs Assessor must consider the matters mentioned in section 208A. The Costs Assessor may have regard to any or all of the matters specified in section 208B. There are provisions which specifically deal with an assessment of costs, where the costs have been ordered by a court or tribunal. These are sections 208F and 208G (these may be found in Subdivision 3 which has the somewhat inappropriate heading, "Assessment of party/party costs"). The Costs Assessor must consider the matters specified in section 208F. He may have regard to any or all of the matters specified in section 208G.

Section 208F contains, inter alia, the following provisions:- 
A costs assessor is to determine the costs payable as a result of the order by assessing the amount of the costs that, in his or her opinion, is a fair and reasonable amount.

If a court or a tribunal has ordered that costs are to be assessed on an indemnity basis, the costs assessor must assess the costs on that basis, having regard to any relevant rules of the court or tribunal.

Since the introduction of the new scheme, the Court has dealt with a number of appeals under the Act. The decisions of the Court has seen the development of a well settled approach to appeals.

In this case, the Costs Assessor has issued a Certificate which, for present purposes, complies with the requirements of the Act and the Legal
Profession Regulation, 1994 (clause 26I(1)(a)). The form of the Certificate itself does not necessarily reveal that the costs for the period beyond 6
February 1995 were not assessed on an indemnity basis.

The Costs Assessor was required to assess the relevant part of the costs on an indemnity basis. He was required to have regard to the relevant rules of the
Court (including Part 52A rule 37).

There is a gross disparity between the quantum of the bill and the quantum of the assessment. There is material that suggests the Costs Assessor may not have had regard to the relevant rules. In my view, the circumstances are such as to manifest relevant error. I do not consider that the Court can affirm the
Costs Assessor's decision in this case. In these circumstances, the options open to the Court are limited (see section 208L(2)). I consider that the best the Court can do is to remit the matter back to the Costs Assessor and order him to redetermine the application.

In the light of this decision, it is unnecessary to consider other arguments presented on behalf of the plaintiff. However, perhaps I should add these short observations. It is well established that a Costs Assessor is not required to give reasons for the determination. The form of the determination is prescribed by the Act. He is not obliged to provide further detail.

The first defendant is to pay the costs of the Summons. If it did not intend to ultimately oppose the appeal, it should not have embarked on a course which saw the waste of valuable Court time and the incurring of unnecessary costs.
 * * * 
