

Regina versus Baraghith Matter No 1007/96 [1997] NSWSC 592 (28 November 1997) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus HAMDI KAMEL MOHAMED BARAGHITH /96 November 1997 
Michael Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
DETERMINATION OF LIFE SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application under [s 13A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act 1989](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) by Hamdi Kamel Mohamed Baraghith. At the hearing it was conceded on behalf of the Crown that a determinative sentence should replace the existing life sentence. 
The applicant is an interior design architect by profession and an Egyptian national. He met Josephine Anderson when she was on holiday in that country.
She later sponsored his migration to Australia in December 1986 and they married in February 1987. On 5 February 1988 he caused her death by beating her about the head with a brick which was used as a doorstop. The crime occurred at a flat in Chatswood. The detail is set out in the Statement of
Facts filed on behalf of the Crown and also to a large extent in a typed record of interview between the applicant and police. After lighting a fire at the murder scene the applicant went to a hotel and then entered the North
Sydney Police Station where he told them of the happening. The applicant claimed that he had difficulty in adjusting to social and cultural aspects of life in this country and the brief period of marriage was punctuated by visits to counsellors. The evidence at trial strongly suggested that the victim was genuinely seeking to make the marriage a success and in his reply to the
Statement of Facts the applicant claims some part in arranging the counselling sessions.

At the time of originally sentencing the applicant I made, amongst others, these remarks: "This murder was a deed of exceptional violence. You beat your wife to death with a brick and the evidence of Dr Hollinger is chilling in its implications about the ferocity of your attack. ................

I record that I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there is not a scintilla of truth in your protestations about your wife's infidelity. I will not pretend to assess or know what caused your marital rift but I am convinced that your scurrilous attack on the virtue and decency of your late wife was nothing more than an attempt by you to avoid just retribution by blackening her both to the law enforcement officers and to the jury." 
Suggestions of a similar nature had been made as well to psychiatrists who had examined the applicant for purposes associated with the trial.

In the light of the findings encapsulated in the above remarks (and the presumed awareness of the applicant's legal advisers of [s13A(9)(c)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) ) it has become apt to consider some subsequent circumstances concerning the applicant's allegations against his wife.

In response to the Statement of Facts filed by the Crown in respect of this application the applicant in his Notice of Reply repeated his assertion of infidelity in express terms, namely: "The applicant still maintains he heard his wife having sexual intercourse the weekend before the killing." 
He elected to give evidence at the hearing. When led in chief by senior counsel he made no reference to this issue. The omission became somewhat more prominent when his final testimony in chief was limited to the following: "Q. Is there anything you specifically wanted to say to his Honour that I have not covered in the questions I have already asked? 
A. Is like answering questions or just submitting in general? 
Q. Was there some topic that I have missed that you wanted to speak about? 
A. Yes it is - in fact you know, I wanted to explain his Honour and the relatives of my wife how difficult it is and how sad tragedy that is, and for myself as well because I was also her immediate family then, and I would like to say that I had come here for the purpose of building a family and being a part of the community here, and that tragedy that has happened, it is extremely difficult and it took me quite a long time to come to terms with it and accept its consequences, but it has left, as I have said before, a scar inside me that I will live with it for the rest of my life and I am prepared to do anything to compensate for this in the proper society as well, and in regard to work, or continue that purpose that I was supposed to do before all that happened, because what has happened has destroyed the track I was supposed to follow as --- 
I spend most of my life in schools and I travel and worked everywhere and life seemed to stop in a very sad way suddenly, for my wife first, and for her family, and for myself and my family.

Q. I think you have said much of that already to his Honour in both the letter and your earlier evidence? 
A. Yes, and that is mainly what I would like to say at the moment, just to be granted a chance to prove that I am prepared to compensate for that damage." 
The letter (exhibit 3) is silent on the issue unless it is intended to be encompassed in the cryptic statement ".... But then I was so damaged by some events that destroyed our marriage and turned our dream into a nightmare".

The applicant has not been reticent about specifying his allegation on other occasions since his sentence. For example in a petition to the Governor dated April 1994 (copy attached to Exhibit B) he asserted ".... the marriage did not last mainly due to her (the victim) being unfaithful".

In cross examination the issue was touched upon in questions by the solicitor representing the Crown (somewhat surprisingly having regard to the absence of any attempt to affirm the statements in the Notice of Reply during evidence in chief) and the exchange is recorded at pages 13 and 14 of the transcript and there is no need to recite it.

The submission by senior counsel was that - tacitly acknowledging the absence of acceptable evidence of any misconduct by the victim - I should nevertheless find that at all relevant times the applicant harboured a belief as to the occurrence of misbehaviour and that his own conduct should be assessed in the context of his being affected by that belief.

I do not accept that the applicant genuinely had such a belief. Statement of it becomes prominent in his assertions when there is some perceptible benefit being sought by him but it does not always seem to be an item of focus on other occasions, some of which being those where challenge might be expected.

I am satisfied that the murder was committed because the applicant lost control of himself during an argument which was itself essentially provoked by his perception that he did not receive the deference he expected from a wife and his anger at her continuance of independent social and employment contacts. His wife had continued to use her maiden name at work. She was a scientific officer employed in the medical research unit attached to a major hospital. She was also an accomplished musician.

I have spent some time on this issue not because I consider it should ultimately be of magnified importance in the determination of an appropriate sentence but particularly because in these public proceedings the attempts by the applicant to traduce the reputation of his deceased wife should receive the firm rejection which they deserve.

An almost allied matter is the question of the applicant's remorse. This he has specifically claimed and he gave evidence of desire to apologize to his wife's family. I am extremely sceptical of the expressions of the applicant. I should make allowance for the circumstance that in giving oral testimony the applicant may have found the occasion one of pressure and thus obstruct his articulation. No such handicap would apply to exhibit 3 in which as stated, he wished to express how he felt about this "sad tragedy". I do not dispute that description but the content of the letter, his evidence and other records such as the petition to the Governor reveal unmistakable signs of externalization of responsibility and a concentration on self interest. In my view little has changed since April 1989 when the applicant made a claim to Dr Shand which I later categorized as brazen. Dr Shand reported: "He described his reaction to what had happened as `horrible bad luck for me and a tragedy because I did not mean to do it. I am the victim of this tragic accident'. He agreed with my question that he does blame his wife for what happened." 
It is convenient at this point to mention Exhibit E which is entitled Victim
Impact Statement dated 23 June 1997 and is signed by the deceased's brother Mr
Bruce Anderson who appears to be the only relative of hers living both at the time of her death and the present. I have read this statement and I sympathize with his expressions. The content however cannot add to what otherwise would be an appropriate imposition upon the applicant and I would (in parallel) respectfully apply the reasoning elaborated by Hunt CJ at CL about <case> of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) in R v
Previtera, unreported 27 May 1997.

I accept the substance of the detail set out in the Statement of Facts filed by the Crown. I have noted the matters disputed in the Reply and dealt with one significant matter already at length. I am prepared generally to act on the variations of detail specified in paragraph 4 of the Reply with that and the following exceptions. I do not accept that the applicant was concerned by a belief of resumed contact between his wife and a former boyfriend. I regard that claim of belief as another element of the issue with which I have already dealt.

I do not accept that the applicant's knowledge of the critical events is as minimal as his comments on paragraphs 25 to 31 of the Crown Statement of Facts suggest. I prefer the evidence of what the applicant told police including the content of his record of interview.

Neither do I accept that the purpose of lighting the fire was self immolation.
I think the more likely reason for the fire was a thought that he might be able to disguise his culpability but I am not satisfied of this beyond reasonable doubt and I treat the matter as of weight neither in his favour nor against him in assessing sentence.

I turn to some subjective matters which must, however, weigh in favour of the applicant.

He had no conviction prior to this offence and his prison record has similarly been impeccable. The various reports from prison overseers and the Council confirm that he has diligently applied himself to assigned tasks and to self improvement whilst in custody.

The applicant can expect to be deported to Egypt upon actual release and it is his expressed wish to return to that country. There is a letter from the
Consul General of Egypt indicating willingness to facilitate his return. I have read the matter conveying the applicant's desire to see his aged and infirm parents. I would take this into account as part of an overall mitigation which I consider should apply to a sentence imposed upon any person who has the additional incident of isolation from family as a factor in the service of that sentence. For a time the applicant was visited by a brother but it would appear that at present his visits, apart from those by officials, are limited to islamic and christian chaplains and he also has some contact with persons interested in prisoner rehabilitation.

I take into account the matters required by <case>, specifically including the practice relating to the previous availability of release on licence to prisoners serving life terms, the age of the applicant at various points (he was born on 14 September 1952) and the report of the Serious Offenders Review
Council which concluded: "Throughout his incarceration BARAGHITH has been described as an excellent worker and a well-behaved inmate who has used his spare time productively pursuing various academic and life skills' interests.

When the inmate's sentence has been re-determined the Serious Offenders Review
Council will prepare a program designed to reduce him through the various security classifications as and when appropriate. His management will include preparation for his eventual release and deportation to Egypt." 
Although conscious of the likelihood, indeed inevitability, of deportation I propose to divide the new sentence into minimum and additional terms. I note that [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) does not apply. Both the total sentence and the minimum term component are less than I would otherwise have considered appropriate to the objective gravity of this exceptionally violent killing but they are tempered by your record apart from this matter and by the other circumstances which I have taken into account particularly the isolation of the applicant.

Hamdi Kamel Mohamed Baraghith, for the murder of Josephine Baraghith, in lieu of the life sentence which I imposed upon you on 4 April 1989 I sentence you to a total term of fifteen years penal servitude to date from 5 February 1988.
This is to consist of a minimum term of twelve years commencing on 5 February and expiring on 4 February 2000 together with an additional term of three years to date from 5 February 2000. You will be eligible for release on 4
February 2000.
 * * * 
