

Eros Cinema Pty. Limited versus Michel Assad Nassar No. 4349 of 1995 [1996]
NSWSC 412 (6 September 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
SIMOS J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 30 May 1996 #DATE 19:7:1996 #ADD 6:9:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiff    R.S. Angyal and V.F. Kerr 
Solicitors for the Plaintiff   Horowitz and Bilinsky 
Counsel for the Defendant    D.L Davies and J.A. Needham 
Solicitors for the Defendant   Konstan and Associates
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
SIMOS J By notice of motion filed 19 April 1996 the Applicant, Eros Cinema
Pty. Limited ("Eros"), the Plaintiff in the principal proceedings, seeks various orders, including an order that leave be granted to Kostas
Kontorinakis a director and shareholder of the Plaintiff, to institute proceedings personally in his own name but as co-plaintiff with the Plaintiff in the principal proceedings,
Eros, such proceedings to be instituted by a statement of claim substantially in the form of the draft annexed to the notice of motion.
The Defendants named in that draft statement of claim are
Michel Assad Nassar, the Defendant in the principal proceedings, Fastrise
Pty.
Limited (in liquidation), ("Fastrise"), and Geoffrey David McDonald, the liquidator of Fastrise.
Mr. Kontorinakis and
Mr. Nassar were and are each fifty per cent shareholders in Fastrise and were and are each directors of that company.
Fastrise was formerly the owner of the property, 51-57 Goulburn Street,
Sydney, ("the property"), and Eros is and has been in occupation of the basement and first floor of the property for some time pursuant to an unregistered lease between a predecessor in title of the property,
Halbear
Pty. Limited (as lessor) and Eros (as lessee).
Mr. McDonald was appointed provisional liquidator of Fastrise on 20
June and the company went into liquidation on 8 March 1996, with Mr. McDonald named as liquidator. Mr. McDonald, as liquidator, caused the company to sell the property to Mr. Nassar for a price of $2.075 million, such sale having been completed on 24 October .
On 16 November 1995 Mr. Nassar, as the new owner and landlord of the property, took possession of that part of the property occupied by Eros, allegedly by entering those premises and changing the locks, apparently claiming to have been entitled to do so by reason of alleged non-payment of rent and alleged breaches of various covenants.
Thereafter Eros commenced proceedings in this Division of the Court seeking relief of various kinds and, in the context of those proceedings, obtained from Bryson J on 23
November 1995 interlocutory injunctions, in effect, requiring Mr. Nassar to return possession of the relevant parts of the property to Eros. Those injunctions were varied by Cohen J by consent on 2
February 1996 in a way which is immaterial for present purposes, an application to Sperling J on 29 December 1995 to dissolve the injunctions having been unsuccessful.
Mr. Nassar, the Defendant in the principal proceedings, filed a cross-claim against Eros on 15 February 1996 claiming possession of the premises occupied by
Eros, and by notice of motion filed 27 February 1996 sought expedition of the hearing of that cross-claim which application was granted.
Directions were thereafter given from time to time by me as
Expedition Judge with a view to having the proceedings ready to be heard.
The present notice of motion, as I have said, seeks an order that leave be granted to Mr. Kontorinakis personally to institute proceedings as co-plaintiff with Eros against Mr. Nassar, Fastrise and Mr. McDonald, claiming, inter alia, that the sale of the property by the liquidator to Mr.
Nassar was at a gross undervalue and that in respect thereof Mr. McDonald as liquidator was in breach of his duties to Fastrise and that Mr. Nassar was in breach of his fiduciary duties to Fastrise
The draft statement of claim annexed to the notice of motion seeks a declaration that Mr. Nassar holds the property as a constructive trustee for
Mr. Kontorinaki and, in the alternative, seeks an order that the sale of the property to Mr. Nassar be set aside. The draft statement of claim also seeks orders that Mr. Nassar and Mr. McDonald pay damages or alternatively equitable compensation, and also seeks relief pursuant to various provisions of the
Corporations Law.
So far as concerns Eros, the draft statement of claim alleges the grant of the lease from
Halbear Pty. Limited to Eros of certain premises within the property for a period of four years commencing 14 December 1992 with two options to renew, each for a period of four years, and claims a declaration that Eros is entitled to occupy the relevant premises pursuant to that lease and an inquiry as to damages payable by Mr. Nassar in respect of his dispossession of Eros on 16 November 1995 and until Eros was restored to possession pursuant to the orders of Bryson J.
On the basis that Mr. Kontorinakis personally was to become a plaintiff, and that he was a person who was in custody as a result of his having been convicted of a felony, the notice of motion also sought the Court's leave pursuant to the [Felons (Civil Proceedings) Act 1981](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/) for Mr. Kontorinakis personally to institute the proposed proceedings.
On the further basis that Fastrise, being in liquidation, was to be named as a defendant, the notice of motion also sought the Court's leave pursuant to section 471B of the Corporations Law for Mr. Kontorinakis personally to institute the proposed proceedings against Fastrise.
It seems obvious that the applicant for such leave in both cases should have been Mr. Kontorinakis personally, and not Eros as was in fact the case.
However, no submission was made that the notice of motion was incompetent for that reason and accordingly, I propose to deal with the matter upon the basis that there is before me an application by Mr. Kontorinakis pursuant to both the [Felons (Civil Proceedings) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/) and the Corporations Law. To the extent that it would have been necessary for Mr. Kontorinakis to have had the leave of the Court under the former Act to make such an application, that leave is now granted upon the basis that I am satisfied that the application is not an abuse of process and that there is prima facie ground for the application, for the reasons appearing in this judgment The relevant sections of the Act in this connection are [sections 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/s3.html), [4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/s4.html) and [5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/s5.html) which are in the following terms:- "Felon may sue.
Subject to this Act, a person shall not, by reason of his having been convicted of, or found to have committed, a felony, be incapable of instituting and maintaining any civil proceedings in any court.

Leave required in certain cases.
A person who is in custody as a result of his having been convicted of, or fourth to have committed, a felony may not institute any civil proceedings in any court except by the leave of that court granted on his application.

Grant of leave.
A court shall not, under [section 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/s4.html), grant leave to a person to institute proceedings unless the court is satisfied that the proceedings are not an abuse of process and that there is prima facie ground for the proceedings."
In the light of my decision as will appear hereafter, no leave will be required pursuant to section 471B of the Coroporations Law.
However, in the course of the hearing, it was submitted by counsel for the Respondent, Mr. Nassar, that the proposed claim to set aside the sale of the property by Fastrise to
Mr. Nassar, by reason of breaches of duty owed by
Mr. McDonald as liquidator to Fastrise, as well as by reason of breaches of his fiduciary duties owed by Mr. Nassar, as director, to Fastrise, and for damages or equitable compensation in respect thereof, was a claim which could be brought only by the company, Fastrise, and not by Mr. Kontorinakis personally, even if Mr. Kontorinakis personally might benefit if the claim was upheld.
Reference was made in this connection to the judgment of the Full Court in Christianos v Aloridge Pty. Limited <case>; [(1995) 131 ALR 129] at 136 where the
Court considered the circumstances in which the Court will grant leave to a contributory to sue in the name of a company in liquidation. The relevant passages are as follows:- "It is well established that in an action to redress a wrong done to a company, or to recover money or damages alleged to be due to it, the company is the only proper plaintiff; and that the company's name should only be used as plaintiff by direction of the company or its directors or, where the company has been placed in liquidation by the liquidator: see Scarel Pty. Limited v City Loan and Credit Corp. Pty. Limited [(1988) 79 ALR 483] per Gummow J at 350. There, Gummow J went on (at FCR [351; ALR 490-1)] to cite the following observations of Lord
Blanesburgh, speaking for the Privy Council in Ferguson v
Warbridge [(1935) 3 DLR 66] (at 83): '... even in the case of a going company a minority shareholder is not entitled to proceed in a representative action if he is unable to show when challenged that he has exhausted every effort to secure the joinder of the company as plaintiff and has failed ... So soon as the company goes into liquidation, the necessity for any such expedient in procedure disappears.

Passing over the superficial difficulty, that a company in compulsory liquidation cannot be proceeded against without the leave of the court, the real complainants, the minority shareholders, are now no longer at the mercy of the majority, wrongly retaining the property of the company by the strength of their votes. If the liquidator, acting at the behest of the majority, refuses when requested to take action in the, name of the company against them, it is open to any contributory to apply to the court ... and it is open to the court, on cause shown, either to direct the liquidator to proceed in the company's name or on proper terms as to indemnity, and otherwise to give to the applicant leave to use the company's name as plaintiff in any action necessary to be brought for the vindication of the company's rights ... And it is the policy of the Act that all claims competent to the company should be brought within the scope and control of the winding up, and that not only in a compulsory liquidation. Therefore, such procedure is not to be discouraged.' 
More recently in another case ... Fargro Ltd. versus Godfroy [(1986) WLR 1134], Walton J said (at 1138): '... the procedure which is adopted in the liquidation is either that the liquidator sues in the name of the company, of course against suitable indemnities, ox against suitable indemnities the would-be plaintiff is allowed himself/herself/itself to sue in the name of the company, but that in all cases in a liquidation the action is brought, as it properly should be brought, in the name of the company.'"
In my opinion, having regard to the authorities referred to above, the submission in this connection on behalf of the Respondent should be upheld. It follows, in my opinion, that the company,
Fastrise, cannot be joined as a defendant in the present proceedings as proposed in the draft statement of claim annexed to the notice of motion, and that what is required is that Mr.
Kontorinakis should be authorised to commence proceedings in the name of the company, provided that he is properly entitled to such an order. The proposed claims by Mr. Kontorinakis personally against Mr. Nassar and
Mr. McDonald based on certain provisions of the Corporations Law are dealt with later in this judgment.
Counsel for the Applicant in effect, also sought such an order authorising Mr. Kontorinakis to use the name of the company, Fastrise, in separate proceedings to be brought in the name of the company against Mr.
Nassar and Mr. McDonald, substantially in accordance with the draft statement of claim annexed to the notice of motion. Separate proceedings will be necessary because Fastrise could not be joined as a co-plaintiff with Eros in the present proceedings because the questions of law and fact as between
Fastrise and Mr. Nassar are quite different from the questions of law and fact as between Fastrise and Mr. Nassar, and there are no common questions of law and fact as between those respective pairs of parties. Nor do the rights to relief claimed as between those respective pairs of parties arise out of the same transactions or series of transactions: cf. Payne versus Young <case>; [(1979-80) 145
CLR 1.] There is accordingly no basis under [Part 8](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/index.html#p8) rule 2 of the Supreme Court
Rules for joining, Fastrise as a plaintiff in the present proceedings. Part 8 rule 1 of the Supreme Court
Rules is in the following terms:- "Joinder of causes of action A Plaintiff may, in any proeedings, claim relief against the same defendant in respect of more than one cause of action- where the plaintiff claims, and the defendant is alleged to be liable, in the same capacity in respect of all the causes of action; where the plaintiff claims, or the defendant is alleged to be liable, in the capacity of executor of the will of a deceased person or administrator of the estate of a deceased person in respect of one or more of the causes of action, and in his personal capacity but with reference to the estate of the same deceased person, In respect of all other causes of action; or where the Court gives leave so to do." 
Nor is there any warrant under Part 8 rule 2 for joining Fastrise as a plaintiff to the present proceedings. Nor would it be convenient to hear together the issues as between those respective pairs of parties.
This alternative application on behalf of the Applicant was opposed by counsel for the Respondent on the basis, in effect, that such leave should be granted only upon satisfaction by the
Applicant of the same requirements as an applicant for leave to commence proceedings against a company in liquidation must satisfy, and that the Applicant had not satisfied those requirements.
It was submitted by counsel for the Respondent that, in relation to what is required to be demonstrated in order than an applicant should be granted leave to proceed against a company in liquidation, that the test is that laid down by the Full Federal Court in Vagrand Pty. Limited versus Fielding [(1993) 41
FCR 550] at 556-557 in the following terms:- "Upon a close reading of the relevant authorities, it is apparent to us that the courts have not in fact required applicants for leave to demonstrate a prima facie case against the company in liquidation, in the technical sense of that term. They have required to be affirmatively satisfied that the claim has a solid foundation and gives rise to a serious dispute. Having regard to the course actually taken by the courts, the term 'prima facie case' is misleading. Perhaps it should be avoided in the future.

The test which has actually been applied is akin to that now used in considering whether interlocutory relief should be granted: la serious question to be tried'. See Castlemaine
Tooheys
Ltd versus South Australia <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 148] at 153, where
Mason ACJ made it clear, with reference to the very same question which arose in the context of an interlocutory debate, that the test of 'a serious question to be tried' is generally to be preferred to that of 'a prima facie case'. It is appropriate that the same standard of proof of the merits should be required for each of these forms of relief. In a particular case an applicant may need both orders. We would think it anomalous if an applicant had to meet a higher requirement merely to commence an action than that necessary to obtain an order potentially imposing a substantial burden on the respondent."
In the same case their Honours held as follows:- "There are authorities in which the term 'prima facie case' has been used to describe the case required to be demonstrated by an applicant for leave. But we are not aware of any case in which it has been held that an applicant must adduce evidence of every element of his claim. To impose that burden would be to shut out many meritorious claims. It is common place for actions against companies to depend upon documentary evidence.
Until there is discovery of relevant documents, it may be impossible for an applicant to prove each element in its case.
On occasions, it may also be necessary for the applicant to interrogate the respondent or subpoena other parties. These steps cannot be taken until the action is commenced."
Those requirements seem to me, as was submitted, to be equally appropriate as requirements to be satisfied by an applicant for authority to commence proceedings in the name of a company, although I was referred to a decision of McLelland J (as he then was) in which his Honour held that the test was that the applicant for authority to sue in the company's name had to satisfy the court that the proposed action in the company's name was "not vexatious or merely oppressive" but had some "arguable foundation". The relevant passages in that judgment also referred generally to the question of authorising the use of the company's name as contained in his Honour's judgment in Aliprandi versus Griffith Vinters Pty. Limited (In Liquidation) <case>; [(1991) ACLC 1],530 at 1,532-1,533 as follows:- "The form in which orders 1 and 2 are expressed is based on a recognition of the power of the Court to order that a creditor or contributory of a company in liquidation be authorised to use the company's name as a Plaintiff. This is a matter which I discussed in Wenham versus General Credits Limited (16 November 1988, unreported). Such a procedure is of respectable antiquity and is sanctioned by high authority.
Orders of that kind were made in (various specified cases) ... the legitimacy of the procedure was also recognised in (various specified cases) . It was said by Jessel M.R.
in
Cape Breton (at 207) to be based on 'the same principle on which a man could always have filed a bill in the old Court of
Chancery against his trustee to be allowed to use his name to recover the trust property. ' The procedure has the disadvantage that the conduct of the litigation in the name of the company is taken out of the control and supervision of an officer of the Court. Nevertheless, in the present case such a procedure would have advantages in that Mr. Aliprandi would be a co-plaintiff and in practical terms the conduct of the litigation would be in the hands of solicitors engaged by him and at his expense and risk. In the light of these matters and in the absence of any assets under the control of the liquidator, and the liquidator's apprehension as to Mr.
Aliprandi's financial position, if any order is to be made in the present application it should be in terms of authorising
Mr. Aliprandi to use the name of the company rather than directing the liquidator to act.
 
The proper approach of the Court in such an application as this has been described by the Privy Council in Lloyd-Owen at in the following terms: 'A judge in winding up is the custodian of the interests of every class affected by the liquidation. It is his duty ...
to see to it that all assets of the company are brought into the winding up. In authorising proceedings, especially if they may or will involve some drain upon the assets, he must satisfy himself as to their probable success; where ... they involve no possible charge on assets, he will nevertheless be careful to see that any action taken in, the company's nape under his authority is not vexatious or merely oppressive.' 
Since in the present case there are assets, the Court should satisfy itself that any action to be taken in the company's name by Mr. Aliprandi is not vexatious or merely oppressive, or in other words that it has some arguable foundation."
Counsel for the, Respondent also submitted, that in applying the Vagrand test to the circumstances of the present case, regard should be had to what the Applicant, suing in the name of Fastrise, would have to prove in the proposed proceedings against Mr. Nassar and Mr. McDonald. In this connection he referred to the following passage, inter alia, in the judgment of
McLelland, J (as he then was) in Northbourne Developments Pty. Ltd. r Reiby
Chambers Pty. Ltd. [(1989-1990) 1 ACSR 79] at 85 where <case> held as follows:- "the court in considering a challenge on commercial grounds to a liquidator's decision must approach the matter on the basis that the liquidator 'is recognised as having' both the qualifications and the access to the multiplicity of information which; may be necessary in order to make ... commercial decisions' and except where bad faith is established, will treat the liquidator's decision as a proper one unless satisfied that he acted in a way which no reasonable liquidator should have acted': see Re Mineral Securities Australia Ltd. (In
Liquidation) ((1973) [2 NSWLR 207)] at 230-232." (See also: Yeomans versus Walker [(1985-1986) 10 ACLR 753] at 757-8).
Counsel for the Respondent argued, in effect, that the Applicant had not, on the evidence, satisfied the Vagrand test that the Applicant's claim should have a solid foundation and give rise to a serious question to be tried (nor did it have "some arguable foundation" per McLelland J in Aliprandi supra), more especially, in relation to what has to be proved in challenging a liquidator's decision, as stated in Mineral Securities, supra, as referred to in Northbourne Developments supra.
In my opinion, however, the evidence adduced by the Applicant does, for present purposes, constitute a solid foundation and does give rise to a serious question to be tried in relation to the proposed proceedings within the meaning of the Vagrand test, and the Applicant should be authorised on appropriate terms to use the name of the company as plaintiff in those proposed proceedings.
In applying the Vagrand test, I do not consider that it is necessary for an applicant to produce to the Court evidence sufficient to establish affirmatively that the proposed proceedings will necessarily be successful.
The Court is entitled, in my opinion, to infer, if appropriate, from the evidence which is before the Court that additional relevant evidence is likely to be or may be available from other sources for the hearing.
In the present case the evidence adduced is, in my opinion, as I have said, sufficient to establish that the Applicant's claim has, relevantly, a solid foundation a gives rise to a serious question to be tried within the meaning of the
Vagrand test. I refer, inter alia, to the facts that the provisional liquidator sold by private treaty and not by public auction and obtained only one valuation, which valuation was on a vacant possession basis, without, on its face, taking into account in any express way, the rental potential of the property. It also appears that the liquidator did not advertise the property or otherwise seek to interest other possibly interested parties by way of calling for tenders or otherwise so as to create a climate of competition between prospective purchasers, except perhaps, which is denied, to suggest that the Applicant was given, through his manager, an opportunity to buy the property.
Moreover, it appears that, essentially, the main dealings in relation to the sale of the property were limited to dealings between the provisional liquidator and Mr. Nassar. In respect of Mr. Nassar there is some evidence to suggest that he, may not have made a full disclosure of all relevant facts to the provisional liquidator, that alleged failure being alleged to have resulted, in conjunction with other conduct, in Mr. Nassar having breached his fiduciary duty to the company in relation to the purchase by him of the property. I also have regard to the valuation of the property as at the date of completion tendered on behalf of the Applicant, which values the property as at that date at some $2.5 million as compared with the actual sale price to
Mr. Nassar of some $2.075 million.
This short statement of some only of the facts relied upon by the
Applicant is in no way intended to be a complete and exhaustive statement of all relevant evidence adduced by the Applicant as contained mainly in Exhibit
A being a bundle of various documents produced by various parties on subpoena, but those facts, in conjunction with the other facts so adduced in evidence are, in my opinion, sufficient to satisfy the appropriate test. I hasten to add that the evidence before me includes a letter from the liquidator dated 22
February 1996 to the solicitors for Mr. Kontorinakis stating his reasons for selling the property to Mr. Nassar at the price and in the circumstances in which it was sold, and that it may well be held after a final hearing that those reasons were such as to result in the proposed proceedings being dismissed. Generally, however, it should be stated that I have formed no view as to whether or not the property was sold at an undervalue, nor as to whether the liquidator was in breach of any duty he owed to the company, nor as to whether Mr. Nassar was guilty of any breach of his fiduciary duty to the company and it would be quite premature and, indeed, totally inappropriate for me to have done so.
Counsel for the Respondent submitted, in effect that Mr. Kontorinakis should not be authorised to commence separate proceedings in the name of the company because the proposed proceedings seeking to set aside the sale to Mr.
Nassar would be an abuse of process in that, in his submission, they were calculated simple to delay the hearing of the original proceedings between
Eros and Mr. Nassar. If I were satisfied that that was the purpose or the principal purpose of Mr. Kontorinakis in seeking to bring those further proceedings, I would have refused he order on the basis that the proposed proceedings would indeed have been an abuse of process.
There is, however, no express evidence to that effect before me, and, although Mr. Kontorinakas was in Court throughout the hearing and available for cross-examination (as I pointed out to counsel for the Respondent in another connection, that is, in relation to the tender of a paragraph in an affidavit by Mr. Kontorinakis to the effect that the sale of the property to
Mr. Nassar was made without his knowledge or consent) there was no cross-examination of Mr. Kontoranikas on this issue. Although, if the order sought is made, and if the Court were to order the proposed new proceedings to be heard in advance of the original proceedings, the effect might be to delay, to some extent, the hearing of the original proceedings, on the evidence before me I am not prepared to draw the inference against Mr. Kontoranakis that delay of the original proceedings was the purpose or the principal purpose of this application. In any event, subject to the exigencies of other matters in my expedition list I would do what I could to ensure that both the new proceedings and the original proceedings were listed for hearing at about the same time.
Accordingly, and having regard to the form of the order made by McLelland
J in the Aliprandi case, it is my view that an order should be made authorising Mr. Kontorinakis, at his own expense and risk as to costs, to use the name of the company as a plaintiff in separate proceedings to be commenced against the liquidator and the Respondent, seeking orders that the sale of the subject property by the liquidator to the Respondent should be set aside on the ground that it was sold at an undervalue and/or in breach of the provisional liquidator's duties to the company and/or in breach of the fiduciary duty owed by the Respondent to the company, and for damages or equitable compensation and generally as set out in the draft statement of claim annexed to the Notice of Motion. The order will be conditional upon the
Applicant delivering to the liquidator a deed duly executed by him indemnifying the company against any costs, charges or expenses in connection with or arising out of any such proceedings and it will be the responsibility of the Applicant to fund the conduct of the proceedings in the name of the company.
It will also be part of my order that the Applicant should not compromise the proposed new proceedings nor receive any moneys recoverable by the company without first obtaining the specific authority of the Court: see Garden Mews -
St. Leonards Pty. Limited versus Butler
Pollnow Pty. Limited [(1984-1985) 9 ACLR 91] at 96.
Although the Plaintiff in any new and separate proceedings will be the company (Fastrise), because it will be Mr. Kontorinakis suing in the name of the company it is probably the case that before those proceedings can be commenced, Mr. Kontorinakis will need the leave of the Court pursuant to the [Felons (Civil Proceedings) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/) to commence those proceedings. Accordingly, I propose to grant to Mr. Kontorinakis, pursuant to [sections 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/s3.html), [4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/s4.html) and [5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/s5.html) of that
Act, to commence such new proceedings in accordance with the Court's orders as noted later in this judgment, again upon the basis that I am satisfied that those proceedings would not be an abuse of process and that there is prima facie ground for those proceedings, for the reasons set out in this judgment.
So far as concerns any principle to the effect that a tenant cannot dispute his or her landlord's title (cf. Industrial Properties (Barton Hill)
Ltd. versus Associated Electrical Industries Ltd. <case>; [(1977) 1 QB 580] at 407C-D), the position is that the proposed new proceedings will be quite separate from and independent of the proceedings between the Applicant and the Respondent in relation to the lease of the subject premises, and, indeed, will be between different parties, and accordingly any such principle, in my opinion, does not operate to prevent Mr.
Kontorinakis from commencing the proposed new proceedings in the name of the company and with himself as co-plaintiff.
Counsel for the Applicant also submitted, in effect, that, even if
Fastrise could not be joined as a plaintiff (or defendant) by amendment to the statement of claim in the present (original) proceedings, (it being plain that it was inappropriate in that circumstance for Mr. Kontorinakis to be joined as a co-plaintiff in those proceedings), nevertheless Mr. Kontorinakis personally should have leave to be joined in the proposed new proceedings by Fastrise against the Respondent (Mr. Nassar) and Mr. McDonald (the liquidator), so as to permit Mr. Kontorinakis as well as Fastrise to make claims against the proposed defendants for relief pursuant to sections 232, 260, 1317HD, 1321 and of the Corporations Law as set out in the draft statement of claim annexed to the amended notice of motion.
I assume that the factual basis for these additional claims is the same as the factual basis of the proposed claims by Fastrise against Mr. Nassar for breach of fiduciary duty arising out of the purchase by Mr. Nassar of the subject property and against Mr. McDonald for breach of duty in respect of the same matter. If this is so, it is appropriate that Mr. Kontorinakis should be a co-plaintiff in the proposed new proceedings and I would, therefore, be disposed, prima facie, on that basis, to grant to Mr. Kontorinakis the necessary leave under the [Felons (Civil Proceedings) Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/fpa1981240/), although I express no view as to whether, either as a matter of fact or as a matter of law, Mr.
Kontorinakis would be entitled to any relief under any of those sections of the Corporations Law, except to say that, in my opinion, it would not, prima facie, be appropriate for me to decide in the context of the present application that those sections could not, arguably, be availed of by
Mr.
Kontorinakis.
However, before I grant such additional leave to Mr. Kontorinakis, I require to see the proposed statement of claim in its final form and to hear further submissions from all parties.
In that connection, I direct that the proposed statement of claim (which will not, of course, include Eros as a party) should contain by way of particulars full details of the facts upon which the proposed plaintiffs will rely to establish each and every breach of duty, statutory or otherwise, upon which they rely, and each and every item of relief by way of injunction, damages or otherwise to which they claim to be entitled. Each such breach and each such item of relief should- also be precisely identified and defined, inter alia, by reference to the particular statutory provision to be relied upon.
The next matter for determination is whether or not the proposed new proceedings should be heard in advance of, and separately from, the principal or original proceedings in this matter. Counsel for the Respondent submitted that since there is no real connection between the two sets of proceedings, and since the outcome of the proposed new proceedings cannot have any effect on the outcome of the original proceedings, the original proceedings, having been granted expedition, should not be delayed by hearing of the proposed new proceedings first. It seems to me, however, that it may well be, as a matter of fact, that, if the sale to Mr. Nassar is set aside, the duty of the liquidator at the relevant time, and in the then relevant circumstances, may require him to discontinue the original proceedings or come to some other arrangement with Eros. I express no view as to whether or not that will be the case.
In any event, at the appropriate time, I propose, as I have said, to fix dates for hearing of, both matters so that they can be heard at approximately the same time, with the proposed new proceedings being heard first. The state of the expedition list is such that I would not, in any event, be able to give either matter a date or hearing earlier than an appropriate timetable for bringing the proposed new proceedings to a state of readiness or hearing would require.
As both Eros and Mr.
Kontorinakis have failed in their application for leave to amend the statement of claim in the original proceedings by adding
Mr.
Kontorinakis as a plaintiff and Fastrise and Mr. McDonald, the liquidator, as Defendants, but have succeeded against the Respondent's opposition in obtaining authority to sue the Respondent in the name of the company, albeit in separate proceedings, with Mr. Kontorinakis a co-plaintiff in his own right, I consider that I should make no order as to the costs of the notice of motion to the intent that each party should bear its and his own costs thereof.
I direct counsel for the Applicant to bring in short minutes of order giving effect to this judgment.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/412.html  
