

Hawke and Ors versus Anderson and Ors [1996] NSWSC 175 (5 June 1996) 
HAWKE & ORS versus ANDERSON & ORS /94 
Wednesday, 31 January 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT (application to amend pleading) 
HIS HONOUR: The statement of claim in this matter was filed on 28 July 1994, the proceedings having been commenced on 11 January 1994, relating to events which occurred in November 1993 and earlier. A few days before the commencement of the hearing yesterday, the Court and the defendants were provided by the representatives of the plaintiffs with a proposed amended statement of claim, which I will have marked M1. It was conceded by the plaintiffs' counsel, after the hearing commenced yesterday, that the then proposed amended statement of claim would itself require some further amendment to deal with the question of, firstly, payments in advance by, or the allowing of credit to, syndicate members and also the question of an error as to the date of purchase of the winning ticket. It was arranged by consensus of the parties and the Court that an amended statement of claim would be provided this morning at the commencement of the second day of the hearing. At the commencement of the hearing this morning, counsel for the plaintiffs proffered an amended statement of claim containing material going well beyond the matters foreshadowed yesterday. Objection has been taken on behalf of the defendants to some of the matters in the current proposed amended statement of claim and in particular subparagraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e) of paragraph 7 and paragraphs 14 to 21 inclusive. As I understand it, there was no objection to the remainder of the now proposed amended statement of claim.

The question before me is whether leave should be given to the plaintiffs to amend the statement of claim in terms of this current proposed amended statement of claim. It is necessary to consider subparagraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e) of paragraph 7 and paragraphs 14 to 21 inclusive separately, as they deal with quite separate matters.

I should add that the plaintiffs closed their case yesterday afternoon, all plaintiffs having given evidence and been cross-examined and, as I understand it, each was present during the evidence of the others and also during the cross-examination of the first two witnesses for the defendants, who were also called yesterday afternoon.

I have concluded that in all the circumstances it is in the interests of justice as between the parties proper to grant leave to include the proposed subparagraphs (b), (c), (d) and (e) of paragraph 7, but that leave should be refused to include the proposed paragraphs 14 to 21 inclusive.

So far as the subparagraphs of paragraph 7 are concerned, it seems to me that the allegations in those subparagraphs are already matters which are legitimately relevant to the proceedings as presented and opened on behalf of the plaintiffs. The matters there referred to, if held to be established, would be on the pleadings as they presently stand, admissible as surrounding circumstances of the critical transaction on 1 November 1993. The specification of those matters in the pleading, as is now contemplated, does not seem to me to add any issue to the case which was not already a matter which was within the ambit of the issues and I see no substantial prejudice to the defendants in permitting those subparagraphs to be included in the proposed new paragraph 7. As to paragraphs 14 to 21, they raise or seek to raise a case based on estoppel which is a matter which has, up till this morning, not been foreshadowed and which is quite a distinct case from that which the plaintiffs sought to raise initially, and at all material times up to this morning. Up till now the plaintiffs' case has been clearly based on the contention that the winning ticket was held in trust for the original syndicate, of which they were members.

The case by estoppel sought to be pleaded in paragraphs 14 to 21 seeks to raise a quite distinct case, to the effect that the defendants are estopped from denying that the plaintiffs are members of a separate and second syndicate, being the syndicate which the defendants have always claimed was entitled to the proceeds of the winning ticket and which was quite distinct from the original syndicate, of which the plaintiffs claimed to be members.
The critical allegations to found the alleged estoppel are expressed in vague and indefinite terms, in particular in paragraphs 15, 17 and 18 of the proposed amended statement of claim and the evidentiary issues raised in this alternative claim have not been adequately explored either in evidence or in pretrial procedures and in my view, could not be adequately explored and dealt with at this stage of the trial without at least serious disruption to the hearing, considerable additional cost, and risk, in respect of any further cross-examination of witnesses who have already completed their evidence, of some procedural contamination, if I can use that expression - without intending to be critical of anyone - of witnesses.

In all the circumstances I have reached the conclusion that it would be unjust to the defendants to permit that particular aspect of this document to be included in the statement of claim and for that reason I do not propose to grant leave to include the assertions in paragraphs 14 to 21 inclusive.

Accordingly, the order I make is to grant leave to the plaintiffs to amend their statement of claim in terms of the proposed amended statement of claim handed up this morning, excluding paragraphs 14 to 21 of that document, and on condition that any of the plaintiffs' witnesses be recalled, who the defendants' counsel may require to be recalled, for further cross-examination.

HAWKE & ORS versus ANDERSON & ORS /94 
Friday, 2 February 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT (plaintiffs' application to reopen case) 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs apply to reopen their case to adduce the evidence which I have already ruled should not be permitted to be adduced in a case in reply. The question as to whether that course should now be permitted after the end of the defendants' case on the fourth the day of what was to be a three day hearing is one which, as counsel have submitted, amounts to balancing the interests of justice, particularly as those interests affect the respective parties. It seems to me that in carrying out that balancing exercise I should take into account, among other things, the circumstance that this is a matter which has had the issues defined by pleadings, and in which on 1 December 1995 it was directed that the evidence in chief of all parties be by way of affidavit, with consequential directions as to the service of such affidavits.

The question of prejudice to the defendant as it seems to me goes beyond merely preparing for any cross-examination of Mr Edwards and, indeed, any other fresh witness in the same class as Mr Edwards. What this proposed evidence does is to open up the possibility of enquiry from what seems to me to be a potentially large number of people who were members of the relevant syndicate from the time of its inception in 1987 to investigate the recollection and potential evidence which might be given from any number up to the whole of the membership from that time of inception. That prospect is one which I think represents a very high degree of potential prejudice to the defendants as well as the potential for very substantial further delay in the resolution of these proceedings and a potential substantial increase in the costs of the proceedings.

Carrying out the balancing exercise to which I have referred, I come to the conclusion that it would not be just as between the parties to permit this course now to be taken, and I therefore refuse the leave sought by the plaintiffs to reopen their case in chief. I should add that it seems to me that the decision of Mr Justice Young in Pryke versus Perpetual Trustee Company of 27 August 1987 and the principles which are there discussed do not on analysis assist the plaintiffs in this case. The circumstances of the two cases are quite different, and in an application of this kind it is rarely useful to consider or to apply the particular circumstances of one case to those of another because they are of infinite variation. In every case the task of the Court is to look at the particular circumstances of each particular case and decide what justice requires should be done, and in the particular circumstances of the present case I have reached the view that I have already expressed. Therefore, I refuse leave to the plaintiffs to reopen their case in chief to adduce the evidence sought to be adduced from Mr
Edwards.

Hawke & Ors versus Anderson & Ors /94 
Wednesday, 5 June 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
McLELLAND CJ in Eq 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: In October 1993 all four plaintiffs were members of the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) attached to a unit at Regents Park RAAF known as 2SD Motor Transport Section (the Section). For some years there had been operating within the Section a syndicate (to which I will refer as the Transport Syndicate) for the regular purchase of Lotto tickets. The Transport Syndicate included both RAAF members and civilian employees, but not all such members or employees attached to the Section were members of the Transport Syndicate.

The funds of the Transport Syndicate comprised contributions made by its members, together with minor winnings from Lotto tickets. Members contributed $2.50 each fortnight. Lotto draws were held each Monday and Thursday nights.
The Transport Syndicate regularly purchased a ticket for two "Systems 8" entries for each draw. A "Systems 8" entry involved the selection of eight numbers instead of the six required for a standard entry, thus increasing the chances of selecting a winning combination. This required an expenditure of $28.80 per week. Members who anticipated being away from the base for an extended period could make advance contributions to cover the period of their absence.

The collection of contributions from members and the purchase of tickets and the keeping of financial records for the Transport Syndicate was carried by, or under the direction of, a syndicate administrator. The syndicate administrator was until June 1993 the first plaintiff (Mr Hawke), and thereafter the first defendant (Mr Anderson).

Prospective purchasers of Lotto tickets may obtain a personal registration card, to be produced when tickets are purchased. The name and address of the holder of a registration card is recorded by the Lotto organisation. Two benefits derive from the purchase of tickets in association with the production of a registration card: (1) if a prize is won and not claimed within eight weeks it is posted to the cardholder, and (2) if the ticket is lost, notification of the loss by the cardholder may prevent the payment of prize money won by that ticket to a finder.

After becoming the syndicate administrator Mr Anderson applied for and obtained a registration card which was issued on 15 June 1993. The application form included Mr Anderson's name and address and against the word "Syndicate", the words "2SD transport". The card itself contained the following details: "THIS CARD SHOULD BE SIGNED IMMEDIATELY BY THE 
AUTHORISED USER AND KEPT IN A SAFE PLACE 
NAME/SYNDICATE 
SD Transport 
SIGNATURE 
B J Anderson" 
At some time between the date of its issue and the date of the hearing the words "2SD Transport" on the card were obliterated.

On Saturday, 30 October 1993 Mr Anderson, using his registration card, purchased on behalf of the Transport Syndicate the regular ticket for two "Systems 8" entries for each of the draws on Monday, 1 November 1993 and
Thursday, 3 November 1993, for which he paid $28.80 from the funds of the
Transport Syndicate. On Monday,1 November 1993 the second defendant (Mr
Stokes), using Mr Anderson's registration card, purchased two tickets for the draw that day, one for a "Systems 10" entry (involving the selection of ten numbers) and another for three "Systems 8" entries. In the draw which took place that night, the "Systems 10" entry won a prize of $1,563,049.20, which was subsequently paid to Mr Anderson.

The plaintiffs, who were members of the Transport Syndicate, claim that the winning ticket was purchased in the name of Mr Anderson in trust for the members of the Transport Syndicate, and that consequently the proceeds are held in trust for all the then members of the Transport Syndicate. The defendants assert that the tickets bought by Mr Stokes on 1 November 1993 (including the winning ticket) were bought on behalf of a separate syndicate comprising the defendants formed ad hoc for that purpose on the morning of 1
November 1993, and of which the plaintiffs were not members.

At intervals, a particular Lotto draw would involve substantially extra prize money. These have been referred to as "special draws" and customarily took place on the anniversary of the establishment of Lotto (the beginning of
November), on Mothers' Day (the second week in May) and on Fathers' Day (the early September) each year. The draw on 1 November 1993 was a Lotto anniversary special draw. From time to time extra tickets (that is tickets additional to the regularly purchased tickets) were purchased on behalf of the
Transport Syndicate in special draws. According to the plaintiffs' case an extra ticket was usually, if not invariably, purchased for the Transport
Syndicate on the occasion of a special draw subject to there being a consensus to that effect of those members of the syndicate who were on base and available to be consulted, and that on each such occasion the funds necessary for the purchase of the extra ticket were raised by a "whip-around" among those members. In my opinion, on a consideration of the evidence as a whole, these matters are not established. Although in earlier years, the purchase of extra tickets for the Transport Syndicate in special draws may well have been a common, if not invariable, practice, I find, on the evidence, that the payments for the extra tickets on such occasions was made from existing funds of the Transport Syndicate and not as a result of any special "whip-around" among available members for that purpose. If, as was common, there were members of the Transport Syndicate not on the base or available at the time of a special draw and from whom therefore no money could be then collected in the "whip-around", one would expect to find in the financial records of the
Transport Syndicate some adjustment to reflect the fact that some members had contributed to the cost of the extra ticket and some had not. The financial records in evidence, while not complete, do cover at least four occasions of a special draw prior to June 1993, but do not disclose any such adjustment. The only entry which appears to reflect the purchase of an extra ticket for a special draw is a notation at the top of a record sheet dated 5 May 1993 which appears to record deductions from the amount of the funds of the Transport
Syndicate to meet inter alia the cost of an extra ticket for the special draw on Mothers' Day 1993. By June 1993 the number of members of the Transport
Syndicate was diminishing because the base was being phased out, and aggregate contributions from members were correspondingly lower, and the funds available correspondingly less. In September 1993 there appear to have been only about members left, contributions from whom amounted to approximately $58.00 per fortnight, as compared with about 40 members at an earlier time, contributions from whom amounted to about $100.00 per fortnight which produced funds well in excess of the cost of the regular tickets. It is pertinent to note that no extra ticket was purchased for the Transport Syndicate in respect of the special draw for Fathers' Day 1993.

I am satisfied on the evidence that the purchase by Mr Stokes of the tickets on 1 November 1993 originated in an ad hoc decision by a number of persons present in the smoko room of the Section during the morning of that day to participate in a "systems entry" for the special draw that night, in response to which Mr Stokes, with the assistance of others, collected $5.00 from various people in the room and other people in the vicinity, who indicated their desire to participate. Those invited to participate included two persons who were not members of the Transport Syndicate, namely Mr D B Lawrence, who declined, and the seventh defendant Mr Lynchahon, who accepted. In three instances $5.00 each was contributed on behalf of other people. Mr Stokes wrote down the names of those from whom or on whose behalf he had collected $5.00. There were 16 such persons, including himself, and therefore a total sum of $80.00 available. The actual cost of the tickets purchased by Mr Stokes was $75.45.

I am satisfied that the circumstances under which Mr Stokes came to use Mr
Anderson's registration card in the purchase of the tickets, while requiring careful scrutiny, do not lead to the conclusion that it was the intention of
Mr Anderson or Mr Stokes that the tickets purchased by Mr Stokes should be considered as being purchased on behalf of, or otherwise belonging to, the
Transport Syndicate. Mr Anderson had used that card from time to time for the purchase of Lotto tickets other than those for the Transport Syndicate, as had
Mr Hawke in respect of the registration card for the Transport Syndicate which he had held while administering the syndicate. I accept that Mr Anderson offered the use of the card to Mr Stokes purely as a matter of convenience substantially in the circumstances deposed to by Mr Stokes, Mr Hodges and Mr
Anderson.

In summary, the winning ticket was purchased by Mr Stokes in the name of Mr
Anderson with money supplied for that purpose by the sixteen persons from whom, or on whose behalf, it had been collected by Mr Stokes, and not with funds of or intended to be funds of, the Transport Syndicate. There was no legal or equitable obligation binding Mr Stokes or Mr Anderson to deal with that money as funds of the Transport Syndicate, or to deal with the proceeds of the ticket otherwise than to hold them for the benefit of those sixteen person. In my view the plaintiffs have not established any entitlement to share in that money, and the proceedings should be dismissed.

However, the circumstance that the winning ticket was purchased using Mr
Anderson's Transport Syndicate registration card created a situation giving rise to legitimate suspicion and calling for enquiry, particularly as the plaintiffs had no direct knowledge of the relevant events. For that reason, I propose to order that the costs of all parties be paid out of the fund representing the proceeds of the winning ticket.

The orders of the Court are as follows: Order that the proceedings be dismissed.
 Order that the costs of all parties be paid or retained (as the case may be) out of the fund representing the proceeds of the winning ticket referred to in the reason for judgment delivered on 5 June 1996, in the case of the first defendant on an indemnity basis.
 * * * 
