

Sydney Showground Markets Pty Limited versus State of New South Wales and Anor
Matter No 21345/95 [1997] NSWSC 406 (16 September 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Sydney Showground Markets Pty Limited versus State of New South Wales & Anor /95 September 1997 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /95 - Sydney Showground Markets Pty Limited versus State of 
New South Wales & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: These proceedings were commenced by Statement of Claim filed on 19 December 1995. Since that time, considerable litigation has taken place. 
On 5 June 1996, I ordered that the Statement of Claim be struck out. I gave leave to the plaintiff to file an Amended Statement of Claim. The leave was confined to the propounding of a claim founded on negligence.

An Amended Statement of Claim was filed on 2 July 1996. On 18 December 1996,
Master Greenwood ordered that it be struck out. He gave leave to the plaintiff to file a Further Amended Statement of Claim on or before 30 January 1997.

The defendant consented to an extension of time for the filing of the Further
Amended Statement of Claim until 28 February 1997. A Further Amended Statement of Claim was filed on that day. A Further (Further) Amended Statement of Claim was filed on 18 April 1997.

The defendant now seeks an order that the Further (Further) Amended Statement of Claim be struck out.

Before proceeding to an analysis of the pleading, I should briefly mention certain matters relevant to the claim. It arises out of the granting of a
Lease by the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales (the Society) to the plaintiff of certain land which comprised part of the Sydney Showground.
This was land which had been vested in the Society subject to certain conditions by the Royal Agricultural Society Act, 1911 (the Act). The
Lease was expressed to be subject to the permission of the Minister for Land and Water Conservation under the Act. The permission of the Minister is endorsed on the Lease. The provision for the giving of that permission is to be found in section 5 of the Act. The plaintiff intended a use of the land as a market. The proposed use was dependent upon, inter alia, the obtaining of development and building approval. The defendant is sued pursuant to [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/cpa193/s5.html) of the [Crown Proceedings
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/cpa193/), 1988.

The pleading extends over some ten pages. There is now only one defendant (the
State of New South Wales). The pleading alleges "negligence and breach of duty" (paragraph 18). I am informed that it purports to propound a cause of action founded on negligence only. The duty of care is pleaded in paragraph
Breach is pleaded in paragraph 17. Damage is pleaded in paragraph 18 ("the
Plaintiff has incurred costs, paid moneys and wasted payments").

Paragraph 11 is in the following terms:- "11. In the premises, the defendant owed to the plaintiff a duty to take and exercise all reasonable care:- a. To disclose to the plaintiff all matters which the defendant knew at the date of the lease, or ought reasonably so to have known, which might affect the prospective viability of the plaintiff's development project; b. Not to give permission to the grant of the lease to the plaintiff, and to withhold consent thereto, if there were any matters which it had not so disclosed; c. To give to the plaintiff due and timely warning of any matter or thing within the knowledge or control of the defendant after the date of entering into the lease which would adversely affect the pursuit by the plaintiff of the development project." 
Paragraph 17 is in the following terms:- "17. The Defendant has breached each of the duties set out in paragraph 11 hereof which it owed to the Plaintiff: 
PARTICULARS a. The Defendant did not disclose to the Plaintiff matters which the Defendant knew at the date of the lease, or reasonably ought to have known, which might affect the prospective viability of the Plaintiff's development project, namely the fact or prospect of the Defendant entertaining and approving a proposal for the development of the Sydney Showground as a film studio complex; b. The Defendant gave permission to the grant of a lease to the Plaintiff notwithstanding that it had not disclosed the matters referred to in (a) above; and c. The Defendant failed to give to the Plaintiff due and timely warning of a matter or thing within the knowledge or control of the Defendant after the date of entering into the lease which would adversely affect a pursuit by the
Plaintiff of the development of the project, namely the facts that the
Defendant did and was entertaining and did and had determined upon a proposal for the development of the Sydney Showground as a film studio complex, and otherwise in a manner inconsistent with the Plaintiff's proposed development on the Showground Site. The precise date or dates of these failures are unknown to the Plaintiff and will be provided after discovery in due course." 
I should mention also the contents of other paragraphs of the pleading. They fall into two broad groups. Paragraphs 1-10 precede the allegation of duty.
Paragraphs 12-16 precede the allegation of breach.

Paragraphs 1-6 relate to more formal matters (including the Lease and the giving of consent by the Minister). Paragraphs 7 and 8 plead matters of knowledge had by the Minister (of, inter alia, the terms and conditions of the
Lease). Paragraph 9 alleges, inter alia, the making of a representation by the
Minister "upon and by reason of his consent" to the Lease (that, "The granting of the lease and the implementation of its provisions were in conformity with the policies of the government, and were likely to promote those policies, with respect to the use and development of the Showground Site"). Paragraph 10 pleads knowledge had by the defendant that the plaintiff, in reliance upon that representation, would incur substantial expense in applying for and bringing about a re-zoning and obtaining certain approvals. The Court was informed that the matters pleaded in paragraphs 1-10 comprise the facts ("in the premises") which are said to give rise to the duty of care pleaded in paragraph 11.

Paragraph 12 pleads the expending of considerable effort and the incurring of substantial costs and expenses in connection with seeking to obtain the re- zoning and approvals. Paragraph 13 pleads, inter alia, an awareness on the part of the plaintiff (in or about December 1994) that the defendant had entertained and determined upon a proposal for the development of the Sydney
Showground as a film studio complex. Paragraph 14 pleads that, as a consequence of the defendant's intended film studio development, the plaintiff became unable to proceed with its own development proposal. Paragraph 15 pleads that, but for the defendant's proposal, the plaintiff probably would have succeeded in obtaining the re-zoning and approvals. Paragraph 16 pleads that, as a result of the defendant's decision to entertain and approve of the proposal to develop the site as a film studio complex, the plaintiff lost the opportunity to obtain the re-zoning and approvals. Whilst the intended role of these paragraphs in the structure of the pleading is not entirely clear, it has been said that at least certain of them had been introduced into the pleading for the purpose of meeting past criticism of the plaintiff's pleadings.

In the Judgment delivered on 5 June 1996, I dealt with certain matters concerning the Deed of Lease and the Act. I do not propose to repeat all of that material. I shall expressly refer to some of it.
 [Section 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/cpa193/s5.html) of the Act is in the following terms:-
If the said society fail to comply with the provisions of the last preceding section, or if the said land be used or occupied for any purpose whatsoever, save as hereinbefore provided, or if the said society sell the said land or attempt to do so, or without the permission of the Minister for
Lands, lease, mortgage, or charge the said land, or if the said land be taken in execution, or if the said society cease to exist, the said land shall, on notification to that effect in the Gazette, revest in His Majesty: Provided that the land so revested shall be subject in the hands of the Crown to any lease, mortgage, or charge for which the permission of the Minister for Lands has been duly obtained.

I observed, inter alia, that:- "For present purposes, this section provides that, if the second defendant leases the land without the permission of the Minister, the land shall, on notification to that effect in the Gazette, revest in the Crown. The effect of the provision is clear. If the land is leased without the Minister's permission, it is liable to revest in the Crown." [Section 3](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/cpa193/s3.html) of the Act vested the land described in the Schedule therein subject to the conditions thereafter contained in the Act.
 [Section 4](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/cpa193/s4.html) specifies the purposes for which the Society may occupy and use the land. One of those purposes is expressed to be "and for any purpose that the Minister for Lands may sanction".

The function of [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/cpa193/s5.html) is to provide the machinery for the enforcement of the provisions of the Act (including the conditions). Revesting is the sanction for non-compliance. The
Lease was expressed to be subject to the permission of the Minister and his permission was obtained for the purposes of compliance with the conditions. It was done to avoid the risk of a revesting of the land. In the giving of the permission, the Minister was performing a statutory function.

For completeness, I should mention that the Act has since been repealed (see
Centennial Park and Moore Park Trust (Macquarie Sydney Common) Amendment
Act, 1992).

I have earlier mentioned certain matters relevant to the claim and the Lease.
I should also mention that, during the present hearing, the attention of the
Court was invited to certain other provisions of the Lease (including Clauses and 40). Clause 25 makes provision for "Early Termination". The Court was informed that the Lease had been determined pursuant to that provision. It was also mentioned that there had been a change in Government in March 1995.

When the matter had been previously before me, the Court was informed that the plaintiff desired to advance a case involving the allegation of breach of "duty to exercise reasonable care to give reliable information". The plaintiff had in mind the taking of advantage of certain observations made by Gaudron J in Hawkins versus Clayton & Ors (1987-1988) 164 CLR 539 at 596-597.
Primarily, leave to amend was given to enable the plaintiff to pursue that course.

Master Greenwood took the view that the Amended Statement of Claim, then relied on by the plaintiff, did not reflect a claim in those terms. The
Further (Further) Amended Statement of Claim is framed in terms that are substantially similar to those contained in the Amended Statement of Claim considered by Master Greenwood. The present allegation of duty of care merely sees a deletion of what was contained in 12(d) of the Amended Statement of
Claim.

Despite the many opportunities had by the plaintiff to plead its case, the present process still suffers from pleading deficiencies. These have been ventilated during argument and require no further elaboration at this stage.
For present purposes, I put those matters to one side.

The parties have presented written submissions. These have been supplemented by oral submissions. The Court has been referred to many decided cases and other authorities. For present purposes, it is unnecessary to indulge in a detailed analysis of the many matters agitated.

In my view, the Further (Further) Amended Statement of Claim fails to disclose a reasonable cause of action in the sense that is contemplated by the Supreme
Court Rules (Part 15 rule 26). It seems to me, when regard is had, inter alia, to the relevant statutory provisions and the matters pleaded, it is untenable to contend that the defendant owed the alleged duty of care. The reaching of this view dispenses with the need to pursue other challenges made to the pleading.

In considering applications for summary relief, the Court bears in mind that the authorities demonstrate that such relief should only be given in what may be described as clear cases. The relief is discretionary. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that summary relief should be granted.

The Court also has regard to the changes that have taken place in more recent years in the law of negligence and that it may be difficult at an early stage to properly assess the prospects of success of the alleged cause of action.

In my view, the onus of clearly demonstrating an entitlement to summary relief has been discharged. The defendant is entitled to have the Further (Further)
Amended Statement of Claim struck out. The plaintiff seeks a further opportunity to replead its claim. This application is opposed.

The plaintiff has now had, at least, four opportunities to plead the claim that it wishes to advance against the defendant. It has had legal representatives acting for it throughout the proceedings. Indeed, it has been represented by Senior Counsel on the occasions of the hearing of the strike out applications. The Court was informed that Senior Counsel had assisted in the drafting of the Further (Further) Amended Statement of Claim. It seems to me that the plaintiff has had more than ample opportunity to plead its case.
In my view, the failure to plead a reasonable cause of action is due to the absence of an arguable cause of action. There is also the consideration of the taking up of valuable Court hearing time. The Court has by now entertained three contested applications for the striking out of the plaintiff's originating process. In the circumstances, I refuse the application for leave to amend.

The Further (Further) Amended Statement of Claim is struck out. The plaintiff is to pay the costs of the application.

The defendant asks for costs on an indemnity basis. It seems to me that the matters agitated in the present application are substantially similar to that heard by Master Greenwood. In argument, the term "re-run" was used. The present application may be loosely described as a "re-run" of that application. It was accepted that, if the application could be viewed in that light, the defendant was entitled to indemnity costs. In the circumstances of this case, I am of the view that the costs should be paid on an indemnity basis and I so order.
 * * * 
