

M Mastronardo versus Remo Constructions P/L [2004] NSWSC 1331 (8 August 2004) 
MARIO MASTRONARDO v. REMO CONSTRUCTIONS PTY. LIMITED /90 
FRIDAY 1 NOVEMBER 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
BADGERY-PARKER, J.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff, Mario Mastronardo, suffered an injury to his back on 19 April 1990 whilst in the employ of the defendant, Remo Constructions. The accident occurred on a building site, a multi-storey hotel construction. On the day of his injury the plaintiff was required to carry out some work inside a cavity in the wall which seems to have been in the nature of a service duct, there being a number of water, sewerage and other service pipes laid along the floor. Access to that cavity was through what appears to have been a normal door-sized aperture but for some reason, perhaps relating to the exigencies of the construction work or perhaps relating to the nature of the construction itself, it matters not, there was a pipe positioned across the aperture and the upper part of the aperture was closed off by a sheet of plywood bolted on to that pipe. Consequently, in order to enter or leave the aperture, the plaintiff was required to bend below the level of the pipe. Either whilst he was entering, whilst he was working inside the cavity or whilst he was attempting to withdraw from it (and again, it seems to me, not to matter) he struck his low back against the under-side of the pipe or plywood. The defendant admits liability but contends that the plaintiff's damages should be reduced by reason of his contributory negligence in that, being aware of the presence of the pipe and plywood, he failed to avoid contact with it. In my view that submission is entirely unreal having regard to the work situation which the defendant had created. It is, in my view, demanding far too much of a worker, in such a work place, to require that he be at all times alive to the possibility of impact with such a hazardous obstruction. However it be viewed - the system of work or the place of work - the defendant put the plaintiff in a position where he was required to expose himself to the very danger which in fact occurred, and I am not prepared to say that he was guilty of contributory negligence in failing then to avoid that danger which the defendant had created.

The plaintiff was taken to St. Vincent's Hospital where he remained until 1
May 1990. The plaintiff claims to have been significantly incapacitated ever since and indeed, his own evidence is of total incapacity. The extent of his incapacity from time to time, and at any time when he was not in hospital or otherwise undergoing specific treatment, depends entirely on acceptance of his complaints. But it is submitted on behalf of his counsel that there is and has been throughout the period sufficient in the way of objective clinical signs and radiological evidence to warrant a finding of significant disability, even if the level of the plaintiff's own complaints be discounted to some extent. I accept that there are clinical objective signs recorded from time to time and there are x-ray findings which reveal the existence of pathology such as could account for complaints of severe pain and disability.

All of that being said, however, a determination of the actual level of disability must depend upon the extent to which one can accept the plaintiff's complaints and it is this that creates the major difficulty for the plaintiff.
His whole presentation is of a grossly disabled man. He walks, using a stick, in a half-bent position with a shuffling gait. It appears that he adopted that stance and gait virtually from the time of his discharge from hospital.
Whatever else the objective signs may support, it does not appear to me on a reading of the whole of the medical evidence that they support a case of disability as gross as that which the plaintiff demonstrates. This is not a case where the defendant has been able by objective investigative evidence to demonstrate that the plaintiff is not disabled as he claims - indeed the impression I have from the whole of the material is that the plaintiff has been entirely consistent throughout these many years in presenting himself as now he does. Nevertheless, his presentation being totally disproportionate to any physical findings and not such as would be expected to result from such injuries as are diagnosable on the basis of the physical findings, I simply cannot avoid the conclusion that he grossly exaggerates. I am prepared to accept that he has some pain in his back; I am prepared to accept that he has some degree of disability; the difficulty is, once it is determined that he exaggerates and that his evidence as to the extent of his disability cannot be relied upon, to find any basis to determine to what extent he is in fact disabled as a result of his injury rather than as a result of some unattributable psychological condition.

I say unattributable because to the extent that there is present a psychological component in his disability, the plaintiff has not sought to say in these proceedings that that is a consequence of the injury. Indeed, the plaintiff is estopped from so saying by a determination of his Honour Judge
Egan in the Compensation Court on 29 June 1994.

At the end of the hearing counsel for the plaintiff made a belated attempt to advance a case based on a "functional overlay" as distinct from a psychological illness of anxiety, but conceded that he had not opened such a case, nor had such a case been particularised. Counsel for the defendant submitted that a late amendment should not be allowed because the plaintiff had not been cross-examined on some matters which would become relevant if an amendment were allowed, and, more substantially, that the defendant would require an adjournment to enable it to seek the advice of medical experts and perhaps to call additional medical evidence. Faced with the possibility of an adjournment, counsel for the plaintiff elected not to press this alternative formulation of the plaintiff's case. He affirmed that the plaintiff's case was that the plaintiff suffered physical disability resulting from disc lesions in the low lumbar spine.

There was indeed objective evidence of disc pathology in investigations carried out while the plaintiff was in St. Vincent's Hospital. On 24 April , a CT scan of the lumbar spine was reported as showing "at the L3/4 disc level there is a small left postero-lateral disc herniation. At the L4/5 level there is mild posterior disc protrusion". On 26 April 1990, a lumbar myelogram was performed and was reported as showing:- "There is minimal indentation of the left side of the contrast filled dural sac at the level of L3/4 with some indentation of the left L4 nerve root.
However this nerve root sheath fills well. No other abnormality has been demonstrated." 
The records of the plaintiff's hospitalisation at St. Vincent's referred to sciatic pain on the right side only, and Dr. T.J. Connelly who had the care of the plaintiff during that period, noting that to be his complaint, regarded the investigations as revealing nothing related to his symptoms. However, Dr.
Marinucci who saw the plaintiff on 2 May 1990 (the day after his discharge from hospital) recorded a complaint relating to both legs, and to Dr.
Bannister on 4 July 1990, the plaintiff complained of back pain with radiation down into both legs. On that basis, Dr. Bannister attributed the plaintiff's symptoms to "disc pathology", and seems clearly to have relied on both the myelogram and CT results. He continued thereafter to make that attribution, notwithstanding that as time went on the plaintiff's sciatica was usually limited to the right side, and on those occasions when the complaint was of bilateral leg pain, the right side was said by the plaintiff to be worse than the left. On this question, I found little assistance in most of the medical reports tendered by the defendant, the authors of which were for the most part concerned to emphasise the extent to which the plaintiff exaggerated or fabricated his symptoms, and were, I think, with respect, distracted by that issue. An exception is the report of Dr. John W. Power of 29 April 1991. He seems to have given more thoughtful attention to diagnosis, and he concluded that the plaintiff "probably sustained a hyperflexion stress to the lumbar spine with a degree of axial compression, resulting in an L3/4 disc herniation of minor extent ...". More recently, the plaintiff was referred to Dr. C.E.
Graham who saw him first on 4 May 1995. On 31 May 1995, he carried out a discogram at St. Luke's Hospital, which, he said, showed "the lower two lumbar discs are widely disrupted, L5/S1 being the worst"; but his opinion was that the presence of a functional overlay rendered the plaintiff an unsuitable candidate for surgery. The plaintiff was seen at the request of his solicitors by Dr. Peter Conrad on 29 November 1995. He reviewed the plaintiff's history and the result of the series of investigative procedures and concluded that the plaintiff had sustained "a severe disc prolapse of L4/5 and L5/S1 discs"; and expressed surprise that the condition had been allowed to go on for so long without surgery having been undertaken. I have some difficulty relating the findings of Dr. Graham and Dr. Conrad to the accident, because the levels involved are not those to which the 1990 tests had drawn attention. However, noting the absence of any history of back trouble before the accident and the immediate onset of symptoms clearly explicable on the basis of disc pathology,
I do find myself satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the plaintiff did sustain in the accident a disc injury in the lower spine, with some associated irritation of the sciatic nerve. I do not find it necessary to make a specific finding as to the precise levels of the spine involved in the injury.

Following his discharge from hospital, the plaintiff came under the care of a general practitioner, Dr. Marinucci, who shortly afterwards referred him to
Dr. Bannister, an orthopaedic specialist. Dr. Bannister prescribed treatment by way of manipulation and an injection of depomedrol, and the use of a tens machine. On 12 July 1990, Dr. Bannister admitted the plaintiff to hospital for traction and he was discharged on 21 July 1990. Dr. Bannister continued to treat the plaintiff conservatively, prescribing a lumbar corset and subsequently a course of physiotherapy. Throughout 1990, he regarded the plaintiff as totally incapacitated for work. With some reservations I accept that view, based as it was on the opportunity which Dr. Bannister had to assess the plaintiff at a series of consultations, in preference to the contrary view of Dr. Ian Bryan based on a single examination on 19 December .

However by April 1991, Dr. Bannister was prepared to say that the plaintiff was fit for some form of light work. Dr. Power, who reported on 29 April 1991, noted the gross inconsistencies and exaggeration in the plaintiff's presentation but accepted (as I have observed) the presence of a disc injury attributable to the accident at work. He was of the view that the plaintiff was "fit for his former occupation with some restrictions. He is not fit for excessively heavy manual labour nor for work which involves repetitive or sustained bending of the back. Such activities would be provocative." The defendant ceased payments of workers compensation as at 4 March 1991, provoking the plaintiff's application to the Compensation Court of New South
Wales to which I have already made a brief reference. The application was for weekly compensation on various alternative bases from 5 March 1991. It was heard by Egan, CCJ. and determined on 29 June 1994. The judge accepted that in consequence of the injury in April 1990, the plaintiff was "unfit for work involving repetitive bending and lifting, heavy lifting, and working in situations where he would have to adopt unusual postures". That was the result of "minor abnormalities in his spine ... sufficient to justify complaints of ongoing symptomatology in the event of strenuous activities", and led to the conclusion that "he would probably be unsuitable to go back to the work of a builders labourer". He was however "quite capable of doing light process work or other work not involving the stresses which I have referred to earlier". It is implicit in his Honour's judgment that that statement of the plaintiff's condition and fitness for work was intended to refer to the whole of the period from 5 March 1991 to the date of the judgment. Both parties accepted they are estopped from contending to the contrary of his Honour's findings:-
That such was the fitness of the plaintiff for employment during that period.
That he was, throughout that period and as at 29 June 1994, able to earn in suitable employment about $380 to $400 per week.

The judge also made a finding that throughout the period with which he was concerned the plaintiff would have earned, had he continued in his pre- accident employment, "slightly in excess of $600". I mention that only to set it aside as irrelevant to the present proceedings which are concerned not with "average weekly earnings" as defined in the Workers Compensation Act but with the assessment of earning capacity, an assessment which must take account not only of basic earnings but additional benefits such as overtime, site allowances and the like. Exhibit N includes documentation relating to the plaintiff's actual earnings in the employ of the defendant from which it can be determined that his net earnings average at $740 per week.

The plaintiff's case is that (subject to the caps imposed by s.151I of the
Workers Compensation Act) he is entitled to damages in respect of past loss of earnings on the basis of a total loss of earnings until 12 April 1991 (the date on which Dr. Bannister first acknowledged him fit for some form of work) and thereafter on the basis of the difference between a net wage of $740 per week and the amount of his residual earning capacity during the period.
However, the plaintiff is not entitled at all to damages for economic loss unless he is able to surmount the barrier raised by [s.151H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151h.html) of the [Workers Compensation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/). [Section
H](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151h.html) as now relevant provides as follows:- "1. No damages are to be awarded for economic loss unless the injured worker has received a serious injury ...
A serious injury is ...
 an injury for which the compensation otherwise payable under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) for the loss or losses resulting from that injury is, in the opinion of the court, not less than 33% of the maximum amount from time to time referred to in [s.66(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html); or an injury for which damages for non-economic loss of not less than ($63,498.54) are to be awarded in accordance with this division (whether or not compensation is payable under [s.66).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) 
In this regard the plaintiff puts his case two ways. First he relies on [s.151H(2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151h.html) and claims that the permanent impairments resulting from his injury would attract compensation under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) at least equal to 33% of the maximum amount.

The defendant contended that the plaintiff is estopped from asserting a case based on [s.151H(2)(a)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151h.html), by certain findings made by Egan, CCJ. in the workers' compensation proceedings referred to above. The plaintiff contended that no such estoppel arises.

The plaintiff, in his Application for Determination filed on 23 September , claimed, additionally to weekly compensation payments:- "[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) lump sum $29,400 in respect of 50% permanent impairment of the back and $14,700 in respect of 20% permanent impairment of use of the right leg above the knee together with a claim under s.67." 
The defendant/respondent by its answer raised issues in respect of those claims:- "Insofar as the applicant purports to claim under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) of the Act, the respondent says that this claim has not been properly assessed or quantified and that the applicant has failed to furnish a copy of the medical report or certificate upon which this claim is laid. The respondent says the applicant is not entitled to a lump sum under s.67 of the Act." 
On 29 June 1994, his Honour Judge Egan dealt with those claims in the concluding paragraph of his judgment. He said:- "In my view, the correct evaluation of those claims is 20% permanent impairment of the back compared to a most extreme case, and 10% loss of efficient use of the leg at and above the knee. I make awards in his favour of $11,094 in respect of 20% permanent impairment of the back and $6,933.75 in respect to 10% loss of use of the right leg at and above the knee. Under s.67,
I make an award in the applicant's favour in the sum of $9,250, being 20% of a most extreme case ..." 
On the following day, on the request of the solicitor for the applicant and with the consent of the respondent, his Honour amended his award by deleting therefrom the sums payable under [ss.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and 67. The award as settled made no reference to any sums payable under those sections; and it is common ground that the defendant has never paid to the plaintiff any sum purportedly due under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) or under s.67 of the Act.

The defendant's argument was simply that the issue of the worker's entitled under [s.66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s66.html) and s.67 was clearly raised on the "pleadings" in the Compensation Court, and was left to be, and was, determined by that court; it was an issue raised between the present parties, and an issue identical to that posed in the present action by reason of [s.151H(2)(a).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151h.html) 
Counsel for the plaintiff asserted (but did not seek formally to prove) that at the commencement of the trial before Judge Egan, counsel for the defendant (then respondent) had drawn attention to the fact that a statement of claim had been filed in this court on 21 November 1990, which event deprived the
Compensation Court of jurisdiction under ss.67 and 67; and that that proposition was not contested by counsel for the plaintiff (then applicant); and that his Honour had apparently thereafter overlooked that matter when he purported to deal with that aspect of the claim; and that it was for those reasons that the award was amended on 30 June 1994.

Counsel for the defendant had no instructions as to the course of proceedings in the Compensation Court nor as to the circumstances in which Judge Egan was asked to and did amend his award.

An estoppel may be created only by a judicial decision within jurisdiction.
The plaintiff contended in this court, that (as it was said, had been pointed out to Judge Egan) the filing of a statement of claim in this court precluded the Compensation Court from exercising jurisdiction to award "permanent loss compensation" (the term by which, in [s.151A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/s151a.html), the Workers' Compensation Act refers to compensation under ss.66 and 67).
This, he said, follows from the provisions of s.151A(2)-(5), which are in the following terms:- "(2) A person to whom compensation is payable under this Act in respect of an injury is not entitled to both:- permanent loss compensation in respect of the injury; and damages in respect of the injury from the employer liable to pay that compensation, but is required to elect whether to claim that permanent loss compensation or those damages.

The person makes that election:- by commencing proceedings in a court to recover those damages or by accepting payment of those damages (in which case the person ceases to be entitled to permanent loss compensation in respect of the injury); or by accepting payment of that permanent loss compensation (in which case the person ceases to be entitled to recover damages in respect of the injury.

An election is irrevocable, except that an election to claim permanent loss compensation may be revoked with the leave of the court given in accordance with this section.

If:- a person elects to claim permanent loss compensation in respect of an injury; and after the election is made, the injury causes a further material deterioration in the person's medical condition that, had it existed at the time of the election, would have entitled the person to additional permanent loss compensation; and at the time of the election, there was no reasonable cause to believe that the further deterioration would occur, the person may, with the leave of the court and on such terms (if any) as the court thinks fit, revoke the election and commence proceedings in the court for the recovery of damages in respect of the injury." 
It is clear that by filing his statement of claim, the plaintiff made an election to claim damages rather than "permanent loss compensation". He therefore gave up any entitlement to recover compensation under ss.67 and 67, and did so irrevocably. Whereas an election to claim permanent loss compensation can be revoked with the leave of the court (s.151A(4), (5)), there is no similar right or power to revoke an election to claim damages.

There was thus no matter "arising under" the Act, relating to permanent loss compensation in respect of which the Compensation Court might exercise jurisdiction (cf. s.107). I therefore hold that the plaintiff is not estopped, by the decision of the Compensation Court, from asserting that he has sustained injuries for which the compensation payable under s.66 for resulting losses is not less than 33% of the maximum.

It is therefore necessary that I examine the evidence adduced in this court, as to the extent of any permanent impairment or loss of use sustained by the plaintiff by reason of his injury.

Various medical practitioners have made assessments of permanent impairment of the plaintiff's back and permanent loss of use of his legs resulting from the sciatica. The assessments made by Dr. Bannister in 1992 are now rendered irrelevant by legislative amendments. Those on which the plaintiff relies include those made by Dr. Marinucci, Dr. Conrad and Dr. Graham. The first two
I reject immediately because they clearly are based not only on an objective assessment but on an acceptance of the plaintiff's own account of the extent of his disability. Clearly Dr. Graham has attempted to avoid that error by discounting somewhat for the effect of the functional element which he identified. He has expressed an opinion that "the percentage of permanent impairment in this man's back would be 30% and the percentage of permanent impairment in the lower limbs at or above the knee including below the knee on each side would be 10%" which amounts to an assessment of a whole body disability pursuant to s.66 of the Act of 33%. If that assessment were accepted it would be sufficient to carry the plaintiff over the threshold defined by s.51H(2)(a).

I accept that Dr. Graham has made a genuine attempt to assess objectively the permanent impairment to which the plaintiff is subject, but nevertheless I find myself unable to accept his opinion. The reason is that his report really does not offer any intelligible basis for the assessment which it states. The plaintiff claimed in effect a total impairment of his back and a very large permanent loss of the use of each leg. Once his own account of the extent of his disability is rejected, it does not appear to me that there remains any objective basis for an assessment of loss particularly in the legs. It may be that one could say fairly arbitrarily that the pathology demonstrated in the back by the various investigations that have been carried out justifies an assessment of 30% impairment of the back; but I do not see how any assessment of permanent disability in the legs can be made without an acceptance, at least to some extent, of the plaintiff's account of his problems.

Alternatively the plaintiff claims to have sustained a serious injury within the meaning of s.151H(2)(b) and claims that the assessment of his damages for non-economic loss would produce a figure exceeding the threshold figure of $63,498.54. It is necessary therefore to detour from the consideration of economic loss to a consideration of non-economic loss.

The concept of non-economic loss corresponds with the concept of general damages at common law although the assessment of damages for the detriments which are relevant to be considered is different from that prescribed by the common law and is that prescribed by s.151G. The detriments to be taken into account however are no different. In the plaintiff's case, they include the happening of the accident itself and the immediate onset of pain; the need for ambulance transport to hospital; the fear and concern which one can infer, even in the absence of direct evidence, would have been aroused in the plaintiff by the experience; his period of hospitalisation for almost a fortnight at that stage, for about 10 days a few months later, and again for a day when he underwent the discogram; the pain and discomfort associated with the investigative procedures (CT scan, myelogram, discogram); the significant interference with his comfort and lifestyle during the period when, according to the findings which I have made, he was totally disabled; and such level of pain and discomfort, not precisely definable but existing in fact as a result of such genuine physical disability as he in fact has; and the probability (as
I find to be) that he will continue to experience some genuine symptoms stemming from his back injury for an indefinite period in the future.

It is necessary to take account of the fact that the plaintiff's physical disability, such as it is, has existed now for almost six and a half years and is likely to continue for some time in the future. The disability is not gross although the plaintiff's reaction to it may have been. He is not to be punished by reason of the fact that he has tried to make more of his condition than the organic pathology justifies, particularly since it is fairly obvious that his exaggeration of symptoms is, to some extent at least, the product of a psychological or psychiatric disturbance which, as Judge Egan found, pre- dated the accident and was not caused by it.

In some cases, it is a matter legitimate to be taken into account in the assessment of damages for non-economic loss that the particular plaintiff has been deprived of the pleasure associated with his regular involvement in valuable work in the course of his employment, the loss of which occupation represents a significant detriment quite apart from any economic consequence of it; but that does not appear to me to be a factor which can be given any great weight in the present case having regard to the plaintiff's patchy work record in the past.

I accept that the plaintiff had relatively constant back and leg pain during the period during which I have found that he was totally disabled, that is almost one year after the accident, but I am not satisfied that since March his pain has been other than intermittent, and probably for the most part although not always precipitated only by physical activity. I am not satisfied that it represents a major interference with his lifestyle although I accept that it would (but for the supervening effect of his psychological state) have the effect that activities which were formerly pleasurable to him would only be engaged in at the cost of some at least intermittent discomfort.

There is one additional element of non-economic loss to which no reference has thus far been made. I have noted that a tens machine was provided for the use of the plaintiff. It appears that relatively soon after he commenced to use that device, he developed an allergic dermatitis on his back, apparently attributable to a reaction to the terminals attached to his skin or the substance by which those were attached. The evidence relating to it is not particularly clear but it does appear that he had a quite significant dermatitis between the time when the condition first appeared in October 1991 and about May 1994 when he was seen by a specialist, Dr. Armati, during which period he required treatment by interlesional steroid injections. That treatment was successful but had to be abandoned because of some effect on his blood sugar level (he suffers from diabetes) and the condition recurred during
His evidence at trial (which in this respect was not challenged) was that the condition was not completely resolved. The area was dry but itchy and he needed regular application of appropriate ointment. It does not appear to be a major problem but does appear likely to recur intermittently from time to time in the future.

Section 151G(2) provides:- "The amount of damages to be awarded for non-economic loss is to be a proportion, determined according to the severity of the non-economic loss, of the maximum amount which may be awarded." 
By sub-section (3), "the maximum amount may be awarded only in a most extreme case".

Taking into account every aspect of the case I have come to the conclusion that a proper assessment of the plaintiff's condition as compared with what could be conceived of as a most extreme case is that his non-economic loss amounts to 35% of a most extreme case. He is therefore entitled by way of damages for non-economic loss to the sum of $66,673.47 (35% of $190,495.63).
It follows that his injury is a "serious injury" within the meaning of s.151H(2)(b), so that he is entitled also to an award of damages for economic loss and I return therefore to that head of damage. The award of damages for economic loss is subject to the caps imposed by s.151I. That section, by subsection (2), requires the court awarding damages for economic loss:- "... to disregard the amount (if any) by which the injured ... worker's net weekly earnings would (but for the injury or death) have exceeded the amount that is the maximum amount of weekly payments of compensation under s.35 (even though that maximum amount under s.35 is a maximum gross earnings amount." 
That appears to mean, and the plaintiff's submission accepted that it means, that during a period in which the plaintiff was totally disabled from earning, his damages may not exceed the "maximum amount of weekly payments of compensation ...", and during a period in which the plaintiff was or will be partially disabled from earning, his damages may not exceed the difference between the value of his residual capacity and that maximum.

The relevant limits were agreed by the parties to be as follows:- April 1990 to 30 September 1990 $577.50 October 1990 to 31 March 1991 $604.10 April 1991 to 30 September 1991 $612.10 October 1991 to 31 January 1992 $616.40 February 1992 to date of judgment: in excess of $1,000.00 
Applying those caps and the findings that I have made earlier, I will include in the award of damages the following amounts by way of compensation for the total loss of earning capacity from 19 April 1990 to 4 March 1991:- April 1990 to 30 September 1990 - 23.5 weeks at $577.50 $13,571.25 October 1990 to 4 March 1991 - 22.14 weeks at $604.10 $13,374.77 
During the period from 5 March 1991 to 29 June 1994, I find (on the basis of the figures in Exhibit N) that, but for his injury, the plaintiff would have earned $740 per week net. The award of the Compensation Court establishes that throughout that period, his ability to earn was between $380 and $400 per week gross. Upon the whole of the evidence, I am satisfied that the upper rather than the lower figure should be utilised. That equates to a net weekly wage of about $340 per week. The plaintiff's net loss can be calculated as $400 per week; at common law, that would be the starting point for an assessment of his damages under this head, but the calculated figures would be subject to a heavy discount, to reflect the grossly disabling psychological state to which the plaintiff was subject before his accident and which was likely in any event to have disrupted his employment.

However, the operation of s.151I limits the plaintiff's loss, to the extent shown in the following table:- 
Period Statutory cap Residual Compensable earning capacity loss March 1991 to 604.10 340.00 264.10 March 1991 (3.86 weeks) April 1991 to 612.10 340.00 272.10 September 1991 (26.14 weeks) October 1991 616.40 340.00 276.10 to 31 January 1992 (17.57 weeks) 
It does not appear to me that the factors which would require a substantial discount to be applied to a calculated loss of $400 per week net require a similar discount to be applied to a loss which by statute is already arbitrarily and substantially reduced. I allow for economic loss from 5 March 1991 to 31 January 1992, the total sum of $12,983.70, calculated as follows:- .86 weeks at $264.10 $1,019.43 .14 weeks at $272.10 $7,112.69 .57 weeks at $276.10 $4,851.08 $12,983.20 
After 31 January 1992, the cap imposed by s.151I does not affect this plaintiff, whose earnings but for injury were likely to have been $740 per week net. His calculable loss is $400 per week. For the period 1 February 1992 to 29 June 1994 (121.3 weeks) the calculated loss is about $48,520.00. For reasons already briefly indicated and to which I will come in more detail a little later, I am of the view that that sum needs to be very heavily discounted in order to arrive at an appropriate award for damages. The same discounting factors, however, apply also in respect of his claim for loss of earnings between 29 June 1994 and the date of this judgment, and in the future, and it is therefore convenient to deal first with those two latter matters.

The findings of the Compensation Court judge do not in terms relate to, and do not create any estoppel with respect to, the plaintiff's capacity for work after June 1994. It would, however, be appropriate to give effect to those findings beyond that date in the absence of any evidence of change in the plaintiff's condition. The defendant adduced no evidence from any doctor who had seen the plaintiff subsequently to the Compensation Court award. Dr. Power whose report of 29 April 1991 I found helpful on the question of diagnosis, was of opinion at that stage that the injury could be expected in the normal course to recover, and that it should not ultimately be the source of disability. He saw the plaintiff on two subsequent occasions, 14 February 1992 and 16 December 1992, when he affirmed his earlier view as to diagnosis and prognosis. He said, in February 1992:- "The natural history of such a condition is one of rapid resolution over a brief period of time although there is some persistent minor weakness. Many people have such injuries and return to heavy work. However it must be said that exceptionally heavy work involving heavy lifting or repetitive sustained bending can give rise to recurrent back pain under such circumstances.
Nonetheless many workers are able to cope with returning to their former occupations with such a minor injury." 
At that stage he thought the plaintiff was fit for his former job but with some restrictions, namely that he should not engage in repetitive and sustained bending. His opinion in December 1992 was that the plaintiff had long since recovered and was fit for his former occupation. However, the finding of the Compensation Court judge amounts to a rejection of the proposition that the recovery anticipated by Dr. Power had occurred, at any rate by June 1994. It leaves open the possibility that full recovery might have taken place after that date; but there is no medical evidence that it has occurred.

The plaintiff's own evidence is that he has continued to be grossly indeed totally disabled. I simply cannot accept as reliable his account of the severity of his symptoms; and in particular I reject his evidence that his condition is now in any way worse than it was at the time when he appeared before the Compensation Court. If the matter rested only on the plaintiff's evidence, I would have difficulty in reaching the conclusion that he had any continuing disability, preferring the view that the natural history of his disease would by now have produced recovery.

However, Dr. Graham and Dr. Conrad accepted, when they saw him in November and
December 1995 respectively, that he had definite organic disability. Dr.
Conrad's assessment of him at that time as totally disabled obviously depends on that doctor's acceptance of the genuineness of the plaintiff's complaints.
I am unable to accept that opinion. Dr. Graham recognised a significant functional element but was satisfied that there was an organic basis for some continuing symptoms. That finding appears to be based not only on the plaintiff's complaints but on the objective evidence, particularly that provided by the discogram which Dr. Graham had carried out. I am aware that there is medical controversy about the validity of such investigations; but no evidence was adduced in the present case to suggest that the discogram finding should be questioned or that its interpretation by Dr. Graham as showing a double lumbar disc lesion sufficient to account for some continuing symptomatology should not be accepted.

In those circumstances I find myself satisfied that there is a continuing disability, not great, but such as to preclude the plaintiff from the full duties of a builders labourer. I am satisfied that the nature and description of his residual disability is adequately encapsulated in the passages from
Judge Egan's judgment which I have extracted earlier. On the basis of that description of his incapacity or obversely of his residual capacity, I am satisfied that it is proper to assess his ability to earn between 30 June 1994 and 30 June 1996 at the upper limit of the range which was found by Judge
Egan, namely $400.00 per week gross, $340.00 per week net. Having regard to the general level of inflation, small though inflationary increases have been in recent years, I assess his capacity to earn, at and since 30 June 1996, at $440.00 per week gross, say $365.00 per week net, and his loss at $375.00 per week. The plaintiff was born on 8 August 1939 and will attain the age of 65 on August 2004, near enough to 7.75 years hence.

On the basis of those conclusions and findings, it is possible to calculate as a matter of mathematics the difference between what the plaintiff would have earned since 30 June 1994 and his residual earning capacity, and similarly to calculate as a matter of mathematics the present value of the difference between what he would have earned from now until he attained the age of 65 and what, on the findings I have made, he will be able to earn during that period.
The mathematical calculation is as follows:- June 1994 to 29 June 1996 - 104 weeks at $400.00 $41,600.00 June 1996 to 1 November 1996 - 18 weeks at $375.00 $6,750.00 
The present value of a continuing loss of $375.00 for 7.75 years (five percent tables, multiplier 336.75) is $126,281.25. That amount is to be discounted for the ordinary vicissitudes of life. Having regard to the shortness of the period involved it is my view that the appropriate discount on that ground does not exceed 10%. Applying that discount the mathematically calculated figure is $113,653.12 which I round down to $113,650.00. The total of the amounts allowed for economic loss after 31 January 1996 is $210,520.00.

As I have indicated earlier, I am of the view that the amount mathematically calculated as representing the plaintiff's loss of earnings needs to be very heavily discounted. The reason for that is that it is clear that before the accident the plaintiff was afflicted by a grossly disabling psychological state and it is abundantly clear that to a very large extent his total disability now is the result of that same condition. It is described by Dr.
Bernardi as a condition of depression, but features of it are perceptions of persecution which appear to have been a feature of the plaintiff's presentation since as far back as 1982. It seems to me that the probability is that by reason of that condition the plaintiff's employment between the date of the accident and his attaining the ordinary retiring age of 65 would in any event have been disrupted. It is highly unlikely that he would have worked throughout those years unaffected by that psychological or emotional disorder.
For that reason it appears to me that the whole of the amount mathematically calculated as the measure of his loss of earning capacity requires to be heavily discounted and, in relation to that part of it which represents future losses, discounted in addition to the 10% allowance which I have already made for the ordinary vicissitudes of life. I allow in respect of loss of earning capacity from 1 February 1992 to date and into the future a total sum of $160,000.00. I make no such discount in respect of the period from the date of accident to 31 January 1992 and in respect of that period allow for loss of earning the amounts previously indicated, ($26,946.02 and $12,983.20).

The plaintiff incurred out of pocket expenses the amount of which is agreed at $41,022.94 (Exhibit O). They have been for the most part paid by the defendant (Exhibit P) but must nevertheless be included in the verdict.

Weekly payments of compensation which were made to him were of course subject to deductions in respect of income tax and the plaintiff is entitled to have included in his verdict, pursuant to the decision in Fox v. Wood the amount of those taxation deductions namely $3,563.07 (Exhibit P) 
I am not satisfied that the plaintiff will incur any future treatment expenses which could reasonably be attributed to the injury and I make no allowance in respect of such.

Accordingly, the plaintiff is entitled to a verdict comprising the following amounts:- 
Non-economic loss $66,673.47 
Loss of earnings during total disablement $26,946.00 
Loss of earnings from 5 March 1991 to January 1992 limited by s.151I $12,983.20 
Loss of earnings from 1 February 1992 to age 65 $160,000.00 
Out of pocket expenses $41,022.94 
Tax deducted from workers compensation payments $3,563.07 $311,188.68 
The defendant is entitled to credit for the amounts paid by it pursuant to the provisions of the [Workers Compensation
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/wca1987255/) which amount to $109,591.02 (Exhibit P).

There will be judgment for the plaintiff for $201,597.66.
 * * * 
