

Westpac Banking Corporation and Anor versus Royal Tongan Airlines and Ors [1996] NSWSC 409 (5 September 1996) 
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION & ANOR versus ROYAL TONGAN AIRLINES & ORS /95 
Thursday, 5 September 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMERCIAL DIVISION 
GILES CJ Comm D 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Westpac Banking Corporation (Westpac) bought New Zealand and United States currency from Bank of Tonga. The currency was sent by post from Nuku'alofa to Sydney, but did not reach Westpac. Westpac and Bank of Tonga (collectively, the plaintiffs) sued Royal Tongan Airlines, Air New Zealand Ltd (Air New Zealand) and Qantas Airways Ltd (Qantas) to recover the value of the currency.

Royal Tongan Airlines contested the court's jurisdiction, and orders were made setting aside the originating process and its service upon that body. The proceedings continued against Air New Zealand and Qantas (collectively, the defendants). The value of the currency was agreed at $248,791.80. In the amended statement of claim the defendants were sued for breach of so-called duties of care in bailment, alternatively for breach of duties of care to ensure that the currency was carried and stored safely and duly delivered. It was common ground that, as the proceedings were conducted, if either defendant was liable as bailee a wider case in negligence would add nothing to the plaintiffs' recovery and if either defendant was not liable as bailee the wider case in negligence would not improve the plaintiffs' position. The submissions were therefore directed to liability as bailee, for which purpose it was also agreed that either Westpac or Bank of Tonga had title to sue in respect of the currency: however, when the property in the currency passed from Bank of Tonga to Westpac was said to be material to liability as bailee.

The arrangements for purchase of currency 
A fax from Ms Karen Heath of Westpac to Mr Ted Murray of Bank of Tonga dated 4
August 1989, replying to a fax of the previous day which was not in evidence, included - "If you were to send us by Registered Airmail USD & NZD parcels, upon receipt;
We would telex advise acknowledgement of receipt.
Credit by telex to your USD Account with Westpac New York and your NZD
Account with Westpac Wellington, New Zealand. Please note we cannot give you dollar-for-dollar, however we can give you 100.75% of value. eg USD20,000 - .75% = USD19,851-12
All overheads are to be worn by ourselves, which includes telex charges, postage charges, processing and insurance overheads." 
Mr Murray replied by a fax dated 9 August 1989 for the attention of Mr
Denis Derrig of Westpac - "Further to Karen Heath's 4.8.89 to me, we agree we will send you by registered airmail USD and NZD currency parcels upon dispatch from Tonga. We will telex advise you amounts dispatched and our parcel No reference. In the telex we will also advise you our telex and postage overheads (we need more time to calculate out our insurance overhead per parcel. Later on we will start to advise you on future shipments that figure). Upon receipt of our telex, you will arrange for immediate credit to our USD acct w/ Westpac NY (or to our NZD acct w/ Westpac Wellington for the NZD case), value at parcel amount / 1.0075, and for credit to our AUD acct/w Westpac Sydney our overhead figure, (for the time being to cover telex and postage, later on insurance to be included.) 
Upon receipt of the parcel itself you will also please telex notify us your acknowledgement of receipt.
 
If now all agreed, please let me know address you would want our shipments of USD and AUD (sic) mailed to." 
The exchange concluded with a fax from Mr Derrig to Mr Murray dated 11
August 1989, reading so far as material - "Ted in response to your Fax yesterday there appears to be only one minor point I would wish to clarify.
 
Insurance is our care and requires no calculation on your part. It will be covered under Westpac's policy.
 
Everything else is exact and as you will be informing us of your postage costs with the currency advice details this will enable us to give you total reimbursement same date (eg on date of dispatch we will credit your accounts for note value @ 1.0075 plus your postage expenditure)." 
Pursuant to these arrangements, a standing offer from Westpac to purchase
New Zealand and United States currency could be accepted by Bank of Tonga dispatching parcels of the currency by registered airmail. Bank of Tonga would provide details by telex, and Westpac would make immediate payment of the value of the currency and the telex and postage charges to the appropriate account. Westpac would undertake insurance, indicating that property in the currency passed to Westpac at the time of dispatch or at the latest at the time of the later telex advising of dispatch: that is consistent with the operation of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/s23.html) of the [Sale of Goods Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/soga1923128/), there was no evidence of the law of Tonga on the point, and in the end I think it became common ground.

The particular currency 
In the period 16-22 December 1992 Mr Veimau Tu'uakitau, the Chief Cashier of
Bank of Tonga, prepared eight parcels of New Zealand and United States currency for dispatch to Westpac. Each parcel was the subject of a letter from
Bank of Tonga to Westpac. The letters followed the same format, and that dated December 1992 is an example: omitting formal parts, it read - "We hereby certify that we have this day posted a sealed carton addressed to the Manager, Westpac Banking Corporation, Travel Finance & Retail Gold, PO
Box 1 GPO, Sydney Containing surplus notes as follows : 
PARCEL NO: 92/336 Notes of USD 100 = USD4,000-00 Notes of 20 = 14,000-00 Notes of 10 = 2,000-00 Notes of = 1,500-00 Notes of 1 = 100-00 
USD21,600-00 ======= 
TWENTY ONE THOUSAND SIX HUNDRED (US) DOLLARS 
On receipt, please credit proceeds to our USD account with Westpac, New
York." 
The other letters had appropriate changes in the parcel numbers, the tabulations of notes and amounts, and the accounts to be credited. The letters, parcel numbers and currency were - 
Date of letter Parcel number Currency December 1992 92/336 USD21,600 December 1992 92/337 USD21,600 December 1992 92/338 USD21,600 December 1992 92/339 NZD41,500 December 1992 92/342 NZD41,500 December 1992 92/343 USD21,600 December 1992 92/344 USD21,700 December 1992 92/345 USD21,700 
Each of the eight parcels comprised the currency in a cardboard box wrapped in brown paper and bound with masking tape, string and sealing wax. On 24
December 1992 Mr Tu'uakitau posted the eight parcels to Westpac at its post office box number in Sydney and sent telex advices of the amounts dispatched, the parcel numbers, and the telex and postage charges. When the letters were sent to Westpac was unclear, but it was agreed that they were sent shortly after 24 December 1992 and bore the circular stamps shortly mentioned.

As to postage, Mr Tu'uakitau went to the Nuku'alofa branch of the Tonga Postal
Department, where he was attended by Ms Seniola Kaufusi. Ms Kaufusi weighed the parcels, assigned a registered mail number to each, wrote out a registered mail receipt for each, stamped the parcels, and charged the postage to the account of Bank of Tonga. According to Mr Tu'uakitau, but not mentioned by Ms
Kaufusi, receipts were provided by stamps on copies of each of the eight letters earlier described, and the photocopy letters in evidence each bear a round stamp of the Tonga Post Office, Nuku'alofa with the date 24 December and an initialling resembling that of Ms Kaufusi. It is evident, however, that the registered mail receipts which Ms Kaufusi said she wrote out were different from these round stamps. The registered mail receipts were not stamps, but separate printed slips on which were written a note of the parcel number, the postal charge, the date, particulars of the consignor and the addressee, the assigned registered mail number, and the weight of the parcel, before signature by the postal officer. The writing on the copies of the registered mail receipts in evidence is not easy to read. An example is - "#92/336 POSTAL ADMINISTRATION OF TONGA $61.80 
RECEIPT FOR REGISTERED ARTICLE 
Received from 
Address Box 924 
W[indecipherable] [stamp] 24/12/92 ...... ... Registered articles, as follows: Date Stamp 
Regd No. Surname of Adresssee Address of Destination 
Manager Westpac Banking Corp PO Box 1 
Syd Aust 2001 
NOTE :- Subject to packing being satisfactory, the maximum compensation payable is $7.25. No com- pensation is payable for perishables, liquids or exceptionally fragile items. This receipt must be [Init] presented if any inquiry is made concerning delivery. Receiving Officer .5kg" 
The registered mail numbers were numbers 14302, 14303, 14305, 14306, 14307, , 14309 and 14310. Each of the registered mail receipts bears a number corresponding to a parcel number in the letters to Westpac. It seems likely, therefore, that copies of the letters were provided to Ms Kaufusi, that she took from them the various parcel numbers for the registered mail receipts, and that she placed the round stamp on the copy letters so that there was a record of the contents of the parcels dispatched by registered mail.

As to the telex advices, at 11.44 am on 24 December 1992 Mr Tu'uakitau sent a telex to Westpac which read, omitting formal parts - "We advise having today despatched by registered airmail to your office our parcel numbers PNBR92/339, PNBR 92/342 containing NZD41,500-00, DLRS41,500-00.
Please immediately credit NZD41,191-07 NZD41,191-07 to our NZD account with
Westpac, Wellington value today. Also, please reimburse us our postage and telex charges by crediting AUD101,75, DLRS101-75 to our AUD account with your
Sydney office value today. Please confirm by return telex. Execution.
 
Please acknowledge receipt of parcels by return telex." 
On the same day, at a time which was not shown on the copy document in evidence but was probably also at about 11.44 am, Mr Tu'uakitau sent another telex to Westpac which read, omitting formal parts - "We advise having today despatched by registered airmail to your office our parcel numbers PNBR 92/336, PNBR 92/337, PNBR 92/338, PNBR 92/343, and PNBR /345 containing USD 21,600-00, DLRS 21,600-00, DLRS 21,600-00, DLRS ,700-00, DLRS 21,700-00. Please immediately credit USD 21,439-21, USD ,439-21, DLRS 21,439-21, DLRS 21,439-21, DLRS 21,538-46, DLRS 21,538-46 our
USD account with Westpac, New York value 28/12. Also please reimburse us our postage and telex charges by crediting AUD 78-73, DLRS 74-67, DLRS 78-73, DLRS -32, DLRS 61-14, DLRS 69-94 to our AUD account Sydney office value today.
Please confirm by return TLX. Execution.
 
Pls acknowledge receipt of our parcels by return TLX." 
The second telex does not refer to parcel 92/344, records parcel number /343 as containing $US21,700 when the relevant letter records $US21,600, and appears to ask for payment for six parcels rather than the five recorded as sent. There was a registered mail receipt for parcel number 92/344, the second telex asked for an appropriate payment and reimbursement, it was not submitted that that parcel had not been sent, and the hearing was conducted as if the result for the currency in that parcel would be the same as the result for the other currency. Nothing was said as to the discrepancy concerning payment for six parcels.

Other than that Mr Tu'uakitau must have attended at the post office between about 8.30 am and about 12.30 pm on 24 December 1992 (they being Ms Kaufusi's working hours), precisely when on that day the parcels were dispatched can not be determined. From the terms of the telexes, Mr Tu'uakitau probably dispatched them a short time prior to 11.44 am on 24 December 1992. I accept that both the round stamps and the registered mail receipts came about at that time.

Looking ahead for a moment, on 29 December 1992 Westpac caused two amounts of $NZ41,191.07 to be credited to Bank of Tonga's Wellington account, two amounts of $US21,538.46 and three amounts of $US21,439.21 to be credited to Bank of
Tonga's New York account, and an amount of $579.09 to be credited to Bank of
Tonga's Sydney account. On the same day it so advised Bank of Tonga and queried the last $US21,538.46 in Bank of Tonga's telex: the evidence did not reveal the response. It will be noted that Westpac paid only for seven parcels. On 31 December 1992 Bank of Tonga queried payment for the eighth parcel, and on the same day Westpac caused a further amount of $US21,538.46 to be credited to Bank of Tonga's New York account.

From the Tongan Postal Department to Royal Tongan Airlines 
Ms Kaufusi took the parcels and a passbook recording all registered items to Mr Lasini Sinamoni, a mail supervisor in the mail room in the post office, shortly before 12.30 pm. He checked the parcels against the passbook and locked them in a cupboard. On the next day, 25 December 1992, they were retrieved from the cupboard by Ms Kalisi Fauolo, a clerk at the post office whose duties included seeing registered items into a registered mailbag. She checked off the registered mail receipts, entered the registered mail numbers in a form C13, put the parcels in the registered mailbag, and secured the tie at the top of the bag and sealed it with a lead seal. The registered mailbag was labelled as registered mail from Nuku'alofa to Sydney.

Ms Fauolo gave the registered mailbag to Mr Sione Manu, another clerk at the post office, who put it together with some other mail items inside an ordinary mailbag, secured the tie at the top of the bag and sealed it with a lead seal, and labelled it with a red label - "From: NUKU'ALOFA TONGA 
For: SYDNEY 
Mail No: 211 
Date of Dispatch: 25.12.92 
LC/AO: 26.650kg 
Flight No: WR006/CD 016 
Airport of Transshipment: AUCKLAND 
Off-loading Airport: SYDNEY" 
Mr Manu prepared a form C12 and Ms Fauolo checked and signed that form.

Form C13 was a tally of registered items which seems to have been intended to accompany the registered mail, since it had spaces at its foot for signature by an official of the dispatching office and signature by an official of the office of "exchange of destination" and form C12 referred to a list of registered items enclosed in the registered mailbag. Form C12 was a tally of mailbags with the same spaces for signature. Ms Fauolo signed form C12 as an official of the dispatching office, and from comparison of her signature with that on form C13 seems also to have signed form C13 as an official of the dispatching office. Both forms were completed to provide for dispatch from
Nuku'alofa to Sydney on 25 December 1992 by Royal Tongan Airlines flight
WR006/CD016 via Auckland. In the case of form C13, it recorded a "Mail No" and listed forty-one items, including items numbered 14302, 14302 again, , 14204, 14305, 14306, 14307, 14308, 14309 and 14310. The discrepancy of a second item 14302 and the possible discrepancy of item 14304 amongst the parcels the subject of these proceedings were not explained. In the case of form C12, it recorded a "Mail No" 211 and (inter alia) one bag containing forty-one registered items.

Mailbag 211 was locked away until taken to the airport. For the flight to
Sydney there was prepared an AV7 bill, a delivery bill in a form promulgated under the Universal Postal Convention. It was prepared in multiple copies, provided for the dispatch of mailbag 211 and another mailbag on 25 December by Royal Tongan Airlines flight WR006/CD016 from Nuku'alofa to Sydney, with transshipment at Auckland, and had spaces at its foot for signature by three officers, one an official of the dispatching office, another an official of the airport or airline, and the third an official of the office of destination. Under the supervision of Ms Paula Paleli, a senior mail supervisor at the post office whose duties included the inspection of each mailbag to ensure that it was properly sealed and that its particulars were properly recorded in the AV7 bill, Ms Fauolo and Mr Manu verified the mailbag numbers, weights and destinations with the form C12 and the AV7 bill. Ms
Fauolo stamped and signed those documents, in the case of the AV7 bill signing as an official of the dispatching office.

Ms Paleli and Mr Manu then loaded the mailbags into a vehicle and took them to the airport. There they delivered the mailbags to a cargo clerk of Royal
Tongan Airlines, who signed for them in the space on the AV7 bill for signature by the official of the airport or airline; the same clerk also completed a "Shipmaster's receipt for mails" dated 25 December 1992 recording receipt by the Master of Royal Tongan Airlines from the Postmaster of Nuku'alofa of (inter alia) a red labelled mailbag destined for Sydney.

It was not submitted that, because of the discrepancies to which I have referred or for any other reason, it should be found that the parcels or any of them were lost before leaving Tonga. I think it was common ground, but in any event I find, that they passed into the possession of Royal Tongan
Airlines.

From Royal Tongan Airlines to Air New Zealand 
I was informed (there was strictly no evidence) that flight WR006/CD016 meant a Royal Tongan Airlines flight followed by a Continental Airlines flight. That must have been the anticipation of those in the Tongan Postal Department, but in fact the first leg of the flight was by Royal Tongan Airlines flight WR008, as is shown by a check-in sheet recording the mail received at the international mail handling unit of New Zealand Post Ltd (New Zealand Post) at
Auckland Airport. According to that check-in sheet Mr John Vaotuua, a senior clerk at the unit, took delivery of mailbag 211 from flight WR008 from a ground handler a little after midnight on 26 December 1992, and again I think it was common ground, but in any event I find, that the parcels passed into the possession of New Zealand Post.

The mailbag was kept in the mail shed, which was locked and alarmed when unattended, awaiting loading on its next flight. There was dispute over whether it had been proved that the parcels went from the possession of New
Zealand Post into the possession of Air New Zealand. In my view, on the probabilities they did.

First, the evidence included another copy of the AV7 bill signed by a representative of Air New Zealand as the official of the airport or airline.
That copy of the AV7 bill differed from the document as completed in
Nuku'alofa, in that the date was changed to 26 December 1992 by overwriting "26" for "25" and a time of 12.20 and flight NZ105 were inserted or overwritten where a time and flight WR008/CD016 had appeared. There was no evidence of who so dealt with the document, but it follows from the evidence of Mr Brotheridge, a senior clerk at the New Zealand Post unit, that what he referred to as an "outbound" AV7 bill recording amongst other things the flight number of the aircraft on which the mail was to be carried and the date and time of the aircraft's departure would be prepared. While Mr Brotheridge had no specific recollection of mailbag 211, according to the normal practice the mailbag would have been kept with other mail on a trolley loaded by Mr
Vaotuua or himself, the trolley would have been taken to the aircraft for loading of the mailbags, and the "outbound" AV7 bill would have been taken to Air New Zealand's load control where a representative of Air New Zealand would have signed it. That a representative of Air New Zealand signed a copy of the AV7 bill in these circumstances indicates that mailbag 211 was received by Air New Zealand for loading on flight NZ105.

Secondly, according to the procedure promulgated under the International
Postal Convention a copy of the AV7 bill should have been taken in an envelope in the flight portfolio on flight NZ105 for provision to the postal service in
Sydney. That seems to have happened, because Qantas had a copy of the AV7 bill. The evidence did not go into Air New Zealand's procedures in this regard, and it is possible that the paperwork and the mailbags followed different paths after signature of a copy of the AV7 bill by the representative of Air New Zealand, but one would expect some reconciliation such that a copy of the AV7 bill would not have been included in the flight portfolio unless at the least the mailbags recorded in it had been received by
Air New Zealand. Qantas' security investigator observed that Qantas' possession of the AV7 bill "indicates that they [the missing mailbags] were received", apparently meaning received by Qantas in Sydney although adding that it was impossible to state that they were offloaded: whatever might be inferred as to what happened in Sydney, the security investigator seems to have been in no doubt that possession of the copy of the AV7 bill meant that the mailbags had been loaded on flight NZ105. Comforted by Air New Zealand's failure to call evidence on the matter, I consider that Qantas' possession of a copy of the AV7 bill also indicates that mailbag 211 was at the least received by Air New Zealand for loading on flight NZ105.

The plaintiffs also referred to Air New Zealand documents to do with loading of flight NZ105 showing that mail weighing 89 kilos was loaded in hold 5 of the aircraft. This is not of assistance: there was evidence of another AV7 bill for mail on the flight, but it was insufficient to permit reconciliation of the weights so as to point to mailbag 211 as part of the mail. All that was shown was that mail was loaded on the flight. The question remains, was mailbag 211 not only received by Air New Zealand for loading on flight NZ105 but also loaded on flight NZ105? 
If mailbag 211 was on the same trolley as other mailbags, and other mailbags were loaded on flight NZ105, that is some indication that mailbag 211 was loaded on flight NZ105. It depends on the number of mailbags and trolleys, and it is possible that (for example) mailbag 211 was stolen at the time of loading. As earlier noted, the evidence did not go into Air New Zealand's procedures and the paperwork and the mailbags may have followed different paths, but one would expect some sort of reconciliation such that a copy of the AV7 bill would not have been included in the flight portfolio unless the mailbags recorded in it had not only been received by Air New Zealand but also loaded on the aircraft. Qantas' security investigator does not seem to have doubted that possession of a copy of the AV7 bill indicated that the mailbags had been loaded on flight NZ105 - his doubt began with offloading. Against this, as later noted it may be that both mailbag 211 and the other mailbag recorded on the same AV7 bill were later not to be found. All other mail on flight NZ105 was accounted for. If the other mailbag was also lost, that could suggest that the mail from Tonga went astray at Auckland, because it might be thought unlikely that the two mailbags lost from a total of seven mailbags on the flight would be those with the common origin and likely that, because the missing mailbags had the common origin, they simply did not join the other mailbags in hold 5. (It would not follow, however, that the mailbags were lost before getting to Air New Zealand.) Whether the other mailbag was lost was unclear. The position as to the other mailbag was not explicitly addressed, one document summarising investigations saying that it was "not received", another saying that all mails were opened and registered items extracted other than mailbag 211. With such unsatisfactory evidence it would be wrong to make findings on the basis that the other mailbag was not to be found, but even on that basis, and with the same comfort as previously mentioned, I think it more likely than not that mailbag 211 was loaded on flight NZ105.

What happened at Sydney? 
Air New Zealand flight NZ105 landed at Sydney at 12.20 on 26 December 1992.
Qantas provided at Sydney Airport both ground handling services for Air New
Zealand and a mail handling service for Australian Postal Corporation (Australia Post) at a mail service centre at the airport. Mailbag 211 should have been offloaded by Qantas from Air New Zealand's flight, taken to the mail handling centre, and there appropriately processed for the delivery of the parcels to Westpac at the address shown: the capacity or capacities in which
Qantas acted was a significant matter in these proceedings.

Mailbag 211 was lost and the parcels did not reach Westpac. Was mailbag 211 stolen or mislaid, and was it stolen or mislaid on unloading from the aircraft's hold, between the aircraft and the mail handling centre, or while at the mail handling centre and prior to processing for delivery of the parcels to Westpac? 
The plaintiffs submitted that it should be found that mailbag 211 was stolen whilst kept in an insecure area adjacent to the mail handling centre. In
January 1992 two mailbags of registered mail containing currency sent from
Fiji had been stolen. In his report upon that incident Qantas' security investigator expressed concern over, amongst many other things, deficient checking of mailbags against AV7 bills and "[t]he number of containers and barrows of mail left out of the Mail Handling Unit all night in all weather", and said that mail should "not be left out over night as it invites both pillage and damage" and that if there was insufficient room in the mail handling unit to store the mail a particular area should be fenced in and floodlit. In his report upon the loss of the currency the subject of these proceedings, the same security investigator observed that his concerns had not been addressed. There was a statement in a Westpac memorandum that "[t]he nature of the Qantas/Australia Post operation at Kingsford Smith Airport over the relevant period has been described as chaotic". From all this it was suggested that, particularly where Qantas had not called evidence to explain its dealings with the mailbag or even the facilities and procedures by which it may have been dealt with, on the balance of probabilities the mailbag was stolen when left outside the mail handling centre instead of being stored within it.

In my opinion that would be speculation, and even on a benevolent view of the probabilities can not be accepted. Particularly when the security investigator's concerns went well beyond storage of mail, it is far from clear to what extent mail was still being left out overnight, let alone whether mailbag 211 would have been so dealt with. Failure adequately to store mailbags received at the mail handling unit may have provided an opportunity for theft, but there was also the opportunity for theft or loss at any time from unloading of the aircraft to processing within the mail handling centre.
At the time the mail was being "fast tracked" at Sydney Airport without weighing and checking, there was evidence that all Qantas staff engaged in the unloading and in the mail handling unit were interviewed but professed no knowledge or memory of the missing mailbag(s), and that detracts from any comfort given to the suggested finding by Qantas' failure to call evidence of the kind indicated. The observations by Qantas' security investigator earlier mentioned do not provide a reliable or sound basis for concluding even that the mailbags were offloaded when the investigator said that it was impossible to state that they were offloaded. I am not satisfied that I should make the finding suggested.

Nonetheless, in my view it has been established on the balance of probabilities that the parcels went into the possession of Qantas. The ground handling agreement between Air New Zealand and Qantas to which I later refer was not specific, but seems to have included unloading Air New Zealand's aircraft. On flight NZ105 landing, hold 5 would have been opened and Qantas personnel would have unloaded the mailbags. Possibly mailbag 211 was extracted by someone from Air New Zealand before Qantas got to it, but that is unlikely: the liklihood is that Qantas took custody of it as part of its offloading service.

Qantas changed at some point from Air New Zealand's ground handler to
Australia Post's mail handler - when did it change, and was the loss before or after Qantas' capacity changed? As already noted, a copy of the AV7 bill originating in Tonga, as amended in Auckland, was received by Qantas, possibly reaching the mail handling centre, but it was not signed in the space provided for signature of an official of the office of destination. This would indicate that the mailbag did not progress to the stage at which the AV7 should have been signed, but there was no real evidence of whether that should have been prior to reaching the mail handling centre (and if prior to reaching the mail handling centre, when) or after reaching the mail handling centre (and if after reaching the mail handling centre, at what point thereafter). Qantas' handling procedures manual stated that it was to be signed and stamped "at the time of mail handover" by post office official and retained, but little can be drawn from that when, it would seem, Qantas as agent for Air New
Zealand had to get a signature from Qantas as agent for Australia Post. IATA standards for mail handling referred to one copy of the AV7 bill signed as a receipt for the mails and kept by the airline and another copy accompanying the mail to the receiving post office, as to which a similar comment can be made. There was otherwise no evidence of handling procedures giving reliable guidance upon whether mailbag 211 was lost at any particular stage of its progress to processing in the mail handling centre. That the AV7 bill should have accompanied the mail might be thought to indicate that the mail would have been unloaded and matched up with the AV7 bill at an early time, but the inference is not available when (as I later note) the mail was being "fast tracked" so that normal procedures were not followed, and would still not be informative as to when the matching up should have occurred.

Later in these reasons I suggest that it may be that Qantas' capacity would have changed when mailbags reached the conveyor at Sydney Airport, although the foundation for that is far from strong. What should have happened to the mailbags before reaching the conveyor, at the conveyor, or after the conveyor was not the subject of evidence, and indeed that they would have reached a conveyor is only an inference from cl 3 of the mail handling agreement between
Qantas and Australia Post. Whether or not they were dealt with in that manner,
I do not think it can be determined when, after they went into the possession of Qantas, the parcels were lost. It may have been while Qantas was acting as
Air New Zealand's ground handler or it may have been while Qantas was acting as Australia Post's mail handler.

A chain of bailments 
Putting aside whether the bailor was Bank of Tonga or Westpac, it was common ground that there was a bailment to the Tongan Postal Department (assumed to be an entity with separate legal existence) and a sub-bailment to Royal Tongan
Airlines. The defendants then suggested a further sub-bailment to New Zealand
Post, which the plaintiffs seemed to dispute but which I find to have occurred. There was again common ground of a further sub-bailment to Air New
Zealand and a further sub-bailment to Qantas. There was raised whether an available view was that there was a series of sub-bailments (Tongan Postal
Department to Royal Tongan Airlines, Tongan Postal Department to New Zealand
Post, Tongan Postal Department to Air New Zealand, Tongan Postal Department to
Qantas) rather than a chain of sub-bailments. The defendants' position was that the successive transfers of possession meant a chain of sub-bailments rather than a series of sub-bailments, the plaintiffs concurred, and I approach the matter accordingly: cf Brambles Security Services Ltd versus Bi-Lo
Pty Ltd [(1992) Aust Torts Rep 81-161] at 61,269 and authorities there cited.

Liability as bailee 
I have found that the parcels went into the possession of Air New Zealand, and thence into the possession of Qantas: they were lost from the possession of
Qantas. In the circumstances, it is appropriate that I consider Air New
Zealand's liability as bailee, on the assumption that the parcels were lost from its possession, as well as Qantas' liability as bailee.

It was accepted that, if the parcels were lost from the possession of either
Air New Zealand or Qantas, it was a bailee for reward and, in the absence of the protection to which I next refer, would be liable as bailee. The defendants then contended - if the parcels were lost from the possession of Air New Zealand, it was protected as against the bailor by the terms of an agreement with New Zealand
Post governing the sub-bailment; and if the parcels were lost from the possession of Qantas, it was protected as against the bailor by the terms of the ground handling agreement with Air
New Zealand governing the sub-bailment or by a privative provision in the [Australian Postal Corporation Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/apca1989337/) (the
Act).

A bailee's reliance on the terms of a sub-bailment as against the bailor 
In Morris versus C W Martin & Sons Ltd [(1966) 1 QB 716] the plaintiff sent a mink stole to a furrier to be cleaned. With the plaintiff's consent the furrier, who did not himself clean furs, sent it to the defendant, which did clean furs, to be cleaned by it for reward. The contract between the furrier and the defendant was made by the furrier as principal and not as agent for the plaintiff, contained a clause exempting the defendant from liability in certain events. The fur was stolen from the possession of the defendant. It was held that, being a sub-bailee for reward, the defendant owed to the plaintiff the duties of a bailee for reward to take reasonable care of the fur. Could the defendant sub-bailee rely on the exclusion clause in its contract with the furrier as against the plaintiff bailor with whom it had no contract? 
Lord Denning MR said (at 729) - "Now comes the question: Can the defendants rely, as against the plaintiff, on the exempting conditions although there was no contract directly between them and her? There is much to be said on each side. On the one hand, it is hard on the plaintiff if her just claim is defeated by exempting conditions of which she knew nothing and to which she was not a party. On the other hand, it is hard on the defendants if they are held liable to a greater responsibility than they agreed to undertake. As long ago as 1601 Lord Coke advised a bailee to stipulate specially that he would not be responsible for theft, see
Southcote's case, a case of theft by a servant. It would be strange if his stipulation was of no avail to him. The answer to the problem lies, I think, in this: the owner is bound by the conditions if he has expressly or impliedly consented to the bailee making a sub-bailment containing those conditions, but not otherwise. Suppose the owner of goods lets them out on hire, and the hirer sends them for repair, and the repairer holds them for a lien. The owner is bound by the lien because he impliedly consented to the repairs being done, since they were reasonably incidental to the use of the car: see Tappenden v
Artus. So also if the owner of a ship accepts goods for carriage on a bill of lading containing exempting conditions (ie, 'a bailment upon terms') the owner of the goods (although not a party to the contract) is bound by those conditions if he impliedly consented to them as being in 'the known and contemplated form,' see the words of Lord Summer in Elder, Dempster & Co v Paterson, Zochonis & Co Ltd which were regarded by Dixon CJ and
Fullager J as stating the ratio decidendi, see Wilson versus Darling Island
Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd with whose judgment Viscount Simonds entirely agreed in Midland Silicones Ltd versus Scruttons Ltd and also the cases to which I referred in that case.
 
In this case the plaintiff agreed that Beder should send the fur to the defendants, and by so doing I think she impliedly consented to his making a contract for cleaning on the terms usually current in the trade." 
His Lordship went on to hold that in any event the exemption clause was inadequate to protect the defendant. Diplock LJ was of the same opinion as to the inadequacy of the exemption clause, and said (at 731) that he deliberately refrained from expressing any opinion upon whether an exclusion clause in the contract to which the plaintiff was not a party would be effective to modify the defendant's duty to the plaintiff. Salmon LJ expressed no concluded view as to reliance on the exemption clause, saying only (at 741) that he was "strongly attracted" by the view expressed by Lord Denning MR.

The basis of this principle of sub-bailment on terms, capable of being seen as an inroad on the doctrine of privity of contract, has been much debated. At one time the principle was treated as an aspect of estoppel (Hispanica de
Petroleos SA versus Vencedora Oceania Navegacion SA (The Kapetan Markos NL) (No 2) [(1987) 2 Lloyds Rep 321] at , 340), but that was criticised (Palmer [(1988) 4 LMCLQ 466] at 471-473) and doubted (Compania Portorafti
Commerciale SA versus Ultramar Panama Inc (The Captain Gregos) (No 2) <case>; [(1994) AC 324](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281994%29%202%20AC%20324 "View LawCiteRecord" ) at 339). It has been suggested that it is an aspect of the principle of volenti non fit injuria (Reynolds [(1972) 88 LQR 179] at 183) and, in similar vein, that consent negatives any actionable tort (Coote [(1977) 36 CLJ 18] at 20).
Consent was wholly put aside in Johnson Mathey & Co Ltd versus Constantine
Terminals Ltd [(1976) 2 Lloyds Rep 215], where Donaldson J cited what Lord Denning had said, was prepared to infer consent to a sub-bailment on the sub-bailee's terms, but went on to say that consent was not relevant because in proving the sub-bailment the bailor had to prove the terms thereof and was bound thereby: this basis was doubted (eg
Carrington Slipways Pty Ltd versus Pacific Austral Pty Ltd (Rogers J, 2 February , unreported)) and was disapproved by the Privy Council (The Pioneer
Container at 340-342). Academic writings generally embrace the principle, and treat it as an aspect of the relationship of bailor and bailee independent of the rules of contract or tort (eg Palmer, Bailment, 2nd ed, 1631-2); this seems to be the preferable explanation, although it does not really explain the basis.

Whatever its basis, the principle has become accepted. In Singer Co (UK) Ltd v Tees & Hartlepool Port Authority [(1988) 2 Lloyds Rep 164]
Steyn J regarded the correctness of Lord Denning's views as established and as expressing a sensible and just principle, and applied the principle and found an implied consent: his Lordship added that it may be sufficient if the bailee has ostensible authority to create a sub-bailment upon terms which include exception clauses and limitation provisions. Rogers J accepted the principle in Carrington Slipways Pty Ltd versus Pacific Austral Pty Ltd, although of the view that there was no express or implied consent to a sub-bailment on the particular terms. More recently, in The Pioneer Container it was said (at , 341) - "In order to decide whether, like Steyn J, to accept the principle so stated by Lord Denning MR, it is necessary to consider the relevance of the concept of 'consent' in this context. It must be assumed that, on the facts of the case, no direct contractual relationship has been created between the owner and the sub-bailee, the only contract created by the sub-bailment being that between the bailee and the sub-bailee. Even so, if the effect of the sub- bailment is that the sub-bailee voluntarily receives into his custody the goods of the owner and so assumes towards the owner the responsibility of the bailee, then to the extent that the terms of the sub-bailment are consented to by the owner, it can properly be said that the owner has authorised the bailee so to regulate the duties of the sub-bailee in respect of the goods entrusted to him, not only towards the bailee but also towards the owner. (Their
Lordships add in parenthesis that for this purpose it is not, in their opinion, necessary to have recourse to the doctrine of estoppel: cf Hispanic de Petroleos SA versus Vencedora Oceanica Navegacion SA (No 2) (Note) [[1987] 2
Lloyds Rep 321], 336, 340 per Nicholls and Dillon LJJ. Even where there is express or implied consent to the relevant terms by the owner of the goods, there can be no estoppel without some holding out on his part. Estoppel may, however, be relevant if recourse is to be had to the doctrine of ostensible authority).
 
Such a conclusion, finding its origin in the law of bailment rather than the law of contract, does not depend for its efficacy either on the doctrine of privity of contract or on the doctrine of consideration.
 ...
 
In addition, the conclusion of Donaldson J that consent is relevant only between the owner and the bailee is inconsistent with the reasoning of Lord
Denning MR in Morris versus C W Martin & Sons Ltd when expressed the opinion, at p 729, that the bailor is bound by the terms of the sub-bailment to which he has consented but not otherwise. Their Lordships have already expressed their agreement with the approach of Lord Denning on this point. Indeed, as they see it, once it is recognised that the sub-bailee, by voluntarily taking the owner's goods into his custody, ipso facto becomes the bailee of those goods vis-a-vis the owner, it must follow that the owner's rights against the sub-bailee will only be subject to terms of the sub-bailment if he has consented to them, ie, if he has authorised the bailee to entrust the goods to the sub-bailee on those terms. Such consent may, as Lord Denning pointed out, be express or implied; and in this context the sub-bailee may also be able to invoke, where appropriate, the principle of ostensible authority." 
The plaintiffs did not contest this principle, and did not rely on (or even cite) the decision to the contrary in Philip Morris (Australia) Pty Ltd v
Transport Commission <case>; [(1975) Tas SR 128:] that decision is questioned in Palmer op cit at 1640-1642, and in the circumstances it is unnecessary and inappropriate that I consider it.

The plaintiffs' consent 
In the present case the debate was over the bailor's consent to the terms of the sub-bailments. The parcels were committed to the postal service. There was no express consent by either Bank of Tonga or Westpac to the Tongan Postal
Department giving possession of the parcels to anyone else, but where the parcels were to be sent from Nuku'alofa to Sydney there must have been an implied consent to the normal incidents of the postal service for such a journey. Those incidents plainly enough included that the Tongan Postal
Department would not carry mail to Sydney in its own ships or aeroplanes, and to the extent that there was a faint submission by the plaintiffs to the contrary I am unable to accept it. The Tongan Postal Department would utilise commercial carriers (here airlines), as appropriate an intermediate postal service (here New Zealand Post), and at the end of the journey another postal service (here Australia Post). Subject to considering the terms of the sub- bailments, there was implied consent to at least those sub-bailments occuring in the course of the journey.

In Morris versus C W Martin & Sons Ltd Lord Denning MR spoke of consent to a sub-bailment "containing those conditions", that is, the conditions as between the bailee and the sub-bailee. His Lordship instanced implied consent to a repairer's lien over a car because repairs are reasonably incidental to the use of the car and implied consent to conditions of carriage in a bill of lading in a known and contemplated form, and was of the view (at 730) that the plaintiff impliedly consented to the furrier making a contract for cleaning on the terms usually current in the trade. In Singer Co (UK) Ltd versus Tees &
Hartlepool Port Authority a freight forwarder crated and delivered the plaintiff's machinery to the defendant for loading on a ship, and Steyn J considered that by entrusting the freight forwarder with that task the plaintiff impliedly authorised it to create a sub-bailment on terms which included the defendant's general conditions. Steyn J added (at 168) - "This view is reinforced by the fact that Bachman's conditions, which governed the contract between the plaintiffs and Bachman, contained an exception clause (cl 14), which was wider in ambit than the port authority's cl 24, and a limitation provision (cl 15) which was identical to the port authority's cl 26. Moreover, Mr J Porteous, who was the finance manager of
Singer (UK) at the relevant time, agreed that Singer (UK) would have been aware that the goods would be delivered to the port authority which accepted goods on its own terms and conditions." 
On the other hand, in Carrington Slipways Pty Ltd versus Pacific Austral Pty
Ltd a finding of implied consent by the plaintiff to a bailment of the goods to the third defendant was declined. A freight forwarder undertook carriage of the plaintiff's goods on a PEACE Line bill, but its agent arranged carriage on a Simsmetal bill. It was said that there was neither express nor implied consent by the plaintiff to a bailment of the goods to the third defendant, "and certainly not upon conditions which differed from the conditions of the
PEACE Line bill". The only consent was to a bill of lading of a very specific kind, the words of the Simsmetal bill were not in a known and contemplated form, and the Himalaya clause in the PEACE Line bill was far different from the words of the Simsmetal bill.

At least three considerations emerge. First, what was the bailor's awareness or expectation in relation to sub-bailment on terms? Secondly, were the terms the normal and expected terms, or those usual in the trade? Thirdly, how did the terms of the head bailment compare with the terms of the sub-bailment?
These considerations are not exclusive of other matters bearing upon the implied consent and its extent, and they overlap, but they provide a convenient framework for enquiry.

As to the third of these considerations, the registered mail receipts limited compensation to $7.25. There was evidence of the Tongan Post Office Act and
Regulations as at 1988, the latter of which provided by reg 82 that parcels would be received and forwarded at the risk of the owners but that compensation might be allowed, as an act of grace, to a maximum of $2.00 for total loss or damage, and by reg 48 - "48. Except in cases beyond control, and in case where registration has been compulsory, compensation not exceeding $7.25 will be paid to the sender for the loss of any registered article which may occur within the Kingdom, it having been clearly shown that the loss was not due either wholly or in part ot the fault of the sender, and that it actually occurred when the article was in the post: 
Provided that no such compensation shall be entertained unless made within one year of the posting of the registered article or in respect of any registered article for which the owner shall have given a receipt on delivery.
In cases where registered articles are lost abroad, the final decision upon the question of payment rests with the Postal Administration of the country in which the loss takes place. Nothing herein contained shall render the
Government liable for any loss occasioned by an act of the enemies of His
Majesty the King, or the enemies of Her Majesty the Queen of England, or for any loss which is the direct or indirect consequence of any war." 
The plaintiffs submitted that because the parcels were lost abroad there was no fixed limit, and that compensation was such amounts as (here) Australia
Post determined. Thus, they said, there was ample room for the terms of a sub- bailment to be disadvantageous compared with the terms of the head bailment, whereby implied consent would be unlikely. Reconciliation of the registered mail receipts with reg 48 is not easy, and no submissions were made on how reg might override a possible consensual limitation, unqualified by regard to where the loss occurred, or whether if it did there was a stringent limitation of liability on which Australia Post would insist. I propose to assume, in favour of the defendants, that the head bailment limited compensation for loss of a parcel to $7.25; the assumption can be made because, even with its benefit, I do not think that there was implied consent to sub-bailments on the terms to which I shortly go.

When the property in the currency passed from Bank of Tonga to Westpac was said to be material to liability as bailee because the plaintiffs argued that passing of property after dispatch of the currency meant that Westpac's title to sue arose after the creation of the head bailment, that meant that Westpac was not bound by the limitation in the registered mail receipts, and therefore any protection by the terms of a sub-bailment was as regards it disadvantageous compared with the terms of the head bailment. The reasoning would seem to throw up the more fundamental argument that Westpac could not have impliedly consented to a sub-bailment at all. I do not think the time of passing of property matters, since Westpac clearly agreed to the currency being sent by post and to the bailment and sub-bailments that entailed: its right to possession of the currency, as earlier indicated arising at the time of dispatch or at the latest at the time of the later telexes advising of dispatch, was subject to the terms of the bailment arranged by Bank of Tonga and to the terms of the sub-bailments to which there was implied consent.

Loss from the possession of Air New Zealand 
The defendants relied on an agreement between New Zealand Post and Air New
Zealand dated 3 March 1992. It was headed "Agreement between New Zealand Post and Air New Zealand Ltd for the carriage of New Zealand origin mail". It was for a term of three years from 1 April 1992 (art 1), provided for rates for the carriage of mail (art 2), and with considerable generality dealt with uplifting of all mailbags or other mail containers correctly presented for a flight (art 3), transhipment between Air New Zealand flights or to other carriers (art 4), flight scheduling (art 5), and payment of accounts for mail carriage (art 7). Article 6 headed "Liability" was in the terms - "'NZ' shall be responsible and liable for any loss of or damage to mail or its contents if such loss or damage occurred whilst the mail was in its custody. In the event of such loss or damage 'NZ' shall be liable to pay to NZ
Post such sums of money as shall be equal to the amount which may have been awarded and paid by NZ Post at its sole option and discretion to the sender or addressee of the lost or damaged items, in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Postal Unions Acts.
 
The current maximum amounts of compensation payable for International mail are: 
Registered NZ$60.00 
Insured item: NZ$1,500 
Unregistered Parcel: NZ$238 
Courier Post International (EMS) Item: NZ$2,000" 
While it seems to me that Bank of Tonga and Westpac must have been aware that the Tongan Postal Department would utilise commercial carriers and any appropriate intermediate postal service, it is less obvious that they would have been aware that there were terms of this kind as between a carrier and a postal service. There was no direct evidence. Consignors of air cargo might be aware, or be taken to be aware, that airlines accept goods on standard terms and conditions, but the special arrangement between New Zealand Post and Air
New Zealand was something else, and was not shown to embody or reflect usual terms for carriage of mail. The liability accepted by Air New Zealand may have been more ample than that accepted by the Tongan Postal Department under the registered mail receipts (on the assumption earlier made, compensation of $7.25 per parcel), but that may not be enough to underpin an implied consent to the very different regime of art 6. It does not matter, because (as was the case in Morris versus C W Martin & Sons Ltd) for reasons to come I consider that art 6 is inadequate to protect Air New Zealand, but if there be taken into account the difficulty next addressed in giving meaning to art 6 I do not think there should be imputed to Bank of Tonga or Westpac consent to terms not only of a special arrangement but also of egregious obscurity.

The plaintiffs first submitted that the heading to the agreement restricted its operation to "New Zealand origin mail", and that it did not apply to the bailment of the parcels because their origin was Tonga. Even if the heading to the agreement be taken into account, I do not think its application was so confined. It was concerned with the carriage of mailbags or other mail containers presented by New Zealand Post in New Zealand, and it did not matter that the mailbags or other mail containers may have come to New Zealand Post from outside New Zealand (as mailbag 211 came to New Zealand Post from Tonga).
Being in the possession of New Zealand Post and presented for a flight, mailbag 211 was New Zealand origin mail.

The plaintiffs then submitted that art 6 did not effectively limit Air New
Zealand's liability as bailee, whether to New Zealand Post or anyone else. Its first sentence reflected that Air New Zealand would be liable as bailee. The second sentence did no more than provide for reimbursement to New Zealand Post of such sums as may have been paid by New Zealand Post, and did not purport to limit the liability of Air New Zealand to payment of those amounts. Even if it did purport to limit Air New Zealand's liability to payment of those amounts (as the reference to maximum amounts of compensation in the third sentence might suggest) it was meaningless, because there were no identifiable "provisions of the Universal Postal Union Acts" (and in particular none with the consequences in the third sentence) by which content could be given to the limitation.

The Universal Postal Union, then called the General Postal Union, was established pursuant to the Treaty of Berne of 1874, by which a number of countries committed themselves to a convention governing the international postal service. Upon further accessions to the Treaty within a short time after 1874, the name Universal Postal Union was adopted. The Universal Postal
Union is presently regulated by a [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) concluded at Vienna in 1964. Provisions relating to the application of the [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) and the operation of the Universal Postal Union are contained in its General
Regulations, and common rules applicable to the international postal service and the provisions concerning the letter-post services are the subject of the
Universal Postal Convention to which countries members of the Universal Postal
Union may accede. Detailed Regulations are agreed between postal administrations of acceding members. The [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/), the General Regulations, the Convention, and the Detailed Regulations are together known as the Acts of the Universal Postal Union: see Universal Postal
Union Annotated Code (Universal Postal Union, Berne, 1991) vol 1, pp viii-x.
It is tolerably clear that the second sentence of art 6 refers to these instruments, particularly when there is no New Zealand legislation to which it could refer. At first sight one would expect that there would be found within the Acts of the Universal Postal Union provisions by which New Zealand Post should at its sole option and discretion award and pay money to the sender or addressee of a lost or damaged item.

The defendants pointed to Chapter III of the Convention, dealing inter alia with liability of postal administrations for the loss of, theft from or damage to registered items (art 57), recorded delivery items (art 58) and insured letters (art 59) and with non-liability of postal administrations in relation to the same items and letters (arts 60, 61). Following provisions deal with other aspects of liability between postal administrations, air carriers, senders and addressees. Where liability is recognised, it is in fixed amounts of so many SDR per item. The provisions are detailed and by no means clear, but they do not contain anything of the description called for by the second sentence in art 6 of the agreement between New Zealand Post and Air New
Zealand. If the third sentence of art 6 was meant to record compensation payable in accordance with the provisions of the Universal Postal Union Acts, the defendants were unable to point to any provision in the Acts providing for payment of the compensation. So the defendants fell back on alternative explanations. They suggested that the second sentence was expressed as a discretion because New Zealand Post was not bound by the Acts in the absence of their adoption in New Zealand domestic law, and that the third sentence was meant to set maximum amounts as between New Zealand Post and Air New Zealand.
The suggestions are strained, they do not solve the difficulty with the second sentence, and in particular the reference to "current maximum amounts" points to an (unidentifiable) consequence of the Acts. In order to give content to the limitation it would be necessary to hold that the references to the Acts and to maximum compensation were mere corroborative detail, the limitation being exposure to New Zealand Post's discretion. In my opinion art is so flawed that it does not effectively limit Air New Zealand's liability.

Even if that be incorrect, I would uphold the plaintiffs' further submission, taking further the proposition that the second sentence of art 6 did no more than provide for reimbursement to New Zealand Post of such sums as may have been paid by New Zealand Post. Article 6 limited only liability to New Zealand
Post, and said nothing about liability to any other person. In Moukataff v
British Overseas Airways Corporation [(1967) 1 Lloyds Rep 396], a case having some similarity with the present case, Bank of England posted parcels of currency to Lebanon; they were stolen by a loader at London Airport while waiting to be flown to Kuwait in a BOAC aircraft. On the assumption that
BOAC could rely as against the consignee on terms of the agreements between
BOAC and the post office, it was held that the agreements did not exclude or limit BOAC's duty or liability to the consignee. The agreements were found in a contract dated 9 June 1937 and subsequent correspondence, cl 37 of the 1937 agreement providing that in the event of any loss of registered postal packets
BOAC "shall be liable to pay to the Postmaster-General in respect of each registered postal packet lost such sum as shall be payable by the Postmaster-
General under the regulations of the Postal Union Convention for the time being in force ...." Browne J said (at 417) - "It seems to me that the foundation of all the ways in which Mr Fisher put this point must be that the agreements between the Post Office and BOAC amounted to an agreement that BOAC should not be liable to senders of postal packets for anything more than the liability of the Post Office to such senders of postal packets for anything more than the liability of the Post
Office to such senders would have been. In my judgment, the 1937 agreement and the subsequent exchanges of correspondence did not amount to an agreement to that effect. In my view, the object and effect of those agreements was to impose on Imperial Airways Ltd, and later on BOAC, an obligation to indemnify the Post Office by way of compensation for postal matter lost or damaged while being carried by BOAC; they were not directed to defining or excluding or limiting the liability of BOAC in respect of claims by senders directly against them, and did not purport to affect such liability, or indeed any liability except liability from Imperial Airways, Ltd, or BOAC to the Post
Office." 
The agreement between New Zealand Post and Air New Zealand, specifically art 6, is in the same position. In my view, if the parcels were lost from the possession of Air New Zealand it was not protected as against the bailor by the terms of the agreement with New Zealand Post.

That view does not affect the result in these proceedings, as I have concluded that the parcels were lost from the possession of Qantas. No submission was made that Air New Zealand should nonetheless be held liable as bailee because the parcels were still in Air New Zealand's possession through the possession of Qantas as its ground handler.

Loss from the possession of Qantas 
For the present characterising Qantas as Air Zealand's ground handler, the defendants relied on an agreement between those parties dated 1 April 1974.
Qantas was to provide handling facilities and services for scheduled flights "within the limits of possibilities of the Handling Company and in accordance with the current IATA rules and regulations", it being agreed that further detail was unnecessary and impossible because it was "generally understood among IATA carriers what such services comprise and the standards to be attained in their performance" (art 1.1). Notwithstanding this, particular services at particular locations, as set out in annexures referred to in, but not attached to, the copy of the agreement in evidence were then specified (art 1.3). Like services were to be provided to aircraft on other than scheduled flights (art 1.4). Qantas was entitled to delegate any of the agreed services to subcontractors with the consent of Air New Zealand, which consent would not be unreasonably withheld (art 3.1). Technical and flight operation services were to follow Air New Zealand's instructions, or in the absence of instructions Qantas' own standard practices and procedures (art 5.1), and all other services were to be provided "in accordance with standard practices and procedures usually followed by" Qantas as modified by reasonable requests of
Air New Zealand (art 5.2). Disputes were to be referred to arbitration in accordance with the IATA Arbitration Clause, the decision being "final and enforceable on the parties hereto". There was much else in the agreement which does not warrant mention, some of it exhibiting the same imprecision as is evident from what I have already extracted.

The particular term on which the defendants relied was art 8 - "8.1 The Carrier agrees, regardless of any negligence on the part of the
Handling Company, to release and indemnify the Handling Company, its employees, agents and sub-contractors, from and against all liabilities claims damages losses costs and expenses (including but not limited to those in respect of death of or injury to person or loss of or damage to property) arising out of or in any way connected with the performance by the Handling
Company of its obligations under this Agreement, which may accrue against or be suffered by the Handling Company, its employees, agents or sub-contractors, unless arising from damage, negligently caused to the Handling Company's own equipment or unless due to wilful misconduct on the part of the Handling
Company, its employees, agents or sub-contractors, acting within the scope of their employment or sub-contract, provided however that the Carrier shall not be liable to reimburse the Handling Company for any payment required to be made by the Handling Company to or in respect of any of its employees pursuant to the operation of any Workers' Compensation legislation or in satisfaction of any other legal liability unless the death or injury for which such payment was made was due to the negligence of the Carrier.
 .2 The Carrier agrees to maintain in effect for the duration of this
Agreement legal liability insurance in such sums as may be acceptable to the
Handling Company covering all of the Carrier's activities and naming the
Handling Company as co-insured thereunder, with all rights of subrogation against the Handling Company waived by the Carrier's insurer and with a cross- liability provision to the effect that the naming of the Handling Company as such co-insured shall not in any way prejudice the Carrier's rights to recover under such insurance in respect of any claim made by the Handling Company against the Carrier. The Carrier shall furnish the Handling Company forthwith upon the signing of this Agreement with a Certificate of Insurance to the effect that such insurance is in full force and effect and containing an undertaking on the part of the insurer that the Handling Company will be given ten days prior written notice in the event the insurer proposes to cancel or materially change such insurance." 
Was there implied consent to sub-bailment on the terms of the ground handling agreement, particularly art 8? Again there was scanty relevant evidence. The normal incidents of the postal service to which the plaintiff must have consented did not necessarily include that a commercial carrier would give possession of mail to a ground handler, as distinct from its own staff, and there was no evidence that it was usual to do so or that the plaintiffs knew of or expected the practice. Nor was there evidence that the terms of the ground handling agreement were normal or usual in relation to handling of aircraft cargos, or that art 8 was a normal or usual part of the arrangements between an airline and a ground handler: even if consignors of air cargo be taken to expect that the carrier's liability will be limited, the normal or usual terms may bear no relationship to the convolutions of art 8.
The ground handling agreement was imprecise, and permitted delegation and modification - its terms were not terms one would readily take someone who posted an item of mail to have assented to.

Treating art 8 as having the effect of wholly protecting Qantas from liability "unless arising from damage, negligently caused to [Qantas']' own equipment" (whatever that may mean) or due to wilful misconduct, liability would be excluded in many situations where the (assumed) terms of the head bailment would permit it, albeit in a small amount, and I do not find satisfactory the defendant' assertion that all is well because in other situations liability would not be excluded although excluded by the (assumed) terms of the head bailment. Where the issue is one of implied consent, care should be taken in imputing consent because what is lost on the swings is gained on the roundabouts, particularly without evidence to assist in assessing the significance of such matters to the bailor. In the present case, to adapt the view of Rogers J in Carrington Slipways Pty Ltd versus Pacific Austral Pty Ltd, the consent was to registered mail receipts of a very specific kind, the words of the ground handling agreement were not in a known and contemplated form, and the exemption clause in the ground handling agreement was far different from the words of the registered mail receipts. I decline to find that there was implied consent to a bailment of the parcels to Qantas (as ground handler) on the terms of the ground handling agreement.

Even if this be incorrect, I do not think that art 8 relevantly has the effect of protecting Qantas from the plaintiffs' claims. It protects Qantas, but by a release and indemnity from Air New Zealand and maintenance of insurance. It does not purport to exclude or limit Qantas' liability to third party consignors of goods handled by Qantas, but rather comprehends such liability as at least part of the subject of the indemnity and insurance cover. Although the structure and wording are different from the structure and wording of the agreements in Moukataff versus British Overseas Airways Corporation, the approach of Browne J in that case is equally the approach to be taken to art 8: it is not directed to defining or excluding or limiting the liability of Qantas in respect of claims by senders directly against it, and did not purport to affect such liability except liability as between Qantas and Air New Zealand.
For this alternative reason the ground handling agreement does not assist
Qantas in the present case.

While the matter does not arise, I should add that the plaintiffs submitted that, whatever other effect it had, art 8 did not apply because the loss of the parcels was due to wilful misconduct on the part of Qantas or its employees. It repeated its submission that it should be found that mailbag 211 was stolen whilst kept in an insecure area adjacent to the mail handling centre, said that this established wilful misconduct, and supplemented the wilful misconduct by saying that the "fast tracking" was without the consent of Australia Post. I am satisfied, albeit on sketchy evidence, that Australia
Post informally agreed to or at the least knew of and condoned the "fast tracking" in order that the heavy Christmas mail be dealt with, but whether or not that be so I do not think there should be found to have been relevant wilful misconduct.

Going then to Qantas as Australia Post's mail handler, on 20 March 1990 Qantas and Australia Post executed a deed regulating the handling of international mail consignments at Sydney Airport. The recitals and introduction to the substantive clauses of the deed were - "WHEREAS : 
A: Australia Post presently operates an Air Mail Transit Depot, which is a dedicated mail service centre at Sydney Airport ('the Airport'); 
B: The Federal Airports Corporation ('FAC') now require Australia Post to vacate the Air Mail Transit Depot; 
C: Qantas operates ground handling services at the airport for the preparation, despatch and receipt of all forms of air cargo; 
D: Australia Post desires to have all import, export and transit international mail ('the mail') handled on its behalf at the airport; 
E: Qantas has agreed to construct by 30 June 1990 a dedicated mail service centre ('the facility') at the Airport so that it is able to handle the mail on behalf of Australia Post pursuant to terms and conditions hereafter; 
F: The FAC has approved the construction of the said facility and the work to be carried out therein.
 
NOW THIS DEED WITNESSES AS FOLLOWS that pursuant to the terms and conditions hereinafter provided, Qantas shall provide a mail handling service ('the operation') for Australia Post at the airport for processing the mail." 
Clauses 5 and 6 provided - "5. SCOPE OF WORK 
Qantas agrees to carry out all work as specified in Schedule II to standards and specifications detailed therein. Qantas agrees that in providing the facility pursuant to Clause 6 hereof, that it will be able to handle an increase in mail volume (on a base volume of 8.6 million kgs at the end of the first year of this agreement) of up to 7% per annum compounded for each year of this agreement after the first year, although Australia Post does not warrant that such an increase will occur.
FACILITIES 
A. Qantas agrees to construct the facility on a site nominated by and leased from the FAC for the prime purpose of undertaking the work specified in Clause and to supply, install, operate and maintain equipment appropriate for the handling of the mail. Qantas will arrange for the facility to be constructed and operational for the purpose of handling the mail under the terms and conditions of this agreement by 30 June 1990.
 
B. Should Qantas fail to construct the facility and have it operational by June 1990 then the base price of 21 cents per kilogram for mail handled which, pursuant to the Schedule hereto, was to be reviewed one year from the facility becoming operational." 
In the copy of the deed in evidence the words underlined had been bracketed and ruled out in manuscript. The alteration was not initialled and whether it was meant to record an amendment is unclear.

The services in Schedule II were listed under the headings of Export Mail,
Load Assembly, Import Mail, Transit Mail, and General Services. In relation to
Import Mail they were relevantly - "Provide accommodation and services for handling of import mail in varying quantities in either bags or containers on behalf of Australia Post, in accordance with local statutory requirements.
 .1 Risk Assessment Profile System 
Provide access for the Australian Customs Service (ACS) to apply the Risk
Assessment Profile System through the use of the dog unit. The ACS require adequate spreading of mail bags to maximise dog resources. (Bags remain on conveyor).
 
The Australia Post representative has the responsibility to ensure suspect bags are despatched on identified scheduled transport to the International
Mail Centre (IMC) and that facsimile advice to the ASC at the IMG provides all the required information.
 .2 Documentation - liaise with ramp handling management, to ensure mail documents from arriving aircraft are delivered as soon as practicable after arrival - check weigh mail and examine the general condition as to packing and labelling - check that the shipment and documentation (AV7 or C18bis) agree and resolve any discrepancy prior to acceptance by the Australia Post representative - acknowledge acceptance by providing copies of the acquitted AV7 or C18bis to: i) Delivering Airline Company or their Agent; and ii) Australia Post representative (2 copies) - report discrepancies or damaged bags/containers, to both delivering airline and Australia Post representative and ensure necessary documentation is completed and respected by said representative" 
Clauses 12 and 13 provided - "12. INDEMNITY 
Australia Post assumes full responsibility for and shall release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless Qantas and its directors, officers, employees, agents and representatives (where they are acting properly in the course of their employment or instructions) from and against any and all liabilities, losses, claims, demands, fines, expenses or damages (including legal fees and disbursements) arising out of or in any way connected with this agreement BUT
ONLY WHERE such claims arise out of damage to or destruction of any postal article processed/handled by Qantas pursuant to this agreement AND NOT WHERE the said liabilities, losses, claims, demands, fines, expenses or damages are caused by the negligence or wilful misconduct of Qantas and, or its directors, officers, employees, agents or representatives. The liability of Qantas under this clause shall not exceed the liability of Australia Post.
CARE OF THE MAIL 
Qantas will take all reasonable steps to protect the mail from loss, damage or destruction during handling under this agreement. Further, Qantas shall take heed of any suggestion made by Australia Post concerning the protection of the mail from loss, damage or destruction during handling under this agreement." 
The defendants did not rely on cl 12 as providing protection to Qantas from the plaintiffs' claims.

Clearly enough Qantas would receive mail from aircraft other than those for which it provided ground handling services. Presumably it would receive the mail from "ramp handling management" or those under the control of ramp handling management. Where Qantas was not the ground handler, it seems it would receive the mail when it reached the conveyor at the airport (see cl 3), and thus it may be that Qantas would have possession of mail as ground handler for Air New Zealand in providing ground handling services from the aircraft to the conveyor and thereafter as mail handler for Australia Post: it was not
Australia Post's function to collect the mail from the aircraft's hold, and
Qantas was not Australia Post's agent at that time. None of this was supported or explained by evidence.

The defendants submitted that Qantas was entitled to the protection of <case> of the Act - "34. (1) An action or proceeding does not lie against Australia Post or any other person in relation to any loss or damage suffered, or that may be suffered, by a person because of any act or omission (whether negligent or otherwise) by or on behalf of Australia Post in relation to the carriage of a letter or other article by means of the letter service.
 
Subsection (1) does not apply if Australia Post provides the sender with a receipt for the article." 
Two questions were debated: first, whether Qantas was "any other person", and secondly, whether Qantas' acts or omissions in handling mail for Australia
Post were "by or on behalf of Australia Post in relation to the carriage of a letter or other article by means of the letter service". The plaintiffs submitted that the questions should be approached on the basis adopted by
Kitto J in Board of Fire Commissioners of New South Wales versus Ardouin <case>; [(1961) 109 CLR 105] at 116, that <case> operated to derogate in a potentially serious manner from the rights of individuals and it was to be presumed that the legislature had "chosen its words with complete precision, not intending that such an immunity, granted in the general interest but at the cost of individuals, should be carried further than a jealous interpretation will allow". A similar approach to statutory limitations or exclusions has been indicated in, for example, Australian National Airlines Commission versus Newman <case>; [(1987) 162 CLR 466.] I adopt that approach, but I do not think the interpretation and application of <case> which follows is affected by whether a jealous, straightforward or generous interpretation is undertaken.

The phrase "any other person" is wide, with the privative effect of <case> regulated only by the nature of the loss or damage suffered by the claimant: it has to be loss or damage suffered when the other person was acting by or on behalf of Australia Post in the act or omission in question. The plaintiffs submitted that the phrase was to be read down on the authority of Shepherd v
The State of New South Wales [(1957) 97 CLR 673] and
Sovereignton Pty Ltd versus Public Transport Commission of New South Wales [(1980) 1 NSWLR 243.] 
Shepherd versus The State of New South Wales was concerned with <case> of the
Transport (Division of Functions) Act 1932, which imposed a one year time limit for commencing actions against "any of the Commissioners appointed under this Act or against any person for anything done or omitted or purporting to have been done or omitted under this Act ....". It was held that "person" did not include the State of New South Wales. Dixon CJ said, without elaboration, that it was obvious that the provision did not cover the
State itself and that "The protection is for authorities of the State and officers" (at 676). McTiernan, Webb and Kitto JJ agreed in the judgment of the Chief Justice. Fullagar J said that it was obvious that <case> was not concerned with the protection of the State from action or suit, and that it was "concerned with the protection of officers and servants of the State and persons, corporate or individual, acting or purporting to act under statutory authority." Taylor J agreed generally that "person" in <case> did not comprehend the State. With respect, their Honours did not spell out why the result was so obvious to them. It would seem to have been because protection to the Commissioners was intended to extend to those through whom they acted but not to that for which they acted.

Sovereignton Pty Ltd versus Public Transport Commission of New South Wales was concerned (amongst a multitude of other provisions) with <case> of the
Government Railways Act 1912, which was in similar terms to <case>. It was held that the Public Transport Commission of New South Wales was not a person for the purposes of that section. Hutley JA said (at 257) - "In Shepherd versus The State of New South Wales the High Court held that the
State of New South Wales was not a person for the purposes of <case> of the
Transport (Division of Functions) Act. Dixon CJ with whom Mc Tiernan, Webb,
Kitto and Taylor JJ agreed, said: 'The protection is for authorities of the
State and officers.' Fullagar J said: 'It (ie <case>) is concerned with the protection of officers and servants of the State and persons, corporate or individual, acting or purporting to act under statutory authority.' The Public
Transport Commission would be a person for this purpose, if the views of
Fullagar J were adopted. Section 27 is similar to <case>. He must be regarded as in the minority. No submission was made that the Public Transport
Commission was a body politic. It follows, that in my opinion, in this Court the Public Transport Commission is not a person for the purpose of ss 143 and of the Government Railways Act, and these sections cannot be pleaded in defence to the plaintiff's claims." 
Reynolds JA observed (at 248) that <case> could only afford protection if the
Public Transport Commission answered the description of "any person" within its meaning, and continued - "The Commissioners referred to in that section are those constituted under under that Act, and 'any person' cannot be construed to include a corporation which succeeds the Commissioners: cf Shepherd versus New South Wales.. The protection which the sections give is for the government authority and its officers. Changes in the constitution of the authority are dealt with differently, and do not come within the phrase 'any person' as properly understood." 
Hope JA agreed generally with these conclusions and reasons upon whether the
Public Transport Commission was a "person" within (inter alia) <case>.

With respect, again the reasoning is not clear. The conclusion of Reynolds JA appeared to turn on the status of the Public Transport Commission as successor to the Commissioners, such that if it was protected at all it was protected by virtue of the succession and not because falling within the alternative of "any person". Hutley JA appears to have put aside what was seen as a minority view whereby the Public Transport Commission could be "any person" because acting or purporting to act under statutory authority, and on applying the concept of authorities of the State and officers concluded that the Public
Transport Commission was not within the concept. Why not? It seems because, in the passage preceding that from his judgment earlier set out, his Honour saw the claim against the Public Transport Commission as really an action against the State of New South Wales because it was, by definition, a statutory body representing the Crown. That is consistent with Shepherd versus The State of New
South Wales - the Public Transport Commission was not "any person" because it was in the same position as that for which the Commissioners acted.

I do not think that the plaintiffs gain any comfort from these decisions.
Qantas was not in the position of the Commonwealth for which Australia Post might be thought to have acted. Australia Post acted through Qantas. Qantas was not an officer of Australia Post, and it was a servant of Australia Post only in a loose sense of servant, but I do not understand Shepherd versus The
State of New South Wales and Sovereignton Pty Ltd versus Public Transport
Commission of New South Wales to have confined "any person" to officers, or servants in the narrow sense of employees, of an authority: those acting on behalf of the authority are within the expression. No submission to the contrary was made.

In my opinion, therefore, Qantas was "any other person" within the meaning of <case>.

Going to whether Qantas' acts or omissions in handling mail for Australia Post were "by or on behalf of Australia Post in relation to the carriage of a letter or other article by means of the letter service", the issues were whether, if the parcels were lost from the possession of Qantas in its capacity of mail handler for Australia Post, its acts or omissions as mail handler were on behalf of Australia Post, and if they were whether they were in relation to the carriage of a letter or other article by means of the letter service.

As to the first issue, the plaintiffs submitted that Qantas was not relevantly acting (or omitting to act) on behalf of Australia Post because it was acting "in an unauthorised fashion". The departure from mandate was said to have been in two respects: "fast tracking" the mail in contravention of the mail handling agreement and storing the mail in an insecure area with increased likelihood of loss. The consequence that Qantas was not relevantly acting (or omitting to act) on behalf of Australia Post was said to follow on the authority of Darlington Futures Ltd versus Delco Australia Pty Ltd <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 500] at 509-511.

I have already stated that I am satisfied that Australia Post informally agreed to or at least knew of and condoned the "fast tracking", and I have declined to make the plaintiffs' suggested finding involving that mailbag 211 was stolen while kept in an insecure area adjacent to the mail handling centre: specifically, I am not satisfied that the mailbag was stored in that area. The factual basis for the plaintiffs' submission is absent. Nor does
Darlington Futures Ltd versus Delco Australia Pty Ltd support the submission.
Following Sydney City Council versus West <case>; [(1965) 114 CLR 481], it rejected reliance on the doctrine of fundamental breach in the construction of exclusion and limitation clauses, calling for such clauses to be construed according to their natural and ordinary meaning read in the light of the contract as a whole, giving due weight to the context in which the clauses appear and where appropriate construing them contra proferentem in case of ambiguity. Assuming an analogous approach to the construction of a privative provision in a statute (the plaintiffs said that was so, but the translation from a contract to a statute may not be so easy), if Qantas lost mailbag 211 in the course of handling mail for Australia Post its acts or omissions were nonetheless by or on behalf of Australia Post. By "fast tracking" the mail or storing it in an insecure area Qantas may have been in breach of its obligations to Australia Post, but its breach would have been in doing what it was authorised to do, handle the mail, and the onus of proof of conduct taking Qantas' acts or omissions outside doing what it was authorised to do rested upon the plaintiffs and has not been discharged: see
Glebe Island Terminals Pty Ltd versus Continental Seagram Pty Ltd (The Antwerpen) [(1994) 1 Lloyds Rep 213] at -8 and cases cited. It do not accept the plaintiffs' submission.

The second issue requires reference to other provisions of the Act.
 "Article" was defined expansively, meaning any matter or thing and including a letter, envelope, packet, parcel, container or wrapper containing any matter or thing. "Carry" in relation to an article included collecting or receiving the article for carriage and carrying it from one place to another by physical means. "Letter" was defined to mean any form of written communication directed to a particular person of address, including any standard postal article and any envelope, packet, parcel, container or wrapper containing such a communication. "Standard postal article" was defined to mean, subject to the regulations - "... a postal article (other than a registered publication) that satisfies all of the following criteria: it does not weigh more than 500 grams; it is not more than 5mm thick; its other 2 dimensions form a rectangle: of whose sides are shorter than the other sides; the shorter sides of which are not less than 88 mm, and not more than mm, long; the longer sides of which are not less than 138 mm, and not more than mm, long; and the adjacent sides of which are in the ratio of 1 to at least 1.414;" 
It was common ground that if the parcels were lost from Qantas' possession its act or omission was in relation to the carriage of an article, but was it by means of the letter service? In the Act as it stood in December 1992 "letter service" was defined to mean the service supplied by Australia Post under <case>, and <case> provided - "27 (1) Australia Post shall, as far as practicable, perform its function in a manner consistent with sound commercial practice.
 
The letter service shall be for carrying by physical means (both within
Australia and between Australia and places outside Australia) principally letters that Australia Post has the exclusive right to carry.
 
Australia Post shall make the letter service available at a single uniform rate of postage for the carriage within Australia, by ordinary post, of letters that are standard postal articles.
 
Australia Post shall ensure: that, in view of the social importance of the letter service, the service is reasonably accessible to all people in Australia on an equitable basis, wherever they reside or carry on business; and that the performance standards (including delivery times) for the letter service reasonably meet the social, industrial and commercial needs of the
Australian community.
 
In this section: 'Australia' does not include an external Territory to which this Act extends." "Ordinary post" was defined as having the meaning given by <case>, and <case> provided - "5. For the purpose of this Act, an article is carried by ordinary post if the article is carried by means of the letter service in such a way as will not involve the supply of a special service for which a special charge or additional fee is payable in relation to the carrying of the article." 
The plaintiffs submitted that the effect of the description of the letter service was that the service supplied by Australia Post under <case>, and thus the definition of the letter service, was confined to letters being standard postal articles carried by Australia Post at a single uniform rate of postage within Australia (see <case> in particular). If so, the carriage of the parcels would not fall within the protection of <case>. But the submission encounters a number of difficulties. First, if it were correct the reference to carriage of another article in the words of <case> "carriage of a letter or other article by means of the letter service" would be otiose, since articles other than letters (eg parcels not containing written communications) could not be carried by the letter service. Secondly, <case> can not have the confining effect suggested because <case> itself shows that a class of letters wider than those which are standard postal articles carried at a single uniform rate of postage within Australia falls within the letter service. Thirdly, <case> describes the letter service as intended for the carriage "principally" of letters that Australia Post has the exclusive right to carry, connoting that other letters and even articles other than letters may be carried by the letter service. Fourthly, <case> also connotes that other letters and even articles other than letters may be carried by the letter service.

The Act was part of a "reform package" for Australia Post intended to redefine its functions and powers and impose on it commercial, community services and general governmental obligations: see the explanatory memorandum and the second reading speech (Hansard, 13 April 1989, pp 1610-1612). The community services obligations included the provision of a letter service available at a single uniform rate of postage for carriage within Australia, by ordinary post, of letters that are standard postal articles (ibid). In that light the framing of <case> is more readily understood: it imposed a kind of core service, without defining its boundaries. The letter service had to provide for carriage of letters being standard postal articles, at a single uniform rate of postage, within Australia, and had to meet equitable and performance standards, and thereby a perceived community need would be satisfied. But the same physical operations as discharged the letter service could also take in letters other than those to which <case> referred (see s (2)) and articles other than letters (ibid and <case>), the carriage of those other letters and articles would also be by the letter service, and the protection of <case> would extend to carriage of those letters or other articles by means of the letter service (s 34(1)). In my opinion, if the parcels were lost from the possession of Qantas in its capacity of mail handler for
Australia Post, its acts or omissions as mail handler were in relation to the carriage of a letter or other article by means of the letter service.

It follows that if the parcels were lost from the possession of Qantas in its capacity as mail handler for Australia Post it is entitled to the protection of <case> of the Act.

So I have arrived at this position. The loss may have been when Qantas was Air
New Zealand's ground handler or it may have been when Qantas was Australia
Post's mail handler: see earlier in these reasons. In the former case Qantas would not be protected as against the bailor by the terms of the ground handling agreement with Air New Zealand, but in the latter case Qantas would be protected by the privative provision of the Act. Did the plaintiffs have to prove when the loss occurred, or did that burden fall upon the defendants (specifically Qantas)? 
In general, a bailor need prove only that goods went into the possession of the bailee and were not re-delivered, and it is for the bailee to prove that he exercised reasonable diligence in taking care of them (for example, Tozer
Kemsley & Millbourne (Australasia) Pty Ltd versus Collier's Interstate
Transport Service Pty Ltd <case>; [(1956) 94 CLR 384] at 397-8; Thomas National Transport (Melbourne) Pty Ltd v
May & Baker (Australia Pty Ltd) <case>; [(1966) 115 CLR 353] at 366-7) or that the loss occurred in circumstances attracting the protection of a contractual exemption (Woolmer versus Delmer Price
Ltd [(1955) 1 QB 291] at 294-5; J Spurling Ltd versus Bradshaw <case>; [(1956) WLR 461] at 466; Levison versus Patent Steam Carpet Cleaning Co Ltd [(1978) 1 QB 69] at 81-2, 83, 85; Glebe Island Terminals Pty Ltd v
Continental Seagram Pty Ltd (The Antwerpen) at 237-8); the bailor may then have the burden of proving that the contractual exemption does not apply because (for example) the bailee actively facilitated an unlawful taking of the goods (Glebe Island Terminals Pty Ltd versus Continental Seagram Pty Ltd (The
Antwerpen) at 237-8). Had <case> of the Act been, in appropriately modified words, a term of a sub-bailment on which Qantas could rely against the plaintiffs, Qantas would have had to prove that the parcels were lost when it was acting as mail handler. It has not proved that, and Qantas would not have been protected as against the bailor.

Is it different when <case> does not have a contractual (or contract-like) operation? In Suatu Holdings Ltd versus Australian Postal Corporation [(1989) 86
ALR 532](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281989%29%2086%20ALR%20532 "View LawCiteRecord" ) it was said to be unnecessary to decide whether [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/psa1975190/s104.html) of the [Postal Services Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/psa1975190/), broadly a predecessor to <case> of the Act, was to be treated as if it constituted a defence or whether the plaintiff had to show it did not apply before he made out the cause of action on which he sued. Gummow J referred to Elna Australia
Pty Ltd versus International Computers (Australia) Pty Ltd <case>; [(1987) 75 ALR 271], from which it is evident that his Honour had in mind the question, decided in the negative, whether a plaintiff claiming damages pursuant to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/s82.html) of the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/) had to allege that the claim was brought within time. In my opinion, it was not for the plaintiffs, potentially affected by <case> of the Act, to prove as part of their claim against Qantas that their loss or damage was not within the protection of <case>. The present question is not whether a claim otherwise pursuant to a statutory provision is excluded by part of that provision: it is whether a claim under the general law is excluded by a privative provision. By analogy with the general position earlier described it should be for the bailee asserting protection to bring himself within the privative provision.
To require this of the person asserting protection is consistent with the approach for which Vines versus Djordjevitch <case>; [(1955) 91 CLR 512] is authority, the application of the approach in that and many other cases being in a context different from the present but reflecting what was said in the joint judgment of Dixon CJ, McTiernan, Webb, Fullagar and
Kitto JJ at 519 - "But in whatever form the enactment is cast, if it expresses an exculpation, justification, excuse, ground of defeasance or exclusion which assumes the existence of the general or primary grounds from which the liability or right arises but denies the right or liability in a particular case by reason of additional or special facts, then it is evident that such an enactment supplies considerations of substance for placing the burden of proof on the party seeking to rely on the additional or special matter." 
Here Qantas is liable as bailee unless it is protected by <case> of the Act, that is, unless (inter alia) the acts or omissions rendering it liable were by or on behalf of Australia Post. It must prove that they were, and fundamental to that must prove that the loss of the parcels was when it was acting as
Australia Post's mail handler. It has not done so. It is not protected against the bailor either by the terms of the ground handling agreement with Air New
Zealand or by <case> of the Act.

For record only 
The defendants submitted, expressly as a formal submission, that they were entitled to the benefit of any limitation of liability under the head bailment. They outlined the argument that as sub-bailees they should be regarded as agents of the head bailee and entitled to its immunities, referring to Elder, Dempster & Co Ltd versus Paterson, Zochonis & Co Ltd [(1924) AC 522], The Pioneer Container, and The Mahkutai <case>; [(1956) 95 CLR 43], J Gadsden Pty Ltd versus Australian Coastal Shipping Commission (Sheppard J, 20 September 1976, unreported; on appeal [(1977) 1 NSWLR )] and Carrington Slipways Pty Ltd versus Pacific Austral Pty Ltd stood in their way, but suggested that there was academic support for development of the law (Reynolds, [111 LQR 8]; Stapleton, [111 LQR 301)] and even judicial encouragement (The Sanko Steamship Co Ltd versus Sumitomo Ltd (Sheppard J, 29 November 1995, unreported)). I do no more than record what was said.

The result 
No submissions were made as to whether Bank of Tonga or Westpac was entitled to judgment if either of the defendants was found liable as bailee. As I understand it, neither the plaintiffs nor the defendants cared, no doubt because behind their respective joint representations by counsel lay arrangements inter se. It is probable that Westpac should have judgment, since it was entitled to possession of the currency at the time it was lost. I add to the value of the currency, $248,791.80, a rounded-off amount of interest at the rates in Schedule J of the Supreme Court Rules in the amount of $98,000.
The orders I make are -
Judgment for the first plaintiff against the third defendant for $346,791.80.
The defendants to pay the plaintiffs' costs of the proceedings.
Exhibits may be returned after twenty-eight days.
 * * * 
