

Chief Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) versus Century
Impact P/L [1996] NSWSC 555 (21 November 1996) 
CHIEF COMMISSIONER FOR BUSINESS FRANCHISE LICENCES (TOBACCO) & ANOR V
CENTURY IMPACT P/L  /92 CLD 30062/91 NOVEMBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, MEAGHER JA, BEAZLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS: BUSINESS FRANCHISE LICENCES (TOBACCO) ACT 1987 - SEIZURE - POWERS OF ENFORCEMENT 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
BUSINESS FRANCHISE LICENCES (TOBACCO) ACT 1987 - SEIZURE - POWERS OF
ENFORCEMENT - quantity of tobacco seized and taken into custody by Chief
Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) - officer suspects (without reasonable grounds) company in breach of Business Franchise Licences
Act - tobacco later returned to company - respondent company brought proceedings against the Chief Commissioner on the basis: 1. the seizure was unlawful and invalid, and 2. misfeasance on the part of the officer who executed the seizure - trial judge found for the company on the first ground, but dismissed the claim on the second: on appeal whether the unlawful seizure executed by the officer was an act done in good faith for the purposes of executing the Act - whether the officer fell within the protection of <case> of the Act.

Held: 1. A seizure based on a suspicion that an officer knows to be unreasonable, depending upon an evaluation of all the circumstances, might well fall outside the ambit of the protection afforded by <case>, but when an officer honestly believes that what is being done is being properly done for the purpose of executing the Act, then the unreasonableness of his suspicion does not affect good faith. 2. The defence raised in reliance on <case> should have succeeded. The ratio underlying <case> is such, that when a public servant is attempting to carry out duties and causes damage to a citizen or legal entity for which the officer would be liable in law in the absence of a section such as <case>, then the officer is protected from liability if what was done by the officer was to be in furtherance of the officer's duty to the general citizenry and was not done in a malicious manner or for any reason other than the carrying out of the officer's public duty. Webster versus Lampard <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598] referred to.

ORDERS 
Appeal upheld.
Judgment below set aside.
Judgment entered for the defendants.
Respondent (plaintiff) to pay the appellant's (defendant's) costs of the trial and the appeal.

JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: 
Preliminary 
This case originated in a confrontation on 14 August 1991 between inspectors of the Commissioner for Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) (the
Commissioner) and persons connected with Century Impact Pty Limited (the company). The inspectors, in substance saying they were acting on a particular basis under the Business Franchise Licences (Tobacco) Act (the Act), took tobacco of the company into custody. The company then and afterwards maintained that the taking was unlawful. Pursuant to procedures under Division of Pt 8 of the Act the tobacco was returned to the company in November 1991.

The company brought proceedings in the Supreme Court claiming damages from the
Commissioner and one of his inspectors, Mr P. Reid, on two grounds, (1) that the seizure of the tobacco had been invalid, and (2) that there had been misfeasance of office. Sully J found for the company on ground (1), but dismissed the claim on ground (2). The Commissioner appealed, and the appeal is concerned only with ground (1). One of Sully J's findings was that Mr Reid had not acted in good faith in taking part in the seizure of tobacco. One of the grounds of the appeal is that the judge was wrong in that finding. If that ground of appeal is upheld, then the judgment for the company must be set aside. Although other grounds of appeal were argued, the good faith ground is in my opinion the one on which the appeal falls to be decided.

To provide some background to the attitudes of the people involved in the confrontation of 14 August 1991 I will mention some matters pertinent to the administration of the Act. The Commissioner functions within the Office of
State Revenue. According to the New South Wales Year Book 1996, the State raised revenue of $633 million in the financial year 1993-94 from what the
Year Book innocently called tobacco franchise taxes.

That revenue is raised in a rather complicated way because of High Court decisions on what the States of the Commonwealth can and cannot do under the
Commonwealth [Constitution](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/coaca430/) in imposing what is commonly called tax. The method adopted under the Act is to compel sellers of tobacco to pay licence fees for doing so. .The greater the value of the tobacco sold the higher the fee. The price paid by retail tobacco buyers in New South Wales is significantly increased by the tobacco franchise licence fees. In 1991 it was possible, in at least one very particular situation, for tobacco to be sold in large quantities in New South Wales by sellers who did not have to pay licence fees in respect of it, and then re- sold sold outside New South Wales at prices advantageous both to the within
New South Wales seller and the outside New South Wales buyer.

The evidence in this case shows that persons connected with the company saw possibilities of profit in this situation. Their view was that such profit making was good business and that they were entitled to carry on such business without hindrance. The Commissioner and his officers seem to have regarded the particular situation in which tobacco was effectively revenue-free as anomalous. They were alert to the possibility that some sets of circumstances not within the revenue-free situation might be misrepresented to them as if they were. They regarded their job as protecting the revenue on behalf of the great mass of the State's citizens against those few members of it whom the officers regarded as taking advantage of the revenue-free situation as part of their business. The officers also, by nature of their jobs had to have in their minds the possibility of activities which in ordinary language are called smuggling and black marketing, which have always seemed to go along with attempts by governments to collect revenues from goods, and which involve lying, deception and clandestine actions of various kinds.

The appeal itself must be considered strictly by reference to the evidence in the case. No suggestion is made in the case that the business people involved had the slightest connection with smuggling or black marketing. Reference to the background does however provide at least part of the explanation for the belief of the persons associated with the company that they were unfairly and wrongly being harassed by the Commissioner and his inspectors and for the latters' belief that they had reason to be very watchful of those connected with the company in order to carry out properly their own job of safeguarding the revenue.

Before outlining the facts in greater detail, I need to explain how the Act works, so far as is relevant to the questions arising in the appeal.

Outline of the Act.

The licensing system created by the Act works in the following way. By <case> no-one is to sell tobacco unless the holder of a licence. Section 34 provides for two different kinds of wholesalers' licences and two different kinds of retailers' licences. By <case> licences must specify the premises to be used for the business in respect of which the licence is granted. Section 41 says that fees are to be paid for licences. For the two kinds of wholesalers' licence the fee is an amount of $10 together with a further amount equal to 35% of the value of tobacco sold in the course of tobacco wholesaling during the relevant period, other than tobacco sold to the holder of either kind of wholesalers' licence. For the two kinds of retailers' licence the fee is an amount of $10 together with a further amount equal to 35% of the value of tobacco sold in the course of tobacco retailing during the relevant period, other than tobacco purchased from a licensee.

By <case>, "relevant period" in relation to a licence means the month commencing two months before the commencement of the month in which the licence expires. By <case>, a licence takes effect on and from the day specified in the licence as the day on which it takes effect and except in the case of licences which took effect on 28th, 29th, 30th or 31st day of the month, remains in force until the end of the 27th day of the month in which it took effect. If it took effect on the 28th, 29th, 30th or 31st day of a month it remains in force until the end of the 27th day of the following month.

By <case>, if a licensee pays the fee payable for a further licence before the expiry of the licensee's current licence the licensee is treated as having applied for a further licence and as having been granted that licence with effect from the expiration of the current licence.

Thus, for a licensee in a continuing business of selling tobacco, the regular routine which the Act permits is for the licence to continue from month to month by the licensee paying during a current month's license a fee of $10 together with a further amount equal to 35% of the value of tobacco sold by the licensee in the month which commenced two months before the commencement of the month in which the licence expires. This routine meant that if a licensee decided say three months ahead that a particular licence period would be its last, then the value of the licensee's sales during the last two licence periods would never be the basis of any calculation of a licence fee for a subsequent licence period. That licensee would, during the business's last two licence periods know the fees which would have to be paid for those licence periods, being $10 plus 35% of the value of tobacco sold in the months commencing two months before the month of the second last and last licence periods, with the result that if the licensee in those two periods sold tobacco to a greater value than it had sold in the earlier months by reference to which the licence fees for the last two periods were fixed, the licensee would never have to pay any fee in respect of that amount of the value of tobacco sold during the last two licence periods which was greater than the value of the tobacco sold in the relevant earlier months. The system obviously presented opportunities to business people.

A separate feature of the Act was that references in it to the sale of tobacco are references only to the sale of tobacco in New South Wales (s 3(3)). This provision presented opportunities to dishonest persons not wishing to pay licence fees on the full value of tobacco sold by them of giving misleading information to the State's revenue authorities about the place where tobacco was being sold by them. A simple device would be to tell the revenue authority that tobacco sold in New South Wales had been sold in Victoria. Such devices, in the absence of precautionary powers and safeguards in the Act itself, would be very difficult for the revenue authority to be aware of or to check.

No doubt because of this, Part 8 of the Act is included among the many and powerful enforcement powers provided by the Act. This Part is headed
TRANSPORTATION OF TOBACCO. Its Division 1 - Duties etc of transporters - imposes strict requirements about what are called in its sub heading
Transportation records. Section 63(1) requires that there shall be carried at all times in any road vehicle transporting tobacco in New South Wales a record complying with <case>. That subsection requires that the record must be in writing, and must contain particulars as follows: "(a) the day the transportation commenced; the type and quantity of tobacco being transported; the name and address of the person who owns the tobacco; the name and address of the person on whose behalf the tobacco is being transported; the name of the person, if any, to whom the driver is transporting the tobacco; the address to which the driver is transporting the tobacco; and the name and address of the person (if any) who has agreed to purchase the tobacco." 
Section 63(4) empowered the Commissioner or an inspector at any time to require the driver of a road vehicle in New South Wales in which the
Commissioner or the inspector reasonably suspected tobacco was being transported to produce the record for inspection. Such a driver failing to produce a record on request or one which the driver knew was false or misleading in a material particular was guilty of an offence and liable to a penalty up to $2,000 (s 63(6)). To enable or assist the Commissioner or an inspector to exercise the powers under <case>, a member of the Police Force was authorised to request or signal the driver of a vehicle to stop the vehicle (s (7)). A driver failing to comply with such a request or signal was guilty of an offence and liable to a penalty up to $1,000, (s 63(8)).

Section 64 of the Act provided: "(1) If the driver of a road vehicle: does not produce a record referred to in section 63 as required under that section; or in purported compliance with a requirement under that section, produces a record which the Chief Commissioner or an inspector reasonably believes to be false or misleading in a material particular, the Chief Commissioner or an inspector may require the driver to drive the vehicle to a police station or other place within a reasonable distance, as determined by the Chief Commissioner or the inspector, at which the tobacco can be unloaded from the vehicle.
 
If the driver does not comply with the requirement, the Chief
Commissioner or the inspector may take charge of the road vehicle for the purpose of driving it or causing it to be driven to the police station or other place referred to in subsection (1).
 
On arrival at the police station or other place, the tobacco shall be unloaded, as soon as may be practicable, from the vehicle.
 
When the tobacco has been unloaded from the vehicle: the Chief Commissioner or the inspector shall tender a receipt to the driver of the vehicle from which the tobacco has been unloaded; and the tobacco: may be taken into custody by or on behalf of the Chief Commissioner; or may be transferred to another vehicle in order to be taken to a place at which the tobacco may be taken into custody by or on behalf of the Chief
Commissioner." 
Among the list of enforcement powers granted by the Act to the Commissioner and any of his inspectors was one to require any person to answer any question relating to any records or documents in the custody of the person (s (2)(c)(i)). Thus the requirements and powers of ss 63 and 64, together with the questioning power under <case> enabled and entitled inspectors, if they chose to do so, to ask questions of any driver of a road vehicle reasonably suspected of transporting tobacco in New South Wales relating to any record or document in the custody of the driver. If an inspector chose, he could ask relevant questions of the driver to the exclusion of any other person, even if that person claimed to be in charge of the driver or otherwise to have superior knowledge to the driver of the matters the subject of the inspector's questions.

The powers given to the Commissioner and his inspectors under the Act are very wide. They permit an almost tyrannical overview and inquiry into the affairs of persons selling tobacco in New South Wales. The powers should obviously be used with such tact and discretion as can be mustered by inspectors carrying out their duties. Nevertheless the purpose of the powers is to give the revenue authority full scope for doing what it can to ensure that all licence fees due under the Act will be paid to the State. So long as the revenue authority's officers carry out their duties in good faith for the purpose of executing the Act they are protected from any claims against them for things done while carrying out their duties. Section 27 gives them this protection and is in the following terms: "No matter of thing done by the Chief Commissioner or any other officer or person shall, if the matter or thing was done in good faith for the purpose of executing this Act, subject the Chief Commissioner or any such other officer or person to any action, liability, claim or demand." 
The facts in summary.

In the present case, the relevant buyer and seller of tobacco was the legal entity, the company. Section 21 of the Act made the Commissioner responsible for the due administration of the Act.

The man in charge of the company was Mr P. Wright. He and his wife had bought the shares in the company and had become its directors on 27 June 1991. Before then it had not conducted any business.

On about 4 July 1991 the company began buying tobacco from a licensee under the Act known as East Coast Giftware (Giftware) which had decided to go out of the business of selling tobacco. It was thus in the position earlier described of being able to increase its own sales of tobacco during its last two licence periods to values above those on the basis of which the licence fees for those periods had been fixed, without ever paying a licence fee calculated by reference to the increased value of sales in the last two licensed periods of trading.

Between 4 July 1991 and 14 August 1991 the company purchased substantial quantities of tobacco from Giftware and sold that tobacco in Victoria. In the six weeks of its operation to 14 August 1991 the company had bought tobacco from Giftware and sold it in Victoria to the value of $4.3 million.

On 14 August 1991, Mr P. Reid, in his capacity as one of the Commissioners' inspectors, required the driver of one of the company's vehicles, which was transporting tobacco, to produce the <case> transportation record. Upon it being produced Mr Reid acted on the basis that he reasonably believed it to be false or misleading in a material particular (s 64(1)(b)) and took further steps on the basis of <case> which led to the tobacco in the vehicle being taken into custody on behalf of the Commissioner. For purposes of Division 2 of Part 8 this is called "seized tobacco" and I will use the words "seized" or "seizure" from here on. It was pursuant to Division 2 that the tobacco was returned to the company in November 1991.

At the trial of the company's damages proceedings before Sully J, there were a great many issues. There was considerable dispute about what had actually happened on 14 August 1991. Sully J considered the factual contentions in detail and then made a series of primary factual findings. On these he then proceeded to reason to his legal conclusions.

In the appeal the appellants did not challenge Sully J's primary findings of fact. They contended that from those findings of fact his Honour should have reached different conclusions.

As a result of the thorough sifting and consequent findings of fact made by the trial judge, the matters arising for consideration by this court are much fewer than the trial judge had to consider, this court being spared the task which his Honour had to perform, of going through the whole of the very bulky evidence which was before him.

I will now set out what appear to me to be the material facts for this court's consideration. (Some of them have been touched on already.) Unless otherwise indicated they are taken directly from Sully J's findings.

Some of the inspectors in the service of the Commissioner were known as
Compliance Officers. On 22 July 1991 and twice on 13 August 1991 Compliance
Officers stopped vehicles of the company which were carrying tobacco. They inspected the consignments and the documentation. They then let the vehicles go on their way.

On the first occasion on 13 August the vehicle was stopped at about 2 pm. Mr
Reid was one of the two Compliance Officers. Mr Jeff was the driver. He produced the transportation record. This showed that the vehicle's destination was Victoria. Mr Reid asked Mr Jeff whether he was driving to Victoria and Mr
Jeff answered yes. (This was a principal factual issue at the trial and a great deal of time was spent on it by the parties in oral and documentary evidence and by the trial judge in his reasons. For purposes of the appeal, all that needs to be known is the fact as I have already stated it.) 
The reason for the stopping of the company's vehicles was that the revenue authority suspected that Mr Wright might be involved with a scheme to defraud the revenue. In evidence Mr Reid said, "I knew not the specific details of the scheme but I was aware of his name and that he had either participated or been prosecuted on some of those schemes".

Not specifically mentioned by the trial judge, but, as I read the evidence, not in dispute, was the fact that Mr Wright's doings were being watched by the
Commissioner and his officers in connection with the sales being made by
Giftware. The Commissioner was attempting to keep a check on all persons purchasing from Giftware.

On 14 August 1991 Mr Reid and another inspector were in a motor vehicle watching premises in Auburn from which it was thought the company would be loading tobacco to be carried by road. A little before midday Mr Jeff arrived at the premises. Mr Reid immediately became suspicious that Mr Jeff had not told him the truth the previous day, had not driven to Melbourne the previous day and had instead driven his load of tobacco to somewhere in New South
Wales.

During the afternoon Mr Wright and Mr Jeff spoke to Mr Reid seated in his vehicle. Mr Wright told Mr Reid he would be transporting tobacco products that afternoon and asked Mr Reid to look at the relevant transportation record. Mr
Reid said he would not do so until the consignment was actually on the road.
Mr Wright went away, and shortly before 2 pm again spoke to Mr Reid, at his vehicle. Mr Wright now had Mr Quilty, his solicitor, with him. Mr Quilty began to ask Mr Reid questions, the object of which was to have Mr Reid look at the transportation record for the proposed shipment there and then. Mr Reid replied "No comment" to most questions. At one stage he said he was one of the officers who had inspected Mr Jeff's record on the previous day. He also said that if and when he chose to look at the transportation record, if it was in order all would be fine. After some further unproductive exchanges, the conversation ended.
 (Sully J was very critical of the stance adopted by Mr Reid in his contact with Mr Wright, Mr Quilty and the drivers during the day. He commented that at an early stage of the day each of Mr Wright and Mr Reid were "suspicious about, prickly towards, and resentful of the other". He was of the view that
Mr Reid's "No comment" attitude was uncivil, unhelpful and unreasonable. It is also apparent from the findings that Mr Reid's attitude was based on his understanding of the enforcement and questioning powers given by the Act, including the power to ask questions of the driver of a vehicle transporting tobacco by road in New South Wales. I do not include the detail of the events giving rise to these criticisms in this summary of the material facts. Sully J in his eventual finding on the critical matter of "good faith" placed no reliance on them. In this I think he was right. The behaviour of both Mr
Wright and Mr Reid on this occasion seems to me to be fully explicable on the basis that each one was wholeheartedly pursuing what he thought to be his best interest; Mr Wright seeking to send the company's tobacco to Victoria for sale and Mr Reid attempting to carry out his duties as an inspector and endeavouring to use what he understood to be his powers in that regard. Thus, these matters in the end are in not in my view material to the question upon which I think this appeal should be decided; nor is there any sign that Sully
J paid any attention to them in deciding that point.) 
Mr Reid next got in touch with Inspector Dewsbury, the Chief Compliance
Officer, who came to the scene. At about three o'clock a police officer also came. At about the same time Mr Wright learned from another driver that he had been pulled up by two inspectors and after examination of his transportation record had been allowed to go on his way.

Mr Wright then decided to attempt the transportation of a small test consignment. Tobacco with a wholesale value of about $39,000 was loaded for transportation in place of the full consignment with a wholesale value of about $300,000 which had been intended. Before the journey began Mr Jeff asked
Mr Reid to look at the transportation record and Mr Reid said he would not do so until the time was appropriate.

The test load was then driven on to the street. Mr Loughland drove, Mr Wright was a passenger. The inspectors and the police officer directed the vehicle to pull over and stop which it did.

Mr Wright got out of the vehicle and approached Mr Reid, handing the transportation record to him and offering to answer any questions Mr Reid might have about the transportation record. Mr Reid said he would only deal with the actual driver of the vehicle. He inspected the transportation record, searched the vehicle and inspected the tobacco.

Mr Reid asked Mr Wright to produce the rental records for the truck. Mr Wright refused. Mr Reid said the refusal would constitute a hindering of him in the execution of his duty and be in breach of the Act. Inspector Dewsbury then told Mr Reid not to fall for Mr Wright's disruptive tactics but to get on and interview the driver. Mr Wright repeatedly asked to be told what if anything was wrong with the record. He got no answer.

Mr Reid and Inspector Dewsbury then discussed the situation in the police motor vehicle, out of the hearing of Mr Wright.

Evidence of this conversation was given by both Mr Reid and Inspector
Dewsbury. Sully J thought the conversation important, and set out both men's version of it in detail in his reasons. I will come back to it later.

After their conversation the two officers returned to the vehicle containing the tobacco. In passing Mr Wright Inspector Dewsbury asked him whether he was
Peter Wright and on being told that he was said to him, "All right, I know you are a jerk". In his evidence Inspector Dewsbury admitted he had meant to insult Mr Wright by saying this and that at the time he felt animosity towards him. Mr Reid heard this exchange. Sully J reproduced the cross-examination of
Mr Reid about what he thought about this incident and explicitly found that Mr
Reid understood when he heard Inspector Dewsbury's inappropriate comment that it was both insulting and intended to insult.

Mr Reid then spoke to Mr Loughland in terms which the trial judge found were intended to notify him as the driver that Mr Reid had formed a reasonable belief that the transportation record was false or misleading in some material particular. Despite heated demands by Mr Wright to be told what was wrong with the record no indication was given of what the false or misleading particular was. By now, the police officer had contacted his superior, Sergeant Roser, who arrived on the scene at about the time of what the trial judge described as the formal purported seizure by Mr Reid of the company's property. Mr
Wright then locked the vehicle intending to go away and fetch a copy of the
Commonwealth Crimes Act. Sergeant Roser demanded he hand over the keys to the vehicle. Mr Wright refused to do so. Sergeant Roser then arrested Mr Wright for hindering the inspectors in the execution of their duty. Mr Wright then handed over the keys. The vehicle was taken to the local police station and the formalities of taking the tobacco into custody were completed.

On following days Mr Quilty and Mr Wright tried to find out from officers at the Office of State Revenue what part or parts of the transportation record had been believed to be false or misleading in a material particular. Letters were written seeking the same information. The trial judge described the responses as bureaucratic obfuscation. The question being asked on behalf of the company was important to it. It was not answered, although assertions were made that the inspectors had acted properly in what they did in seizing the tobacco.

The procedure laid down by the Act for the way in which seized tobacco is to be dealt with was then followed. An advertisement was published on 2 September calling upon any person claiming to be entitled to the tobacco to make a claim for it. the company duly made a claim which was by letter dated 4
November 1991 accepted.

In considering the claim for the invalid seizure of the tobacco the trial judge said that the contention of the defendants that it had been lawful depended on Mr Reid's having reasonably believed at the time when Mr Loughland handed the transportation record to him that it was false or misleading in a material particular.

This was undoubtedly an essential issue at the trial. If the judge held that
Mr Reid's belief at the time was reasonable, then the company's case failed.
Mr Reid at the trial said that the particular which he believed to be false or misleading on 14 August 1991 was the statement of the destination shown in the record as Fawkner, Victoria. He was led to this belief because he thought that
Mr Jeff had lied to him the previous day, and that what was now going on was an exact duplication of what had happened the day before.

The trial judge concluded that Mr Reid's process of reasoning did not give rise to a reasonable belief as required by the Act. He said that a mere suspicion (as entertained by Mr Reid because of his belief that Mr Jeff could not have gone to Victoria as he said he was doing on 13 August) about what might have happened to a consignment investigated on 13 August, did not justify a positive belief that the transportation record for a different consignment on the following day was false or misleading in the way he said at the trial.

This finding was not challenged in the appeal. It was what his Honour next proceeded to deal with which was debated in the appeal. That was the question whether the defendants had made out on the probabilities that what was, as now must be accepted, an unlawful seizure by Mr Reid of the company's tobacco, was an act done in good faith for the purpose of executing the Act within the meaning of <case> (set out at p 9 above).

Sully J first considered what meaning he should give to the expression "in good faith for the purpose of executing this Act". He pointed out that it was not defined. He referred to what Barwick CJ had said in Tickle Industries Pty
Limited versus Hann & Anor <case>; [(1974) 130 CLR 321] at 331: "It is, in my opinion, a sound rule of statutory construction that a meaning of the language employed by the Legislature which would produce an unjust or capricious result is to be avoided. Unless the statutory language is intractable, an intention to produce by its legislation an unjust or capricious result should not be attributed to the Legislature." 
Next he cited Central Estates (Belgravia) Limited versus Woolgar [[1972] 1 QB ] in which the English Court of Appeal had to consider a similar "good faith" question. He quoted Phillimore LJ's conclusion "that the only course ... is to deal with this matter on the facts of this case", at 56 and Lord Denning
MR's conclusion that in "... such cases, when a word or phrase goes undefined, the judges have to work out for themselves the meaning of it, doing the best they can to interpret the will of the Legislature in regard to it" (at 55).

Sully J then said that he would, like Phillimore LJ, deal with the matter on the facts of the case. The passage that then follows in his reasons contains all the essential matters for the decision of this point in the appeal and his own reasoning on it. I therefore reproduce it in full. It was as follows: "As I have previously indicated, I believe that the second defendant did not form that reasonable belief which was the statutory precondition of his entitlement to seize the plaintiff's goods. I am satisfied that the second defendant did become suspicious that he had been misinformed on 13 August about what was the arrangement then in hand for the transportation of the consignment which he intercepted on that day and at a time when Mr Jeff was the driver who was actually effecting the transportation. I am prepared to accept that the second defendant formed an honest suspicion that, by reason of his suspicions concerning the consignment of 13 August, there might be something amiss with the declared end destination of the quite separate and distinct consignment of 14 August. I do not accept that this latter suspicion ever hardened into a belief in the real sense of that word, let along a belief that was reasonable in the sense that I have earlier discussed. I am satisfied that what really happened was that the second defendant, a comparatively young and inexperienced inspector, found himself in a situation of confrontation with a person whom he had been conditioned to regard as 'a big player' in an enterprise which he, the second defendant, had been conditioned to believe was wrongly depriving State Revenue authorities of considerable amounts of revenue. I am satisfied that the second defendant, operating in that context of prior conditioning, found himself fixed with an ineradicable suspicion that something was wrong somewhere in connection with the consignment of the 13th
August, and that that suspicion carried over in his mind to the distinct and separate consignment of 14 August and its covering transportation record. I am satisfied that the second defendant, having intercepted the consignment of 14
August and thereby initiated a full-scale confrontation with Mr Wright, found himself in a situation which he was quite unable to control. In my opinion, he became, thus, subject to pressures which were not made any easier for him by the comments of his superior, Inspector Dewsbury, that the situation was indeed getting out of hand and that he, the second defendant, had to take the responsibility of making up his mind as to whether or not he would effect a seizure. I am satisfied that the second defendant, embroiled in those suspicions and pressures, simply rationalised in his own mind that what was, in truth, nothing more than an unsubstantiated suspicion, was in fact a reasonable belief. It was, in my opinion nothing of the kind. That being so, I cannot think that it was the intention of the Legislature that the second defendant, and his principal, the first defendant, should be able to walk away from the consequences of the actions of the former, sheltered by an umbrella of convenience provided by section 27. To hold otherwise would entail, in my opinion, a construction of the nature and scope of section 27 productive of precisely that kind of wilful and capricious result against which Barwick CJ warns in the passage earlier cited herein from the Tickle Industries decision.
 
In my opinion, therefore, section 27 does not avail the defendants for present purposes." 
On the primary facts upon which Sully J bases his conclusion, I have formed a different opinion. The point on which we divide is, I think, that we have different understandings of the meaning of "good faith for the purpose of executing ... the Act". The features indicated by the trial judge as leading him to his conclusion were that the seizure was invalid, it was the result of unsubstantiated suspicion and that it could not be supposed that it was the intention of the Legislature that a citizen whose goods were seized in those circumstances should be deprived of a remedy by <case>.

For my part I approach the question of the meaning of the words in a different way. First, in terms of this case the question becomes whether the thing done by Mr Reid was done in good faith for the purpose of executing the Act. That means, it seems to me, that it is Mr Reid's good faith (or otherwise) and Mr
Reid's purpose which must be looked at. It is thus Mr Reid's actual state of mind at the time of seizure which must be looked at in deciding whether what he did fell within the protection of <case>. Sully J found that at the critical moment Mr Reid had an honest suspicion there might be something amiss with the declared end destination of the consignment that was seized.

That seems to me to raise as one relevant question, what was the purpose in Mr
Reid's mind for forming that suspicion, or perhaps more sensibly, what was his purpose in acting on that suspicion. I can see no other answer to either question but that his purpose, in his own mind, was to carry out his duties under the Act as he conceived them.

The companion question is whether, again in his own mind, he was acting in good faith for that purpose. It seems to me to follow from Sully J's finding that Mr Reid's suspicion was an honest one, that Mr Reid in doing what he did, honestly thought that he was carrying out his duty as an inspector under the
Act. Put another way, it seems to me to follow from Sully J's findings about honest but unreasonable suspicion that it never entered Mr Reid's mind at the time of the seizure that he was doing anything other than carrying out his duties: Sully J made no finding that he was acting maliciously against the company, or seeking to satisfy some private purpose of his own, or acting vindictively.

The only possibility that Sully J had some such finding in mind arises from what he had earlier said about the " you are a jerk" remark made by
Inspector Dewsbury to Mr Wright. I mention this as a possibility only to show that I have not overlooked it. On reading Sully J's reasons again with the possibility in mind, I can see no sign at all that he thought this incident had any bearing on Mr Reid's good faith at the moment of seizure. That seems to me to be clearly the correct attitude to take towards it. By modern standards the "insult" was, so far as the word used was concerned, so minor as barely to be worth mentioning. Certainly, public servants should be polite to the citizens they deal with, but a lapse from politeness does not of itself show that the public servant is not carrying out his duties. Still less is it evidence that a person who happened to overhear the remark might be said as a result to be himself acting outside the scope of his duties.

Once that possibility is set aside, then, my conclusion is, based on Sully J's findings, that what Mr Reid did, he did honestly believing he was carrying out his duties. Also, on Sully J's findings, there is no doubt he was quite wrong in law in doing what he did and his belief that he was acting reasonably was itself unreasonable, but the critical point, to my mind, is that there is no finding and there was no suggestion as I understood the argument, that Mr Reid was aware that he was acting unreasonably.

A seizure based on a suspicion that an officer knew was unreasonable might well, depending on an evaluation of all the circumstances, fall outside <case>'s good faith protection. Where however an officer believes that what he is doing is being properly done for the purpose of executing the Act, then I do not see that the unreasonableness of his genuine belief has an effect on his good faith.

Section 27 only comes into question when the Commissioner or one of his officers has done something for which there would be liability in the absence of the section. That is, the section recognises that from time to time the
Commissioner or one of his officers may make a mistake or do some other thing not allowed by law which causes damage to a citizen or some legal entity, but for which the State, in the person of the Commissioner and his officers, should not be liable. It seems to me that the underlying ratio of sections such as <case> is that when a public servant is attempting to carry out duties, such as those connected with raising revenue for the State, and thus for what is taken to be the good of the general body of the citizenry of the State, and in doing so causes damage to a citizen or legal entity for which the officer would be liable at law in the absence of a section such as <case>, then the officer is protected from liability so long as what the officer did was intended to be in furtherance of the officer's duty to the general citizenry and was not done maliciously or for any reason other than the carrying out of the officer's public duty.

The approach I have taken above to the proper application of <case> seems to me to be fully warranted by what the High Court said about provisions generally of a similar kind to <case>, in Webster versus Lampard <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 598], especially at pp 605-608 per Mason CJ and Deane and Dawson
JJ. (This decision was not delivered until some ten months after the case under appeal was decided by Sully J.) 
On Sully J's primary findings of fact, in my opinion, Mr Reid fell within the protection of <case> understood in the way I have tried to describe.

I mentioned earlier the conversation that took place between Mr Reid and
Inspector Dewsbury when, on 14 August 1991, they retired from the discussions with Mr Wright and spoke privately together in the police car. Sully J said that the conversation that then happened was of the greatest importance and he set out the versions of both men in some detail. The versions did not correspond in terms, although both versions were obviously attempts to recollect the same conversation. So far as I can see, Sully J did not indicate whether he preferred one version of the conversation to the other and did not make any specific findings about its content. However, he said nothing indicating that he found the conversation had not occurred and I think it must be taken from the way he dealt with the matter that he accepted that either one or other version of the conversation or something like one of the versions did occur.

The conversation took place immediately before the seizure and would provide in my opinion strong evidence of Mr Reid's state of mind immediately before the seizure. Either version of the conversation, in my view, shows Mr Reid giving the best consideration he could to what was the right course of action he should take in carrying out his duties under the Act. In my opinion the conversation is strong evidence that Mr Reid did what he did in the seizure in the belief that he was carrying out his duties. There is no sign that any of the vitiating elements I mentioned earlier in discussing the application of good faith, were present in his mind. This provides a further basis for my conclusion that Mr Reid was entitled to the protection of <case>.

At the risk of repetition, and in the hope of clearness, my opinion is, restricting myself entirely to the factual basis upon which Sully J acted as set out in the long passage from his reasons reproduced above (at pp 17-18), that Mr Reid brought himself within the protection of <case>. I reach that conclusion without reference to the conversation between Inspector Dewsbury and Mr Reid immediately before the seizure. If it is permissible to take that conversation into account, and for the reasons mentioned above, I think it is, then my view of the conversation is that it provides strong evidence on its own account both leading to the same conclusion and confirmatory of it, when taken together with Sully J's findings.

My opinion therefore is that the defence raised in reliance on <case> should have succeeded. This conclusion makes it unnecessary to deal with the other matters raised by the appellants in support of their appeal.

In my opinion the appeal should be upheld, the judgment below set aside, and judgment entered for the defendants. It follows, I think, that the plaintiff should be ordered to pay the defendants' costs of the trial and the appeal.
 
MEAGHER JA: I agree with Priestley JA.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 * * * 
