

Regina versus D B Shinner [1996] NSWSC 407 (5 September 1996) 
REGINA v. David Brian SHINNER /96 September 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
COLE JA, SMART J, JAMES J 
JUDGMENT 
COLE JA: I will ask Smart J to give the first judgment.

SMART J: This is an appeal against conviction on a count of sexual assault being vaginal penetration.

The appellant was charged with four counts of sexual assault arising out of the events which took place late on 28 November - early 29 November 1988.
Count 1 covered the first act of penile intercourse, count 2 the first acts of oral intercourse, count 3 the second act of penile intercourse and count 4 the subsequent acts of oral intercourse. He was acquitted on counts 1,2 and 4 and convicted on count 3.

It was common ground that the complainant and the appellant met late at night in an hotel in Liverpool. They spent some time together, remaining until closing time. The appellant and the complainant took a taxi to his caravan in the Cabramatta area. It was paid off by her. She suggested that she was going to look at his Harley Davidson motorbike and then go home. He suggested that it was a sexual assignment and there is more than a reasonable possibility that it was.

The complainant and the appellant entered the caravan. It was the Crown case that the appellant roughed her up, threatened her, demanded intercourse, undressed her, forced her legs apart and penetrated her. He had also undressed. She alleged that after he had ejaculated, he withdrew, that she dressed and that he insisted on inserting his penis into her mouth on a number of occasions. She alleged that he demanded more intercourse, used further force and threats, undressed her again, placed her on the bed in a different position and inserted his penis into her vagina. She claimed that further acts of oral intercourse took place. She dressed and ultimately was able to leave.

The accused contended that she undressed herself and that normal penile intercourse took place with her fully consenting. He agreed that there were two sessions or acts of penile intercourse but said that she did not dress after the first session.

The complainant's descriptions of the acts of oral intercourse were a little florid. The accused, in his statement to the Court, said, "She may have sucked my penis once but not twenty or thirty times and then we started making love for the first time." That was also the way it was put by the appellant's counsel during the course of the trial.

At p.7 of the summing-up the judge reminded the jury that there was no issue between the parties that sexual intercourse of the nature described in the charges occurred. The judge continued, "The issue between the parties is that oral intercourse as opposed to vaginal intercourse on the Crown account, took place on many occasions and on the defence account it occurred only once..." 
My initial view on reading the papers was that so far as the last acts of oral intercourse were concerned, which formed the basis of the fourth count, there was no real corroboration as to these and I could understand why a jury would reject the counts based on oral intercourse. The acts of vaginal intercourse were admitted.

While theoretically the jury could have accepted her evidence that she dressed after the first session of penile intercourse and did not consent and the accused knew that she was not consenting to the second session of penile intercourse, the case was not fought on the basis of distinguishing the various acts and parts of the period spent in the caravan. She did not suggest that she consented to the first act of penile intercourse and then withdrew her consent to the second and told the appellant to cease. The accused was not alerted so he could cross examine on this alternative basis. This may be what the jury thought. The case was conducted by the Crown on an all or nothing basis. That is, that the evidence of the complainant was either substantially accepted or it was not. At p.15 of the summing-up the judge said, "Nonetheless if you are not convinced beyond a reasonable doubt that her account to you, as
I have put it to you, of sexual dealings in the caravan is true, then that would be the end of the charges." 
Upon the jury returning a verdict, both counsel and the judge expressed considerable surprise at the verdicts of not guilty on counts 1,2 and 4 and the verdict of guilty on count 3.

Before us the Crown took the view that having regard to the way in which the case was conducted - that is, on an all or nothing basis - the verdict on count 3 was inconsistent and indeed as I understood counsel, it was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

While the case may have been conducted differently and a somewhat more subtle approach taken, I have to deal with the matter as the trial was conducted. On this basis her evidence had to be taken as a whole and there are certainly inherent difficulties in accepting her evidence substantially in toto on the third count but not in relation to the others, bearing in mind it was probably a period of about one hour to one and a half hours in which the entire episode took place. I have not overlooked the evidence of the police constables as to her state almost immediately after she left the caravan, nor the medical evidence and the photographs. Having regard to the way the matter was conducted before the jury the verdict on count 3 is inconsistent and could fairly be classed as unsafe and unsatisfactory. The appeal should be allowed, the conviction on the third count quashed and a verdict of acquittal entered.

COLE JA: I agree. In my opinion the matter can be shortly stated. The events the subject of the four charges took place in a short continuum of time. The Crown case was that the complainant did not consent to sexual intercourse, that she was assaulted to gain a form of consent, that thereafter there occurred vaginal intercourse followed by a series of oral intercourses, followed by a vaginal intercourse and followed thence by oral intercourse. The matter was left by the trial judge, without complaint, on the basis that there was no issue between the parties that sexual intercourse of the nature described in all charges had occurred. The only issue was, in truth, consent.

For a jury to find verdicts of acquittal on the first, second and fourth counts and thus consent in that brief continuum of time, yet to find a verdict of conviction on the third and thus absence of consent, seems to me to indicate an inconsistency amongst those verdicts.

Clearly, in my view, the verdict of conviction is unsafe and unsatisfactory. I agree with the orders proposed.

JAMES J: I agree with both of the judgments which have been delivered.

COLE JA: The orders will be as outlined by Smart J.
 * * * 
