

Regina versus Gjt [1998] NSWSC 1037 (29 August 1998) `REGINA versus GJT` ``60109/95 
WEDNESDAY 24 JULY 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, SULLY J, HULME J 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: In this matter I will ask Sully J to give the first judgment.

SULLY J: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentence. All that needs to be said about the relevant background and the one, although from the applicant's point of view not insignificant, question to be decided is set out in the succinct and helpful submissions put in by learned counsel for the appellant as follows: "1. Graham John Taylor faced two separate trials before Judge Saunders and a jury of twelve at the District Court at Penrith. In relation to the first trial on 30 August 1994 he was found guilty of sexual intercourse without consent of a child, KET, under the age of 16.
In relation to the second trial on 1 February 1995 the appellant was found guilty of indecent assault on TCI, a child under the age of 16, but not guilty of buggery of TCI.
On 10 February 1995 the appellant was sentenced in relation to both matters. In relation to the count of indecent assault (the second trial), the appellant was sentenced to a fixed term of 12 months to date from 30 August
In relation to the count of sexual intercourse without consent (the first trial), the appellant was sentenced to a minimum term of two years six months to date from 30 August 1995 and to expire on 1 March 1998. An additional term of 18 months was imposed.
On 22 November 1995 this honourable Court delivered its judgment in relation to the appellant's appeal against conviction. The conviction in relation to the first trial was dismissed. The conviction in relation to the second trial was allowed, the conviction and sentence were quashed and a verdict of acquittal was entered.
No appeal against sentence was maintained by either the appellant or the
Crown.
When the appellant was sentenced in relation to the first trial, he was sentenced on the basis that he had also committed the offence against TCI. In view of the decision of this honourable Court the appellant now falls to be sentenced on the basis that the offence against KET was an isolated incident.
It is submitted that the sentence imposed by Judge Saunders for the offence of sexual intercourse without consent was within the range for offences of this kind.
It is submitted that the sentence should commence from 30 August 1994." 
In my opinion, leave to appeal should be granted. The appeal should be upheld.
The sentence imposed in the Court below should be set aside and there should be substituted a sentence of imprisonment comprising a minimum term of two years and six months to commence on 30 August 1994 and to expire on 1 March with an accompanying additional term of eighteen months to commence on 2
March 1997 and to expire on 29 August 1998. I would propose orders accordingly.

GLEESON CJ: I agree.

HULME J: I also agree.

GLEESON CJ: The orders of the Court will be as proposed by Sully J.
 * * * 
