

The Lorna Hodgkinson Sunshine Home versus Chapman and Ors [1996] NSWSC 624 (17
December 1996) 
The Lorna Hodgkinson Sunshine Home versus Chapman & Ors /95 December 1996 
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
MASTER MALPASS 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: It is alleged that the plaintiff has suffered loss (in the order of somewhere between 2 and 7million dollars) as a consequence of defalcations by a former employee (William Davidson). In these proceedings, the plaintiff brings a claim for damages to recover the loss.

The process names two sets of defendants. There is a group of persons named as first defendants. There is a group of persons named as second defendants. The first defendants are alleged to be partners of a firm of accountants which had been retained as auditors for the plaintiff. The second defendants are the partners of another firm acting as auditors at a later time. Broadly speaking, it is contended that the defendants failed to detect the defalcations.

The first defendants (save for Mr Selinger) have defended the proceedings. It seems that Mr Selinger may not have been a partner of the firm sought to be named as first defendants and process has not been served on him. For convenience, I shall refer to the remaining persons of that group as the first defendants. The first defendants have brought a Cross-Claim against certain officers of the plaintiff (directors or former directors). The second defendants have defended the proceedings (the Defence, inter alia, raises a plea of contributory negligence). They have not brought any cross-claim.

The cross-defendants seek to have the Cross-Claim dismissed pursuant to Part rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules. The only evidence adduced at the hearing of this application is to be found in the affidavit of Veronica Chapman sworn on 18 October 1996.

The only parties interested in this application are the cross-defendants and the first defendants. Counsel for these parties have prepared written submissions. This material was supplemented by oral submissions.

These proceedings were commenced in November 1995. They seem to have progressed at a comparatively leisurely pace. The proceedings are now subject to Differential Case Management. Directions were given on 30 August 1996. The
Cross-Claim was filed in July 1996. This application was not brought until 18
October 1996 (which seems to be a date outside the time allowed by the directions).

The Defence of the first defendants raises a plea of contributory negligence pursuant to section 10 of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/), 1965 (paragraph 8). It also raises a plea of failure to mitigate loss (paragraph ). The Cross-Claim seeks either indemnity or contribution pursuant to [section 5](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/s5.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/lrpa404/), 1946.

The Particulars alleged in paragraph 8 are as follows:- "(a) Allowing its cheques to be drawn payable to W Davidson; 
Allowing the proceeds of cheques drawn on its bank accounts to be credited to accounts of W Davidson; 
Failing to monitor, supervise and/or control the activities of W Davidson during his employment by the plaintiff; 
Delegating the right and power on behalf of the plaintiff as trustee of the Lorna Hodgkinson Sunshine Staff Superannuation Fund to sign, draw, accept, make, endorse, issue or otherwise execute any cheques, promissory notes, drafts, bills of exchange, bills of lading and other negotiable or transferable instruments and receipts for money paid to the plaintiff as trustee; 
Delegating the obligations the plaintiff as trustee of the Lorna
Hodgkinson Sunshine Home Residents Trust (`LHSHRT') had to W Davidson; 
Failing to keep accounting records in accordance with its obligation under section 267(1) Companies Code and/or section 289(1) Corporations
Law; 
Failing to discharge its fiduciary duties as trustee of LHSHSSF; 
Failing to discharge its fiduciary obligations as trustee of the LHSHRT." 
The Cross-Claim pleads breaches of duty owed by the cross-defendants as directors to the plaintiff. The various breaches are alleged in paragraph 3 thereof.

No complaint is made as to the manner in which the Cross-Claim has been pleaded. It is said that the Cross-Claim is untenable and that it would be futile to allow the first defendants to maintain it.

The Court has been referred to a number of authorities during the course of argument (in particular, the judgment of the majority (Clarke & Sheller
JJA) in Daniels & Ors versus Anderson & Ors [(1995) 37 NSWLR 438).] Indeed, the cross-defendants rely on what was said in that judgment as being determinative in this application. In that case, when dealing with the questions of contributory negligence and contribution, the majority, inter alia, followed Barisic versus Devenport [(1978) 2 NSWLR 111] and adopted an approach suggested by Dr Glanville Williams, Joint Torts and
Contributory Negligence (which has been applied in other cases (see pp -580)).

At p 580E, the majority said:- "Where, as in the present circumstances, a party has secured partial relief, by way of a finding of contributory negligence it would not, in our opinion, be just and equitable that it obtain an award for any compensation. If it were otherwise it would unjustly receive double compensation." 
The cross-defendants argue that the conduct which is alleged to constitute their notional liability to the plaintiff must necessarily be first taken into account in determining the issues raised by the defences (see p 579D/F). It is said that, if the defences are successful, there would be a diminution of the plaintiff's damages upon the apportionment of liability and that the first defendants are not entitled to double compensation. It is said that there is no circumstance in which the first defendants could fail in their defences and yet succeed against the cross-defendants for contribution (the former being wider than the latter).

Without disrespect to the detailed arguments put by learned counsel, it seems to me that this application can be disposed of without resorting to any detailed analysis of the decision in Daniels.

It may be said that the circumstances of this case have some similarity to the case that was considered in Daniels. However, I bear in mind what was said by the majority at p 580E:- "We are not, however, concerned with hypothetical situations but in endeavouring to provide the most satisfactory solution to the present problem." 
The submissions made by the cross-defendants have an initial impact of some force. However, further reflection raises doubt as to whether the position in this case is as clear as it is said to be.

Each case is going to turn on its own particular circumstances. In Daniels, the Court was dealing with the circumstances present in that case. The Court of Appeal was concerned to find the most satisfactory solution to the problem before it. There had already been a lengthy trial.

The defences and the Cross-Claim throw up different legal issues. There are many issues of fact. In the circumstances of this case, the granting of summary disposition requires the Court to reach final conclusions in relation to a variety of matters (including the question of whether the conduct which would be properly taken into account in determining the defence issues must necessarily include those to be taken into account to determine the Cross-
Claim issues). It seems to me that the exercise involves an element of speculation. There may be matters which can only be resolved at a trial.

The cross-defendants are seeking summary dismissal of the Cross-Claim. The cross-defendants accept that they must satisfy the approach taken in, inter alia, General Steel Industries Inc versus Commissioner For Railways <case>; [(1964) 112 CLR 125.] The authorities demonstrate that summary relief should only be granted in what may be described as clear cases. It is a discretionary remedy. The applicant bears the onus of satisfying the Court that he or she is entitled to summary relief.

I am not satisfied that this is one of those clear cases. I am left with doubt. I consider that justice is best done between the parties by a refusal of the application for summary relief. In my view, the cross-defendants have failed to discharge the requisite onus.

I dismiss the Notice of Motion. The cross-defendants are to pay the costs of the Notice of Motion.
 * * * 
