

Polycarpou versus Australian Wire Industries Pty Ltd Nos. Ca 40703/92; Sc /79 Master and Servant - Evidence [1995] NSWSC 158 (14 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
KIRBY P(1), MEAGHER(2) AND HANDLEY(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 21 June 1994 #DATE 27:2:1995 #ADD 14:11:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:   G G Masterman QC and A Haesler 
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Solicitor to the Legal Aid
Commission of New South Wales 
Counsel for the Respondent:  J
E Maconachie QC and C E Moore 
Solicitors for the Respondent: Blake Dawson Waldron
ORDER
Appeal allowed
JUDGE1
KIRBY P This is the second time that the present parties have come before this Court in respect of substantially the same matter. On 20 December ,
the Court (constituted by Hope JA, McHugh JA and myself) set aside a judgment in favour of Mr Polycarpo (the appellant) in the sum of $279,616.82. That judgment had followed a trial before Cantor J and a jury. This Court allowed the appeal. It ordered that a new trial be had on all issues.
Cantor J has died. Hope JA has retired. McHugh JA has been translated to the High Court of Australia. I alone of the original Court remain for the second stage of these proceedings. A jury in a retrial brings in a verdict -
high contributory negligence
The retrial, ordered by the Court, was duly had before Smart J and a jury.
The trial lasted fourteen days. At the end of it on 29 October 1992, the jury returned with the, following answers to questions put to them: "1. Has the plaintiff proved the defendant negligent? 
Answer: Yes.
If so, has the defendant proved the plaintiff guilty of contributory negligence? 
Answer: Yes.
If the answer to (2) is yes, in what proportion do you assess their respective responsibilities? 
Answer: Plaintiff 40%; defendant 60%.
If the answer to (1) is yes, in what amount do you assess the plaintiff's damage? 
Answer. $321,606."
Following adjustment for workers' compensation payments to the plaintiff, the deduction for contributory negligence found by the jury and the addition of interest, judgment was entered in favour of Mr Polycarpou in the sum of $292,488.
It will be convenient to set out the background to this appeal before dealing with the substantive issues which were argued before this Court.
 
A worker is struck on the head by a chain block
At the time of his accident, as long ago as 17 October 1979, the appellant was working as a crane chaser at Australian Wire Industries Pty Ltd (Australian Wire).
He was working with Mr Peter de Looper. Their task was to repair a lead bath. In their evidence, Mr Polycarpou and Mr de Looper disagreed as to whether they were repairing or replacing the lead bath. Mr
Polycarpou believed that they were replacing the lead bath. Mr de
Looper believed that the task was to repair the bath. However, nothing turns on this point.
Mr Polycarpou was involved in an operation to lift and place a lead bath in position. The bath was used in the manufacture of wire. The bath was sitting on the floor of the premises. About 4.5m above the lead bath, was a monorail, along which trolleys could run. For the task in question, there was a trolley positioned above the lead bath. Suspended by a hook below the trolley was a chain block. It was made up of a heavy block at the higher end which contained pulleys. through which ran 6 falls of chain. The chains, in turn, ran through a set of pulleys at the lower end below which there was a hook. This hook was attached either directly or indirectly to the object that was to be lifted. In order to lift the lead bath, a lifting beam had to be attached to it. The lifting beam was suspended at the end of a line which was attached to the jib of the forklift. It was Mr Polycarpou's job to work with the forklift driver, Mr de Looper, to place the lifting beam in position.
In the course of this manoeuvre, the jib of the fork lift became entangled with some part of the chain block. The chain block was dislodged from the trolley. It fell on Mr Polycarpou's left leg. In the course of the accident,
Mr Polycarpou sustained head injuries as well. The chain block weighed 10 tonnes. Mr Polycarpou was knocked unconscious. He remained unconscious for about a minute. He was taken to the Balmain Hospital.
On 8 February 1980, after the accident Australian Wire wrote to the
Department of Industrial Relations and Technology. It informed the Department that, within two months, it intended to replace the existing lifting gear which had been used by Mr Polycarpou. There was a hand written comment at the bottom of the letter which said: "Refer to accident on file No 12107/79 for modification reason." 
I infer from this comment that Mr Polycarpou's accident was the reason that
Australian Wire planned to modify the existing lifting equipment.
 
The extent of the worker's injuries
According to the Balmain Hospital papers, admitted into evidence, Mr
Polycarpou was at the time of the accident, 35 years old.
He had had no previous illnesses or operations. He was taking no medications and had no allergies.
The accident caused compound and comminuted fractures of the left tibia and fibula. There was also a stellate fracture of the skull in the frontal region. Steinmann's pins were inserted into the heel and the leg was in traction for one week.
On 24 October, 1979, a second operation was performed whereby the pins were removed. The left tibia was openly reduced with the insertion of a compression plate. The hospital discharge summary stated that the post-operative x-ray showed good alignment. Mr Polycarpou progressed well post-operatively showing no neurological problems. He was walking by 14
November 1979 on crutches. He was discharged on 16 November 1979.
However, on 20 November 1979,
Mr Polycarpou saw Dr Sheriff, a general practitioner. He complained of headaches, loss of concentration, forgetfulness, irritability as well as irritation in the scrotum skin. His leg was at that time in full plaster. Dr Sheriff suggested an x-ray of the skull and spine. An x-ray, taken soon afterwards showed a linear fracture of the left frontal bone of the head.
In February 1980, Dr
Sheriff referred Mr Polycarpou to the Neurosurgery
Department at Westmead Hospital. He was there seen by Dr Dorsch, a visiting neurosurgeon, who made the following diagnosis: "He seems to have quite a definite post concussional syndrome and judging by his description of the weight that fell on him and the fracture on his x-ray, he certainly had quite a nasty blow to his head.

The syndrome in his case consisted of frequent bi-frontal and temporal headaches, difficulty with short term memory, dizziness and especially irritability and tense nerves, often with inability to sleep.

I find that there is often very little that can be done in this situation except to wait for the gradual improvement that usually occurs with time. I have explained to the patient and reassured him that there is nothing serious behind his problem and this sometimes helps. I also started him on Amitriptyline in doses increasing up to 775 mgs at night. This helps the nervous aspect and often seems to help the headache more directly.
Also giving it at night should also help his sleep."
Mr Polycarpou went back to work on 28 May 1980. He worked in the store for 6 to 8 weeks before he was transferred from that section. Thereafter, Mr
Polycarpou was frequently moved from one section to another.
On 29 August 1980, Mr Polycarpou was referred by his local doctor, Dr
Santamaria, to Dr Bailey, a specialist psychiatrist, for treatment of depression. According to Dr Santamaria, part of the reason for the reference was Mr Polycarpou's expressed anxiety about an imminent operation on his left leg. Mr Polycarpou was also complaining of disabling pain which is often recognised as a sign of depression. Combined with his anxiety, Dr Santamaria believed that a full psychiatric consultation was indicated.

On 7 January 1981, Mr Polycarpou duly had an operation in the Balmain
Hospital to remove the plates and pins from his left tibia.
Dr Dixon performed this operation. Mr Polycarpou returned to work on 23 February 1981. He swept floors and cleaned windows in the workshop as well as occasionally helping with the cleaning of parts of machinery. He also carried tools for the fitters.
On March 1981, there was a second accident at work involving a pulley.
This pulley was about 10 inches round, 12 inches thick with grooves. Mr
Polycarpou was handed the pulley. However, he said that he could not hold it.
It fell from his hands and hit his left leg. Mr Polycarpou went off work for a week as a result of this incident. On his return to work, he was moved to yet another section.
On 18 November 1981, Mr Polycarpou saw Mr Dixon who decided to recommend to the respondents that Mr Polycarpou might be fit for return to forklift driving. On 26 November 1981, Mr Polycarpou was asked to drive a forklift truck. However, Mr Polycarpou complained of pain in his left leg. After an hour, he refused to continue driving the truck. Following his refusal to do so, Mr Polycarpou had a meeting with his foreman, Mr Bob Holmes and the superintendent of the engineering department, Mr Geoff Aiken. In his evidence,
Mr Polycarpou said that he was told that if he could not work he would be dismissed. He was asked to leave and he did so.

On 15 December 1981, Dr Bailey wrote to Mr Aiken and made the following observations about Mr Polycarpou: "Basically this man is a good personality who suffered a very severe injury. He is getting better, but slowly.

If you can put him behind the store counter or somewhere similar he can continue to work effectively whilst preserving his self-esteem. I would be grateful for your help."
On 12 March 1982, after his suspension, Mr Polycarpou again saw Dr Dixon who recommended that Mr Polycarpou see Dr Marsh, an occupational health physician. On 16 March, Mr Polycarpou also saw Dr Bailey again. Dr Bailey reported: "He came back and told me that they had given him a job sitting down, probably as a result of my previous letter, but he could not sit at this job for any length of time and they finally suspended him from the job so he was back depressed and anxious again. He had all sorts of somatic symptoms. He was shaking and vomiting and he had severe headaches and sat that stage I thought I had better and(sic) stop this thing from escalating so I put him off work for a period of three months.
Subsequently,
I arranged for him to be admitted into a rehabilitation centre."
Mr Polycarpou took the certificate of sickness for three months leave from Doctor Bailey to the personnel officer at Australian Wire. The latter did not accept the certificate. He asked
Mr Polycarpou to see the company doctor
Mr Foley. He, in turn, referred Mr Polycarpou to Dr Marsh.
Before Mr Polycarpou saw
Dr Marsh, Dr Foley wrote to Dr Marsh on 26 March and said: "At a recent management meeting, a decision was made to terminate all productive permanent selected duties positions, with the result that Mr. Polycarpou has had to be relocated.

He was offered a position in the gabions section and provided with a comfortable chair (although the position is not normally a sit down one . No production demands were placed upon him.
The actual work involved twisting and weaving wire strands into wicker-like sheets which he later used to fortify earthen embankments. Unfortunately, Mr Polycarpou tired after only a brief attempt. stating that the work caused him to have headaches and provoked pain in his left lower limb.

It is sad but true that most of the positions at the Sydney
Wire Mill are of a heavy, repetitive, manual type and stated simply, the management are unable to think of any physically easier position he could fill. On several occasions, Mr
Polycarpou has been invited to suggest alternative positions he fell were within his capabilities but to date, has remained strangely silent.

Any assistance you could give with his relocation and/or
Occupational Rehabilitation would be greatly appreciated." .
Dr Marsh saw Mr Polycarpou. However, prior to this, on 16 April 1982, the manager of Australian Wire wrote to Mr Polycarpou and threatened dismissal if
Mr Polycarpou did not report for work on or before 23 April, 1982. On 23
April, 1982, Australian Wire wrote to Mr Polycarpou. It terminated his employment. It also informed him that the company would no longer meet any further expenses incurred by him. To this end, Australian Wire informed Dr
Dixon on 27 May 1982 that they would no longer pay Mr Polycarpou's medical accounts.
In June 1982, Mr Polycarpou was admitted to Mount Wilga Rehabilitation
Centre on Dr Bailey's recommendation. It was at the
Centre that psychologists concluded that there. was something organically wrong with Mr Polycarpou's mental function. Dr Bailey was informed. In his evidence, Dr Bailey said that: "Frixos was having far greater difficulties in coping with his problems than even I had recognised. There were fairly serious deficits in some of his thinking process and his memory function. All the things that he has been telling me throughout this period of time were very well confirmed in the testing and this raised serious problems regarding his future rehabilitation because on the figures that were obtained there, there was a very poor chance of getting this man back to a reasonable job again."
Dr Bailey referred Mr Polycarpou to Dr Davies, a psychologist, for assessment in September 1982. Dr Davies saw Mr Polycarpou six times for psychometric assessment. Dr Davies diagnosed Mr Polycarpou with post concussional syndrome. Dr Dixon also decided in September 1982 that Mr
Polycarpou's orthopaedic injuries had stabilised.
Ms Helen Newman, a clinical neuropsychologist, was the visiting sessional psychologist at Mount Wilga. She carried out psychometric testing on Mr
Polycarpou. According to her evidence, she concluded that Mr Polycarpou had visuo-spatial problems which appeared to be organic in nature.
Mr Polycarpou was discharged from Mount Wilga on 15 June 1983. On 16 June , Mr Polycarpou underwent a CT brain scan. Dr Roche performed the scan which was reported to be normal.
The first trial before Cantor J took place in
April 1984. On 20 November , the Court of Appeal ordered a retrial. On 21 May 1986, Dr George Lloyd, a consultant physician neurologist, re- examined the results of the scan taken on 16 June 1983. He expressed this view: "My conclusion of what I found from examining and taking his history and from looking at his scan was that he had suffered some frontal brain damage and I thought that that injury was the reason for some of his disability and inability to function as he had before." 
Dr Dorsch, the first neurosurgeon to see Mr Polycarpou after the accident had said: "He seems to have quite a definite post concussional syndrome and judging by his description of the weight that fell on him and the fracture on his x-ray, he certainly had quite a nasty blow to his head. The syndrome in his case consists of frequent bi-frontal and temporal headaches, difficulty with short term memory, dizziness and especially irritability and tense, nervous, often with inability to sleep." 
Dr Lloyd found that this first diagnosis was consistent with his diagnosis of
Mr Polycarpou. He believed that his symptoms had a definite organic basis.
The second trial began on 12 October 1992 before Smart J and a jury. As I have said, the jury returned with the answers to the judge's questions which I have set out above. As a result, Smart J entered judgment in favour of Mr
Polycarpou. From that judgment,
Mr Polycarpou. has appealed to this Court. It is in that way that the Court, for the second time, is required to consider this case.
Australian Wire has cross-appealed.
 
The appeal includes challenge to a ruling permitting prejudicial questioning
In the course of the argument of the appeal one question of general importance arose. It concerns the suggested discretion of the presiding judge in a civil trial to exclude evidence upon the ground that its admission, at least before a jury, would have such a prejudicial effect as to outweigh its probative value. Mr Polycarpou argued for that discretion both at the trial and in this Court. Australian Wire disputes its existence. The facts of the case tender the issue for consideration in a rather distinct way.
By Pt 51, r 16 of the [Supreme Court Rules 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/scr1970232/) it is provided: "(1) The Court of Appeal shall not order a new trial - on the ground of improper admission or rejection of evidence...

Unless it appears that some substantial wrong or miscarriage has been thereby occasioned."
The facts of the case do suggest that a substantial wrong or miscarriage occurred in the consideration by the jury of the issue of contributory negligence. Something appears to have affected the jury's consideration of that issue in a way which was distracting and highly prejudicial to Mr
Polycarpou. The jury cannot be interrogated. All that this Court can do is to apply rational consideration to the explanation of the jury's verdict. One possible explanation may be that something prejudiced the jury against the appellant personally. It made the jury look with severe criticism at his conduct as a worker and to bring in a verdict which most substantially reduced his recovery.
It is this explanation of the jury's verdict (and in particular of their answer to the question concerning contributory negligence) which occasioned the appellant's fifth ground of appeal: "5. That (Smart J) was in error in admitting into evidence a large number of questions and answers about Deep Sleep Therapy and the involvement of the late Dr Bailey, Dr Herron and, allegedly,
Dr Davies in such treatment and their reputations based on that treatment which evidence was irrelevant and otherwise inadmissible and such questions and answers were highly prejudicial and unfair to the appellant and caused the trial to miscarry." 
The primary judge's refusal to exclude the questions
The circumstances which gave rise to the decision of Smart J to allow the questions on deep sleep therapy addressed to the medical practitioners called for Mr Polycarpou are not entirely clear. The transcript of the trial before
Smart J and the jury is, in this respect, defective. All that is recorded tspt is: "Submissions to his Honour by (counsel for the defendant) regarding cross-examination in relation to the witness' knowledge of in connected with deep sleep therapy and other matters."
However, in this Court there was no real dispute that the admissibility of the line of questioning about deep sleep therapy was raised, in the absence of the jury, for a ruling by Smart J. Counsel for Australian Wire quite properly sought his Honour's leave, in the absence of the jury, to argue the admissibility of the questions before asking them.
The matter was argued before Dr Herron gave evidence on behalf of Mr Polycarpou. His Honour, having heard the arguments of both counsel, gave a general ruling allowing questions of the type which were then asked. In view of the ruling, which counsel for Mr
Polycarpou was bound to accept no particular objection was raised to the line of questioning which then ensued. Formally, counsel for Mr Polycarpou ought, in the presence of the jury, to have recorded his objection to the questions without arguing the objection further. This was not done. But, in the way the appeal was conducted, nothing turns upon that failure.
There then ensued a line of questioning directed to establishing that Dr
Herron had been, or was still, an adherent to the practice of deep sleep therapy; that he was a close personal and professional friend of the late Dr
Harry Bailey of Chelmsford Hospital fame; that his practice of deep sleep therapy had been criticised by many members of the psychiatric profession both in Australia and overseas; that the criticism was to the effect that the therapy was dangerous and life-threatening; and that Dr Herron was still an adherent to deep sleep therapy as a form of psychiatric treatment. He agreed, in evidence, that it was his view that "there is a place for it".
 
The significance of the questions: prejudice to the appellant
The significance of this line of questioning was three-fold. First, it took place before a jury drawn from a community in which a great deal of media attention had been given to the practice of deep sleep therapy and to the complaints of patients of the Chelmsford Hospital who alleged that they had suffered serious harm as a consequence. The medical practitioners involved in the therapy had been publicly criticised. They were the subject of disciplinary action before their professional tribunal.
They were sued in the courts for civil damages. Their conduct was examined by a Royal Commission.
All of these events attracted widespread notoriety.
Secondly, Dr Bailey (who had also treated Mr Polycarpou) had died after the first trial. Indeed he died before the first appeal to this Court. It was his death which occasioned the order of Hope JA, in the first appeal, that: "At that trial the testimony of Dr Bailey, given at the first trial, may be read from notes of that testimony." 
The attacks on the medical witness for Mr Polycarpou, based upon his association with Dr Bailey and deep sleep therapy had to be assessed by the jury without the opportunity to see and hear Dr Bailey. In cross-examination of Dr Herron the following questions were put to him by counsel for Australian
Wire. "Q. Could I ask you some questions about your history. You were for many years associated with Dr Harry Bailey, were you not?
A. I was.
Q. You became an adherent of a particular form of treatment in the 1960's and 1970's, did you not?
A. I think that is a reasonable comment.
Q. That was deep sleep therapy, was it not?
A. That is correct.
Q. That was a form of therapy which involved the administration of large doses of narcotics to cause people to be in an unconscious state for a period of time?
A. There were no narcotics.
Q. Narcosis therapy, is that a term that has been used to describe it?
A. There have been lots of terms used - 
OBJECTION 
Q. Let us call it deep sleep therapy.
I involved causing a patient to be put into a state of unconsciousness for long periods?
A. A state of sleep.
Q.
A state of sleep for long period?
A. For intermittent periods.
Q. That form of treatment was one that you embraced as being a
proper psychiatric treatment, was it not?
A. That is correct.
Q. And you engaged in it for many years?
A. That is correct.
Q. As did Dr Bailey in conjunction with you, did he not?
A. I think it was the other way round.
Q. All right.
The other way round. But together it was a form of treatment that you employed in practice together?
A. That is correct.
Q. In the course of that treatment another associate, Dr Evan
Davies, a psychologist, took part in the assessment of patients did he not?
A. He did."
In cross-examination of Dr Davies, counsel for Australian Wire posed the following questions: "Q. You were a close and personal friend of Dr Bailey, were you not?
A. Dr Bailey was a world famous psychologist and certainly I was associated with him and I always understood I was his friend.
Q. He conducted a practice in which deep sleep therapy was administered to patients, did he not?
A. That's correct.

OBJECTION 
Q. You over a number of years, very many years, assessed patients who were to undergo that therapy both before they underwent it and after, did you not?
A. Well, my understanding of that is that over a period of something like fifteen years I've been told that there were of Dr Bailey's patients assessed by me out of a total number of something like 1800 patients who undertook deep sleep treatment, and furthermore of course, I didn't ever know whether those patients had that kind of therapy or any other kind of therapy. That was up to the psychiatrist. But I've been told in recent time, and apparently at great expense, that that was the precise number of people over that period of fifteen years whom I'd seen who had subsequently undergone deep sleep treatment.
Q. But in the context of the deep sleep treatment problem your methods were closely examined by other doctors in your profession and by the medical profession, were they not? 
OBJECTION. QUESTION ALLOWED 
Q. Were they not? 
A. Well, they were examined by certain psychologists, some of which were not members of the Psychological Society and there were a number of experts who formed a committee and two of those experts who were non members of the Australian
Psychological
Society had certain critical comments. The other three experts disagreed in fact with those two. Now, that's the picture of these criticisms to which you are referring.
Q. All I want to obtain from you is this: do you accept that there has been criticism of your methods?
A. I said to you earlier that in my forty years there has been endless criticism of what
I do in my techniques, as indeed nearly every other professional in Sydney would have a similar kind of criticisms.
Q.
Do you accept that the techniques which you employed in this s and early 1980s have been rejected by your peers?
A. That's quite incorrect."
Counsel cross-examined Dr Greenberg and asked him the following questions: "Q. Deep sleep therapy, can I just ask you some short questions about that. Are you familiar with that treatment - 
OBJECTION. ALLOWED.

Q. Are you familiar with that treatment?
A. In a general sense, yes.
Q. Have you ever employed it?
A. No.
Q. Have you seen it employed?
A. No.
Q. Have you seen it employed?
A. Once, yes.
Q. Where was that?
A. In the York Clinic Hospital in London.
Q. Was that many many years ago?
A. Thirty years ago.
Q. it is a form of treatment which has been very rarely used, is it not?
A. In recent years, yes.
Q. By 'recent years' you mean, do you not, in the last 30 or so years?
A. Something like that.
Q. It is a treatment which has been recognised for 30 years as being largely ineffective? 
A. Yes.
Q. It is a treatment which has been recognised for 30 years as being life threatening?
A. Dangerous, yes.

Q. And it is a treatment that has been deprecated by the vast majority of psychiatrists for the last 30 years, has it not?
A. Yes.
Q. If one were to adhere to it as an acceptable treatment in any circumstances that would be inconsistent with accepted psychiatric doctrine, would it not? 
A. I am sorry, I did not quite follow the beginning of your question? 
Q. I will try and put it again. If one were to adhere to the view that deep sleep therapy was today acceptable even in a limited range of cases, that would be inconsistent with and opposed to the view of the vast majority of psychiatrists here and overseas, would it not?
A. Yes.
Q. If the man drives and drives successfully motor cars and has done for years, does that have any part to play in trying to resolve this problem?
A. I do not think it is inconsistent with the view I have expressed about him.
Q. Driving requires planning, co-ordination, active and quick response thought processes all the time, does it not?
A. One would hope so, yes."
In examination of Dr Roberts, counsel for Australian Wire asked the following questions: "Q. I want to ask you one or two questions about deep sleep therapy. You were in court yesterday, were you not? 
MR MASTERMAN (counsel for Mr Polycarpou) CONTINUED HIS PREVIOUS
OBJECTION 
Q. You were in court yesterday, were you not, when some questions were directed to Dr Greenberg about deep sleep therapy?
A. Yes.
Q. Did you hear what was asked of him and the answers he gave?
A. Yes, I did
Q. Do you agree with what Dr Greenberg said or not?
A. Well, fundamentally what I understand him to have said is that it is an outdated treatment which has no current application. The definitive statement on deep sleep therapy - 
OBJECTION 
Q. Do you agree with what he said?
A. Yes."
Thirdly, and most significantly,
Mr Polycarpou was never subjected to the treatment known as deep sleep therapy. He never underwent treatment of the controversial kind to which the questioning of the medical witnesses called in his case was addressed. He had been examined by the doctors to ascertain whether he had suffered organic brain damage and/or severe depression as a result of his work injury with Australian Wire. The questions addressed to deep sleep therapy were therefore highly prejudicial. They cast doubt upon the integrity and honesty of the medical witnesses whom Mr Polycarpou was calling before the jury. Those witnesses were made to appear in a false or unfavourable light. The questioning was directed to matter extraneous to their actual treatment of Mr Polycarpou. It was upon an issue apparently irrelevant to that treatment. it was about matters of which Mr Polycarpou would know nothing and upon which he had absolutely no influence or input. It was simply prejudicial and irrelevant.
 
Respondent defends the questions and disputes the asserted power to exclude them
This Court does not have a reasoned statement from Smart J concerning the basis upon which he decided, over objection, to admit this line of questioning. No complaint can be made in this regard. Decisions on evidence must often be made quickly and sometimes peremptorily, as a trial is progressing. Counsel for Australian Wire sought to support his Honour's ruling and the relevance of the questions addressed to Mr Polycarpou's medical witnesses. It was submitted that the nature and extent of the damage suffered by Mr
Polycarpou was a central question at the trial. The defendant's case was that the blow to his head had caused nothing more than a transient concussive episode involving no brain damage, no psychiatric or psychological condition and no reason to justify his cessation of work. Accordingly, it was put, it was legitimate to place before the jury questions addressed to the weight or value of the opinion expressed by Drs Herron and Davies in support of Mr
Polycarpou. Such questions (it was argued) were put, not upon the basis of the credit of the witnesses, as such, but as matters relevant to the weight which the jury would give to their testimony having regard to their final conclusion concerning the nature and quality of their expertise. That expertise was relevant to the acceptability of the evidence of the witnesses in support of
Mr Polycarpou which was a question exclusively in the domain of the jury.
Alternatively, counsel defended his line of questioning upon the footing that there was no common law power in the trial judge to exclude the evidence once it was demonstrated to be relevant. Furthermore, in this Court, the Rules of Court and the practice of the conduct of appeals would restrain interference in Smart J's discretionary decision to permit the questioning now attacked. This was because Mr Polycarpou had failed to demonstrate any substantial wrong or miscarriage as having been occasioned by the questions asked. Those questions revealed facts relevant to the experience of the medical witnesses which it was for the jury to evaluate. The trial was long and complex. It involved many issues. The subject of deep sleep therapy was not referred to in Smart J's summing up. If it had been the case that the jury was prejudiced against Mr Polycarpou by the fine of questioning now impugned it might have been expected that such prejudice would have exhibited itself in the damages found in favour of Mr Polycarpou rather than in the collateral question of apportioning contributory negligence.
 
Divided authority on the judicial power to exclude for prejudice in civil trials 
To address ground 5 in the notice of appeal, it is necessary first to ask the question whether, in a civil trial, there is a residual judicial discretion to exclude probative, ie relevant, evidence? Upon this question the authorities are divided: 
The general principle of evidence law is that evidence is admissible in a trial if it is relevant to an issue in contest in the trial. This rule is subject to various exceptions by which evidence, though relevant, is excluded.
However, the exclusions are also stated in the form of rules. The general effort of the common law in relation to the admission or rejection of evidence has been to reduce the dependence upon the discretion of judges: see R v
Inhabitants of Eriswell (1790) 3 Term R 707 at 714; <case>; [100 ER 815] at 819. This approach, like so much else in the law of evidence, is a product of the
English system of jury trial and of respect for the jury's right to hear and evaluate all probative, ie relevant, evidence so that they, the jury, should make of such evidence what they will. The jury's function in this respect was not to be usurped by judges except with clear authority of law; 
Gradually, however, in criminal trials, a practice of prosecutorial restraint which developed as a result of judicial encouragement gave way to a recognition of the residual judicial power, in the exercise of the discretion, to exclude from the jury's consideration evidence which, although relevant, was unduly prejudicial to the fair determination of disputed facts and/or the accused's guilt: see Noor
Mohamed versus The King [(1949) AC 182] at 192. This principle, derived from English practice, was accepted as part of the law of
Australia: see Driscoll versus The Queen <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 517] at 541f. Indeed, in
Australia, the scope of the power of judicial rejection of evidence was enhanced, in the context of criminal trials, by a recognition of a discretion to reject otherwise admissible evidence if it were obtained illegally or improperly: see
Bunning versus Cross <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54] at 11, 19; 
For a very long time, as these developments were occurring in the context of criminal trials, it was said by courts, both in England and Australia, that they had no application to civil trials where judges did not, therefore, enjoy a like discretion to exclude prejudicial evidence so long as it was probative: 
In Ibrahim versus Rex [(1914) AC 599], at 610, the Privy Council observed "in an action of tort, evidence (of a statement made under circumstances of hope, fear, interest or otherwise) could not be excluded when tendered against a tortfeasor, though a jury might well be told as prudent men to think little of it"; 
In Manenti versus Melbourne and Metropolitan Tramways Board <case>; [(1954) VLR 115]
Sholl J, conducting a jury trial in a civil negligence action, rejected a submission for the plaintiff that certain evidence, otherwise admissible, was unduly prejudicial and should be excluded as a matter of discretion. His
Honour held (at 120) that the discretion which had evolved in the context of criminal trials had no place in the conduct of a civil trial. He therefore resolved to admit the evidence but to warn the jury of its limited relevance and of the care with which they should weigh the evidence in question; 
In David Syme and Co Limited versus Mather <case>; [(1977) VR 516] the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria had occasion to review Manenti. Lush J (with the concurrence of Starke J, who had been counsel in Manenti and on this point
Kaye J said "There is ... in civil cases no discretion to exclude evidence relevant to the issues"; see also Mister Figgins Pty Ltd versus Centrepoint
Freeholds Pty Ltd <case>; [(1981) 31 ALR 23] at 147; 
In Koutsouras versus State Rail Authority of New South Wales Court of Appeal, November 1991 (unreported, at 10), although
Meagher JA did not have to decide the issue, he expressed a preference for the view that "tainted" evidence, whatever its weight, is always admissible. He said that: "(u)nder the criminal law, in certain cases there is in certain circumstances a well-recognized judicial discretion to reject otherwise admissible evidence; but, apart from that, there is, in my view, no situation known to the law where evidence is admissible solely on a discretionary basis." 
A contrary conclusion was reached in Queensland in Taylor v Harvey [(1986) 2 Qd R 137.] Carter J held that the prejudicial effect of certain "similar facts" evidence in a civil damages action was so substantial, when weighed against its probative value that the evidence in question should be excluded by him from his consideration. Its prejudicial effect, his Honour concluded, "far outweighed its cogency". In reaching this conclusion, Carter J relied heavily upon a judgment of Lord Denning MR in Mood Music Publishing Co v De Woolfe Limited [(1976) 1 Ch 119] at 127. There his Lordship had said: "In civil cases the courts have followed a similar fine but have not been so chary of admitting (such evidence). In civil cases the courts will admit evidence of similar facts if it is logically probative, that is if it is logically relevant in determining the matter which is in issue: provided that it is not oppressive or unfair to the other side and also that the other side has fair notice of it and is able to deal with it"; 
In Pearce versus Button [(1985) 60 ALR 537], Pincus J, then of the Federal
Court of Australia, threw doubt upon the "universality of the proposition that a civil court cannot exclude relevant evidence on the ground that it was improperly obtained". He suggested that a power of exclusion "on policy grounds" would exist if, for example, admissions were tendered in a civil trial which had been obtained by violence or threats of violence.
In the result, Pincus J concluded that it would not, in the facts of that case, be "a sound exercise of discretion to exclude the evidence". Accordingly he was not obliged to resolve the quandary. But a fair reading of his Honour's judgment (at 551-2) indicates that, in an appropriate case, Pincus J would have looked with favour upon extending the principle hitherto applied in criminal trials to civil matters. He said: " ... It is not clear why considerations of policy should necessarily be more favourable to the admission of illegally obtained evidence in civil matters than in criminal matters".
 
Text writers doubt that the judicial power exists in civil trials
Text writers in Australia appear to have assumed that the criminal law discretion does not extend to civil trials.
However, they are divided as to whether this was logical or desirable. In most cases, they contend that the judge in the civil trial has sufficient discretion to exclude the contested evidence upon the footing of its lack of relevance. Upon that basis the provision of an enlarged judicial discretion for exclusion on the additional ground of undue prejudice is not normally required: see Cross on Evidence, (4th Aust ed), 20;(par 1135); 91 (par 1565); 773 (par 27315); A Ligertwood,
Australian Evidence (2nd ed 1993, Butterworths (par 2.18); Elis S Magner "Exclusionary Rules of Evidence" in A E S Tay (ed) Australian Law and Legal
Thinking Between the Decades,
Uni of Syd, 1990, 439 at 451, concludes that the general trend of authority in Australia has been towards the reduction of the rules of exclusion and the increase of "a power in the judge to admit evidence that will prove helpful in determining the truth".
 .
The Australian Law Reform Commission, in its interim report on Evidence, deals with the discretion to exclude in civil cases in these terms (par 154): "Whether there is a discretion to disallow improperly obtained evidence is not clear. The Privy Council indicated in Ibrahim v R that an unfairly obtained admission 'could not be excluded when tendered against a tortfeasor ...'But more recent English and South Australian cases have suggested that improperly obtained evidence could be excluded in civil cases on public interest grounds or by adopting the concept of abuse of process." 
The Commission refers to ITC Film Distributors v Video Exchange Limited [(1982) All ER 241] at 361.
In an article "Extent of the Judicial Discretion to Reject Prejudicial
Evidence in Civil Cases" [(1988) 62 ALJ 211], Mr J R Forbes reviews the controversy set out above. He examines taylor. He is critical of the foundation which Carter J expressed for his principle, contending that neither
Mood Music nor the cases cited by Lord Denning MR support the proposition of the broad discretion which Carter J claimed and applied. Mr Forbes concludes (at 215): "Apart from authority a case can be made for extending (the discretion) to civil proceedings which involve a jury, but in most Australian jurisdictions, including Queensland, the vast majority of civil trials are now heard by a judge or magistrate alone, as was Taylor versus Harvey, It is rather late in the day to graft the ... discretion onto civil procedure for the sake of an occasional jury trial. In trials by judge alone there are enough formal and informal methods of 'bending' rules of evidence to the perceived merits of the case, without introducing another imponderable. Besides it appears artificial, even fictitious to say in effect: 'having heard this evidence, I consider that I may lawfully consider it, but as judge of fact I will set it aside, lest I be prejudiced by it'.
The unreality is greater when the decision to reject the evidence is postponed for quite some time."
The question has been considered in a number of overseas jurisdictions of the common law other than Australia and England.. In New Zealand, the
Law
Commission, in its preliminary paper number 13 Evidence Law: Principles for
Reform debates (at p 7f), the principles relating to the suggested bifurcation of criminal and civil evidence are examined. Citing Zukerman's The Principles of Criminal Evidence (1989), the Commission says: "It has been said that there should be separate laws of criminal and civil evidence. Zukerman, a proponent of this view, contends that the policies behind the rules of evidence are too closely linked with procedural and substantive law policies to be treated in abstract; and the procedural and substantive law policies are quite different for civil and criminal matters. He points out that there are already basic differences between civil and criminal evidence and procedure.

However, the New Zealand Commission was disinclined to adopt the rigid distinction. It says (at p 8): "23. On the other hand, our own law as well as most modern evidence codes and draft codes tend to adopt a common approach to criminal and civil evidence, and within that makes distinctions for criminal evidence. There is also no doubt that many fundamental concepts remain common in civil and criminal proceedings. Thus the principle that relevant evidence is prima facie admissible is accepted in both civil and criminal cases.
Similarly, the distinction between admissibility and weight is found in both types of proceeding.
And ... many of the exclusionary rules of evidence apply in both criminal and civil cases, although their content may in some respects be different.
We therefore incline to the view that an endeavour to develop completely different laws for civil and criminal evidence goes too far. Indeed, it may be that the emphasis should be on congruence of approach - and that (provided there are adequate safeguards in the rules of criminal procedure) the exclusionary rules could be liberalised for criminal as well as civil trials."
In the United States of America, the exclusionary rule has been developed substantially around the Fourth Amendment and in criminal cases. However, lately questions have arisen in that country as to whether the same rule should not be expanded to civil proceedings. In Turner versus Lawton [733 P 2d 375] , the Supreme Court of Okalahoma held that the State's constitutional protection against unlawful search and seizure applied to the attempted use of evidence thereby obtained whether offered in proceedings civil or criminal in character. A fireman employed by the city of Lawton was dismissed from the city's service when he was charged with possession of cocaine. The cocaine was found in his home as a result of a search which was later found in criminal proceedings to have been illegal. It was held that the search had been based on an inadequate affidavit. The criminal case against the accused was dismissed. He then sought an order of reinstatement in his employment. In those proceedings the evidence of the discovery of cocaine was tendered. It was relevant to the employer's resistance. However, the trial court rejected the tender. He found the dismissal improper. The Okalahoma Court of Appeals reversed.
But the Okalahoma. Supreme Court restored the primary judge's decision. It upheld the exclusion of the evidence from the civil reinstatement proceedings. The decision has been criticised. See S Meacham "Evidence: The
Exclusionary Rule in Civil Administrative Hearings: Turner v City of Lawton" Okalahoma L Rev 320 (1987). The decision was described as "misguided and short sighted": "If something is a constitutional right for criminal actions, it does not necessarily follow that it also is for civil actions." 
Other discussion of the issue in the United States tends to be unhelpful because, typically, it rests upon constitutional principles which do not, as such, apply here. See eg Herman Clurman "When May Evidence be Suppressed in
Civil Tax Cases under the 'Exclusionary Rule'?",
The Journal of Taxation, Sept , 178.
Against the background of this line, and trend, of authority in the understanding of the common law of evidence it may be seen that there is no binding principle for the resolution of Mr Polycarpou's ground of appeal.
No decision of the High Court of Australia or of this Court obliges a particular conclusion in this case. It is therefore necessary to resolve the matter posed by ground 5 in the grounds of appeal by reference to legal authority, principle and policy: see Ocean
Sun Line Special Shipping Co Inc versus Fay <case>; [(1988) CLR 197] at 252.
 
Conclusion: it is not established that a general discretion exists in civil trials
The state of legal authority in
Australia appears to support the proposition that, by our common law, no residual discretion exists in a judge conducting a court trial. But this cannot be conclusive. The law in this subject, in criminal proceedings, has itself been developing. The Australian developments have not always adhered to the approach taken in England. Some recent decisions in Australian courts suggest that a residual discretion may exist in civil trials. Whilst this authority has been doubted or criticised, it nonetheless competes for acceptance in this State where no binding rule has yet been laid down. The trend of authority seems accurately to have been summarised by the Australian Law Reform Commission (above). The old authority was clearly against a discretion. The more recent authority (at least in some jurisdictions) has tended to favour its existence.
Turning from the state of authority to legal principle, a number of points must be considered: 
Generally speaking it is preferable that decisions in contested litigation should be arrived at after the evaluation of all available relevant testimony. It requires very good reasons to exclude from the decision-making process evidence which is relevant to the rational conclusion of that process.
This is because a decision arrived at with disregard for relevant testimony, whose existence is known to the Court, the parties and the interested community, may appear to be flawed or even to lack legitimacy or to be undermined by irrationality; 
Conceptually there seems to be less justification for differentiating between civil and criminal proceedings than between jury and non-jury proceedings. It is injury proceedings rather than civil proceedings, as such, that there may be a need for exclusion for undue prejudice. If the purpose is to avoid prejudicing the decision-maker, in a way that may not be corrected to arrive at a proper decision, this is arguably of greater concern in a jury trial (whether civil or criminal) than in the sometimes controversial question whether proceedings are criminal or civil in nature: see Attorney General v
Deeks, Court of Appeal , unreported, 15 July 1994; 
The general approach of the law should be to adopt the same rule in civil and criminal trials. It should be to reduce the disparities in the rules applicable to each: see eg, Registrar, Court of
Appeal versus Willessee [(1985) 3
NSWLR 650] at 65. If there is a chance of prejudice which will outweigh the probative value of evidence, that prejudice is just as offensive in the context of a civil trial as it is in the context of a criminal trial. Its outcome may not be the loss of liberty. But neither is the outcome of every criminal trial so devastating. At least in some civil trials the consequences for the parties may be quite as great as are the consequences for the accused in at least some criminal proceedings. The present case provides a good illustration.
The consequence for Mr Polycarpou of the suggested prejudice against him, instilled in the mind of a jury by questions which are highly prejudicial, could work a far greater wrong, in social terms, than prejudice in a criminal trial where the outcome may be a minor fine or some other non-custodial sentence;
The question asked by Pincus J in Pearce versus Button remains to be answered.
If evidence is illegally obtained and is relevant (so that it cannot be excluded on the footing of relevance) is it really to be thought that courts will countenance such evidence in civil trials, whatever the outrageous conduct of those who gathered it? There must be public policy grounds for excluding such evidence and particularly before a jury. Yet if the judge in a civil trial has no residual discretion but must admit probative evidence, unless some other basis for exclusion can be found, the evidence will be received.
At least it will be received unless the judge can be persuaded to stretch the concept of relevance and exclude the evidence as irrelevant when really meaning that its relevance is slight and its prejudice great; 
One of the difficulties in the discussion of the exclusionary rule is the controversy about its conceptual basis: see Cross on Evidence (4th Aust ed) , (par 27240); see also A
E Acorn, "Similar Fact Evidence and the principle of Inductive Reasoning" (1991) 11 Oxf J Leg Studies 63,67f. Much of the relevant
American jurisprudence is based upon the notion that the rule exists to provide disincentives to public officials against breaches of the law. This reason may also be relevant in our society. It may explain some cases of exclusion. But it is scarcely a comprehensive rationale. Other cases explain the principle in terms of notions of due process and the desirability of ensuring that court decisions are arrived at in a manifestly just way. Still others lay emphasis upon the need to uphold the legitimacy of judicial decision-making, to maintain the manifest integrity of those involved in it and to avoid damaging that legitimacy and integrity by the introduction of matter which is tainted by illegality, undue prejudice to one party or the like. Some, at least, of the basic reasons for the exclusionary rule apply only, or mainly, in criminal proceedings. But some would appear to inhere in the very nature of curial decision-making and to be equally applicable to civil proceedings. 
On the other hand, criminal trials involve, typically, the prosecution of an accused by the organ of State power. The exclusionary rule in such trials serves many social purposes. It may be grounded ultimately in perceptions of the nature of public power in a society such as ours and the need to keep power in check. Such considerations do not apply, at least in the same way, in civil litigation; 
The tendency in recent times has been to increase trial before single judicial officers and to reduce jury trial. The manifestations of that tendency may be seen in the passage of legislation in this
State in recent years reducing the residual right to summon a jury in civil trials. This presents the irony noted by Mr Forbes in his article (above). There is, as he observed, an air of unreality in the judge's refusing to receive evidence which is to some extent flawed lest it prejudice the very same judge's decision-making. Unlike the jury, the judge will not be spared knowledge of the evidence;
There is also the tendency, which probably derives from, or has accompanied the move from jury to judge trial, to admit probative evidence, to reduce the ambit of the exclusionary rules and to bend the rigidities of evidence law developed for the time of jury trials. In this context, the addition of a further discretion to exclude probative evidence may seem to be ill-timed; and 
Finally, there is the consideration that evidence law in Australia is currently under active legislative consideration. This consideration has followed numerous reports of law reform bodies, Federal and State. Those reports were designed to assist in the clarification and simplification of evidence law in this country. That law is part of the procedural law which judges are well equipped to develop and adapt: see Halabi versus Westpac Banking
Corporation [(1989) 17 NSWLR 26] at 39. For the time being, the contemporary reform of evidence law by Parliament may make it inappropriate, as a matter of principle, for significant new common law rules to be adopted at this time.
 
The questions were irrelevant but did not, alone, occasion a miscarriage
The result of the foregoing consideration of matters of authority, principle and policy are that I would uphold the submission for Australian
Wire. To that extent I would uphold the ruling of Smart J. So long as the questions addressed to Mr Polycarpou's medical witnesses were relevant to the trial of the issues in contest between them, Smart J was right to permit the questions to be asked.
To the extent that his Honour refused an application to reject the evidence on some broad discretion said to have been enjoyed by him as a judge to exclude from the jury's consideration highly prejudicial material, I see no error. I am not convinced that such a broad discretion exists, by the common law, in civil trials whether conducted before a jury or a judge sitting alone.
This is not to say that, in appropriate cases, there may not be other bases for excluding evidence from a civil trial which would otherwise be admitted: eg upon the ground of public policy, for example, that such evidence was secured by oppression or otherwise unfairly or because the opponent did not have fair notice of it so as to be able to meet it: see Ligertwood , 48 (par 2.16) and cases cited. It is unnecessary to consider such grounds of exclusion in this case for such considerations were not suggested to be relevant.
The sole basis for exclusion here was the alleged disproportionate prejudice.
This conclusion leaves, however, the issue whether the questioning was relevant to the cause between Mr Polycarpou and Australian Wire. In my opinion, and with every respect to Smart
J, it was not. Certainly, counsel was entitled to crossexamine the appellant's witnesses as to their qualifications and expertise.
But they were all legally qualified medical practitioners with established expertise in psychiatry. Their former or even current attachment to the theories of Dr Bailey and their former participation in deep sleep therapy had nothing whatsoever to do with the trial of Mr Polycarpou's case.
He had never undergone that therapy. Clearly enough, this forensic red herring was introduced for forensic purposes to prejudice the evaluation by the jury of the medical evidence called for Mr Polycarpou. The questioning ought to have been excluded on the basis of its irrelevance to the actual issues for trial. Instead, the questioning was permitted over the objection of counsel for Mr Polycarpou. That allowed into evidence a series of questions of the kind which I have described.
The question should have been rejected. The primary objection should have been upheld. The questioning was irrelevant.
That leaves the final question as to whether the line of questioning which was in fact permitted occasioned a relevant miscarriage of the trial. It is here that counsel for Australian Wire returned to his best argument. The trial was long and complex. The issue of deep-sleep therapy, although doubtless vivid, was not referred to by Smart J in his summing up. If it had affected the jury's verdict, it seems more likely that it would have affected the damages which the jury returned rather than their assessment of the issue of contributory negligence. Thus, I would conclude on this matter that an error occurred. But it is not one which, standing alone, occasioned such a miscarriage of justice as would authorise this Court, without more, to order a retrial. No evidence to ground the jury's finding of contributory negligence
This conclusion therefore takes me back to Mr Polycarpou's alternative submission that there was no evidence of any contributory negligence and that the jury's finding of 40% contributory negligence was perverse in the relevant sense.
Contributory negligence is a plaintiff's failure to meet the standard of care to which the plaitiff is required to conform for his or her own protection and which is a legally contributing cause, together with the defendant's default, in bringing about the injury: Fleming, J G, The Law of
Torts, Law Book Co, 8th ed, (1992), at 268.
At the trial Mr Polycarpou alleged there had been an unsafe system at work at Australian Wire as there had not been a safety hook to prevent the chain block from dislodging from the trolley. The fact that Mr Polycarpou had not looked up at the jib was a result of his concentration of the task at hand.
In Bus versus Sydney County Council <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 78], the High Court discussed the relevance of momentary inadvertence on the part of a person to whom a duty of care is owed. Mason CJ,
Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ (at 90) said: "Since the decision in Dell'Oro the law has progressed by placing an increased emphasis upon the relevance of the possibility of negligence or inadvertence on the part of the person to whom a duty of care is owed That possibility is now recognized as being relevant to the standard of care owed by an employer to an employee and as well generally in situations in which a duty of care exists."
However, Australian Wire submitted that the proved inattention on the part of Mr Polycarpou was some evidence of contributory negligence as it would only have taken a momentary glance up on his part to avert the accident. The assessment of his argument was for the jury. It is difficult to see how the jury could have come to the conclusion that Mr Polycarpou was guilty of contributory negligence. To find contributory negligence, it would have been necessary for Mr Polycarpou's actions or omissions to have contributed to the injuries suffered by him.
In McLean versus Tedman <case>; [(1984) 155 CLR 306] at 315, Mason, Wilson, Brennan and
Dawson JJ discussed contributory negligence in a case of an unsafe system of work. Their Honours said: "The issue of contributory negligence has now to be approached on the footing that Brambles failed to discharge its obligation to provide a safe system, that is, to take appropriate precautions against the risk of injury arising from the motorist's negligence and the employee's failure to observe an oncoming vehicle as he carried out his allotted task. The question is whether that failure should be characterized as mere inattention or inadvertence or whether it amounts to negligence, there being a well recognized distinction between the two. It is accepted that in considering whether there was contributory negligence by an employee in a case in which the employer has failed to provide a safe system of work, the circumstances and conditions in which he had to so his work must be taken into account. And the issue of contributory negligence is essentially a question of fact.

As Windeyer J observed in Sungravure ((1964) <case>; [110 CLR 24] at p37), when an employee in a factory sustains injury, the jury in considering contributory negligence may have regard to 'inattention bred of familiarity and repetition, the urgency of the task, the man's preoccupation with the matter in hand, and other prevailing conditions'. It is then for the tribunal of fact to determine whether any of these things caused some temporary inadvertence, some inattention or some taking of a risk, 'excusable in the circumstances because not incompatible with the conduct of a prudent and reasonable man'."
This passage supports the point that Mr Polycarpou's momentary inadvertence while concentrating on the task at hand would not amount to contributory negligence in law. To find otherwise would be perverse.
It cannot be said that Mr Polycarpou failed to take reasonable precautions for his own safety. Although, the accident could indeed possibly have been avoided if Mr
Polycarpou had looked up, it was accepted by both parties that Mr Polycarpou's failure to do was attributable to his concentration on the job he was engaged in. That concentration was in discharge of his duties as an employee of
Australian Wire. It is unreasonable to conclude that Mr Polycarpou was guilty of contributory negligence because his injuries might have been avoided if he had looked up. Moreover, Mr Polycarpou was entitled, in the performance of his duties, to assume that
Australian Wire had fulfilled its statutory duty of providing a safe system of work. In Glass, McHugh and Douglas, The Liability of Employers, Law Book Co, 2nd ed (1979) at 220, it was said that: "The plaintiff was entitled to act on the basis that the defendant and its servants had done their duty. A workman, therefore, is entitled to assume that fellow workmen are acting prudently and that his employer has performed its common law and statutory obligations. Thus in Grant v. Sun Shipping Co ((1948) AC 549; [(1948) 2 All ER 238)] the plaintiff went into an unlighted part of a ship and fell through an uncovered hatchway. The House of Lords held as a fact that there was no negligence on his part as he was justified in assuming that the statutory duty to cover hatchways had been performed. Lord du Parcq said: 
Almost every workman constantly, and justifilably, takes risks in the sense that he relies on others to do their duty, and trusts that they have done it."
It is impossible to imagine what Mr Polycarpou could have done in the circumstances of the case to avoid the accident found by the jury's verdict to have occurred as a result of
Australian Wire's negligence. Glass et al, at , set out the relevant circumstances in judging whether a plaintiff is guilty of contributory negligence: "Among the circumstances in light of which the quality of the plaintiff's conduct is to be judged is included the industrial background to his activity.

What is all-important is to adapt the actual conditions negligence to the facts, and to give due regard to the actual conditions under which men work in a factory or mine, to the long hours and the fatigue, to the slackening of attention which naturally comes from a constant repetition of the same operation, to the noise and confusion in which the man works, to his pre-occupation in what he is actually doing at the cost perhaps of some inattention to his own safety. (Caswell versus Powell
Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd [(1940) AC 152] per Lord Wright at pp 177-8, also per Lord Atkin, at p 166)
It is thus important that Mr Polycarpou's conduct should not be viewed in isolation. Mr Polycarpou's only real fault was that he was standing under the chain block when it fell on him. In his evidence, Mr de Looper, the co-worker, gave the following account of the accident from the time Mr Polycarpou got into the lead bath: "Q. What signal did he give you when he was standing in the bath?
A. Come forwards.
Q. Was that the signal that you have indicated before, with your arm extended, curling your fingers back towards yourself?
A. Correct.
Q. Did he say anything at that stage?
A. No sir.
Q. Please tell us what happened from that point on. Before I do that where were your eyes at the time that that signal was given?
A. My eyes never leave Frixo's hands - that's my task, that's my job - I only look at Frixo's hands.
Q. Did you continue to look at Frixo's hands?
A. I did
Q. What happened next?
A.
After Frixos was in the bath again he gave me the indication of going up and down, the movement coming towards him, which I did.
Q. What happened next? What did you see happen next?
A. The chain block came down and hit Frixos on the forehead." 
It was therefore perfectly clear that Mr Polycarpou and Mr de Looper were both busy concentrating upon the job at hand. Neither looked up. In cross-examination, Mr de Looper said: "Q. Was Frixos standing in the bath with the chain block in front of him? A. Correct.
Q. You saw him, did you not, concentrating, looking down at the hook, the bottom hook?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. And at the approaching lifting beam?
A. Correct.
Q. Is that right?
A. Correct.
Q. And both of you had your eyes down?
A. Yes, sir.
Q. Neither of you looked up?
A. No, sir.
Q. So that the jib striking the chain block as it did came as a surprise to you, is that right?
A. Correct.
In my view, no jury, properly instructed, could make a finding a
contributory negligence upon the foregoing evidence. There was no evidence to support the jury's finding in that regard. The fundamental inquiry in deciding if Mr Polycarpou was guilty of contributory negligence required consideration of the reasonableness of his failure to look up at the chain block while he was concentrating on his job of repairing the lead bath. The issue was whether his failure to do so meant that he had failed to take reasonable care for his own safety. The evidence does not show that Mr Polycarpou. failed to take reasonable care of his own safety especially in view of the fact that his failure to look up is explained by his concentration on his employment task: cf Kelly versus Valnet Pty Ltd (Court of Appeal (Queensland) 20 September 1994 unreported). Professor Fleming (ibid., at 284) puts it in terms that I accept: "Ordinarily, it is true, we may proceed on the assumption that other people will act with care and in accordance with accepted canons of propriety, but prudence demands as much from a potential plaintiff as from a defendant that he take guard as soon as he has reason to suspect that assumption to be ill-founded Moreover, it is unreasonable - where there is no necessity for it - to cut things so fine as to allow no margin of safety for the mistakes or thoughtlessness of others. ... a person's conduct in the face of sudden emergency cannot be judged from the standpoint of what would have been reasonable in the light of hind-knowledge and in a calmer atmosphere conducive to a nicer evaluation of all alternatives. A certain latitude is allowed when 'in the agony of the moment' he seeks to extricate himself from an emergency not created by his own antecedent negligence. The degree of judgment and presence of mind expected of the plaintiff is what would have been reasonable in such a situation, and he will not be adjudged guilty of negligence merely because, as it turns out, he unwittingly took the wrong course." 
There was no warning by Australian Wire that the chain block was about to fall. Mr Polycarpou had no realistic way of knowing that, if he had looked up, the accident could have been avoided. As stated in Glass et al at 227, "the evidence of contributory negligence is not sufficient to the point of discharging the onus as a matter of law unless the plaintiff concedes without qualification or ambiguity that he acted in a particular way, (b) that there was no reasonable explanation of his conduct consistent with the exercise of due care, (c) that it would be unreasonable to conclude that the conduct did not materially contribute to the injury."
I therefore conclude that the jury's finding of contributory negligence, still more its assessment of 40%, was perverse in the relevant sense. These were conclusions which no reasonable jury properly performing their task would have come to.
 
Other grounds of appeal and cross-appeal
Certain other grounds of appeal were advanced for Mr Polycarpou. However, none of them has merit and they should all be dismissed. In view of my conclusion upon the principal points argued I will deal with the remaining grounds of the appeal briefly. The cross appeal may also be dealt with economically.
Smart J withdrew from the jury the statutory counts upon which Mr
Polycarpou relied. In the first appeal, this Court held that Cantor J had erred in leaving the issue of whether a chain block was a "load" within the meaning of
Construction Safety Regulations 1950, reg 127(70). Mr Polycarpou, however submitted that Smart J should have left the claim based on reg 141 (1) of the Regulations to the jury. Regulation 141(1) provides that: "All plant and gear and every part thereof shall be of sound material, good construction, adequate strength, free from patent defects and be suitable and safe for the purpose for which it is intended."
Smart J found for the purposes of the Regulation that the top hook which attached the chain block to the trolley was not a "gear" within the terms of the Regulation. Mr Polycarpou submitted that his Honour erred in this finding.
The appellant also submitted that the issue of whether the top hook or safety hook was "suitable ... for its purpose" should have been left to the jury. In my view, these submissions are clearly without substance. The regulation has no application.
Mr
Polycarpou also submitted that his Honour should have left to the jury the claim based on reg 73 of the Regulations made pursuant to the Construction
Act 1912 as the job that Mr Polycarpou and Mr de Looper were engaged in when the accident occurred amounted to "building work" within the terms of the
Regulation. Regulation 73 provides: "73. Any person who directly or by his servants or agents carries out any building work shall take all measures that appear necessary or advisable to minimise accident risk and to prevent injury to the health of persons engaged in such building work and for this purpose, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, he shall subject to Regulation 74, - provide head protective helmets of an approved type, for the use of persons working in places over which it is impracticable to fix overhead protection;" 
This ground of appeal likewise has no substance. The regulation also has no application to the facts.
Mr Polycarpou challenged Smart J's refusal to grant a view. However, the appellant has not shown that his Honour erred in the exercise of his discretion to refuse the conduct of a view or that it was significant to the outcome of the case. I would certainly not have disturbed that ruling.
Mr Polycarpou also submitted that the jury may have been confused by His
Honour's direction that: "You would not reduce them. I do that." because this direction was made before lunch in the course of a very long summing up. This submission is also without substance. The jury were expressly told to come back and ask his Honour if there was any confusion or doubt. They did not do so.
Finally, Mr Polycarpou challenged the way in which his Honour divided the figure which the jury arrived into its components for the purpose of calculating interest and making orders on costs. Australian Wire cross-appealed on this point as well. The appellant and cross-appellant both argued for different calculations. However, neither party has shown that his
Honour erred in his calculations upon the stated premises.
Australian Wire appealed as to costs. I accept the cross-respondent's (Mr
Polycarpou's) submission on this point that his
Honour properly analysed the background of the case, addressed all relevant issues, identified the special features of the case and applied relevant authority. Had the judgment not been disturbed I would not have altered the costs order made by Smart J.
 
Orders
The jury's only real error, in my view, occasioning an injustice, was its finding that the momentary inadvertence on the part of a worker in Mr
Polycarpou's position amounted to contributory negligence. Consistent with the oft repeated statements of principle in that regard, it was nothing of the sort. There was no evidence at all of contributory negligence in this case.
The only lawful answer to question 2 if the jury had properly understood their function and the law, was "No". Question 3 would not then have arisen.
A question is posed for this Court as to whether the demonstrated error in the answers to the questions relevant to contributory negligence infect the answers to questions 1 and 4 so as to require a general retrial for the third time. Retrials are a great misfortune both to the litigants involved and for the community which must bear the public costs. In the circumstances of this case, I regard a third trial as unnecessary, indeed unthinkable. The jury's answers to questions 1 and 4 are perfectly natural and fully supported by the evidence before them. They can stand and sustain a judgment of the Court based upon them when the erroneous answers are excised.
Accordingly, to cure the only miscarriage of justice which has been established in this case, I believe that this Court should accept the jury's answers upon questions 1 and 4 specially put to them by the trial judge. The
Court should disregard the answers to questions 2 and 3 as being flawed with legal error. Question 2 should have been withdrawn from the jury in the circumstances of this case. Question 3 does not then arise.
I would propose the following orders: 
Appeal allowed; 
Set aside the judgment entered by Smart J following the verdict of the jury; 
In lieu thereof, direct that judgment be entered in favour of the appellant in the sum of $321,606, such judgment to take effect from 29 October ; 
Order that the defendant pay interest upon the judgment in accordance with the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/), such interest to be as agreed and in default of agreement as to be determined by this Court by further order; 
Cross appeal dismissed with costs; 
Order the respondent to pay the appellant's costs of the appeal but to have, if otherwise so qualified, a certificate under the [Suitors' Fund Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sfa1951176/); 
Costs order at trial confirmed; 
Liberty to apply for further orders provided such liberty is exercised within 28 days of the publication of the judgment herein.
JUDGE2
MEAGHER JA I agree with Kirby P.
JUDGE3
HANDLEY JA In this matter I have had the benefit of reading the reasons for judgment of Kirby P in draft form. I agree with his conclusion that there was no evidence of contributory negligence by this plaintiff and that the jury's apportionment of 40% responsibility by the plaintiff should be set aside.
Judgment should be entered for the plaintiff for the damages assessed by the jury without any reduction for contributory negligence.
I also agree generally with his Honour's reasons for concluding that a judge presiding at a civil trial with or without a jury has no general discretion to reject relevant and otherwise admissible evidence.
The evidence objected to at the trial included evidence in the cross-examination of Dr Herron a psychiatrist and Dr Davies a psychologist, both former associates of the late Dr
Harry Bailey, who were called for the plaintiff. The oral evidence of Dr Bailey at the first trial in 1984 was read at the second trial pursuant to leave granted by this Court on 20 December in its order directing a new trial of the action. Objection was also taken to part of the cross-examination of Dr Greenberg, an eminent psychiatrist also called for the plaintiff who had had no professional association with the late Dr Harry Bailey.
Drs Herron and Davies were cross-examined about their professional association with the late Dr Bailey and their acceptance and past use of deep sleep therapy as a method of treatment for patients suffering from psychiatric illness. Dr Greenberg was cross-examined to establish that at the time Dr
Bailey and the other doctors accepted and used deep sleep therapy it was not an acceptable or appropriate method of treatment. He said that the vast majority of psychiatrists had for the past thirty years deprecated this method of treatment because it was both ineffective and dangerous.
Dr Roberts, another eminent psychiatrist, called for the defendant, gave evidence in chief, which was also objected to, to the same effect.
The evidence in chief of Dr Roberts, and the evidence in cross- examination of Dr Greenberg only became relevant because of the earlier cross-examination of Drs Herron and Davies. Mr Polycarpou was not given deep sleep therapy and it was not suggested that he should have had this treatment.
The President and Meagher JA have concluded that these questions asked in cross-examination of Drs Herron and Davies were not relevant to any issue in the proceedings and being objected to should have been rejected. On this basis the relevant evidence of Dr Greenberg in crossexamination and of Dr Roberts in chief which was also objected to should also have been rejected.
I regret that I have reached a different conclusion. The plaintiff's damages were in issue at the trial and one of the questions the jury had to decide was the nature and extent of the plaintiff's head injuries and their psychiatric consequences. As the trial Judge said in his summing-up:- "The defendant contends that there was no organic brain damage and no true psychiatric disability and that the plaintiff has refused to work and refuses to work unless he is given work which is to his liking and which he feels is commensurate with his position. The defendant contends that it tried to rehabilitate the plaintiff for over two years, all to no avail, and that it had done more than could reasonably be expected of it. The defendant contends that the plaintiff could have worked and could work if he wished. The plaintiff contends that he suffers from frontal lobe damage (and) a true psychiatric condition including depression and anxiety. There is a major conflict in the evidence about these matters and about the plaintiff's fitness for work".
The evidence for the plaintiff on this question included expert evidence from Drs Bailey, Herron and Davies who had treated the plaintiff in 1979 and later years for what were alleged to be the psychiatric consequences of his head injuries. At the time he gave his evidence at the first trial, which was read at the second trial, the late Dr Bailey professed to be an competent psychiatrist, an expert in a relevant branch of medicine. When Drs
Herron and
Davies gave evidence at the second trial both professed to be experts in their respective fields. On these issues the defendant called Dr Roberts, read the evidence of the late Dr Boris Selecki, a neurosurgeon who had given evidence for the defendant at the first trial, and called Dr Garrick, a neurologist.
In my opinion a witness who is undoubtedly competent to and has given expert evidence on some issue may, in principle, be cross-examined to test the true nature and quality of his expertise. The competency and credit of such a witness are relevant matters for the tribunal of fact in determining the weight of his or her evidence. See generally Cross on Evidence 4th Aust ed, at 783 and Phipson on Evidence 13th ed, 1982 pp 572-573. Although these passages are expressed in general terms and do not deal directly with the present problem they lend general support to the view expressed above.
Further support for this view is to be found in Wigmore (Chadbourn
Revision 1970) Vol 3A par 939 and par 999 where the authors state:- "For testimony upon some subjects an experiential capacity is necessary ... and must be shown 'prima facie' before the witness may speak. By way of impeachment, then, the lack of this capacity, in a greater or less degree, is relevant.
How it is to be evidenced by specific instances involves another rule ...
It is enough here to note that the general quality of such incapacity may be offered to discredit ... It may be assumed in general that the discrediting quality offered must be in kind the same as that required in advance to show competency; and that incapacity at a former time may be used as the basis of the argument in the same way that character at a former time may be used." 
And at par 991:- "Wherever a special qualification is required for testimony to a certain fact, the lack of that qualification is ascertainable logically by particular instances of the witness' failure to possess or to exercise it. On crossexamination there is no doubt these particular instances may be brought out by questions to the witness himself..."
In my opinion these general principles are applicable in the present case and, as the trial Judge ruled after argument, counsel for the defendant was entitled to cross-examine the witnesses and to lead evidence from Dr Roberts to show that Drs Bailey, Herron and Davies accepted and used deep sleep therapy, a method of treatment which had long been rejected and abandoned by the vast majority of psychiatrists. The jury had to determine, as best they could, the weight they would give to the evidence of these witnesses and to the evidence of other experts who had expressed a contrary view on the issues raised at the trial. In my opinion the jury could properly take into consideration the fact that one group still accepted and used unorthodox methods of treatment rejected by the great majority of practitioners in their specialty.
In my opinion therefore the relevant evidence was admissible and I would reject this part of the appellants case. Nevertheless as previously indicated
I agree that the appeal should be allowed and that this Court should make the orders proposed by Kirby P.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/158.html  
