

Chief Commissioner of Stamp Duties versus Wf Securities Pty Limited Nos. Ca /91, Ald 30016/91 Stamp Duty [1995] NSWSC 140 (8 November 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF APPEAL
MAHONEY(1), PRIESTLEY(2) AND POWELL(3) JJA
HRNG
SYDNEY, 12 May 1995 #DATE 12:5:1995 #ADD 8:11:1995 
Counsel for the Appellant:   H.R. Sorensen 
Solicitors for the Appellant:  State Crown
Solicitor 
Counsel for the Respondent:   A. Slater QC 
Solicitors for the Respondent:  Andrew Thorp
ORDER
Orders made
JUDGE1
MAHONEY JA The facts are detailed in the judgment of Powell JA which I have had the advantage of reading. As his Honour has indicated, the issue in this appeal is whether the Memorandum of Transfer of the land in question from the company ("the Trustee") is liable to duty ad valorem or in another way.
Prima facie a memorandum of transfer of land is subject to ad valorem duty: it is a "conveyance" within [ss 65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s65.html) and [66](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s66.html) of the [Stamp Duties Act 1920](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/) as amended within the paragraph "Conveyance" in the Second Schedule to that Act.
However, Smart J held that in this case the memorandum was not liable to ad valorem duty because of [s 73(1)(d).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) It is the correctness of that conclusion which is in issue.
The Commissioner advanced three main argument in support of the appeal: he submitted that the declaration of trust (as I shall describe it) is not a "conveyance" for the purposes of [s 73(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html); (2) he submitted that the transfer is not a document exercising "a power of appointment" within [s (1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html); and (3) he submitted that, if it is the exercise of a power of appointment, it is also a conveyance and that, by reason of [s 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html), it is to bear stamp duty both as the exercise of a power of appointment and as a conveyance.
The Commissioner's submissions related to and developed from these arguments.
 
IS THE DEED OF TRUST A "CONVEYANCE"?
The term "conveyance" according to its ordinary meaning involves, of course, that the instrument in question transfers or vests property. The definition of the term in [s 65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s65.html) is, by its terms, an inclusive rather than an exhaustive definition. However, Mr Sorensen, for the Commissioner, has stressed that the definition in terms refers to an incident by which "property is transferred to or vested in" another. Therefore, he submits, that is an essential part of the meaning of the term within [s 73(1)(d).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html)
Ordinarily a declaration of trust would operate to transfer all vested property in this sense: it would create in the beneficiaries there referred to the equitable interest to which it refers. In this case, the Trustee contends, the declaration of trust operated to transfer and vest the relevant interests in the property of the trust, viz $20, in the class of beneficiaries specified in the declaration. (I do not pause to consider the nature of the rights or interests created by discretionary trusts of this kind: nothing has been urged to turn upon such matters: see generally Hartigan Nominees Pty Ltd and Anor v
Rydge [(1992) 29 NSWLR 405] and the cases there referred to).
However, Mr Sorensen submits that that did not happen in this case. He submits, in effect, that the relevant equitable interests in the $20 were created before the declaration of trust was executed and therefore those interests were not transferred or vested by that document. His argument is generally to the following effect. What occurred is set forth in the recital to the trust deed: there is no other evidence of it. That recital reads: "WHEREAS the settlor is desirous of settling the sum of Twenty
Dollars ($20.00) in the manner hereinafter appearing and with that object has paid the said sum to the
Trustee before the execution of these presents to be held by the Trustee upon the trusts and to and for the ends and intents and purposes hereinafter declared as the trustee hereby admits and acknowledges".
The recital shows that the $20 was handed by the settlor to the Trustee before the declaration of trust was executed. By handing the $20 to the
Trustee, the property in it passed to the Trustee. However, the terms of the recital ("be held by the Trustee upon the trusts and to and for the ends and intents and purposes hereinafter declared ") indicate that it was the mutual intention of the settlor and the Trustee that the Trustee not own the $20 absolutely but only subject to the trusts which, though not yet executed in writing, were intended to be attached to the $20 from the inception of the transaction. In other words, the $20 was intended to be received by the
Trustee subject to those trusts and not otherwise.
The argument would no doubt suggest that though the law presumes that in a transaction things are done in the order which will make the transactions effective: cf Gartside versus Silkstone and Dodworth Coal and Iron Company [(1882) Ch D 762] at 767-768; that does not apply where the evidence establishes otherwise. It was, the argument suggests, only after these things occurred that the declaration of trust was executed. Accordingly, the interests in the $20 were not transferred or vested by the declaration of trust and it is not a conveyance within the Act.
I do not think that this view of the transaction should be accepted. The mere fact that, for example, property transferred by delivery is handed to a trustee in advance of but in anticipation of the exercise of a declaration of trust does not mean that the relevant interests in it passed to the trustee in any sense here relevant. Property may, of course, pass by and on delivery. But essentially property passes when it is intended by the parties that it pass.
See, in other contexts, Seath and Co versus Moore [(1886) 11 App Cas 350] at 463. In such a case as this, the intention was in my opinion that the title to the property and the relevant equitable interests should pass only later, on the execution of the declaration of trust.
However, Mr Sorensen submits that the terms of the recital indicate that the parties' intention was different. This, of course, depends upon the meaning to be given to the recital. I do not read the recital that way. The draftsman did not, I think, concern himself with the conceptual issues which now become significant.
No doubt, when the Trustee received the $20, it did not become entitled to it absolutely for its own purposes. But, in my opinion, it did not then acquire the ownership of the money and the property in it subject to the equitable interests in question. The money was, I think, given into the Trustee's possession to hold pending the execution of the declaration of trust upon the basis that by the declaration of trust, the relevant interests would be created. If the terms of the recital and of the operative part of the declaration of trust are to be followed precisely, the equitable interests were "hereby" created, that is, by the coming into effect of the declaration of trust.
In my opinion, therefore, the declaration of trust did transfer or vest the equitable interests in the $20 and to that extent constituted a conveyance for present purposes.
IS THE TRANSFER A "DEED OF APPOINTMENT" WITHIN [S 73(1)(d)?](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html)
Mr Sorensen submitted that what was done by the transfer was not, within the section, the exercise of a power of appointment but was a transfer pursuant to a power of advancement. For this reason, he submitted, the memorandum of transfer does not fall within [s 73(1)(d).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html)
The distinction between a power of appointment and a power of advancement and the precise boundaries between them is not clear.
Mr Slater QC, for the
Trustee, submitted that a power of appointment looks to the creation of an interest which did not previously exist, by the selection of a beneficiary from a class of possible beneficiaries. He submits that an advancement looks to the acceleration of the vesting or enjoyment of property to which the beneficiary is already entitled, whether absolutely or contingently. Reference was made to Re Gosset's Settlement <case>; [(1854) 19 Beav 529] at 533; In re
Abrahams' Will Trusts; Caplan and Anor versus Abrahams and Anor [(1969) 1 Ch 463] at ; Halsbury's Laws of England (4th ed) Vol 36, par 872. There is, I think, force in these submissions. However, it would I think be wrong to conclude that the terms "appoint" and "advance" have accepted definitions and that those definitions can be distinguished one from the other with precision. It cannot be claimed that, in the use of the terms in the decided cases and in the texts, the meanings of them have been kept distinct: see generally Vaizey,
The Law of Settlements of Property, pp 342-343; 1052 et seq.
 .
It is, I think, of assistance in considering these terms to see what was here done as involving two things (or, at least two stages or processes). It involved the vesting in interest in or appointment of the relevant interests to one of the class of possible beneficiaries; and it involved, in addition, the transfer to the selected beneficiary of the ownership of the property or the application of it for her benefit. The first of these is of the nature of an "appointment"; the second is in the nature of an "advancement". These two things may be done separately. An appointment may be made by a document but the property may be left with the trustee. Later, there may be, by a separate document, an advancement of it to the beneficiary or for her benefit, by transfer of it to her. In accordance with this analysis, the transfer here in question did both of these things. The fact of transfer of the land to the selected beneficiary indicates and effects two things, namely, that she has been selected as "the appointed" beneficiary; and that the property is vested in her as such. There is, I think, nothing unprecedented in this view of the transfer. Thus, in Chesterfield Brewery Company versus Commissioners of Inland
Revenue [(1899) 2 QB 7], a transfer of shares was held to effect both an appointment and an advancement in the sense to which I have referred. Cf generally
Eastern National Omnibus Company Ltd versus Commissioners of Inland
Revenue [(1939) 1 KB 161]
It is therefore necessary to consider the effect of this view of the memorandum of transfer upon the operation of [s 73(1)(d).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) As I have indicated, the effect produced in the end by the memorandum of transfer is that there has been both an appointment of the beneficiary and a transfer to her of the property in question. It is clear that the memorandum operates as a transfer to her of the relevant property. It is not as clear that the appointment is, in the ordinary sense, made by the transfer rather than assumed by the transfer to have been made. On either view, the appointment is, of course, assumed to be effective; but it is necessary to decide whether the appointment is, for stamp duty purposes, made by the transfer.
In my opinion, the appointment was made by the instrument so that if and insofar as duties are imposed upon an instrument which exercises a power of appointment, duty would be payable upon the transfer as such. It is, I think, not uncommon for the appointment to and the transfer to a selected beneficiary to be done, as in the present case, by a single document. Cf generally Hadgett v The Commissioners of Inland Revenue [(1877) 3 Ex D 46.] Were the trust deed to require, eg, the exercise of the power of appointment by deed, a deed which, in terms, transferred the relevant property to the selected beneficiary would, in my opinion, ordinarily be seen to satisfy the requirements of the document.
I see no reason why, in the present case, the memorandum of transfer should not be seen as such. The consideration for which it was given or, more accurately the basis of it, is described in it in the following terms: "pursuant to the power of appointment vested in the transferor pursuant to a certain settlement". In my opinion, therefore, there was an appointment within the terms of [s 73(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) and insofar as the document is liable to stamp duty as such, the fixed rate of duty applicable to such a document would be applicable.
But that leaves for consideration the question whether because the document also transfers to the selected beneficiary the title to the property appointed, it is liable separately to a charge of duty in that regard and (if it is) what that duty is.
 .
That leads to the consideration of the third argument advanced by Mr
Sorensen for the Commissioner, namely, the operation of the
Act to impose multiple duty upon the same instrument.
MULTIPLE DUTY UPON AN INSTRUMENT
There is in principle no reason why a single document may not be liable to separate charges of duty. The possibility of multiple charges have been accepted in the authorities: see Hill, Stamp Duties, New South Wales and the
Australian Capital Territory, Vol 1, par 17/1 and the cases there referred to.
[Section 17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) recognises this principle. However, the application of this and similar principles has required the making of a number of distinctions.
In some cases, a document may do one thing but what it does may, because of the terms of the relevant Act, fall within two categories of charge. Thus, read literally, a document which, being a declaration of trust conveys land might be subject to two separate charges to duty: as a conveyance and as a declaration of trust: cf the terms of the Second Schedule of the Act. In such a case ordinarily the document will be liable only to one charge of duty. It may then be open to the Revenue in such a case to choose which head of duty is to be applied: see generally Brown, Shipley and Co versus Commissioners of Inland
Revenue [(1895) 2 QB 598] at 95. However, where there are two heads of duty it will be necessary to consider whether, upon the proper construction of the Act, only one is to operate. Thus, the Act on its proper, construction may mean that, where a document falls within two heads of charge, only one head is to be applicable. Thus, where a document is both a conveyance and a transfer of shares, the Act may provide, as a matter of stipulation or construction, that duty is chargeable only as a transfer of shares: see, eg, the operation of the
Second
Schedule.
In other cases, a single document may do not one but several things.
Thus, it may operate as a transfer of property from A to B and a mortgage of it by B to A. There is, in principle, no reason why a single document may not be chargeable both as such a transfer and a charge. Whether it will be will depend upon the construction of the Act. See generally John Danks and Sons
Pty
Ltd versus Collector of Imposts <case>; [(1944) VLR 172] at 174-175.
Where a document has multiple effect in this way, different questions may arise. Thus, the document may produce two effects, eg, the effect of an appointment and of a transfer by way of advancement but may, in the relevant sense, merely assume the first and do only the second. In principle, duty will in such a case be payable only in respect of the second and not the first.
The document may, whilst being primarily of one category, eg, a contract to transfer property, operate to do ancillary things, eg, to grant a licence to occupy the property pending completion of the transfer. In such a case it may be necessary to determine whether the document is stampable only according to its primary effect or whether in addition one or more of its secondary or ancillary effects operates to attract separate and additional liability for duty. See Commissioner of Stamp Duties (New South Wales) versus Pendal Nominees
Pty
Ltd <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 1] at 10.
In my opinion, the memorandum of transfer here in question did two distinct things: it appointed property within [s 73(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html); and it transferred that property to the beneficiary who, because of that appointment had become entitled to it. As I have said, each of these things could have been done separately, by separate instruments, operative at different times. I see no reason why, if the instrument falls within heads of duty in respect of the exercise of the power of appointment and the transfer of the property to the appointee, it should not be liable to duty in respect of each of those heads of duty.
As the appointment of property, it would fall within [s 73(1)(d).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) Under that heading, only a fixed duty would be imposed. As a transfer, it would in my opinion fall within that portion of the Second
Schedule to the Act, under the heading "Conveyances of Any Property" par 4(b). Under that heading, it would also be liable only to a fixed rate of duty.
The appeal has been dealt with upon the basis that duty is payable under the Act as it was in 1991, ie, prior to the 1992 amendments. It is therefore not necessary to consider the effect of the amendment to [section 73(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) effected in 1992.
However, it has been submitted that insofar as duty is payable on the transfer as a conveyance in the manner to which I have referred, it is necessary to consider the provisions of [s 73(1)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) That subsection provides: "73.(1) (b) A conveyance not made for valuable consideration and made to a beneficiary under and in conformity with the trusts contained in a conveyance, declaration of trust or other instrument on which ad valorem stamp duty imposed by an Act in force at the time of its execution has been paid or which, by an Act so in force, was exempt from stamp duty, but only to the extent that the conveyance to the beneficiary is a conveyance of property that the Chief Commissioner is satisfied is wholly or substantially the same as: property that, at the time of the execution of the instrument containing the trusts, was held or to be held by the trustees upon those trusts and was property in respect of which that ad valorem duty was paid or that exemption applied; property representing the proceeds of re-investment of property referred to in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph; or property referred to in both subparagraph (i) and subparagraph of this paragraph."
Mr Sorensen suggested that, insofar as that subsection became relevant, advantage could be taken of it only if, in substance, the property transferred was part of the property originally the subject of the declaration of trust or had resulted, within the terms of the subsection, from the investment of the assets of the trust. It has been agreed that the land transferred may be assumed to have been acquired by the Trustee by purchase in the ordinary way: nothing appears to suggest the contrary. It was not suggested that the property was, eg, the subject of a separate gift to the Trustee to be held upon the original trusts. On this assumption, the property was purchased by the Trustee by use of the existing assets of the trust and, it may be, by means of loans advanced to him for the purpose. This would be part of the ordinary investment activities of a trust. I see no reason to doubt that a property the sale of which was so required would fall within the terms of that section should they be applicable.
For these reasons I am of opinion that the transfer is liable only to fixed duty as I have indicated.
The conclusion at which I have arrived is in substance one which favours the Trustee. It differs to an extent from that arrived at by the learned judge but in the circumstances the substance of the contest is to be decided in favour of the Trustee. I would therefore uphold the appeal to the extent that it is necessary to do so to allow charge upon the property of the two heads of duty to which I have referred.
However, I would order that the Commissioner pay the costs of the proceeding below and of this appeal.
JUDGE2
PRIESTLEY JA WF Securities
Pty Limited by a summons filed in the
Administrative Law Division, in which it was plaintiff and the Chief
Commissioner of Stamp
Duties (the Commissioner) was the defendant, sought a declaration that the stamp duty exigible on a document of transfer of land from it to Elizabeth Wadsworth executed on 13 November 1990 was $10. The
Commissioner contended that ad valorem stamp duty was payable.
The case was decided by Smart J, who made a declaration in the terms sought by the plaintiff. The Commissioner appealed.
The
Facts. The facts of the case, as found by Smart J, and about which there was no dispute in the appeal, were as follows.
The plaintiff was the trustee named in a Deed of Settlement bearing date January 1972. This deed recited that the settlor had paid $20 to the
Trustee upon the trusts and to and for the purposes declared in the trusts.
Clause 1 of the Deed set out the terms upon which the Trustee was to hold the trust fund. The parts of the clause relevant for this case said: "The Trustee shall hold the trust fund upon trust to ... apply the whole of the income of the trust fund to or between ... all or any one or more of the persons ... specified in the schedule hereto (... 'the specified class') in such manner as the Trustee shall... think fit. Provided that the Trustee may ... apply ...
any part... of the capital of the trust fund to ... anyone ...
of the specified class ..." 
The specified class was defined in a Schedule to the Deed as "The said Joseph Robert Wadsworth, any future spouse or widow of the said Joseph Robert Wadsworth his children or remoter issue or the spouses widowers or widows of such children or remoter issue."
Elizabeth Wadsworth was a daughter of Joseph Robert Wadsworth and thus one of the specified class. The land transferred to her by the [Real Property Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) transfer, the proper stamp duty on which is the issue in the case, was part of the capital of the trust fund.
On 8 November Mr Raphael was asked to prepare the transfer. In a letter of the same date to Mr P. Wadsworth he said he was forwarding the transfer and "would be pleased if you would resolve to and indeed affix the seal of the company to" the transfer and then return it to Mr Raphael.
Smart J expressed his findings as to what happened on 13 November 1990 as matters of probability: the probabilities were that Messrs Peter and Phillip
Wadsworth met on 13 November 1990 with Mr P.W. Blacket in attendance, the two brothers being the only directors of the plaintiff, that one of the brothers said that a transfer of the land to Elizabeth had been received from their solicitors and it had to be signed and sealed, that they agreed that the land should be transferred to their sister, that the transfer was signed and the common seal affixed; the form of the transfer was left to Mr Raphael.
The transfer provided that the land be transferred "pursuant to the power of appointment vested in the transferor pursuant to a certain settlement", this being a reference to the Deed of Settlement dated 25 January 1972.
On about 14 November 1990 the transfer was lodged with the Commissioner.
The argument. The plaintiff's argument before Smart J was based on [s (1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) of the [Stamp Duties Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/) (the Act), which, in November 1990, and until May 1992, was as follows: "73(1) The following instruments are not to be charged with ad valorem duty as conveyances, namely:- ...
An instrument of appointment in favour of persons specially named or described as the objects of a power of appointment contained in a conveyance on which ad valorem duty has been paid, ..."
The plaintiff contended that the transfer was within the meaning of [s (1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) an instrument of appointment in favour of a person specifically named or described as the object of a power of appointment contained in a conveyance, namely, the deed of January 1972 on which ad valorem duty had been paid, so that [s 73(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) applied, and the transfer was not liable to be charged with ad valorem duty as a conveyance.
The Commissioner argued that the Deed of Settlement was not a conveyance within the meaning of par (d) of [s 73(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html),(2) that the transfer was not an instrument of appointment within the meaning of par (d) and (3) that if the transfer was within par (d), then the transfer fell under two separate classifications for stamp duty purposes so that in addition to being liable to be stamped with fixed duty in respect of the appointment, the transfer was also liable to be stamped with ad valorem duty as a conveyance by force of [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) of the Act.
Smart J found that the 1972 deed was a conveyance within [s 73(1)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html), that the transfer was the exercise of a power of appointment, and that as it did not cover two distinct matters, did not fall within [s 17(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) He accordingly made the declaration asked for by the plaintiff, that is that the relevant stamp duty was $10 only.
On the appeal to this court the same three points were argued by the appellant Commissioner.
Was the deed of trust a conveyance?
For the reasons given by Mahoney JA,
I think this question must be answered yes.
Was the transfer the exercise of a power of appointment? Again, for the reasons given by Mahoney JA, I think the answer to this question is yes.
Did the transfer fall within [s 17?](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) For the reasons explained by Mahoney
JA, I think the transfer here did two distinct things; it appointed the land to Elizabeth Wadsworth, and additionally it transferred that land to her.
These were separate legal events, which could have been accomplished by separate documents. The transfer should therefore, in my opinion, "be separately and distinctly charged with duty in respect of each of such matters," in accordance with [s 17(1).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s17.html) As an instrument of appointment, the transfer is not to be charged with ad valorem duty; as an instrument of transfer the transfer is a conveyance falling within [s 65](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s65.html) and also either par or par 4(b) under the heading "Conveyances of any Property" in the Second
Schedule of the Act. If it is within par (2) it is chargeable with ad valorem duty, if within par 4(b), it is liable to a fixed rate of duty.
Paragraph 4(b) is in substantially the same terms as [s 73(1)(b).](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) The difference is that [s 73(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sda1920157/s73.html) says that the instruments with which the subsection deals are not to be charged with ad valorem duty and the paragraph in the
Schedule says that the amount of duty payable is $10. The exemption from ad valorem duty in a conveyance within the two provisions depends, in the circumstances of the present case, upon the property conveyed being property representing the proceeds of reinvestment of the property that at the time of execution of the deed of settlement (25 January 1972) was held or to be held by the trustee upon the trusts established by the deed of settlement and in respect of which ad valorem duty was paid or an exemption applied.
Few facts are available to this court concerning the property the subject of the instrument presently in question. The court does know however that the amount settled on the trusts in the deed of settlement on 25 January 1972 was $20. Further, the court was told from the Bar table that the appeal could be approached on the footing that the land in question was later acquired by the trustee by purchase in the ordinary way. The court was also told that the amount of ad valorem duty in question was of the order of $65,000. It seems to me necessarily to follow from this bare information that the land could not have been acquired by the trustee with the proceeds of reinvestment of property (i) at the time of the execution of the trust instrument held or to be held by the trustee upon the trusts of that instrument and (ii) in respect of which ad valorem duty had been paid or any exemption applied. This would also seem to be the view of the leading text on the subject, Hill's Stamp
Duties (Neu, South Wales and Australian Capital Territory), vol 1 at 143 where the following appears: "It would seem, that where a trust is settled only with an initial settled sum, a conveyance from a trustee to a beneficiary of property will never be exempted from duty, since the property conveyed while possibly being the proceeds of investment of the settled sum would never be the proceeds of reinvestment of that sum."
It therefore seems to me that the transfer, not falling under par 4(b) falls under par (2).
Conclusion. Thus, on the materials before the court, the transfer is chargeable with ad valorem duty. I see nothing surprising in this result, when the facts are looked at in light of the basic objects of the Act in regard to conveyances of land. When the land was transferred to the plaintiff as trustee, it became an asset of the trust for all the purposes of the trust; the economic benefit from its being an asset of the trust was available, actually or potentially, for such of the members of the specified class as the trustee in its discretion decided; it was not in any sense, at law or in equity an asset of or destined for Elizabeth Wadsworth; the trustee in transferring it to her was transferring it from economic entity A to economic entity B in circumstances where the only legal or equitable interest or right
B had in A was to see that A properly administered its trust obligations.
In my opinion the appeal should be upheld, the judgment below set aside, the plaintiff's summons dismissed; the plaintiff should pay the defendant's costs of the proceedings before Smart
J and the appellant's costs of the appeal.
JUDGE3
POWELL JA Three questions fall to be decided on this appeal from a
Declaration made by Smart J, sitting in the Administrative Law Division, on the application of the present Respondent, they being:- whether the Declaration of Trust ("the Deed"), pursuant to which the Memorandum of Transfer ("the Transfer") to which
I will next refer was later executed, constituted a "conveyance" for the purposes of the Stamp Duties Act 1929 ("the Act")? whether the Transfer constituted "an instrument of appointment" for the purposes of s.73(1)(d) of the Act, as it was at the date of its being executed, and, thus, prima facie not liable to ad valorem duty? whether, even if the Transfer did constitute "an instrument of appointment", it also constituted "a conveyance", for the purposes of the Act, and, thus, by reason of the operation of the provisions of s.17 of the Act, was liable to ad valorem duty?
Smart J answered each of those questions in a manner favourable to the
Respondent, and accordingly declared that the Transfer was liable only to duty in the sum of $10.00.
The Deed was executed on 25th January 1972 between Violet Bibo (therein referred to as "the Settlor") of the one part and the
Respondent (therein referred to as "the Trustee") of the other part. Insofar as is relevant to the questions which are now to be dealt with, it provided as follows: - "...

WHEREAS the settlor is desirous of settling the sum of Twenty
Dollars ($20.00) in the manner hereinafter appearing and with that object has paid the said sum to the Trustee before the execution of these presents to be held by the Trustee upon the trusts and to and for the ends and intents and purposes hereinafter declared as the trustee hereby admits and acknowledges.

NOW THIS DEED WITNESSETH that in order to effectuate the
Settlor's said desire the Settlor hereby declares and directs that the Trustee shall and the Trustee hereby acknowledges and declares that it doth and will hold and stand possessed of the said sum of Twenty dollars and all other property and money for the time being subject to the trusts hereof (all of which are hereinafter collectively referred to as "the trust fund") upon and to and for such trusts intents and purposes and subject to and with such powers and provisos as are hereinafter expressed and declared concerning the same namely: TRUST - Until the expiration of twenty-one years after the death of the last survivor of the issue now living of His late
Majesty King George V the Trustee shall hold the trust fund upon trust to pay divide or apply the whole of the income of the trust fund to or between or for the maintenance support or benefit of all or any one or more of the persons for the time being living and included among the persons or classes of persons specified in the schedule hereto (all of whom are hereinafter collectively referred to as "the specified class") in such. proportions and in such manner as the Trustee shall in its uncontrolled discretion think fit. Provided always that the Trustee may at its own discretion at any time or times after the date hereof and before the expiration of twenty-one years after the death of such last survivor as aforesaid if in its uncontrolled discretion it think fit pay or apply the whole or any part or parts of the capital of the trust fund to or for the benefit of any one or more of the specified class or in writing appoint that the whole or any part or parts of such capital shall be held upon such trusts (either revocable or irrevocable) for the benefit of the specified class or any of them subject to such powers and discretions exercisable by any person or persons other than the Settlor and generally in such manner as the Trustee shall think fit but so that all interests so created shall vest within twenty-one years after the death of such last survivor as aforesaid.
CAPITAL AND INCOME - Subject to the trusts aforesaid the
Trustee shall hold the trust fund in trust as to both capital and income for the member or members of the specified class living at the expiration of twenty-one years after the death of such last survivor as aforesaid and if more than one in equal shares and if there shall be no such member then in trust for the persons other than the Settlor who would be entitled under the Law of New South Wales to the estate of the last survivor of the children of Joseph Robert Wadsworth.
 ...

THE SCHEDULE HEREINBEFORE REFERRED TO 
The said Joseph Robert Wadsworth, any future spouse or widow of the said Joseph
Robert Wadsworth, his children or remoter issue or the spouses widowers or widows of such children or remoter issue. "
The Deed appears thereafter to have been submitted to the Commissioner of
Stamp Duties for the assessment of stamp duty and, after the duty had been assessed and paid, was duly stamped. It is accepted by the Appellant that, if the Deed constituted "a conveyance" for the purposes of the Act, it is, for the purposes of s.70(1)(d) of the Act, a conveyance upon which ad valorem duty has been paid.
Thereafter, on 23rd December 1975, the Respondent, in reliance on the power in that behalf contained in the Deed, executed a Supplemental Deed enlarging the powers of a trustee under the Deed. However, as the terms of the
Supplemental Deed do not bear upon the questions which now fall for decision, it is unnecessary to set them out here.
At some time which is not revealed by the material before the Court, the
Respondent, in its capacity of Trustee under the Deed, acquired the land comprised in Certificate of Title Registered Volume 1339 Folio 247 ("the land"); neither the source of the funds utilised the purchase of land, nor the value of the land in November 1990 - the relevance of which date will shortly appear - is revealed by the material before the Court, but, given that it is a question as to the amount of stamp duty to which the Transfer is liable with which the Court is concerned to deal, it seems reasonable to assume that the value of the land in 1990 was significant.
Although the material which is before the
Court is in a less than satisfactory form, it would appear that, in November 1990, the Directors of the Respondent were Messrs. Peter
Wadsworth and Phillip Wadsworth, the former of whom was also the Secretary of the Respondent.
Although, yet again, the material before the Court is not in a particularly satisfactory form, it would seem that, at some time prior to 8th
November 1990, the Messrs.
Wadsworth, in their capacity as Directors of the
Respondent, had determined that the Respondent, in its capacity as Trustee under the Deed, should appoint the land to their sister, Elizabeth Anne
Wadsworth, who, as a daughter of Joseph Robert Wadsworth ("Ms.
Wadsworth"), was a member of "the specified class" of persons set out in the Schedule to the Deed.
Thereafter, on or about th November 1990, the Respondent's then solicitor, Mr. D.K.L. Raphael, drafted, and had engrossed, a form of
Memorandum of Transfer of the land from the Respondent to Ms. Wadsworth, the relevant part of which form of Memorandum of Transfer was: - "...(the abovenamed TRANSFEROR) hereby ... transfers an estate in fee simple in the land above described to the TRANSFEREE pursuant to the power of appointment vested in the transferor pursuant to a certain settlement ... " and, having done so, forwarded the same to one or other of the Messrs.
Wadsworth under cover of a letter dated 8th November 1990, which letter was in the following terms: "Re: BIBO TRUST and ELIZABETH WADSWORTH 
We forward herewith Transfer which we have prepared and would be pleased if you would resolved to and indeed affix the seal of the company to that same and then, after executed, return it to us .

There is currently an opinion lodged with the Chief Commissioner of Stamp Duties confirming the writer's original opinions.

We should like the Transfer back in our hands by Tuesday next."
It is said that a Meeting of the Directors was held on 13th November , at which Meeting there was in attendance, in addition to the Messrs.
Wadsworth, a Mr. P.W. Blacket.
It is also said that, at that Meeting, the
Messrs. Wadsworth, in their capacity as Directors of the Respondent, formally resolved that the Respondent appoint the land to Ms. Wadsworth and that the form of Memorandum of Transfer be executed under the Respondent's
Common Seal.
The "Minute" which is said to record the proceedings of the Meeting, is in the following form: - "MINUTES OF A
MEETING OF DIRECTORS OF W.F. SECURITIES PTY.
LIMITED HELD AT 31 ALEXANDER STREET, PADDINGTON ON THE 13TH
NOVEMBER, 1990 
PRESENT: Peter Wadsworth and Phillip Wadsworth (in attendance)
P.W. Blacket 
CHAIRMAN: By agreement, Phillip Wadsworth was Chairman.

TRANSFER OF LAND: 
RESOLVED that, as a consequence of careful deliberations by the directors, and after consulting the solicitor of the trust,
Mr. D.K.L. Raphael ('the solicitor') the company appoint the land, being the whole of the land in Certificate of Title Volume Folio 247, and which is an asset of Violet Bibo Settlement of which the company is the trustee, to Elizabeth Wadsworth and that accordingly the company execute a memorandum of transfer tabled by the Chairman and which had been prepared by the solicitor and that the seal of the company be and is hereby affixed thereto and that Phillip and Peter Wadsworth as director and secretary subscribe their signatures thereto testifying to the due affixation of the seal and that Mr. Blacket likewise subscribe his signature as a witness to the subscription of the signatures of the brothers
Wadsworth.

INTEREST: For the purposes of the Companies (New South Wales)
Code 1981 the directors declared that Elizabeth
Wadsworth was their sister but had been advised by the solicitor that their actions in determining to benefit her were not prejudicial to the company's interests and that, in fact such a decision was a proper one.

CLOSURE: There being no further business the Chairman declared the meeting closed. The Minutes having been reduced to writing in anticipation of the foregoing resolutions being passed were read and confirmed by the Chairman as and by way of confirmation that they constituted a true record of the resolutions passed and the matters otherwise adverted to herein."
However, as the form of Minute - which was prepared by Mr. Raphael - was not prepared until 18th March 1991 - shortly before the commencement of these proceedings - and as the signatures now appearing on it were not placed there until that day, at least to the extent of the matter appearing alongside the title "Closure", the "Minute" is misleading.
Be that as it may, it would appear that the form of Memorandum of
Transfer was in fact executed in the manner described in the "Minute" on l3th
November 1990, following which Mr. Phillip Wadsworth telephoned
Mr. Raphael - whose "diary note" confirms that this was so - to advise him of that fact. In an Affidavit sworn by him in support of the Summons by which these proceedings were commenced, Mr. Raphael deposed (inter alia): - "3. On the 13th November, 1990
I had a telephone discussion with Phillip Wadsworth, one of the directors of the Plaintiff, and he said to me 'David we have just executed the Transfer I am sending it to you today.' I then said to him 'I am formally asking you whether I am to hold the memorandum of transfer on behalf of your sister when I get it from you and is this
Transfer to be treated as a Transfer duly executed in her favour?' He said to me "Yes". I said to him 'I'll get it to the Commissioner either tomorrow or the next day. "
The Transfer is said to have been lodged at the Office of State Revenue on 14th November 1990; however - as will be apparent from what I have earlier recorded - it had not been stamped when these proceedings were commenced.
The form of "Minute" which I have set out above appears as if it may have been prepared, and executed, as the result of advice given by senior counsel - this was in fact done on 18th March 1991.
In the Summons which was filed on its behalf on 22nd March 1991 the
Respondent sought the following (inter alia) relief: - "1. A declaration that the stamp duty exigible on the transfer from W.F. Securities
Pty. Limited to Elizabeth Wadsworth of the whole of the land in Certificate of Title 1339 Folio 247 is the sum of $10.00 only."
As will be apparent from what I have earlier recorded, the Summons at first instance came before Smart J, the arguments at that time, so far as I am able to judge, being, in substance, the same as those which have been advanced on the hearing of this appeal.
In the course of his Judgment, which he delivered on 14th November 1991,
Smart J held: - that the Deed constituted "a conveyance" for the purposes of the Act; that the Transfer constituted "an instrument of appointment" for the purposes of s.73(1)(d) of the Act as it stood in November 1990; that the Transfer dealt with only one matter, and not with two distinct matters in consequence of which His Honour made the Declaration which had been prayed in the Summons, and ordered that the Appellant pay the Respondent's costs of the proceedings.
The submissions of Mr. H.R. Sorensen, who appeared for the Appellant on the hearing of the appeal, were, in substance as follows: the Deed did not constitute "a conveyance" for the purposes of the Act since it was not an instrument "whereby any property ...(was) transferred to, or vested in" any person; rather, the Deed constituted a "property vested"
Declaration of Trust under paragraph (2) of that title in the Second Schedule of the Act; the Transfer did not constitute "an instrument of appointment"; rather, it was an instrument whereby the Respondent exercised a power of advancement -
"appointment" and "advancement" are differing concepts; even if the Transfer constituted "an instrument" of appointment, it also operated as "a conveyance"; insofar as it prescribed or declared the destination of property pursuant to the power to appoint, it constituted "an instrument of appointment", and insofar as it was to pass the legal title to the land it operated as "a conveyance", and, thus, in addition to being liable to a fixed duty of $10.00 as "an instrument of appointment", was liable to ad valorem duty as "a conveyance".
The submissions of Mr. A.H. Slater Q.C., who appeared for the Respondent were, in substance, as follows: - even if, as the Appellant contended, the "property" in sum of $20.00 referred to in the Deed had passed to the Respondent prior to the execution of the Deed, the Deed still constituted "a conveyance" for the purposes of the
Act; this was so because the effect of the Deed was to vest equitable estates and interests in the beneficiaries - vested,, but defeasible, interests in "the default beneficiaries" - those who took in default of an appointment - and lesser rights in those in whose favour "the power of advancement" and "the power of appointment" might be exercised; the power "to pay or apply the whole or any part of the capital of the trust fund to or for the benefit of any one or more of the specified class" upon which the Appellant relied as the source of the Respondent's power to execute the Transfer is a power of appointment, and the Transfer, being the means by which the power was exercised was, thus, "an instrument of appointment" - no particular form of words was necessary in order that a power of appointment be duly exercised; the Transfer did not deal with "several distinct matters" as it had but one effect - in the exercise of the power of appointment, the land was transferred to Ms. Wadsworth.
Before I turn to deal with those submissions, it will be convenient, first, to set out the terms of the relevant provisions of the Act as they were in November 1990 - the terms of s.73(1)(d) of the Act were substantially amended as from l8th May 1992 by the Stamp Duties (Amendment) Act 1992. Those provisions were as follows: - "...
From and after the commencement of this Act there shall be charged for the use of His Majesty and to form part of the
Consolidated
Revenue Fund upon and in respect of the several instruments and matters described or mentioned in this Act and in the Second and Third Schedules hereto the several duties and at the several rates in the Act and in the said Schedules specified, which duties shall be in substitution for the duties theretofore chargeable under the enactments repealed by this Act, and shall be subject to the exemptions contained in this Act and the said Schedules and in any other Act for the time being in force.
 ...
 .(1) Except where express provision to the contrary is made by this or any other Act, an instrument containing or relating to several distinct matters is to be separately and distinctly charged with duty in respect of each of such matters, as if each matter were expressed in a separate instrument.
 ...
For the purposes of this Act the expression 'conveyance' includes any transfer, lease, assignment, exchange, appointment, settlement, surrender, release, foreclosure, disclaimer, declaration of trust, and every other instrument (except a will), and every decree or order of any court whereby any property in New South Wales is transferred to or vested in or accrues to any person, and also includes a covenant to pay money not made for a full consideration in money or money's worth, the money covenanted to be paid to be regarded as the property conveyed; and 'convey' has a meaning corresponding with that of 'conveyance'. 'Conveyance on sale' includes every instrument and every decree or order of any court whereby any property on the sale thereof is conveyed to a purchaser or other person on his behalf or by his direction.
 .(1)Subject to the provisions of this Act every conveyance is to be charged with ad valorem duty in respect of the unencumbered value of the property thereby conveyed.
(a) A conveyance on sale of any property is to be charged with ad valorem duty on the amount or value of the consideration of the sale.
If the amount or value of the consideration is less than the unencumbered value of the property the duty is to be charged on the unencumbered value of the property ascertained in accordance with section 68.
 ...
 .(1) The following instruments are not to be charged with ad valorem duty as conveyances, namely: - ...

An instrument of appointment in favour of persons specially named or described as the objects of a power of appointment contained in a conveyance on which ad valorem duty has been paid, or in a will in respect of property on which death duty, or duty under any Act, imposing duties on the estates of deceased persons has been paid.
 ...

In each of the aforesaid cases the instruments not chargeable with ad valorem duty are to be charged with the duty of $10.

Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any of such instruments from liability to any other duty to which it is or may be liable under this Act, or to extend to any instrument referred to in paragraph two of the matter appearing in the Second Schedule under the hearing 'Declaration of Trust.' (Schedule omitted)
It is in the context provided by these various provisions that counsel's submissions are to be assessed.
Did the Deed constitute a conveyance for the purposes of the Act?
What might be called Mr. Sorenson's broad opening submissions, namely: that stamp duty is a duty upon instruments, and not upon transactions; and that the character of an instrument, and the liability of that instrument to duty, fall to be determined at the time of the instrument first being executed; are not in dispute.
Basing himself upon those principles, Mr. Sorensen then submitted that the Deed did not constitute "a conveyance" since it did not transfer to, or vest the property in the settled fund in, anyone; as the recital in the Deed made clear - so the submission ran - the settled fund had already been delivered to, and the property in it had passed to, the Respondent prior to the execution of the Deed. This being so - so the submission ran - the Deed constituted, and fell to be assessed for duty as, a Declaration of
Trust falling within class (2) under that title in the Second Schedule to the Act.
Such an approach, so Mr. Slater submitted, was misconceived, as it concentrated solely upon the legal title to the settled fund, and did not have regard to the fact that, even if the legal title to the settled fund had vested in the Respondent prior to the execution of the Deed, the Deed, upon its being executed, operated to vest in the "default beneficiaries" equitable interests in the settled fund (he referred to Lutheran Church of Australia
South Australia, District Incorporated v. Farmers Cooperative Executors and
Trustees Limited ((1) <case>; [(1969-1970) 121 CLR 628], 653-4)) and lesser rights in members of "the specified class". This being so - so the submission ran - the
Deed constituted "a conveyance" for the purposes of the Act, and, particularly, for the purposes of s.73(1)(d) (he referred to Davidson v.
Chirnside ((2) <case>; [(1908) 7 CLR 324], 340-1, 345, 348).
Even if one is to treat the recital in the Deed as recording, first, that the settled fund was delivered to the Respondent prior to the execution of the
Deed, and, second,, that it was the intention of the Settlor and the
Respondent that the legal title to the settled fund should pass to the
Respondent at the time of delivery, it is, I believe, clear that it was not intended that the beneficial interest in the settled fund should pass to the
Respondent, but, rather, it was intended that the beneficial interest in the settled fund should remain in the Settlor until the intended trusts had been declared and that, thereafter, the beneficial interest in the settled fund should reside in those in whose favour the trusts then were, or thereafter were to be, declared.
 .
While those whose only status, at the time of the execution of the Deed, was that of one of "the specific class" did not, at that time, acquire an interest in possession in the settled fund (see, for example, Spellson v.
George ((3) [(1987) 11 NSWLR 300)]; and cases there cited) the "default beneficiaries" did, upon the execution of the Deed, acquire vested, but defeasible, interests in the settled fund. Since the effect of the Deed was, thus, to work a change in the destination of the beneficial interest in the settled fund, the Deed, in my view, was, and is, to be regarded as constituting "a conveyance" for the purposes of the Act, and, in particular, for the purposes of s.73(1)(d) of the
Act.
Did the Transfer constitute "an instrument of appointment"?
Mr.
Sorensen's submission was, not that a Memorandum of Transfer could not, in law, constitute "an instrument of appointment", but that, in the present case, the power upon which the Respondent relied when executing the
Transfer was, not a power of appointment, but a power of advancement. The terms, "power of appointment", and "power of advancement" - so the submission ran - are terms of art, and, while there may be an analogy between the two forms of power, the terms are not synonymous (he referred to In re Abraham's
Will
Trusts; Caplan v. Abrahams ((5) [(1969) 1 Ch 463)] - a power of appointment enables the appointor to control the ultimate destination of a settled fund, while a power of advancement enables the person in whom the power is vested to accelerate the enjoyment of an interest which the enjoyment of which is deferred or to which a person is only contingently entitled.
Such an approach, so Mr. Slater submitted, was erroneous, if only because it sought to impose upon the power limitations which were not justified by the language in which the power was couched the power was a power to appoint, whether or not it could also be described as a power of advancement. In any event - so the submission ran - powers of advancement are but a sub-class of powers of appointment (he referred to In re Pilkington's Will Trusts;
Pilkington v.
Pilkington ((70) [(1961) 1 Ch 466 (CA)] 641 per
Viscount Radcliffe); In re Abraham's Will Trusts ((8) (supra) at 484)).
I am by no means persuaded that the distinction which Mr. Sorensen has sought to draw between powers of appointment and powers of advancement is as clear-cut as he would have it (but see In Re Aldridge; Abram v. Aldridge [(1886) 55 LT 554], 556 per Cotton LJ), and still less am I persuaded that the distinction is to be achieved, in any particular case by, the use, or failure to use, any particular verbal formula. But let it be assumed that, as Mr.
Sorensen would have it, the essence of a power of appointment is that it enables the appointor to control the ultimate destination of a settled fund, it seems to me that this is exactly what the powers as to corpus conferred by
Cl.1 of the Deed on the Respondent do - insofar as the corpus, or some part of it, is in cash, the Respondent may pay it to, or apply it for the benefit of, any one or more of the specified class, and insofar as it is not in cash, the
Respondent may appoint any one or more of the specified class to take the beneficial title to it (see, for example, Re Morris' Settlement Trusts; Adams v. Napier ((9) [(1951) 2 AER 528).]
As I understand it, Mr. Sorensen's submissions that the Transfer did not constitute "an instrument of appointment" were limited to the fact that - as he would have had it - the power pursuant to which it was executed was not a power of appointment, and did not extend to a submission that a Memorandum of
Transfer could not, in law, constitute "an instrument of appointment".
However, lest my understanding of Mr. Sorensen's submissions be incorrect, I indicate that I am satisfied that, in the present case, the Transfer did constitute "an instrument of appointment" - "a donee of a power may execute it without referring to it, or taking the slightest notice of it, provided that the intention to execute it appears" (Cunningham v. Anstruther ((10) (1872) LR Sc. and Div. 223. 233 per Lord Chelmsford); see also Marler v. Tommas ((11) [(1873) LR 17 Eq. 8)]; In re Dobson's
Settlement; The Equity of Trustees Executors and Agency Co. Limited v.
Morrison ((14) <case>; [(1946) VLR 83).]
Was the Transfer liable to duty as both "an instrument of appointment" and as "a conveyance"?
If I have understood correctly what was Mr. Sorensen's submission in respect of this question, it was to the effect that if contrary to his earlier submission - the Transfer was properly to be regarded as "an instrument of appointment", the result was that the Transfer operated to do two distinct things - as an instrument of appointment" it operated to nominate who was to be the beneficial owner of the land, and, upon registration, it would transfer the legal title to the land to the person so nominated and thus, was "a conveyance (he referred to Hadgett v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue ((15) [(1877) LR 3 ExD 46)]
By contrast, Mr. Slater's submission was that the Transfer involved but one transaction, which transaction was attended by two legal effects - the power of appointment was executed by transferring the title in the land to Ms.
Wadsworth.
As has been often enough observed, "the distinction between one matter and several is not easy to draw". The approach to be adopted, in any particular case, to the task of determining whether an instrument deals with but one matter, or with several distinct matters, was discussed by Mason C.J.
in Commissioner of Stamp Duties (New South Wales) v. Pendal Nominees Pty.
Limited in the following terms ((17) (supra) at 10-12): - "The statutory concept of 'distinct matters' has traditionally been associated with the rule enunciated by
Martin B. in Limmer
Asphalte Paving Co. v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue [(1872)
LR 7 Ex 211] at p 217 in these terms: 'There is no better established rule as regards stamp duty than that all that is required is, that the instrument should be stamped for its leading and principal object, and that this stamp covers everything accessory to this object.' 
This rule has been described as a common law rule. It may be traced back as far as Pratt v. Thomas (1831) C and P 554 <case>; [(172 ER 822)] which was decided long before a provision in the form of s.17(1) first found its way into the United
Kingdom [Stamp Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa85/) of 1870 (33 and 34 Vict. c. 97): see s. 8 of that Act. But it should be noted that the Act of 1815 (55 Geo
III c. 184) contained a similar provision under the heading 'Conveyance'. it is likely that the common law rule was fashioned with this provision in mind. Be this as it may, the statutory provision seems to have been regarded as being consistent with the common law rule, no doubt on the footing that, in general, a provision that is merely accessory or merely ancillary to the principal transaction or obligation embodied in an instrument is not a 'distinct' matter which attracts additional duty: see Freeman v. Commissioners of
Inland Revenue (1871) LR 6 Ex 101; Hadgett v. Commissioners of Inland Revenue [(1877) 3 Ex D 46] However, what must be recognised is that s. 17(1) now provides the governing rule.
The old common law rule, being entirely subservient to the statutory provision, cannot generate a life of its own. The utility of the old rule is limited; it conveys the idea, which conforms to the statutory concept of distinctness, that a provision which is merely accessory or merely ancillary to a particular transaction or obligation embodied in an instrument is not a matter 'distinct' from that transaction or obligation.
But, in judging what is merely accessory or merely ancillary, the court must always have regard to the statutory concept itself. The court cannot expand or confine that concept by attributing a narrow or broad operation to what is accessory or ancillary.
 
Once this is acknowledged, as it must be, it is impermissible to characterise an instrument by reference to a single broad purpose or object so that all obligations created by the instrument may be treated as subsidiary or accessory to that object or purpose. Neither the terms of the sub-section nor the authorities lend support to such a broadbrush approach.
This does not, however, require that two matters which truly form part of the same transaction embodied in a document must necessarily be treated as 'distinct' for the purposes of determining the liability to stamp duty of that document in relation to that transaction.

The correct approach was stated by Sugerman J. in Bambro (No. 2) Pty. Limited v. Commissioner for Stamp Duties [(1963)
SR 522], at p 1146, where he said: 'I see no reason for concluding that 'matters' may not be 'distinct' in the sense now under consideration even though in a contractual sense, and in terms of the instrument which embodies them, they are integrated and interlocked as parts of a single larger transaction or bargain or agreement. Matters contained in the same instrument are distinct for the purposes of s.17(1) when it is necessary to regard them separately in order to assess the same amount of duty as would have been assessable if each had been expressed in a separate instrument, more particularly when each falls within a different classification created by the Act for the purpose of specifying the nature (fixed or ad valorem) and amount of rate of the duty payable.'"
While I accept that other minds may differ on this question, it seem to me that, if the position be that, unless the instrument bestowing a power of appointment prescribes a particular method for the valid exercise of the power, the power may be exercised in any manner which evidences the intention to do so, the correct view in the present case is that the exercise of the power and the transfer of title to the land are but two differing aspects of one transaction.

Although, in the event, it is not necessary for me to express a concluded opinion on the matter, I would add that I am disposed to think that, if I had been of a contrary view to that which I have recorded above, I would have held that the Transfer was liable to ad valorem, rather than a fixed, duty.
 
Conclusion
In the result, I conclude that Smart J was correct in the decision to which he came, it following that the appropriate order is that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
Resolving the differences within the Court of Appeal
Since preparing the above reasons, I have had the benefit of reading the separate Judgments which have been prepared by Mahoney JA and Priestley JA. As a reading of those Judgments, and of the above reasons, makes clear, although all three members of the Court are agreed that the Deed was "a conveyance" of the type referred to in s.73(1)(d) of the Act, and that the Transfer constituted "an instrument of appointment" for the purpose of s.73(1)(d) of the Act; and, although both Mahoney
JA and Priestley JA are agreed - but I am not - that the Transfer, in addition to constituting "an instrument of appointment" for the purposes of s.73(1)(d) of the Act, also constituted "a conveyance" for the purposes of the Act, there is no agreement as to the amount of additional duty to which, by reason of that fact, s. 17 of the Act makes the Transfer liable.
As I am in the minority in relation to the question of the liability of the Transfer to multiple duty, it seems to me that it is incumbent of me to take such action as is necessary to achieve a result which best reflects such concurrence as there is within the Court, or, to put it in another way, which produces the result which is least objectionable to all the members of the
Court. That result, so it seems to me would be achieved if, as Mahoney JA has, in substance proposed, the following Orders were made: 
ORDER that the Declaration made by Smart J be varied by deleting therefrom the symbol and figures '$10.00' and by substituting therefor the symbol and figures '$20.00'; 
ORDER that the Appeal otherwise be dismissed. 
ORDER that the Appellant pay the Respondent's costs of the Appeal.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/140.html  
