

Regina versus C P Camp [2000] NSWSC 1266 (2 March 2000) 
REGINA versus CLIVE PETER CAMP /95 DC94/41/0083 
Tuesday 3 September 1996 
THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
BEAZLEY JA, STUDDERT AND SULLY JJ 
CATCHWORDS: 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - Nature of corroborative evidence - Matters about which jury could use common sense and everyday experience 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - Whether police evidence with procedural defect should attract a McKinney & Judge type warning - summing up adequate 
CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Summing up - Whether trial judge's use of colloquialism constituted improper direction to jury 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - Whether accused prejudiced by late presentation of evidence.

CRIMINAL LAW - PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE - Whether unsafe and unsatisfactory 
RESULT: DISMISSED 
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE 
The accused was found guilty of being an accessory before the fact to manslaughter and of being an accessory before the fact to the dishonest destruction of premises at Bomaderry. The case against the accused rested mainly on the evidence of an accomplice. The accused appealed against both convictions and sentences. The Crown had relied upon evidence of a police detective who had interviewed the accused on two occasions which showed that the appellant had lied about a relevant matter. The accused argued that this evidence, which was procedurally defective as it had not been recorded in an official police note-book, should have attracted a McKinney & Judge versus R type direction to the jury. The accused also argued that certain evidence relating to the condition of the back door and evidence of a judgment debt and garnishee order against the accused should not have been left to the jury as corroborative evidence. In relation to the latter evidence, the accused said that he was unfairly prejudiced by its late introduction. The accused also challenged the trial judge's direction to the jury, in which he had explained the term "accessory before the fact" by way of a colloquial expression. The accused also argued that the verdict as a whole was unsafe and unsatisfactory - HELD - 
The direction given to the jury in relation to the evidence of the police detective was sufficient and clearly raised the procedural irregularity, and the possibility that the evidence was a concoction or an exaggeration or involved some misunderstanding by the police officer.

The evidence relating to the back door was not a matter requiring expert evidence before it could be left to the jury. It was a matter about which the jury could use its common sense and experience of everyday things.

Corroborative evidence need not provide a complete or self-contained implication of guilt. It need only confirm, support or strengthen the evidence of which it is corroborative: R versus Doney <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 207.] Accordingly the evidence relating to the judgment debt and garnishee order was properly left to the jury as available corroboration.

There may be a danger in a trial judge departing from strict terms of a charge contained in an indictment if it involves the use of language susceptible of more than one meaning. The expression "put him up to it" does not fall into this category 
The verdict as a whole was not unsafe and unsatisfactory. The evidence of the accomplice was not "vague and imprecise to an extraordinary degree". The trial judge's intervention during cross examination of the accomplice was not so intrusive as to render the verdict unsafe.

ORDERS
The Court orders that the appeal be dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: On 2 March 1995, the appellant was found guilty of being an accessory before the fact to manslaughter (the first count) and of being an accessory before the fact to the dishonest destruction of premises at Bomaderry, on the south coast of New South Wales (the second count). On the first count the appellant was sentenced to a minimum term of 5 years penal servitude to date from 2 March 1995 and an additional term of three years to date from 2 March 2000. On the second count, he was sentenced to a fixed term of 3 years penal servitude to date from 2 March 1995. The appellant appeals against both convictions and sentences.

Background 
The appellant owned a small mixed business/milkbar which operated out of the
Bomaderry premises, which was a two storey converted homestead. The ground floor comprised three separate shops, including the appellant's. There were five flats on the first floor of the premises. On 1 August 1991, one Colin
Waters (Waters) lit a fire in the back section of the appellant's shop. The fire spread to the first floor of the premises and an occupant of one of the flats, Sidney Knight, was trapped inside his flat and died.

The Crown case relied upon Waters' evidence, who had pleaded guilty to charges of manslaughter and arson. The Crown accepted that the jury's guilty verdict meant they must have accepted Waters' evidence. That evidence was to the following effect. The appellant had discussed with Waters the lighting of the fire. The subject had come up because "[the appellant] was getting low in money, he had a lot of credit out". The intention in lighting the fire was to enable the appellant to make an insurance claim. There was evidence that the appellant had an insurance policy for the premises covering contents to a value of $67,000.00 and loss of income up to $55,000.00.

At about the time of the fire, Waters owed the appellant approximately $300.00-$400.00. This was not the first time Waters had owed the appellant money. He built up debts from time to time by making credit purchases from the shop. He would then work for the appellant to work off these debts. At the time of the discussion about the fire, the appellant told Waters that, if he lit the fire, his current debt "would get wiped and [he'd] get some money when the insurance money came through". The appellant also gave the appellant a large quantity of cigarettes for his expected role in lighting the fire.

The appellant and Waters initially agreed that the fire would be lit on the
Monday following this discussion. The fire was to be started by using petrol, which Waters was to get from a service station, and methylated spirits which was in the shop. On that Monday, Waters and another person, Gavin John Heyman, who, unbeknown to the appellant, Waters had recruited to assist him, tried to break into the shop through the back door, using a tyre lever. However, they were not able to get the door open. Waters saw the appellant the following day and told him that he could not get in as the door was too strong. The appellant and Waters decided that Waters would make another attempt the following night. Waters and Heyman did so but could not get in, the problem still being that the door and the frame was too solid. Waters spoke to the appellant the following morning. They inspected the door, which bore press marks up and down it, where Waters and Heyman had attempted to lever it open.
The appellant decided to report the matter to the police "to make it look like a break and enter". The police attended at the premises later that day.
It was agreed that Waters would make another attempt the following night.

The following morning, Waters and the appellant had a discussion when the appellant told Waters that he would help Waters "break [the door] open with [a] jemmy bar". That night, after the appellant had closed the shop he and
Waters walked through the shop to the back door, which they "busted open".
This was achieved by the appellant placing the jemmy bar "in the top hinge of the door", which Waters then held whilst the appellant propped the door closed. This caused the hinge to tear off the frame. The bottom hinge was torn off the frame by the same process. This left the door swinging on the deadlock. The appellant and Waters left the tyre lever with the fuel in the shop. The appellant then went home. Waters stayed in the proximity of the milk bar with some friends and was later joined by his girlfriend. The appellant apparently came back to the vicinity of the shop about 10 o'clock that evening and spoke to Waters, asking him "is everything alright". Waters went home sometime after this conversation. He returned to the shop premises, with
Heyman, shortly after 11 o'clock. Waters and Heyman "pushed the backdoor open and then. . .went in with the fuel". They tipped fuel throughout the shop, lit a piece of paper, threw it on the floor and ran out the backdoor. Later that night, the appellant went to Waters' home and informed Waters that someone had died in the fire. They decided to keep their distance from each other for a while.

The appellant was interviewed by the police three times in relation to the fire. On the day following the fire, the appellant made a written statement in which he set out the nature of the business, the circumstances of its purchase and other details including the value of its stock and the leasing arrangements and trading hours. He stated that he had, until four months prior to the fire, owned the pizza business which traded in the shop adjacent to the milkbar. He had sold the pizza business to the present operators for $40,000.00. A deposit of $10,000.00 had been paid and the balance was being paid in instalments of $1,000.00 per month. The appellant stated that he had the following debts: a $10,000.00 personal loan with the Illawarra Credit
Union; an outstanding tax debt of $3,000.00, which was subject to an arrangement with the Taxation Department to pay over a three month period (it is unclear whether this $3,000.00 was in addition to or was part of the $10,000.00); an amount of $6,000.00 owed to his father in law and another amount of $4,000.00 owed to a friend in Sydney. He stated there was no pressure on him to pay monies off these debts at that time. He also said that he had recently issued a number of summons in respect of the non payment of accounts held at the milk bar. He said that these accounts were for "a couple of hundred dollars".

On 16 October 1991, the appellant was arrested and interviewed by Detective
Sergeant Hetherington (Hetherington), accompanied by Detective Senior
Constable Keys (Keys). The appellant was informed that Waters and Heyman had implicated him in the fire and was given the usual warning. During the interview, the appellant denied having called around at Waters' home in the early hours of the morning after the fire. He declined to give a formal record of interview. The appellant was charged with these offences. However, those charges were not proceeded with.

Hetherington again spoke to the appellant on 23 September 1993 when the appellant was re-arrested in relation to the fire. The appellant was given a warning in relation to anything he might say. Hetherington then informed the appellant that both Waters and his girlfriend had verified that the appellant had gone to Waters' house after the fire and discussed the fact that Knight had died. The appellant responded: "I went to Waters' house that night to see if he knew anything about the fire or if he saw anyone hanging around. He knew a lot of hoodlums around the area and I thought he might be able to shed some light on who was responsible." 
Hetherington reminded him that he had earlier said that he had not been to
Waters' home. The appellant responded: "No, you've got it wrong. I told you that I went there to see if I could get any information from Waters." 
The appellant was recharged with the two counts which subsequently went to trial.

Evidence relied upon as corroboration 
As already stated, the Crown case depended upon the jury's acceptance of
Waters' evidence. The trial judge correctly warned the jury of the dangers of accepting his evidence and of the need for that evidence to be corroborated.
The Crown relied upon the appellant's denial to Hetherington that he had called around at Waters' house in the early morning hours after the fire as being a lie which might corroborate Waters' evidence. The Crown relied upon the following further evidence as possible corroboration: the appellant attributing the cause of the fire to an electrical fault which, it was said, was a lie; the appellant's financial position; the condition in which the back door was found after the fire; and a conversation the appellant had with the wife of the deceased. Save for the lie in respect of the cause of the fire, the appellant challenged the other items of evidence in various ways. It is thus necessary to deal with that corroborative evidence more fully.

Appellant's financial position 
The Crown adduced evidence that, in March 1991, the appellant had been sued by a Mr John Melville for a debt of $5,600.00. Judgment in that amount had been entered against the appellant on 12 June 1991 together with an amount for court costs and service fees. On about the same date, a garnishee order was issued to the National Bank at Bomaderry. The garnishee order was returned unsatisfied on 17 June 1991 as the bank held funds of less than $50.00 in accounts in the appellant's name.

Evidence of deceased's wife 
The Crown also called the deceased's wife to give evidence of a conversation which she had with the appellant, two days after the fire, when the appellant was cleaning up his shop. The appellant told Mrs Knight that an investigation had been done and he had been informed officially that the fire was started due to an electrical fault. He mentioned to her the loss it had caused him. He then said to her: "Oh, condolences to you for your loss, but that wasn't meant to happen." 
Mrs Knight said that as he said the last words, his voice "trailed away" and he then swiftly turned on his heels and walked off. As Mrs Knight put it: "it was a complete stop to the conversation". Mrs Knight was cross examined to the effect that the appellant had in fact said to her "loss and condolences, it wasn't meant to happen, it was a fire trap". Mrs Knight said he definitely did not add the additional words. She explained that "the conversation stopped abruptly".

Evidence called on behalf of accused 
The appellant made a statement to the jury and also called two witnesses.
The first witness, one Michael Sutherland (Sutherland), had known the appellant for about 7 to 8 years. He also knew Waters, and had lived with him for about 6 months in 1990. Sutherland had also worked for the appellant in his shop a few months before the fire. He said that about a week before the fire, Waters had said to him: "[the appellant] will not lend me any more to pay my fines and I am going to get him good." 
He said that that was not the first time that Waters had said he was going "to get" the appellant. He said something like that had been said many times before when the appellant would not lend money to Waters. He described Waters as "a very moody person". He said: "he would say one thing one day and he would change his mind the next". Sutherland said he had told the appellant of these conversations. However, he had not given this information to the police.
He was cross examined as to why he had not done so, given that the fire was a serious matter resulting in the death of Mr Knight. Sutherland gave two reasons for not having spoken to the police. First, he said he had "stayed out of that business for a while" because someone had accused him of lighting the fire. He was recently out of jail and he "didn't need" those types of accusations against him. The second reason was that he had started a new job and had a few other things on his mind.

The appellant also called his accountant who had prepared his income tax returns for the financial years ending June 1990 and 1991. The accountant gave evidence that during the time the appellant conducted the pizza bar it had operated at a profit and that the milk bar was also operating at a profit. As at June 1991, the milk bar business had total assets of $78,000.00. It had a goodwill which could have been worth as much as $80,000.00. The appellant also owned his own home, subject to a mortgage. The accountant was unaware of a debt of about "$5,600.00 or of about $4,000.00 to a Mr Melville". He said, however, that he was aware of a personal debt in respect of which the appellant had made some payments and said he would have classified the expense "as being private". He did not consider the low balances of less than $50.00 in the appellant's bank accounts to be unusual. He said: "On an account like Mr Camp's, that wouldn't surprise me. Most clients operate an account where they hardly leave any funds in the bank because you don't receive interest on your account. You keep it as low as you can and you just move a very small band if possible." 
Grounds of appeal 
The appellant raised 5 grounds of appeal. They were: that the trial judge should have given the jury a direction similar to the direction in McKinney & Judge versus R <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 468.] It was submitted that this direction was required because of the danger of accepting Hetherington's evidence of 16 October 1991, given the procedural irregularity in Hetherington having failed to make notes of that conversation in his police notebook; that the condition of the back door and the evidence of the judgment debt and garnishee order should not have been left to the jury as corroborative evidence; that the trial judge had improperly directed the jury as to the meaning of "accessory before the fact" by the use of the colloquialism "did [the appellant] put [Waters] up to it?" that the appellant was "ambushed" and thereby unfairly prejudiced by the late introduction of the evidence of the judgment debt of Melville and the unsatisfied garnishee order; and that the verdict as a whole was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

McKinney & Judge Warning 
Hetherington did not make a note of his conversation with the appellant on October 1991 in his police notebook. He said, however, that he made some notes of the conversation on a notepad 15 to 30 minutes after he had spoken to the appellant. These notes were used to make a more formal typed statement on December 1991. Keys also made a statement at this time, using
Hetherington's notes and his typed statement.

The appellant's case was that Hetherington's evidence in relation to the interview on 16 October 1991 was a lie. It was submitted that, in circumstances where Hetherington had not followed standard police procedure by recording this conversation in his police notebook, the trial judge should have given a "McKinney & Judge" type warning in respect of this evidence. The warning which it was contended should have been given was in these terms: ". . .where there is an irregularity in procedure as is represented by the failure to take proper police notebook notes of an alleged conversation, then the experience of the courts is that that may be an indicator of malpractice and that you would have to be particularly cautious about accepting such evidence." 
Alternatively, by reference to the summing up, counsel for the appellant submitted that the trial judge should have directed the jury that it would be "dangerous to convict" the appellant on Hetherington's evidence in the absence of a corroborating note.

In McKinney & Judge, Mason CJ, Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ held at 476 that there should be a prima facie rule of practice that a jury be instructed: ". . . that they give careful consideration as to the dangers involved in convicting an accused person in circumstances where the only (or substantially the only) basis for finding that guilt has been established beyond reasonable doubt is a confessional statement allegedly made whilst in police custody the making of which is not reliably corroborated." 
The prima facie rule is subject to "extraordinary and special cases" where other evidence "unmistakably confirmed" the police evidence: McKinney &
Judge at 475; Carr versus R <case>; [(1988) 165 CLR 314.] 
The need for a warning in the strict McKinney & Judge case (that is the case of an unsigned confession) arises because of the unfairness to the accused in the circumstances discussed. There have been a number of attempts to extend the McKinney & Judge warning to other cases: see R versus Derbas (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal, 22 February 1993); R versus Goonan (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal, 13 April 1993); Dominican versus R <case>; [(1992) 66 ALJR 285]; R versus Tarantino (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal, 26
February 1993). This case represents a further attempt. Counsel for the appellant recognised that there was no direct authority which required that a trial judge give the warning for which he contended. He urged the court, however, that the law required such further development. He submitted: ". . .we have now reached the point in history where the improper and procedurally irregular methods of taking notes and admissions. . .require(s) a special warning." 
In making this submission, counsel retreated from any suggestion that police evidence was inherently unreliable or that police witnesses should be put in some special category of unreliable witnesses: see McKinney & Judge at .

The basis for the "prima facie rule" or "rule of general application" was identified by the majority in McKinney & Judge as lying in the: ". . .special vulnerability of an accused to fabrication when he is involuntarily [held in police custody without access to a lawyer or an independent person who might confirm his account], in that his detention will have deprived him of the possibility of any corroboration of a denial of the making of all or part of an alleged confessional statement".
 
None of those considerations applies here. It must be recognised however that suspicion might attach to evidence which is corroborative but which itself might conceivably have been concocted. If that is the case, then, as is the case with any evidence which is unreliable, a fair trial would require that a warning be given to the jury: see R versus Pollitt <case>; [(1992) 174 CLR 558.] However, the appellant did not contend that Hetherington's typed statement was made other than on 13 December 1991. It would be extraordinary for him to have concocted a lie at that point in the hope that the appellant might later contradict himself in an interview which was not known and probably could not be foreseen, would take place.

The trial judge dealt with Hetherington's evidence in these terms: ". . .are you prepared to accept beyond reasonable doubt the evidence of
Hetherington? - because no note was made, and certainly the other police have used Hetherington's notes to prepare their statement and, surprise, surprise, it comes out on a par with Hetherington. You may think, it is a matter for you, that relatively little weight could be given to the evidence of the corroborating police.
. .you might think of course that some police gild the lily, strap up a weak case with a bit of assistance of what is said in the police premises with nobody there but them and the accused, but that they do not do it if they desist forthwith when a fellow says "I want a solicitor." and they say "It's your perfect right to have one, okay, that is the end of it.". And you may think that, if Hetherington was going to tell lies that he could have worked up a better "verbal" than something like this:. . .
 
The possibility, I suppose, advanced by the accused is that the police are not superhuman; they can just get it wrong. Hetherington says that a note was made soon after, but we cannot check it, we did not have it here to check, and maybe he misunderstood what the accused was saying to him, maybe he mis- remembered it, maybe he wished that the accused had said it, because it would provide another little nail in the coffin, Hetherington being suspicious.
Anybody must be suspicious once Waters has got his story out, once you know an insurance claim has been made, but suspicions do not make proof, and suspicions can indicate that we might be mistaken. Now, members of the jury, this is, you may think, a very important matter in the case, and you might think it is a matter which will be important to your deliberations." 
In my opinion, this was a sufficient direction to the jury. It clearly raised the procedural irregularity. It gave a warning as to Keys' evidence. It raised the possibility that the evidence was a concoction or an exaggeration or involved some misunderstanding by the police officer. It identified the
Crown's reasons as to why the evidence ought to be accepted and the defence reasons as to why it should not. It also raised other possibilities for the jury to consider in deciding whether or not to accept the evidence.

It follows from what I have said that this ground must fail.

Corroboration 
Counsel submitted that the condition in which the back door was found after the fire and the evidence of the judgment debt and garnishee order could not amount to corroborative evidence. It will be necessary to deal with each of these items of evidence in turn.

It was submitted that the trial judge should not have treated the condition of the door, found as it was hanging from the deadlock and off both its hinges, as available corroborative evidence of Waters' evidence. There was no expert evidence to the effect that the door in the condition it was found after the fire, was jemmied open from the inside. Counsel submitted therefore that to have left that matter to the jury was to invite the jury to engage in "pure speculation".

Two comments are to be made about this submission. First, the trial judge told the jury this evidence might be corroborative. Whether it was or not was a matter for the jury. Secondly, it was a matter about which the jury could use its common sense and experience of everyday things. Expert evidence was not, as was submitted by counsel for the appellant, necessary before a jury could decide that it might be difficult to jemmy open a door from the outside at the places where hinges are affixed on the inside: R versus Monks (Court of Criminal
Appeal, unreported, 23 May 1996). See also Clark versus Ryan <case>; [(1960) 103 CLR 486]; R versus Murphy <case>; [(1989) 167 CLR 94]; R versus Bonython [(1984) 15 A Crim R 364.] 
It was next submitted that the evidence of the judgment debt and the unsatisfied garnishee order was not capable of amounting to corroboration.
Counsel for the appellant pointed out that this evidence was rebutted by the appellant's statement that: "[a]fter I was issued with these papers I approached Mr Melville and we then agreed the debt was $4,000 and we settled it. Right, we settled all the argument." and submitted that: ". . .the jury cannot reject what [the appellant] says about the $4000." 
It appears that this submission was advanced on three bases. First, that the judgment debt and garnishee evidence ought not to have been admitted. I will deal with that point shortly. Secondly, that there was no evidence that, as at the date of the fire, there was any pressure to pay the debt, the garnishee order having been issued approximately 6 weeks prior to the fire. Thirdly, that there was evidence to the contrary. This submission overlooks the true nature of corroborative evidence. As the High Court said in Doney versus R <case>; [(1990) 171 CLR 207] at 211: "[t]he essence of corroborative evidence is that it "confirms", "supports" or "strengthens" other evidence in the sense that it "renders [that] other evidence more probable": Reg. versus Kilbourne [[1973] AC 729] at 758, per Lord
Simon of Glaisdale. It must do that by connecting or tending to connect the accused with the crime charged in the sense that, where corroboration of the evidence of an accomplice is involved, it "shows or tends to show that the story of the accomplice that the accused committed the crime is true, not merely that the crime has been committed, but that it was committed by the accused": R versus Baskerville [[1916] 2 KB 658] at 667." 
Thus, corroborative evidence need not be complete in itself, in the sense that it need not provide a complete or self contained implication of guilt. Nor is evidence rendered incapable of being corroborative merely because there is other evidence which meets, contradicts or explains it. It need only confirm, support or strengthen the evidence of which it is corroborative in the sense specified in R versus Doney. This evidence was capable of being corroborative. It showed that there was pressure on the appellant to pay his debts at a time shortly prior to the fire. It was open to the jury to rely on that evidence.
It was also open to the jury to accept the appellant's explanation that, notwithstanding the judgment debt and the fact that the garnishee order had been issued, he had reached an agreement with his creditor that he did not owe the full amount and that there was no pressure on him, at the time of the fire, to pay the amount he admittedly owed. It follows that this evidence was properly left to the jury as available corroboration. It was a matter for the jury to determine whether it accepted it.
 
Trial Judge's direction on the meaning of "accessory before the fact" 
The trial judge directed the jury as to the meaning of "accessory before the fact" in these terms: "Now the final thing is that the accused did one or more of the following, that he incited, that he moved, that he procured, that he aided, that he counselled, that he hired, that he commanded Waters to do what he did. It means, in the circumstances of this case: did Camp ask and/or assist Waters to light the fire in the shop in order that he could make an insurance claim, in circumstances where he must have appreciated that there was some appreciable degree of danger,. . .to human beings in so doing? Members of the jury, was it his fire and was Waters just his tool? . .
 
In relation to the second count, . . .
. .the final question with all this wonderful litany of inciting, moving, procuring and so on simply is: in the facts and the circumstances of this case, did Camp put him up to it?" 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the use of this colloquial formula had the capacity to blur and confuse the true test. For myself, I would have thought that the phrase used by his Honour was perfectly understandable and correctly reflected the meaning of the relevant legal phraseology. It is not a phrase which bears various meanings depending upon its context. If there is any doubt about it, resort may be had to dictionary references. In both the
Oxford Encyclopedic English and the Concise English Dictionaries the phrase "put a person up to" is stated to mean: "instigate a person in (put them up to stealing the money)".
 
In the Macquarie Dictionary, the phrase "put up to" is defined as meaning "persuade to do".

There may be a danger in a trial judge departing from the strict terms of the charge contained in the indictment if, by doing so, it involves the use of language susceptible of more than one meaning. This case does not fall into that category. This ground of appeal therefore also fails.
 `Ambush' by late presentation of evidence 
Waters' evidence provided critical evidence of motive, that is, that the appellant was "cash-strapped". The evidence of the judgment debt and unsatisfied garnishee order was corroborative of Waters' evidence in this regard. Counsel for the appellant submitted however that the appellant was prejudiced by the admission of this evidence, which had not been called at the committal and of which no notice had been given prior to trial.

At the trial, the then counsel for the appellant conceded the evidence was relevant. He submitted to the trial judge, however, that his client was prejudiced: "[b]ecause the documents on their face do not tell enough information about what the debt is about and the circumstances of the debt".

He said he was not saying that his instructions were that the appellant knew nothing about the matter. It follows from this and, as it became apparent from the appellant's statement to the jury, the appellant was able to respond to the evidence. He also told the Court he was not seeking an adjournment, the trial judge having asked: "What advantage if any would your client have from an adjournment of the case?" 
Counsel then sought clarification from the Crown as to whether the appellant's statement of 2 August 1991 was to be tendered. Upon being told that it was, he said: "I can't take my objection any further." 
After a short exchange about the statement of 2 August 1991, which contained the information about the appellant's state of indebtedness to which I referred above, counsel further stated to the Court: "It is just paragraph 7 [of the statement] which is relevant to the moneys that he owed at the time and that may encapsulate this judgment so he can tell the jury something about that in his statement." 
There was further discussion and it was agreed that rather than the Court documents being shown to the jury, the Crown would inform the jury of their contents.

The evidence of the judgment debt and the unsatisfied garnishee order was important evidence in the Crown case. It not only demonstrated the existence of a debt - the appellant never denied he owed certain monies - it was evidence from which a jury might conclude he was being pressed for payment. It was thus capable of providing strong corroborative evidence of Waters' evidence. The question of an adjournment was raised by the trial judge, although it cannot be said that his Honour indicated that he would grant an adjournment. However, the appellant's counsel stated to the Court that he did not seek an adjournment. The appellant specifically dealt with the matter in his statement to the jury. Thus, whilst the appellant was denied the opportunity of calling the creditor to give evidence, I do not consider that the admission of this evidence without prior notice to the appellant caused the trial to miscarry.

Verdict Unsafe and Unsatisfactory 
Counsel for the appellant submitted that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.

This submission, which encompassed aspects of the previous ground as well as certain additional factors, had, as its base, the notion that Waters, who had committed the crime, was trying to downplay his own role and offload responsibility onto the appellant.

In M versus R [(1994) 181 CLR 487], the High
Court (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ; Gaudron J agreeing) stated at :
 ". . .a verdict may be unsafe or unsatisfactory for reasons which lie outside the formula requiring that it not be "unreasonable" or incapable of being "supported having regard to the evidence". A verdict which is unsafe or unsatisfactory for any other reason must also constitute a miscarriage of justice requiring the verdict to be set aside.
. .
 
Their Honours further stated at 494-5: 
Where, notwithstanding that as a matter of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is asked to conclude that the verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question which the court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty (see
Whitehorn versus The Queen (1983) 152 CLR at 686; Chamberlain versus The Queen [No. 2] CLR at 532; Knight versus The Queen <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 495] at 504-505, 511). But in answering that question the court must not disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury is the body entrusted with the primary responsibility of determining guilt or innocence, or the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the witnesses. On the contrary, the court must pay full regard to those considerations (Chamberlain versus The Queen [No. 2] (1984) 153 CLR at .
. .
 
In most cases a doubt experienced by an appellate court will be a doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced. It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by a court of criminal appeal that the court may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred. That is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, a reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced. If the evidence, upon the record itself, contains probative force in such a way as to lead the court of criminal appeal to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence (Chamberlain versus The Queen [No. 2] (1984) 153 CLR at 618-619;
Chidiac versus The Queen <case>; [(1991) 171 CLR 432] at 443-444. In doing so, the court is not substituting trial by a court of appeal for trial by jury, for the ultimate question must always be whether the court thinks that upon the whole of the evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty (Chidiac versus The Queen (1991) 171 CLR at 443, 451, 458, 461-462.)" 
The onus is on the appellant to persuade the court that it was not open to the jury to have found the appellant guilty beyond reasonable doubt: McKnoulty v
R [(1994) 77 A Crim R 333.] In
McKnoulty, Hunt CJ at CL (Smart and Levine JJ agreeing), at 338 summarised from M versus R the guidelines for an appellate court in determining whether a verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory, as follows: "(1) In most cases, a (reasonable) doubt experienced by an appellant court, after making its own independent assessment of both the sufficiency and the quality of the evidence, will be a doubt which a jury ought also to have experienced.
 
It is only where a jury's advantage in seeing and hearing the evidence is capable of resolving such a doubt experienced by that appellate court that it may conclude that no miscarriage of justice occurred - that is to say, where the evidence lacks credibility for reasons which are not explained by the manner in which it was given, the reasonable doubt experienced by the court is a doubt which a reasonable jury ought to have experienced.
 
If, from the record itself, the evidence contains discrepancies, displays inadequacies, is tainted or otherwise lacks probative force in such a way as to lead the appellate court to conclude that, even making full allowance for the advantages enjoyed by the jury, there is a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted, then the court is bound to act and to set aside a verdict based upon that evidence." 
His Honour added at 339: ". . .It is also important to emphasise that the High Court in M has not stated that the mere existence of discrepancies or inconsistencies in the evidence is sufficient to lead to the verdict being held to be unsafe or unsatisfactory. If they exist, they must be of such a nature as to persuade this Court that there is "a significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted." 
With the question thus formulated, and the guidelines in mind, it is necessary to consider the matters said to make this verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.

First, it was submitted that Waters' evidence, upon which the Crown case depended, was "vague and imprecise to an extraordinary degree". In particular, during the course of his evidence, Waters was not able to recall certain details relating to the conversations which he had with the appellant relating to the lighting of the fire. Counsel referred to five such occasions.
Notwithstanding that there were lapses in Waters' recollection, I do not consider that they were so frequent or in respect of such essential matters that they require the description given to them by counsel. More significantly, however, his evidence regarding the essential conversations with the appellant was both certain, sufficiently detailed and unshaken in cross examination.

Counsel for the appellant also submitted that Waters' evidence was flawed by the undue intrusion of the trial judge. In particular, it was submitted that
Waters' most direct evidence implicating the accused was elicited by a leading question from the judge. This submission, however, fails to take into account the context in which the trial judge asked the question. The relevant part of
Water's evidence was: "Q. What was the discussion when the fire actually was raised, how did the conversation go? 
A. Just `cause he was getting low in money, he had a lot of credit out.
 
Q. Can you tell the Court what he said to you about a fire? 
A. He said what I just aid, basically.
 
HIS HONOUR: 
Q. He said he had a lot of credit out, did he say anything about a fire or did you say anything about a fire, what was said about a fire? 
A. Yes, for an insurance claim.
 
Q. Well who said what? 
A. Camp said for insurance money.
 
Q. He said what, he didn't just say the words "for an insurance claim", he said something to you, put yourself back at the time it was being said and then say the exact words he said as best you can remember them.
 
A. I can't recall the actual words.
 
Q. What was the effect of the words? 
A. I can't recall that, I can't recall it at all.
 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: 
Q. Whose idea was it to set fire to -- 
OBJECTION.
 
HIS HONOUR: 
Q. Did somebody mention a fire? 
A. Yes.
 
Q. Who mentioned a fire? 
A. Camp.
 
Q. What did he say? 
A. Light, get me to light the fire so he could get an insurance claim.
 
Q. Did he say he wanted you to light a fire so he could make an insurance claim? 
A. Yes." 
There was nothing in this series of questions asked by the trial judge which was unduly intrusive. His Honour was merely seeking clarification of answers which the witness had already given.

Counsel for the appellant also referred to questioning of other witnesses by the judge, which it was said was so intrusive as to render the verdict unsafe.
However, during the course of his oral submissions counsel said that he did not seek to "over emphasise" this point. That being so, it is unnecessary to refer to the various parts of the evidence relied upon in support of the submission. It is sufficient to note that the trial judge did not unduly interfere in the running of the trial or the conduct of the defence case: see
Lars, Da Silva & Kalanderian [(1994) 73 A Crim R 91]; R v Costello (unreported, CCA, 5 December 1995).

Counsel next relied upon the evidence of Mrs Knight, which, he submitted, was so remarkable that "it must provoke reasonable thinking as being unreliable" and therefore as rendering the verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory.
 
I have already referred to Mrs Knight's evidence. Again, with respect to counsel for the appellant, it in no way fits the description he applied to it.
She gave a version of events in respect of which she was unshaken. She did not agree with the version put to her in cross examination. Indeed, she emphatically denied that version. It was a matter for the jury as to whether they accepted her version and her denial of the additional statement put to her in cross examination.

It follows from what I have said that none of the matters relied upon in support of this submission are sufficient to establish that the verdict was unsafe.

Appeal against sentence 
The appellant also sought leave to appeal against sentence. I am of the opinion that leave should be granted. The sentence was a lengthy sentence and considerably in excess of that of Waters.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that the appellant's sentence was manifestly excessive. Very little was advanced to support this submission other than that regard should be had to the roles of Waters and Heyman and that there was no intention to kill the deceased. The last matter is, of course, implicit in the charge. However, with respect to counsel, I consider that the bareness of the submission demonstrates its weakness. This was a serious crime. It involved a deliberate act with full knowledge of the relevant surrounding circumstances. In particular, the appellant knew that there were residential flats above the shop. He knew the fire was to be lit at night when it might be expected that some, at least, of the residents would be home and possibly asleep. The appellant's failure to foresee that physical injury and as it turned out, the death of a person, was possible was such a gross oversight that it did not call for any leniency by the trial judge. In my opinion, the appeal against sentence should also be dismissed.

STUDDERT J: I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of Beazley JA in draft form and I agree with the conclusion reached by her Honour that the appeal against conviction fails for the reasons expressed in such judgment.

I would grant leave to appeal against sentence but I also consider that such appeal should be dismissed.

The sentencing judge properly adverted, inter alia, to the following considerations in his remarks on sentence: "What [the appellant] had his co-offender do was very dangerous. It only has to be stated that if you light a fire sufficient to destroy the stock and plant of a shop in a building where people might be upstairs, any building, there is a real risk of danger to limb and to life. Secondly, the prisoner knew that this was very dangerous: he told the jury that the building was, to use words of his, 'archaic', 'bad' and a 'fire trap'. He stressed to the jury how old the building was. He stressed that he knew its dilapidated condition from having to have one or other, perhaps both, of the shops he had in the building re-wired. He knew that there were people upstairs: the co-owner of the pizza shop carried, as she thought, the news of the fire to the prisoner; his immediate response was to ask whether all the people upstairs had got out safely, so he knew that there very likely to be people upstairs during the night in their flats. His conduct was premeditated and persistent; he had ample opportunity to think better of this dangerous scheme and to withdraw from it. The unlawful act itself was very serious, it involved both the destruction of other people's property and an intention to make a dishonest gain in the way that I have referred to." 
The objective gravity of the crimes requires no further emphasis.

The sentencing judge recognised the particular hardship that would accompany the sentences imposed on this appellant who faced prison conditions for the first time as a forty-five year old man.

It was not contended on the appellant's behalf that the remarks on sentence contain any error of fact or of legal principle and I detect none from a reading of them. It was submitted only that the sentences were manifestly excessive. I do not accept this submission. The sentences were stern but the crimes were grave. In my view, the sentences were proper.

Accordingly, I agree that the appeal against conviction fails and whilst I consider leave to appeal against sentence should be granted, that appeal should also be dismissed.
 
SULLY J: I agree with Beazley JA.
 * * * 
