

Ecco Personnel P/L versus Barrett and Ors [1996] NSWSC 475 (6 October 1996) 
ECCO PERSONNEL PTY LTD V BARRETT & ORS /96 
Monday 2 September 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiff sues to police certain clauses in contracts with former employees. 
The plaintiff carries on business as an employer of temporary blue collar labour. The first defendant was employed by it between 18 September 1995 and 6
June 1996 as a branch manager. The second defendant was employed by it from 16
October 1995 to 28 June 1996 as an industrial consultant as was the third defendant who was employed from 22 January 1996 to 28 June 1996. The fourth defendant was employed by the plaintiff from 4 December 1995 to 20 June 1996 as a "team assistant".

The employment contract between the plaintiff and the first defendant was made on 18 September 1995. It did not take the form of a deed. The agreement with the second defendant which was made on 16 October 1995, the agreement with the third defendant which was made on 22 January 1996 and the agreement with the fourth defendant which was made on 3 June 1996 are in identical form. The provisions of clauses 17 and 18 are as follows:- "17. Restraints 
In the event that the Employee's employment under this Agreement is terminated, the Employee shall not:- 
For a period of four months after the date of termination of employment under this 
Agreement, canvass, solicit, interfere with or entice away any person, firm or company who shall at any time during the continuance of the Employee's employment hereunder have been in the habit of being a client or employee of the Employer; 
Without the prior written consent of the 
Employer's Managing Director, from the date of termination of employment under this 
Agreement, for a period of four months, be as principal interested, engaged or employed to act as an adviser or consultant in, or be an employee, agent or officer of, or an adviser or consultant to, any person, firm or corporation interested or engaged in any activity of a like or similar kind to that in which the Employee was interested or engaged during the course of the Employee's employment with the Employer or any business of a like or similar kind to that engaged in by the Employer, within a radius of 10 kilometres from the office or offices of the 
Employer from which the Employee worked during the last four months of his or her employment with the Employer.
 . Confidentiality 
Except in the course of the Employee's duties the Employee will not during the Employee's employment or at any time after ceasing to be employed (howsoever this may occur) disclose to any other person (without the previous consent in writing of the Employer) either directly or indirectly, any confidential information relating to the Employer of which the Employee became possessed whilst employed by the Employer, nor use any such confidential information in any manner which may cause or be calculated to cause injury or loss to the Employer. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing the Employer's confidential information shall include information which the Employer directs the Employee to treat as confidential and shall include (but not be limited to) the Employer's debtors lists, profit and loss documents, client lists, clients cards, job orders, employee availability lists, telephone contact lists, employee application forms and the 
Employee's consultants diary.

Upon the termination of the Employee's employment with the Employer, or at any time on the request of the Employer, the Employee will immediately deliver up to the Employer all documents which were prepared by or on behalf of the Employer which are in the Employee's care, custody or control and all other property belonging to the 
Employer. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, documents shall include those documents referred to in Clause 18(a) hereof." 
There is no doubt that the first defendant had an argument with representatives of the plaintiff on 29 May 1996. He proceeded on leave later that day. On that day, and for some time previously, Nestl Confectionary Pty
Ltd, (hereinafter simply called "Nestl"), was a customer of the plaintiff.

On 5 June 1996, the first defendant attended Nestl`s premises. The second defendant went there the same day, though it may well be that she went for an innocent purpose of the plaintiff. Just what was discussed by the first defendant with whom at Nestl is not clear; indeed, why he called on that day is not clear. I find that the evidence given by the first defendant as to his purpose was not credible, but that leaves me in a situation where there is no evidence of the purpose. However, I would strongly suspect that the visit involved suggestions that the first defendant might acquire Nestl`s business.

Certainly it is clear that the first defendant registered the Business Name "Parramatta Personnel" on 11 June 1996. This became the corporate name of the fifth defendant which was incorporated on 25 June 1996.

On 19 June 1996, the first defendant again visited Nestl. He says that it was at Nestl`s invitation. The first defendant says that a little before that date he received a phone call from Kristine Porter, Nestl`s personnel manager. He says that she asked him what he was doing and he told her that he was now working for Parramatta Personnel and that upon hearing this, Ms Porter asked the first defendant to put in a proposal. He says that he did this before 19
June and then was invited to a meeting at Nestl`s factory with Ms Porter and the factory manager, David Wales.

Ms Porter says that she had phoned the first defendant's mobile phone and learnt that he was now working with a different personnel agency and asked him to submit a proposal to Nestl. He brought in that proposal some days later and then on 19 June 1996 there was a meeting between Mr Wales, the first defendant and herself at which time the proposal was further discussed and Nestl decided to proceed with it. Mr Wales gave evidence that he found out on 11 June 1996 that the first defendant had left the plaintiff. He had rung the plaintiff's
Parramatta office to speak to the first defendant. He then asked Ms Porter to find out what was going on, and was advised later that she had located the first defendant and asked him to provide Nestl with a written proposal.

It would seem quite clear from the whole of the evidence, that whilst the plaintiff had served Nestl for some time before the first defendant became the plaintiff's representative, Nestl had been dissatisfied with the service it received. It found the first defendant and the second defendant reliable people, and was prepared to deal with them rather than risk reverting to the situation that existed before the first and second defendants took over its account.

The plaintiff seeks orders for injunction against the first, second and third defendants. It does not seek any order against the fourth defendant. Interim orders are current against the first, second and third defendants, which prevent them from carrying out the same type of business as the plaintiff within 10 kilometres of either the plaintiff's Blacktown or Parramatta office.
The defendants did at one stage carry on business from Granville, but later moved their base to Top Ryde. Although Top Ryde is within 10 kilometres of the plaintiff's Parramatta office, the interim injunction that was granted permitted trade to continue at a designated address in Top Ryde whilst I considered my decision.

It is first necessary to consider the meaning of 17(i) of the employment contract. It will be remembered that this provides that the employer is not to "canvass, solicit, interfere with or entice away any person" who has "been in the habit of being a client or employee of the" plaintiff.

There was some argument with respect to the word "solicit". I was referred to the recent decision of Allen, J in Jitjarden versus Thompson [(1995) 38 NSWLR .](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%281995%29%2038%20NSWLR%20611 "View LawCiteRecord" ) That case was, however, decided under a rather strange statute. The statute prohibited a person using a massage parlour for the purpose of soliciting for prostitution. The detective in the case provided a convenient opening for the defendant to make an offer that she would prostitute herself and she was found guilty of soliciting. The circumstances of the statute show that the word "soliciting" must have been used in a sense other than the common one. As his
Honour said at 613, "There is no doubt that `soliciting' in relation to prostitution commonly conveys an element of pestering by way of accosting, importuning or flaunting. Standard dictionary definitions reflect that common element. But the expression `soliciting' does not necessarily convey that element. A commercial traveller, for example, is still soliciting for orders if he offers his company products politely and succinctly without any element of pestering. The element of pestering commonly conveyed by speaking of soliciting for prostitution is that in the usual setting for that activity, namely, streets or at least public places, the prostitute, if she is to succeed, has to attract attention - that is, intrude upon the privacy of others to offer for sale her sexual wares." In Jitjarden's case, as the defendant had already taken the detective to a private room with a double bed in it for the purpose of giving him a massage, there was no need for her to attract his attention further; accordingly, the word in the statute could not have its normal meaning.

It seems to me that in the expression "canvass, solicit, interfere with or entice away", the rule noscitur a sociis shows that the word "solicit" has within it the conception of a person being the mover for the action happening.
The defendants argue that they did not solicit Nestl, rather Nestl approached them. The plaintiff puts it that whilst Ms Porter provided the window of opportunity, the solicitation was by the first defendant attending at Nestl on June and by providing a proposal which was more attractive to Nestl than its then current contract with the plaintiff. This raises a question of fact to which I will return.

However, continuing to deal with the construction of 17(i), the words "entice away" are also used.

I dealt with the concept of enticement in Laporte Group Australia Ltd v
Vatselias - 14 May, 1992, unreported. Although the result of that case was varied on appeal, the present matter survived. At p 33 of the judgment, I said that ordinarily the word "entice" has the primary meaning of X making conditions so attractive that Y will be persuaded to do what X wants, and that
X must be the person who offers the enticement. I then gave the illustration of Dinkins versus United States [(1977) 374 A (2d) 292 (DC)], where a plain clothes police officer stopped his car adjacent to the appellant who was wearing a red sweater, blue mini skirt and corduroy knee length boots and when she put her head through his window and was asked "What do you do?" she said "Anything you want" and named a price. It was held that even though the police officer was the first to speak, the circumstances including the way the woman was dressed and her indication that she would do anything the policeman wanted was an enticement. Again accordingly, we are in the same sort of situation where ordinarily the enticer is the person who makes the first approach, but it is not necessarily so and there may be situations where another party makes an enquiry or gives an opportunity or expresses some interest and then the solicitor (in the American sense of the word) or the enticer makes things so attractive that the other party succumbs.

The next question is, what does the word "habit" mean? The evidence suggests that Nestl was at all material times a client of the plaintiff. Nestl had one contract with the plaintiff, and pursuant to that contract the plaintiff provided men and women to do casual work at the Nestl factory, the Nestl company paying the plaintiff who would pay the casuals.

Ordinarily, something that happened on one occasion is not a habit; see eg
Knickerbocker Life Insurance Co versus Foley <case>; [105 US 350], 354, . Accordingly, as there is only one retainer of the plaintiff by Nestl, how, it is asked, could it be said that Nestl was in the habit of being a client of the plaintiff? What occurred was that there was one ongoing contract between the plaintiff and Nestl, and pursuant to that contract, requests for labour were made from time to time.

Although I appreciate the semantic correctness of this proposition, it still seems to me that where one has a state of affairs that one resorts to a particular person for supply whenever one needs that supply, one can be fairly described as a person who is in the habit of being a customer. It does not matter that there is one contract under which an habitual recourse is made.
The real semantic significance in the word "habit" is that the person must be a client of the plaintiff who seeks more than one (or perhaps a series of) isolated placements. It must be a person who, at the relevant time, indicates that when it has a need it will resort to the plaintiff to fulfil that need.
Nestl is in the circumstances a person who is in the habit of being a client of the plaintiff.

I now return to the facts which I have already outlined. The first defendant and Mr Wales were cross examined. Ms Porter's state of health was such that she was unable to be cross examined.

I have already indicated that I would not accept the first defendant as being a credible witness. There were many factors which led me to this view. In no particular order they are: 
That the first defendant changed his answer with respect to when he had visited the Nestl premises between 29 May and 6 June (T88).

The rather evasive evidence as to his signing the book at the security gate at Nestl.

The number of coincidences that are involved in the third and fourth defendants just happening to be the people who responded to the first defendant's advertisement in The Daily Telegraph.

The number of coincidences that just happened to have occurred for the benefit of the first defendant.

That although the first defendant was so friendly with the second defendant that he would ring her 15-20 times a week (though he says he could not remember her phone number!) she only realized that he was working for another personnel agency after she had seen the advertisement in The Daily
Telegraph.

The rather strange circumstances in which the first defendant apparently resigned as a director of the fifth defendant, yet seemed to retain as much status as he had before.

Accordingly, I would discount the evidence of the first defendant. So far as
Mr Wales is concerned, he swore in his affidavit that it was after discussions with the first defendant on 19 June 1996 that he decided that it was in the best interests of Nestl to allocate to Parramatta Personnel the majority of
Nestl`s daily labour hire business. In cross examination, Mr Wales said that he read the proposal which had been received from the first defendant, but did not form the opinion at that stage that the fifth defendant was an established recruitment agency that should obtain Nestl`s business. Mr Wales said, T113, that at the meeting on 19 June, the first defendant "indicated that a number of other people that were formerly in the branch office of Ecco would also be involved in Parramatta Personnel." He knew that the second defendant was employed by the plaintiff, but only that her name was "Elizabeth", and that she was a reliable and key person in the plaintiff's Parramatta office. Mr
Wales gained the impression that Elizabeth would be involved in Parramatta
Personnel. That statement had a bearing on the decision-making process. It is quite clear from Mr Wales' evidence that it was the presentation that the first defendant made on 19 June that was the effective cause of the fifth defendant obtaining the contract with Nestl.

In my view, Mr Gleeson, who appeared for the plaintiff, is correct in his submission when he says that although Ms Porter may have provided the window of opportunity, it was the first defendant who solicited and enticed away
Nestl from the plaintiff.

There was further evidence that a company called National Can Limited was also a client of the plaintiff. Although the evidence is not as strong, it would seem quite clear that Mr Barrett, the first defendant, went through much the same sort of process as he did with Nestl. Indeed, he said at T77, in answer to a question in cross examination from Mr Gleeson:- 
Q. "Is it your position, Mr Barrett, that provided you have received any form of invitation from a client of Ecco you may then do your best to obtain that client for yourself?" 
A. "If they ask me to, yes." 
With that mindset, it is not at all surprising that Mr Barrett would also solicit National Can.

Mr Gleeson also puts that Mr Barrett solicited the second and third defendants, Elizabeth Kulevska and Deborah Rogers, who were former employees of the plaintiff.

As to this, the first defendant says that being confident of having obtained the Nestl contract, he put an advertisement in classified section of The Daily
Telegraph on Thursday June 20 1996 which simply read "PERSONNEL CONSULTANT New and exciting company situated in the Parramatta area requires three consultants for immediate start. Please send resume to: The Manager Suite 2/10
Bridge Street Granville NSW 2142".

Mr Gleeson put to Mr Barrett that this was merely a ruse to cover the fact that he had already made arrangements with the second, third and fourth defendants to leave the plaintiff and to join him. The first defendant denied this, but it seems to me more likely than not to be correct.

On Wednesday 19 June 1996, Mr Barrett had been assured that he had the Nestl contract. He needed three consultants. He first said that the advertisement was put in the paper on 19 June and that the fourth defendant had applied within a day or so; indeed, he said he had received four resumes. However, the fourth defendant in fact submitted her resignation to the plaintiff on
Thursday 20 June. One wonders why she did this if she had not already obtained another position, namely a position with the fifth defendant. The fourth defendant did give evidence. She appeared quite a pleasant person, but it is to my mind impossible to accept her evidence that she just threw herself on the mercy of the job market and resigned from the plaintiff before being sure that the first defendant had given her a job (vide T135).

The second and third defendants did not give evidence. I can, under the rule in Jones versus Dunkel <case>; [(1959) 101 CLR 298], infer that nothing that the second or third defendant could have said could have assisted their case.

It seems very surprising that in a case where the first defendant telephoned the second defendant whom he said was a friend, 15 or 20 times each and every week, that he would never have mentioned to her that he had become a principal (later he says merely the general manager) of a new personnel agency. It is then an extraordinary coincidence that she responded to the advertisement without knowing that it had been placed by the first defendant. The explanation that she was unhappy with the plaintiff just makes it more incredible. If one knows a friend is unhappy in her job and she is just the person that one wants to assist in a new business, and one is being straightforward about everything, one asks the friend whether she would be interested in taking the position.

The only inference is that the first defendant solicited employees of the plaintiff.

The first defendant's propensity to breach clause 17(i) is such that, subject to matters of hardship which I will come to, an injunction should go to restrain him up until 6 October 1996 from breaching clause 17(i).

So far as the second defendant is concerned, there is to my mind just sufficient evidence that she is co-operating with the first defendant in his solicitation of the plaintiff's clients. As she has not given any evidence to the contrary, I believe I am justified in finding that she too has threatened to solicit the plaintiff's customers. There is not sufficient evidence that she has threatened to solicit the plaintiff's employees.

The third defendant also has not given evidence, but there is little to link her with the first defendant other than as a colleague in the working environment. I do not consider there is sufficient evidence of a threat by her to make an injunction in the terms of 17(i).

No order is sought against the fourth defendant.

The fifth defendant was incorporated on 25 June 1996. Its statutory records are Exhibit PX19. These show that so far as members are concerned, Peter David
Johnson was allotted one subscriber's share on 25 June 1996, but this was "redeemed" the same day and a company, Lenold Pty Ltd, was allotted a share.
The other share was allotted to Caldville Pty Ltd. The original directors are shown as Peter David Johnson, Paul Brian Johnston and Stephen John Barrett.
The firstnamed, who appears to be the salesman of the shelf company resigned on incorporation. Stephen John Barrett is shown as having resigned on 28 June and Corynne Lee McArthur is shown as having become director and secretary on 28 June 1996. The only evidence is that Ms McArthur is a business acquaintance of Paul Johnston. Lenold Pty Ltd is a company, the shareholders of which are the first defendant's father and stepmother. He is a director of
Lenold. The first defendant says that he thought that the shares would have been transferred when the directors were changed (T81). However, he did not sign any share transfer. There may be some basis for the first defendant's belief that Lenold was no longer a shareholder in the fifth defendant because it would seem that both he and Mr Johnston were to put $45,000 into the company, and that Mr Barrett never did put in that amount of money. He may have believed that Ms McArthur, as an associate of Mr Johnston who did put his $45,000 into the company as promised, may have been entitled to the beneficial interest in the second share. However, what dissuades one from taking that view is that it is quite clear that it was Mr Barrett who had the skills in this particular area. Mr Johnston is apparently a person who has done some motivational training and hiring of people, but does not seem to be involved in the field of hiring blue collar casual workers. Furthermore, the general manager of the business has always appeared to be Mr Barrett rather than Mr
Johnston. Mr Johnston, in all the circumstances, appears to have been a sleeping rather than an active partner, and it is very difficult to believe that Mr Johnston and Ms McArthur are the controllers of the fifth defendant and that Mr Barrett is merely an employee. Again, it is significant that although originally some 16 affidavits were read on behalf of the defendants (some were later withdrawn), there was no evidence from either Mr Johnston or
Ms McArthur.

The question is just how far the fifth defendant is really just a tool of Mr
Barrett, the first defendant.

The question of colourable evasion of contractual rights was thoroughly considered by the Court of Appeal in Page versus Vanker (7 December 1990, unreported). In a comprehensive judgment on the subject, Handley, JA referred to the various leading cases such as Smith versus Hancock [[1894] 2 Ch ], and Gilford Motor Co Ltd versus Horne [[1933] 1 Ch 935.] In the firstmentioned case, Lindley, LJ said, "If the evidence admitted of the conclusion that what was being done was a mere cloak or sham, and that in truth the business was being carried on by the wife and Kerr for the
Defendant, or by the Defendant through his wife for Kerr, I certainly should not hesitate to draw that conclusion, and to grant the Plaintiff relief accordingly." 
The behaviour of Mr Barrett and the failure to give evidence of Mr Johnston and Ms McArthur gives rise to a fairly firm inference that part of the reason for setting up the fifth defendant was to evade the covenant. However, I do not think that I can conclude that the company was a complete sham or a mere cloak for evading contractual rights. It is common business practice to set up a corporation when going into this sort of business. I am quite sure that the fifth defendant was at least half owned by Mr Johnston as a bona fide business enterprise and these matters in themselves make it virtually impossible to draw the conclusion that the company was a mere cloak.

However, there is no doubt at all in my mind that the corporate mind of the fifth defendant was well aware of the provision of the restrictive covenant in
Mr Barrett's contract of employment (and in the contract of employment of the second, third and fourth defendants), and knowingly employed them and assisted them to break their contract with the plaintiff. This is sufficient in my mind to grant an injunction also against the fifth defendant.

It will be noted that clause 17(i) is to enure for four months after resignation. To my mind this is quite clearly such a short period of time as would be reasonable in all the circumstances to protect the plaintiff's goodwill in its customers and employees.

I now turn to 17(ii). Mr Molomby, who appears for the defendants, has submitted that this covenant is unreasonable and is void for being in restraint of trade. Mr Molomby points to the fact that the effect of the covenant is to protect the employer against competition per se and is not to protect any legitimate interest in goodwill. He also says that the area of extent of the covenant is too wide for the same reasons.

Before I deal with these matters I should deal with the question of fact as to whether one should measure the 10 kilometre radius from the Blacktown office or the Parramatta office.

Apart from the relief that can be given under the Restraint of Trade Act 1976, there are difficulties in enforcing a restriction which covers a geographic area from a place where the employee has little or no connection: see
Lindner versus Murdock's Garage <case>; [(1950) 83 CLR 628.] The facts in the instant case, so far as the first defendant is concerned, are that the first defendant was, prior to November 1995, physically located at 239 Church Street Parramatta and was the head of the
Parramatta Industrial Division of the plaintiff in premises shared with the plaintiff's Parramatta Administrative Division. In that month the first defendant moved to the Blacktown office. Ms Hull, the current branch manager of Parramatta and Blacktown of the plaintiff, says that the first defendant was fulfilling a caretaker role as branch manager of Blacktown in addition to his other positions. Ms Hull further says that Mr Barrett was in the
Parramatta office on at least four occasions during April and May 1996 to interview people or to look for new Parramatta accommodation for the
Parramatta Industrial Division. Ms Hull became manager of Blacktown on 23 May and there is some material that Mr Barrett was working from Parramatta from 27 May 1996 to when he resigned.

I cannot help find from the facts that in the four month period before 6 June , to which clause 17(ii) is directed, the first defendant worked from both the Parramatta and the Blacktown office.

So far as the second and third defendants are concerned, it is again clear that they worked from the Parramatta office, at least for a few weeks during
June 1996.

The first defendant and/or Parramatta Personnel Pty Ltd, the fifth defendant, worked out of Granville for a while. This was clearly contrary to the covenant on its literal construction, and indeed, one would have thought that if the covenant covered too wide an area, then whatever reading down would be effected under the Restraint of Trade Act, Granville would have been included in the affected area.

The present office of the defendants is in Blaxland Road, Ryde. The scale map which is in evidence, shows quite clearly that the whole of Blaxland Road Ryde is just within the 10 kilometre radius from 239 Church Street Parramatta, though that area would only comprehend one further block east of the eastern extremity of Blaxland Road.

The area which is served by the Parramatta office of the plaintiff does not include Ryde itself, but comprehends an area roughly bounded by West Ryde,
Pennant Hills, West Hornsby, Cherrybrook, South Kellyville and Northmead.
Apart from Parramatta itself, the major industrial sites would be along the
Parramatta River from Rydalmere to Meadowbank. Epping is included, but the
North Ryde industrial area and the North Ryde Hospital are outside the area.

When considering whether an area of restraint is reasonable, the Court looks to see whether the business substantially extends over the area in issue, though the employer need not prove that it does business in every part of that area: Ropeways Ltd versus Hoyle [(1919) 120 LT 538], 542.
Usually it is only if there are substantial areas within the radius which has been set as a prohibited area in which areas the employer has no connection, that the covenant will be set aside. In the instant case, it would seem to me on the evidence that the area of the restraint imposed by the covenant is reasonable with the possible exception of it operating in the Top Ryde area, a matter to which I will return.

Mr Molomby also says that the covenant is unreasonable because it covers activities of the workers which could not possibly affect the goodwill of the employer. Mr Molomby says that it prevents an ex-employee even being involved on a contract basis as a part-time consultant in an activity of a similar kind to which he or she was engaged during the four months prior to termination.

Again, I do not consider that this is unreasonable. It is quite common for ex- employees to find all sorts of devices of evading a covenant. Even a covenant structured as 17(ii) is, does not prevent the employee earning his or her living from his or her normal occupation in vast areas of the Sydney metropolitan area.

As Mr Gleeson has submitted, if the Court was to read down the covenant under the Restraint of Trade Act, the Court would look at the particular facts of this case rather than generalities. The facts are that each of the first, second and third defendants, with the connivance of the fifth defendant, is carrying on the occupation of an employment consultant within the prohibited area. There is a clear interest in the plaintiff employer to prevent this happening.

As I said earlier, the only doubt I have is as to Top Ryde. There are some connections between Ryde and Parramatta, but it seems to me that where Ryde is partly within and partly without the prohibited area, and the service area of the Parramatta office has little connection with Ryde, that bearing in mind the prima facie presumption that covenants in restraint of trade are void unless shown to be reasonable, I should exclude the Top Ryde area from the operation of the covenant to allow it to survive as a reasonable covenant.
This will be affected by making orders permitting the defendants despite the general terms of the injunctions, to continue to operate from Blaxland Road
Ryde during the period of the restraint. However, otherwise injunctions should go as prayed.

Mr Gleeson also says that there is a breach of clause 18 of the employment contract which is a covenant by the employee against breaching confidentiality. Mr Molomby says there is no evidence that any of the defendants breached confidentiality. Mr Gleeson suggests that there have been breaches in at least four respects by the first defendant. The evidence on these matters was rather vague, probably because there was suspicion in the minds of Ms Hull and others from what they saw, but because the time for preparing this case for trial was limited, there was no time to follow up those matters. It is clear beyond doubt, that Mr Barrett must have had access to some confidential information of the employer in order to prepare his quotation to Nestl which undercut the plaintiff on the Nestl contract. Just how much of that information was in his head and how much was from filched papers is unclear. Mr Barrett says that the material which he used in the proposal to Nestl was information that was common throughout the industry. I think this could well be right. The situation is that the onus is on the plaintiff to prove its case and I am not prepared to find a breach of clause
In any event, the effect of a breach of clause 18 would be as much cured by the injunctions that are to be made under 17(i) and 17(ii).

At the end of the hearing on 30 July 1996, I made these orders: "Without expressing any views as to the merits, upon the plaintiff by its counsel giving to the Court the usual undertaking as to damages, I make orders 1, 2, , 6, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 23, and 25 of the amended summons filed 29 July 1996 up ... until further order. It shall not be a breach of orders 11, 12 and 13 for the relevant defendant to continue to work at Suite 4, 120 Blaxland Road 
Top Ryde." 
The result of the case is that I will continue those orders permanently with the exception of orders 17 and 18 because I do not think the evidence is really sufficient to make those out. When I say "permanently" where the relevant order names a date that merely means that the order will operate up to that date. There is a typographical error in order 24 where the word should be "restrained" rather than "retrained".

The plaintiff is also entitled to an order for either damages, equitable compensation or an account of profits as against the first and fifth defendants in respect of the profit made on the Nestl contract as a result of the first defendant's activities during June. Provided that the plaintiff files a notice of motion within one month of the date of delivery of these reasons, there may be an inquiry before the Master to ascertain the amount of such damages, equitable compensation or account of profits. I put these in the alternative because it may well be that the plaintiff has to elect which is the appropriate remedy.

I believe that I have made clear the orders that flow from these reasons.
However, the plaintiff may list the matter before me on or before 6 September for short minutes to be considered. That will be the last day I will be sitting in Court this year so that if there are any problems with the form of order after that date, the same will have to be dealt with by a Master or as the Master may direct.

The plaintiff is entitled to an order that the first, second, third and fifth defendants pay its costs of the proceedings. The exhibits may be returned after 28 days.
 * * * 
