

Chopard and Anor versus Vamiso Pty Ltd Matter No 2226/97 [1998] NSWSC 704 (4
December 1998) 
Last Updated: 18 January 1999 `JEROME PAUL CHOPARD & ANOR versus VAMISO PTY LTD` `2226/97` `4 December 1998` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is a purchasers' suit for specific performance. When the proceedings were commenced the statement of claim embraced many more issues than what might be called a simple claim for specific performance, including applications for rectification. However, perhaps a little to the surprise of counsel for the defendant, when the case was opened it was confined to specific performance and indeed the whole of the evidence was documentary, not one affidavit being read. 
The plaintiffs as purchasers and the defendant as vendor entered into a contract in the 1992 edition of the standard form, with very many special conditions and annexures to purchase and sell part of 16 Le Vesinet Drive,
Hunters Hill, being lot 137 in an unregistered plan, a copy of which was annexed to the contract. The purchase price was $1,500,000. Lot 137 has gone through various metamorphoses and would appear to be almost equivalent to lot in the current deposited plan covering the land.

Mr Coles QC, who appeared with Mr Leggat for the plaintiffs, indicated that so far as the plaintiffs were concerned they would be prepared to take a specific performance decree for lot 158 and not seek any compensation for the lack of property between lot 158 and the old lot 137. Mr Rares SC and Mr Ashhurst for the defendant did not make any submissions on that matter, though they did submit that to grant specific performance in this case would be futile.

It is not necessary to look in great detail at much of the rather bulky contract for sale document, which is PX01, however, I will at this stage set out clause 25.1, which is as follows: " 25.1 Vendor's Development Application and Registration of Plan 
Except as provided in this clause, completion of this contract is conditional on: the vendor obtaining development approval under the Environmental Planning & Assessment Act 1979 to the vendor's development application no 053/96 on terms and conditions acceptable to the vendor in all respects; and the vendor obtaining the approval of the Hunters Hill Municipal Council (the "Council") or of any other authority (judicial or otherwise) that may be charged with exercising the Council's approval function to a subdivision plan (the "Plan") in or substantially in the form of the draft plan attached and marked with the letters "AA" (the "Draft Plan") or varied as permitted by this contract and the subsequent registration of the Plan as a deposited plan at the Land Titles Office.

The condition set out in paragraph (a)(i) is for the sole benefit of the vendor and may be waived at any time by notice in writing to the purchaser referring to the condition and specifying that it is waived. The condition set out in paragraph (a)(ii) is for the benefit of both parties.

If the conditions set out in paragraph (a) are not met (or waived) by 10
December 1996 (or such later date as the parties may expressly agree to in writing) then, subject to paragraph (c), either party may by notice in writing to the other rescind this contract before the conditions in paragraph (a) are met (or waived) in which case the provisions of clause 19 apply.

If the purchaser fails for any reason to rescind this contract within 7 days after the right of rescission first accrued, then the purchaser is deemed to have waived its right to and may not rescind this contract under this clause.

The purchaser consents to the application by the vendor for the development approval referred to in paragraph (a)(i) and will not make any objection or cause or encourage any objection to be made to the consent authority in respect of the application." 
That clause must be read together with clause 25.1A which is on a later page of the document, which reads as follows: "25.1A The vendor will use reasonable endeavours to obtain development consent on terms acceptable to the vendor and subdivisional approval and will prepare and lodge at its cost any necessary plan of subdivision with reasonable expedition. For the avoidance of doubt the parties acknowledge that this clause does not place any obligation on the vendor to commence proceedings in the Land and Environment
Court." 
The only other clause to be considered is 28.1, which is as follows: "28.1 Completion 
Completion is to take place on the latter of: December 1996; days after the date the vendor notifies the purchaser that the Plan (referred to in clause 25) has been registered by the Land Titles Office as a deposited plan; and months after the condition in clause 25.1(a)(i) is met or, in the alternative, waived." 
The key question is whether the vendor obtained development approval of development application 53/96 on terms and conditions acceptable to the vendor in all respects.

The subject land is in Hunters Hill municipality and on 14 October 1996 the
Hunters Hill Council issued to the defendant a notice that it had granted a deferred commencement consent of the application pursuant to <case> of the [Environmental Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
EPA Act). The first page of the document says; "f) Conditions of Consent: As set out on page 2." 
Page 2 is headed: "Development Application No: 053/96 
Conditions of Consent" and then these words appear: "A. That a "deferred commencement" consent be granted to DA 53/96 subject to the restrictions as to user or (sic) the land which prohibits the erection of any residential dwelling other than a free standing dwelling house or more than two (2) free standing dwelling houses, being released from the title, within 12 months.

B. That upon satisfactory fulfillment of A above development consent be granted to development application No 53/96 as amended generally in accordance with ... subject to the following conditions of consent:" 
Then there followed 30 numbered paragraphs setting out the matters that one commonly sees as conditions to development consents.

The approval was a deferred commencement consent. However, the authorities show that even though the commencement of the consent is postponed, the consent is a final one. As Talbot J said in Cameron versus Nambucca SC [(1997) LGRA 268], 276: "A deferred commencement consent is a final consent when it is granted, even though the date from which the consent operates must not be endorsed on a notice, as required by <case>(a), until the applicant satisfies the consent authority as to the matters specified in the condition." 
The matter referred to in para A of the development consent derived from an
B instrument which was filed with DP 843181 and registered on 14 October
The registered proprietor of not only this land but the whole of the adjoining affected land at that stage was the defendant. The instrument burdened every lot, including lot 23, out of which lot 158 is taken, in favour of every other lot, so that: "The registered proprietor from time to time of a burdened lot shall not permit or suffer the erection of any type of residential dwelling on the burdened lot other than a free standing dwelling house and shall not permit or suffer the erection of more than two (2) free standing dwelling houses on the burdened lot." 
As the proposal of the defendant was to erect thirty-five flats in five separate buildings on the land there was obviously a conflict with the restriction imposed by the 88B instrument.

The defendant obtained a development consent by what is nowadays the usual process, that is there is a dialogue between the applicant and its advisers and officers of the council to ensure that conflict is at the minimum and the development consent is obtained, if it can be obtained, as early as possible.

The evidence in this case shows that that process was carried through and that the defendant retained the services of Julie Bindon & Associates (JBA) to negotiate with the council. JBA drew the attention of the council to the existence of the covenant during the negotiation phase. There was a free, frank and open disclosure and what is more, the council was obliged to take into account the presence of the covenant. All this is set out in the letter from JBA to the council of 8 October 1996, which is part of PX14.

The consent was given in the form that I have already set out. Indeed, the applicant was aware before the formal consent was given by the council of council's officers' recommendation and did nothing, or at least there is nothing in the evidence, to dissuade the council from adopting the recommendation in the officers' report. As Mr Coles QC put, the defendant asked for a particular consent and got it.

When the consent was promulgated, there is no evidence of any reaction on the part of the defendant. As I have indicated, cl 28 of the contract envisaged completion might take place on 10 December 1996. Accordingly, in December correspondence was generated between the solicitors.

On 5 December 1996 the defendant's solicitors wrote to the plaintiffs' solicitors indicating that the council had granted a deferred commencement consent subject to various conditions, including the removal within twelve months of a restriction on the user of land. The solicitors enclosed a copy of the development approval and said: "We are instructed to advise that the development approval is not acceptable to our client. Our client is currently in the process of investigating the feasibility of removing the restriction as to user in order to satisfy condition A of the consent but has not arrived at any concluded view." 
The evidence shows that before that letter was sent it was faxed to Mr Chris
Rose for his approval. The role of Mr Rose in the defendant is not completely clear. It would seem from the material before the court that at one stage the defendant company was part of the Londish empire, but is now controlled by the
NatWest Bank and that Mr Rose is an officer of NatWest. He is not a director of the defendant, but appears to be a local associate director of a NatWest company, though his precise authority is not revealed. However, on PX19 the solicitor has made a note: "Spoke to Chris Rose: He advised letter okay to issue".

It is to be noted that the letter of 5 December is expressed in a rather singular way, though this may be pure accident rather than the product of deep consideration. First, the letter does not say that the development approval is not acceptable to the client, but merely that the solicitors are instructed to advise that. Secondly, there is the phrase "satisfy condition A", whereas "A" was merely a matter that had to be dealt with before the consent could operate at all.

Although, when I put these matters to Mr Rares SC his reaction was that I was quibbling, and that when a solicitor says he is instructed that the development approval is not acceptable to the client what he or she means is that the client has in fact determined that it is not acceptable. When one does find the core point of a case is whether a certain condition is or is not acceptable, one normally expects if not direct evidence from the client that it is not acceptable, at the very least a firm statement to that effect. When one sees what might be called a mealymouthed negotiating statement, one gets suspicious.

The solicitors then started negotiating as to what might be conveniently called a new sunset clause. Part of the rectification issue in this suit, which has now gone away, is that the plaintiffs are saying that there was an error in the contract and it was never anticipated that they should complete in December 1996 at any stage, and it was doubtless these matters which have become irrelevant to my consideration, apart from others, that were involved in the discussion between the solicitors.

At that stage NatWest were being advised by Mallesons Stephen Jaques solicitors on associated matters. The associated matters included proceedings in the Federal Court of Australia by some of the persons entitled to the benefit of the restrictions, who had apparently been purchasers from the defendant, for false and misleading conduct under the [Trade Practices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/numact/tpa1974149/). Those proceedings were in due course referred to mediation. An accommodation was reached after the mediation and in November 1997 the covenant was modified by this Court, more or less by consent. That, however, was too late to activate consent 053/96.

However, in the letter from Mr Rose to Mallesons Stephen Jaques of 13 January those solicitors were advised that NatWest had obtained a deferred commencement consent and that until the condition was satisfied it was restricted in dealing with the land, and then the letter continued: "This development application is of considerable financial importance to
NatWest and is crucial to the recoupement of substantial loan and development funds which the bank has invested in the Project to date ... From the date of this correspondence there remains less than 10 months in which to determine the covenant issue. Any opportunity to expedite this matter would result in significant financial savings to NatWest as well as remove uncertainty for existing Estate residents." 
On 23 January 1997 there is a note in one of the solicitor's files to the effect that Mr Chopard understood that NatWest had not accepted the current development consent and will only accept it if it becomes fully fledged and unconditional. I note this because Mr Rares SC put that it had some significance, but I do not really think it has any significance for a number of reasons which will become clear in due course.

On 8 April 1997 the defendant purported to rescind the contract under the powers allegedly reserved to it in cl 25.1(c) of the contract. This was rejected by the plaintiffs' solicitors on 16 April 1997. In due course, the vendor obtained other approvals, for instance, development approval 92/97 on August 1997, for some other subdivision and development of the land.

There is a note of the plaintiffs' solicitors in the file that in April they were telephoned by the defendant's solicitors and told that those who were in control of the defendant company in New Zealand had indicated that as the market for land in Sydney had changed considerably there would be no alteration to the sunset clause and the contract would be rescinded. Mr Rares
SC objected to that being received in evidence. I received it in evidence because it seemed to me that this was one of the cases where subsequent conduct threw light on what the parties' intentions were at an earlier point in time: see Hide & Skin Trading Pty Ltd versus Oceanic Meat Traders Ltd [(1990) 20 NSWLR 310], 316; Boranga versus Flintoff [(1997) 19 WAR 1], 6. Although it does reinforce the view that I have otherwise reached, it is not a pivotal piece of evidence in the case.

In these circumstances, was there approval given by the council on terms and conditions acceptable to the vendor in all respects? 
The words are "terms and conditions". This is to be contrasted with the word "condition" which is used in paras (b) and (c) of cl 25. "Terms" is a fairly weak word. It would seem originally that the words "terms and conditions" came from landlord and tenant law where "terms" meant a provision in a lease relating to its duration and "conditions" came from the introductory words of many leases after the habendum "provided always, and these presents are upon the express condition"; see the 8th edition of Foa's General Law of Landlord and Tenant (Thames Bank Publishing, London, 1957) p 112. Generally speaking, the word "terms" is not a word of art and has no definite legal meaning: In re Gillespie <case>, 81.
"Conditions" however, is a word with a definite legal meaning, which meaning is in general that a person makes a promise which can be enforced. One does in odd cases get the situation where courts distinguish between promissory conditions and contingent conditions; see for instance Perri versus Coolangatta
Investments Pty Ltd <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 537], but generally speaking the word "conditions" has the overtone of promise. Thus one finds in some lease cases that it is very important to distinguish between a covenant which is a promise, breach of which results in damages, as opposed to a qualification on a covenant. So if a landlord promises that if there is a promise by the tenant not to sublet without consent, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld, there is no covenant on behalf of the lessor sounding in damages if the lessor unreasonably withholds consent: Sear versus House Property and Investment
Society [(1880) 16 Ch D 387]; Yared v Spier [[1979] 2 NSWLR 291.] 
Accordingly, if there was nothing else I would have expected that "terms and conditions" would mean something which imposed an obligation on the person getting the development consent, and what might be called a contingent condition would not be one of the terms and conditions of a development consent. The reason is that no additional burden is placed on the defendant.
It was already bound as a matter of conveyancing law to get rid of the burden of the restriction vis-a-vis any purchaser, and was already bound to comply with the covenant, so far as the persons to whom it had already sold land in the subdivision.

The words "terms and conditions" of a planning consent were examined by this
Court in Karbonkraft Pty Ltd versus Hampson [(1996) 13 LGRA 54.] In that case the court said at pp 55-56 that it was usual for councils to provide not only matters which were conditions of the consent in the strict sense, but also other matters as to how work should be carried out and during what hours, which, whilst not conditions, were terms. Again the whole flavour is that "terms and conditions", (though it should be noted that the phrase is often "terms or conditions") relate to what the council required to be done as a partial quid pro quo for granting the consent.

It is clear from PX52 that the only reason the terms and conditions were not acceptable was because of condition A. As this is not a term and condition within clause 25 the defendant must fail on this point.

Even if that were wrong, then one needs to consider what the word "unacceptable" means and work out as a matter of fact whether the consent was unacceptable to the vendor in all respects.

The word "unacceptable" does not seem to be one that is liked by lexicographers. In the standard dictionaries I have looked at, with the exception of the Macquarie Dictionary, the word does not appear except as a cross-reference to "acceptable". The Macquarie Dictionary defines the word as "that cannot be accepted; unwelcome; unsuitable".

One gets the same problem when one looks at judicial dictionaries and the cases to which they refer and, indeed, one finds that the cases are somewhat conflicting. The reason for this is that one needs to look at the word "unacceptable" in its context. In Connell versus Avon Garage Company Inc [137 A ]
(Penns) the broker had to find a ready, willing and able purchaser with reasonable financing. At pp 767-8 the court said that there was a difference between "reasonable financing" and "acceptable or satisfactory financing".
However, in Diettrich versus JJ Newberry Co Inc [19 P (2d) 115] (1933) (Wash) the question as to what was an acceptable rental was held to be a reasonable rental and to be a reasonable rental on an objective basis which could be determined by the courts where the parties could not agree. In Connell's case it seemed to be said that "reasonable" was objective, whereas "acceptable" was subjective. In Burke versus Daughters of the Most Holy Redeemer
Inc [26 A (2d) 460] (1942) (Penns) the question was whether the brokers had obtained an acceptable mortgage for the defendants so that they could get a commission. The test was said to be that "acceptable" meant the same as "satisfactory" and it was not whether the defendants ought to be satisfied, but whether they were in fact satisfied, subject to the limitations that any dissatisfaction must be genuine and not prompted by caprice or bad faith.

In Commercial Credit Co versus Insular Motor Corporation [17 F (2d) 896] (1927) (First
Circuit Court of Appeals) the contract between a factory and the car salesman required sales papers and purchase agreements to be acceptable. The court held that the word "acceptable" meant acceptable within the usual business meaning of the word and not by whim.

Finally, the word occurs in a very different context in Rocha versus Hulen [44
P (2d) 478](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=44%20P%20%282d%29%20478 "View LawCiteRecord" ) (1935) (Cal) as to whether a child who was injured and put in a neighbour's motor vehicle accepted a ride in the vehicle and so was uninsured. The court held that a person, who without their consent but without their disconsent either, is put into a car to be taken to hospital does not accept a ride in the vehicle because acceptance involves a knowledgeful consent.

In Australia the word has only been used in two cases, neither of which has any close association with the present, but the use of the word is significant. In R versus Gallagher <case>; [[1986] VR 219] the question was whether there was an unacceptable risk of the jury reaching a non-consensual verdict. Although the Victorian Full Court did not dwell overmuch on the word "acceptable", it is clear from what they said that it had to be a fairly serious risk before the court should intervene in the trial. Again, one sees the phrase in family law in unacceptable risk to children because of alleged sexual misconduct by a parent. See Re G [[1987] 1 WLR 1461] at 1469 and M versus M [(1988) 166 CLR 69], 78. Again an unacceptable risk is something which is more than an element of risk or a possible risk, it means a very serious risk.

It is in this background that one has to view the submissions made by Mr Coles
QC, on the one side, and Mr Rares SC, on the other side, as to whether the word "unacceptable" means, as Mr Rares SC says, something that is commercially inconvenient or worse, or as Mr Coles QC says, something much more than mere commercial inconvenience.

It seems to me that Mr Coles QC's view is the correct one and that the flavour of the word "unacceptable" means that what is preventing the matter being welcomed and agreed to is something which is more than inexpediency, or more than the idea that it is somehow or other not the done thing, but that for some core reason it is not able to be welcomed.

This method of approaching the matter is, I believe, consistent with the way in which courts approach contracts where one party includes a provision, which if read literally means that it has a complete discretion as to whether it will complete the contract, or alternatively if certain events occur has complete discretion. If the contract is one which can be performed or not performed at whim then it is illusory and no contract at all; see for instance Placer Development Ltd versus Commonwealth <case>; [(1969) 121 CLR 353], 356 and Meehan versus Jones <case>; [(1982) 149 CLR 571], 581.

Accordingly, courts tend to interpret provisions that provide a gateway for escape in such a way that it cannot be said that one party or the other can at will decide whether or not it will perform. Sometimes, as in Meehan versus Jones , the gateway has got to be opened reasonably. Other times it is opened both reasonably and honestly.

Mr Rares SC kept saying to me that there was no allegation in the present case that the defendant was acting dishonestly. That is completely true, but the word "honestly" in this connection is really just used as a very rough English translation of the legal term "bona fide" and does not involve any moral opprobrium. The real question is as in some mortgage cases that a right cannot be exercised capriciously or at whim. That is really what is meant by "honestly" in this connection.

Here, as I have said, there is very little evidence that the defendant found the consent unacceptable. There is no statement by any director or even a clear statement from Mr Rose that that is so. There were no reasons given as to why the conditions of the consent, as opposed to the obligations under the
B instrument, were not acceptable. All that we have is the solicitors' letter of 5 December 1996. Furthermore, what had to be unacceptable were the terms and conditions of the development consent, not the matter that was imposed by the 88B instrument, or even complying with the terms and conditions of the 88B instrument. It had to be the terms and conditions themselves that were unacceptable or acceptable.

One has to take not only the solicitors' letter and what was said in January , but the whole conduct of the vendor. As I have indicated, the vendor told Mallesons Stephen Jaques that it was a very valuable consent. It instructed Mallesons to deal very, very quickly with getting rid of the restriction, so that the matters could all be completed. This conduct of the vendor has got to be taken into consideration together with the statements that its solicitors made.

There was some debate before me as to on whom the onus of proof lay as to whether the terms and conditions were acceptable or not. It is, I think, true that the authorities do not speak with one mind, and part of the reason for that is that often the way in which litigation is framed puts the evidentiary onus on one party, and sometimes it puts it on the other. Despite what I have said in earlier decisions, I think it is probably wise to follow what
McLelland CJ in Eq said in Plumor Pty Ltd versus Handley [(1996) 41 NSWLR ]
at 35-6 and to say that the onus is on the plaintiffs, though it does not really seem to me that the question of onus makes any difference in the present case.

The whole of the material suggests that the development consent was one which was asked for. It was realised that it was going to issue in that form.
Nothing was ever said about the form. The vendor tried to get its solicitors to reach the position where the consent would become activated and the solicitors did this. It was a very valuable consent to the defendant and no matter on whom the onus is, I am satisfied that the terms and conditions were acceptable to the vendor.

I note Mr Rares SC's understandable reliance on the words "in all respects" and it is certainly the case that they must be taken into account, but I do not really see how this helps the present case, though it might have been a consideration had one of the conditions 1 to 30 been unacceptable to the vendor in a minor respect.

The other aspect of cl 25.1(a) is that when one looks at clauses 28.1(b) and .1(c) it can be seen that it is vital to the working out of the contract that a person know whether the event in clause 25.1(a)(ii) has happened or not.

As Mr Coles QC put, this means that subject to the usual period of grace allowed for people to collect their thoughts and take advice, the time for the vendor indicating that a development consent contains acceptable or unacceptable terms and conditions must be within a reasonable time after the development consent is issued or not at all.

It would seem to me that the reasonable period would have expired at least a month after the deferred commencement approval was given, so that anything that happened after the end of November 1996, apart from a light it might shed on to earlier conduct, cannot affect the position.

I said I would mention again the telephone conversation of January 1997, but it really seems to suggest that the vendor was taking the position not that the terms and conditions themselves were unacceptable, but that it would keep in reserve its decision as to whether they were acceptable or not until it could see whether it could comply with the covenant. This it just was not able to do under the contract. Again, the suggestion in April 1997 was that the conditions had been considered unacceptable because of some other economic factor. That again would be something that could not be taken into account.

It follows, accordingly, whichever way one approaches the main point in this case that the vendor cannot succeed. The plaintiffs are entitled to declaration (d) and order (e) in the further amended statement of claim.

There was a defence of futility, but as things have turned out I cannot see any reason why the decree should not be carried out. If in the future some problem arises then the court can consider whether damages should be given in lieu.

Accordingly, I also order that there be liberty to apply for directions as to the implementation of the order for specific performance and reserve further consideration.
 (Counsel addressed on costs).

As to costs, generally the plaintiffs should receive their general costs of the action, but two matters need to be taken into account. First, that the rectification issue and, indeed, other ancillary issues were abandoned at the beginning of the trial and these were issues that the defendant would ordinarily have spent time in investigating.

Secondly, on 9 July 1998 the plaintiffs' solicitors sent to the defendant's solicitors a letter offering to settle. This was responded to by a counter- offer, but both the offer and the counter-offer were more favourable to the defendant than the actual verdict. This ordinarily means that costs should be on the indemnity basis after the date of the letter.

There is evidence as to what counsels' fees are and, on the tariff that applies these days, they appear to be fair and reasonable, but there is no evidence as to what the solicitors' costs are. I am always reluctant to make an indemnity order for costs without at least an indication that there is no costs agreement which is charging a more favourable rate to solicitors than is common in the industry; see Wallace versus Baulkham Hills Smash Repairs Pty Ltd (No 2) 21 August 1995 unreported.

I believe Mr Ashhurst is right, there should be some discount because of the failed issues, which I think that I would normally make ten percent, but in view of other factors I will adjust it to five percent. This is because I think that ordinarily I would have made an order that there be indemnity costs after 9 July 1998, but as there is no evidence as to the solicitors' costs I will limit that to counsel. So I think on a broad bush approach that will fairly reflect what should be done. I order the defendant to pay 95 percent of the plaintiffs' cost, counsels' fees to be on the indemnity basis after 9 July
That order covers costs to date. Further costs are reserved. The exhibits should remain.
 * * * 
