

Regina versus Neredith Joy Stackelroth No. 60317/95 Criminal Law and Procedure [1996] NSWSC 41 (4 March 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
HUNT CJ at CL(1), ALLEN(2) AND DUNFORD(3) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY, December 1995 #DATE 5:2:1996 #ADD 4:3:1996 
Counsel for the Appellant    G.J. Graham 
Solicitors for the Appellant 
Baker Love 
Counsel for the Respondent   R.N. Howie QC 
Solicitors for the Respondent  S.E. O'Connor
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
HUNT CJ at CL The factual background to this appeal, the modified grounds of appeal so far dealt with by this Court and the arguments in relation to those grounds are set out in the judgment prepared by Allen J.
I agree, for the reasons given by Allen
J, that leave pursuant to r 4 of the Criminal Appeal Rules 1952 should be refused to permit the appellant to rely on the first and third of those grounds, and that the fourth of them should be rejected. I also agree that the second of those grounds of appeal should be rejected, but I prefer to state my own reasons for that conclusion.
As Allen J says, it involves a question of law of general importance.
As reformulated, the second ground of appeal asserts that the statement of
Det Sen Const Carters (who died between the committal proceedings and the trial), if otherwise admissible pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/), should nevertheless have been rejected by the trial judge in the exercise of his discretion. The death of Det Sen Const Carters was not in dispute. The admissibility of the statement at the trial depended then upon whether it had been admitted at the committal proceedings pursuant to [s 48A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48a.html) of the [Justices
Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), which was the subject of the first ground of appeal. I agree with
Allen J that there is no substance in that ground of appeal.
The issues which were raised under this second ground of appeal were (i) whether the trial judge had a "residual discretion" to exclude the statement, and (ii) whether he ought in any event to have excluded it in the exercise of the general discretion which a trial judge has in any criminal trial to exclude otherwise admissible evidence. As to the second of those issues, I agree with
Allen J that that general discretion remains applicable to any evidence or statement otherwise admissible pursuant to <case>. That general discretion covers not only the case where the prejudicial effect of the evidence outweighs its probative value, ((1) Rex v Christie [(1914) AC 545] at 192; Driscoll versus The Queen <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 517] at 479) but also where the use of the evidence would result in an unfair trial for the accused ((2) McDermott versus The
King [(1948) 76 CLR 501] at 519-520; Cleland v
The Queen <case>; [(1982) 151 CLR 1] at 8-10, 13-14, 19-20) or where the evidence was unlawfully or improperly obtained. ((3) The Queen versus Ireland <case>; [(1970) 126 CLR 321] at 74-75; Collins versus The Queen <case>; [(1980) 31 ALR 257] at 551-554;
Foster versus The Queen (at 20-21)) That all three areas of that general discretion remain applicable notwithstanding the admissibility otherwise of the evidence pursuant to <case> has always been understood to be the case. ((4) See, for example, Regina v Lynch [(1979) 2 NSWLR 775] at 101.)
However, something more than the mere fact that the witness is unavailable for cross-examination at the trial would have to be shown in relation to each of those areas of the general discretion, for the prejudice flowing from such an unavailability has necessarily been accepted by the Legislature itself as appropriate in the circumstances to which <case> is applicable. ((5) Scott v
The Queen [(1989) AC 1242] at 1258-1259).
The only area of general discretion suggested as being relevant in the present case was the first. I agree with
Allen J that, for the purposes of the exercise of this particular discretion, the unavailability of the witness for cross-examination at the trial may be relevant to a consideration of the probative value of the evidence, ((6) Regina versus Brotherton (at 101)) although
I repeat that that fact alone is insufficient. And I agree with Allen J that there was nothing relevantly prejudicial about this evidence in the present case. All that it did was that it proved the Crown case; there was nothing relevantly prejudicial in the sense of introducing material which, although not itself probative (or only slightly probative) of guilt, was also probative of some other matter which may wrongly have been regarded by the jury as probative (or strongly probative) of guilt, such as propensity.
((7) DPP v
Boardman [(1975) AC 421] at 47-48;
Scott versus The Queen (at 1256-1257); Regina versus Masten (at 479); Pfennig versus The
Queen <case>; [(1975) 182 CLR 461] at 487-488, 528.) It would not have been appropriate in this case for the statement to have been excluded upon that basis.

That leaves only the first issue which was raised under the second ground of appeal, whether the trial judge had any "residual" discretion to exclude evidence which was otherwise admissible pursuant to <case>. By "residual discretion", I refer to some form of discretion to reject evidence otherwise admissible pursuant to <case> apart from that general discretion in the various areas referred to in the previous paragraph but one.
Section 409 is concerned with the admissibility of two types of material at the trial where the relevant witness is unable, for the reasons then specified in the section, to give evidence - namely, that he is dead, or so ill as not to be able to travel or to give evidence, or is absent from
Australia. This appeal is not concerned with the interpretation of those specified reasons; ((8) See Regina versus Sinanovic [(1992) 67 A Crim R 230] at -232; Regina versus Brotherton (at 100-101, 102-103); cf Regina versus Mendham [(1993) A Crim R 382] at 387, 394. The section now applies also where the witness is so ill as not to be able to travel or to give evidence without a risk of endangering his life.) as I have said, there was no dispute that Det Sen Const
Carters had died between the committal proceedings and the trial. The section is concerned with the admissibility of both the oral evidence of such a witness given at the committal proceedings and the statement of such a witness which was admitted as evidence at the committal pursuant to [s 48A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48a.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/), and with the admissibility of each type of material at the trial both as evidence for the Crown and as evidence in the accused's defence. Each of those four situations is dealt with in a slightly (but nevertheless significantly) different way from the others.
Section 409(1) deals with the oral evidence of such a witness at the committal proceedings being read at the trial as evidence for the Crown. Upon the fulfillment of various conditions - that most relevant for the purposes of the present discussion being that the accused, or his legal representative, had a full opportunity of cross-examining the witness at the committal - the subsection says: "A deposition of a witness may be read as evidence for the prosecution at the trial of the accused... " 
It does NOT say that the court may permit the previous evidence to be read as evidence for the prosecution. As Street CJ observed in Regina v
Lynch, ((9) (at 780)) the section does not confer any power on the court; it confers a right on the Crown or, in the case of <case> (to which I turn shortly), on the accused. There is, in my view, no room to read into subsection (1) any residual discretion in the court to reject the evidence once all of the conditions have been fulfilled. That was the unanimous view of this Court in
Regina v Lynch, ((10) (at 780-781, 784)) in Regina versus Murray Frederick Farquhar ((11) (CCA, 29 May 1985, unreported) at 25-26) and in Regina v Brotherton ((12) (at 100).) It was the view of the Privy Council in relation to a
Jamaican provision similar to <case>, in Scott v The Queen; ((13) (at 1255)) their Lordships described it as the absence of any "statutory discretion", but they were speaking of what I have described as a "residual discretion".
Section 409(2) deals with the oral evidence of such a witness at the committal proceedings being read at the trial as evidence in the accused's defence. There is no condition that the accused, or his legal representative, had a full opportunity of cross-examining the witness at the committal to be fulfilled. The subsection says: "The deposition of any (such) witness ... may, if the accused so require, be read as evidence in his defence at the trial..." 
Again, it does
NOT say that the court may permit the previous evidence to be read; it confers a right on the accused - a right to require the evidence to be read (that is, by the Crown). In practice, the evidence is sometimes read during the accused's case. The use of the verb "require" could not be more descriptive of a right of the accused - subject, of course, to the usual rules as to the relevance and form of that evidence ((14) The tentative suggestion to the contrary made in Gorman versus Fitzpatrick (at 337-338) is, with respect, clearly wrong.) - without there being any residual discretion in the court once the evidence is otherwise admissible pursuant to the section.
The operative words are the same in both subsections (1) and (2) - "the deposition ... may ... be read as evidence", and there is nothing in the context of either subsection to suggest that those words should be interpreted differently in each.
I turn now to the statement of a witness unable for the reasons then specified in the section to give evidence at the trial where that statement had been admitted at the committal proceedings pursuant to [s 48A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48a.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/). Such a statement is referred to in the section as a "prescribed statement". These provisions were added by amendment in 1983, ((15)
Act No 170 of 1983, Sched 1, par (1)(b)) and thus after this Court's decision in Regina v
Lynch. Upon the fulfilment of various conditions - to which brief reference will be made shortly - <case> makes a statement of a witness admissible in the committal proceedings "as evidence to the same extent as if it were oral evidence to the like effect given in those proceedings by that person". The statement must contain certain particulars, and it must have been served on the defendant within a given time (ss 48B, 48C). The defendant may serve on the informant within a given time a notice that he desires the attendance of the witness at the committal proceedings and, if such notice is given by the defendant, the statement becomes inadmissible except by consent (s 48E). The justice conducting the committal proceedings may also give a direction that the witness attend the hearing, in which case the statement becomes inadmissible unless the direction is withdrawn (s 48E). In both such cases, the witness must be called to give oral evidence if the prosecution relies upon his evidence. The statement is also inadmissible if, at the time of its tender, the witness is dead (s 48 I). Another relevant matter to which attention should be drawn is that there are restrictions imposed upon the cross-examination at committal proceedings of witnesses who are the alleged victim of certain crimes of violence (s 48EA).
Section 409(7) deals with a statement which had been admitted at the committal proceedings pursuant to <case> being read at the trial as evidence for the Crown. There is no condition - as there was for <case> - that the accused, or his legal representative, had a full opportunity of cross-examining the witness at the committal. The subsection says: "Except in so far as the judge otherwise orders, a prescribed statement may be read as evidence for the prosecution at the trial of the accused..." 
Section 409(8) deals with such a statement being read at the trial as evidence in the accused's defence. Again, there is no condition relating to the opportunity of cross-examining the witness at the committal. The sub-section says: "A prescribed statement may, if the accused so requires, be read as evidence in the accused's defence at the trial of the accused..."
The words "Except in so far as the judge otherwise orders" in <case> are not in <case>. Nor are they in either <case> or <case>. These words, in my view, do give the court a discretion to exclude a prescribed statement - or parts of a prescribed statement - notwithstanding that it is otherwise admissible pursuant to <case>. I so described them in Regina versus Brotherton, ((16) (at 101)) although I pointed out that it was unnecessary in that case to consider the width of that discretion. It has become necessary to do so in the present case.
There are two ways of looking at the reference to discretion in subs (7).
Subsection (10) permits the trial judge to reject the whole or any part of a prescribed statement if it is inadmissible. That subsection is applicable whether the statement is to be read as evidence for the Crown or in the accused's defence. The inclusion by the Legislature of these two provisions specifically in relation to the admissibility of prescribed statements - the giving of a discretion and the power to reject inadmissible material - may have been intended as no more than an express reference to what has always been understood to be the trial judge's power (referred to earlier) to rule upon the admissibility of the oral evidence given by such a witness at the committal hearing and to be read pursuant to subs (1) or subs (2) - that is, upon its relevance and form - and to exercise the general discretion a trial judge has in any criminal trial to exclude otherwise admissible evidence. That is one way of looking at the reference to discretion in subs (7). The other is that it gives to the trial judge a residual discretion to reject the reading of a prescribed statement as evidence for the Crown, but not its reading in the accused's defence, notwithstanding that it is otherwise admissible pursuant to <case>.
In my view, the second way of looking at the reference to discretion in subs (7) is the correct one. ((17) The presence of Subs (10) Can be explained by the fact that prescribed statements are more likely to contain material which is either irrelevant or inadmissible in form than oral evidence which has already been given at the committal proceedings, and thus the need to emphasize the power to exclude material upon this basis: cf Regina versus Adamiczka [(1993) 33 NSWLR 68] at 79-80.) The distinction thereby drawn between <case> and <case> is a sensible one. Different factors may have effect one way or the other upon the exercise of that residual discretion to exclude the whole or part of the particular material where it is a prescribed statement, rather than the oral evidence, of a witness which is being read as evidence for the
Crown. The unavailability of the witness for cross-examination at the trial may well have a greater prejudice in the particular case where - as will usually be the case under <case> - there was no full opportunity of cross-examining the witness at the committal. It may well be different in some circumstances if there was a deliberate decision made not to cross-examine the witness at the committal proceedings; it is unnecessary to explore those circumstances in the present case. On the other hand, the exercise of the discretion could more readily be enlivened in the case where cross-examination of the alleged victim of a crime of violence was restricted at the committal by s 48EA of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/). What may also be relevant to the exercise of that residual discretion would, of course, be the fact that the accused - who was under no obligation to put his case to that witness at the committal ((18)
Regina versus Birks [(1990) 19 NSWLR 677] at 689) - would have the advantage of putting his case to the jury without the Crown being able to refute it from the mouth of the witness who is unable to give evidence at the trial. ((19) (This is often reflected to as the "free kick" advantage)). Another matter which may also be relevant is the effect of the jury warning which is required whenever material is read as evidence in the trial pursuant to <case> - that, in evaluating the weight to be given to such evidence, the jury must take into account the fact that they have not had the benefit of seeing the witness give the evidence or being cross-examined - and the obligation of the trial judge in the appropriate case to develop this warning by pointing to particular features of the evidence which conflict with other evidence and which could have been explored in cross-examination. ((20) Scott versus The Queen (at 1259);
Regina versus Mendham (at 388)). That is not intended to be an exhaustive list of the factors which may be relevant to the exercise of the residual discretion.
In the present case, the fact that the witness (Det Sen Const Carters) was unavailable for cross-examination at the trial had no greater prejudice than that which the Legislature has necessarily accepted as appropriate in the circumstances to which <case> is applicable.
The witness was cross-examined at the committal, and the relevant parts of the oral evidence which he gave there was also being read to the jury as evidence for the prosecution. Indeed, it is difficult to see how it could ever be appropriate to exclude the prescribed statement of the witness in the exercise of the residuary discretion permitted by <case> where the Crown has a right to have the oral evidence of that witness read as its evidence at the trial. It could not properly have been excluded in this case in the exercise of that residuary discretion.
For these reasons, I would reject the second ground of appeal. I agree with Allen J, for the reasons which he has given, that the sentence imposed upon the appellant should not be disturbed. In my view, leave to appeal against the sentence should be refused, but an order should be made (if the appeal against conviction ultimately be dismissed) that time is to count.
Following the conclusion of the argument on these four grounds of appeal and on the application for leave to appeal against sentence, the appellant filed an application to have the hearing re-opened and for leave to add a new ground of appeal against conviction - that there is fresh evidence which would, if adduced at the trial, have created "a high probability of a different verdict" - together with two affidavits in support of that ground of appeal. Such an application will involve a consideration of
Gallagher versus The
Queen, ((21) <case>; [(1986) 160 CLR 392)] which was recently examined by this Court in
Regina versus Gregory Mark Hemsley, ((22) (CCA, 8 December 1995, unreported)) and it may involve cross-examination of the deponents.
Because of prior commitments of a substantial nature of two of the three members of the Court which heard this appeal, it is a matter of practical impossibility to have that application heard by the Court as presently constituted until considerably later this year. After consultation with the legal representatives of the parties informally, it is agreed that this application should be heard by a differently constituted Court which, by consent, will be able if necessary to give effect to the judgments now given in ultimately disposing of the appeal. ((23) A similar procedure was adopted in Regina versus Dufffield [(1992) 28 NSWLR 638] at 125-126.)
The appeal is to be mentioned before the Registrar on Monday 12 February for a date to be fixed for the hearing of the appellant's application and, if leave be granted, the further hearing of the appeal.
JUDGE2
ALLEN J On 1 May 1995 the appellant was indicted before his Honour Judge
Coleman QC at the District Court at Newcastle on the charge that on 5 March at Morisset being a director of Eralyn Nursing Home Pty Limited she defrauded David Elliott of money. On 8 May 1995 she was found guilty by the jury and on 2 June 1995 his Honour sentenced her to six months' imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention commencing on 16 June 1995.
She appeals against conviction and seeks leave to appeal against the sentence.
As the trial was conducted many facts were common ground. The company conducted a twenty-two bed nursing home, one of the residents in which was Mr
Elliott.
He gave the appellant an authority to permit her to operate on his savings bank account which was with the Belmont branch of the
Commonwealth
Bank. The purpose of the authority was to enable the appellant to withdraw funds from that account to pay accounts rendered to him from time to time by the company. Mr Elliott had only limited mental capacity to manage his own financial affairs. Similar arrangements were in place with a number of other of the residents. In 1991 the appellant decided to have all such accounts centralised in the Newcastle branch of the ANZ Bank. On 5 March 1991 she closed Mr Elliott's Commonwealth Bank account by making a cash withdrawal of $2,663.53. On the same day she deposited $900 into the Newcastle branch of the
ANZ Bank-in an account which she opened, styled in the name of the appellant "as trustee" for Mr Elliott. On the same occasion she also opened accounts "as trustee" for a number of other residents, having first closed their respective existing bank accounts. One resident whose money was dealt with by the appellant in this way was Vera Talbot.
On 2 January 1992 Mr Elliott, whose condition had worsened, was transferred to a different nursing home - not one operated by the company. Not long thereafter a cheque was sent by the company to the management of the new nursing home for what was left in Mr Elliott's account from the $900 which had been deposited in it on 5 March 1991. At about the same time
Mr Elliott's son telephoned the appellant enquiring about the state of his father's banking account. He was dissatisfied with the information furnished by the appellant.
He made his own enquiries from a number of banks. In consequence he went to the police.
On 8 April 1992 Detective Carters and Detective Sergeant McBride went to the first mentioned nursing home and spoke to the appellant.
Detective Carters informed her that Mr Elliott's son had complained that she had taken his father's money and had failed to account for it. The appellant agreed to go to
Toronto police station that afternoon and said that, as requested, she would bring the financial records with her. That afternoon she did go to the police station as arranged. What took place at the station was in dispute at the committal hearing and in the ensuing trial of the appellant.
At the committal hearing Detective Carters, who to that point had been the officer in charge of the investigation, produced the Crown brief which he had prepared. It included a statement by him dated 25 May 1992. It was made an exhibit at the committal. Detective Carters gave evidence that the contents of the statement were true. He was cross-examined at some length, the cross-examination occupying 13 pages of the transcript. Prior to the trial, however,
Detective Carters died. His statement was received in evidence at the trial pursuant to <case> of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). Also in evidence, edited by agreement by the Crown and counsel for the appellant, was a copy of the transcript of his cross-examination at the committal.
The substance of Detective Carters' account, as so put before the jury, was that after an initial interview by him at the police station of the appellant, in the company of Detective Sergeant McBride, a formal record of interview was conducted by him, with Detective Sergeant McBride typing the record as the interview progressed.
I deal first with the conflicting accounts before the jury as to what occurred at the police station before the commencement of the formal record of interview. Detective Carters' account was that when he spoke to the appellant in the presence with Detective Sergeant McBride he reminded her of the complaint made by Mr Elliott's son. She replied that she could "explain it all". She produced the bank statement for the account which she had opened as trustee for Vera Talbot, the bank books of Mr Elliott for his former account with the Commonwealth Bank and a bank withdrawal slip which was blank apart from some calculations written on it. That withdrawal slip was an exhibit at the trial, the written calculations being as follows: "5.3 91
D Elliott ,663.53 $ 315.46 $ 2,348.07 Depost." 
Having produced that withdrawal slip, she pointed to the figure $2,348.07 and said that that was the money from Mr Elliott's former account but that she had paid it by mistake into the account for Vera Talbot. She pointed to an entry in Vera Talbot's statement of account which showed a payment into it of that sum on 5 March 1991. She said that she had worked out the figures on the withdrawal slip which she had produced. The $315.46 shown on her calculations on the slip were expenses which she had deducted. Detective Carters, however, then drew her attention to a record which he had obtained showing that on the same day $900 was deposited into Mr Elliott's new account and asked the appellant how that could be so if she had paid all the money from Mr Elliott's
Commonwealth Bank account, less the expenses, by mistake into the account for
Vera Talbot. He indicated that he would have to make further enquiries in relation to Vera
Talbot's financial records. His statement, as read to the jury, then continued: "The defendant put her face in her hands and said, 'Please don't, I feel so embarrassed about the whole thing, just give me a few minutes to think'. I waited a couple of minutes, then said to her, 'I can see you're upset, is there something you want to tell me?' She said, 'Yes I took his money but what's going to happen, I've got too much at stake'."
The appellant gave evidence at her trial. She said that the interview which took place prior to the formal record of interview was one between her and Detective Carters alone. Detective
Sergeant McBride was not present. She did not produce the bank withdrawal form with her calculations already on it.
All that occurred was that she and Detective Carters went through the financial records seeking to trace what had happened to Mr Elliott's money.
One possibility that occurred to her during the examination of the records was that she had banked Mr Elliott's money by mistake into the account for Vera
Talbot. The calculations appearing on the slip were jottings by her in the examination in respect of that possibility.
She denied saying anything to
Detective Carters which in any way acknowledge that she had wrongfully taken
Mr Elliott's money or which made any reference to any such thing as her having too much at stake.
I turn now to the record of interview. The contents of it of particular importance for the purposes of the present appeal are as follows: "Q.30 I now show you a commonwealth bank withdrawal slip dated the 5.3.91 which was presented at the Morisset branch for a cash withdrawal of $2,663.53. What can you tell me about that?
A. I signed that withdrawal on the 5th March 1991. Part of that total amount was banked into Eralyn nursing home trading account and part of the funds were banked into David Elliot's account at ANZ bank Newcastle.

Q.31
How much was paid into his account at the ANZ bank?
A. Yeah $900.00.

Q.32 How much was paid into the Eralyn Account? 
A. $1,763.53.

Q.33 Can you tell me for what purpose you paid that cash money into the Eralyn account?
A. I honestly don't have any reason.

Q.34 At the time of doing so did you believe that you had any legal right to the amount of $1,763.53?
A. No.

Q.35 Can you tell me where this amount of money is now?
A. It's still in the Eralyn account. ...

Q.43 Can you tell me why you transferred this money to your account?
A. No."
In her evidence at the trial the appellant did not dispute reading and signing the record of interview. She denied, however, that it accurately recorded what was said. She said that she signed it because she "had no choice" because of threats made by Detective Carters of giving publicity to what she had done and that he wanted to "blow" her "out of the water". She denied in particular that she had acknowledged that she had paid Mr Elliott's $1,763.53 (being the amount which she had withdrawn from the Commonwealth Bank less the $900 she had paid into the new account for
Mr Elliott with the ANZ
Bank) into the company's account. She said that what she in fact said to
Detective Carters was that she did not know where the money had gone and that it may have gone into the company account by mistake. Detective Carters, however, kept telling her that her answers were not good enough. What was typed down as her answers appeared in the record of interview including the answer, attributed to her, that the money was paid into the company account, that she could give no reason for doing so, and that she was aware at the time that she did not have any legal right to do that, was not what she said.
Detective Carters' evidence, before the jury in his statement and the edited transcript of his cross-examination at the committal, received only partial support from Detective Sergeant McBride as to what occurred at Toronto police station. He recalled being present during the interview which preceded the formal record of interview and that the appellant produced at the outset the bank slip having the calculations already written on them. He recalled that there was a further conversation but was unable to remember the detail of it. He had made a statement concerning the matter. That was not, however, until about six months later. His Honour did not permit him to refresh his recollection by reading that statement. It was not suggested in cross-examination of Detective Sergeant McBride that he heard any threats made, at any stage, to the appellant. It was not suggested to him in cross-examination that he typed as the appellant's answers only answers the form which Detective Carters was prepared to accept. All that was put to him is that the typing was done using a word processor. He was asked whether he recalled making alterations to what had been typed at any stage. He said that he could not recall any alterations having been made. It was not suggested to him that he was being untruthful about that. His evidence was given in the
Crown case before the appellant's evidence of her version of what occurred at the record of interview.
In her evidence at the trial the appellant gave an account of what, she claimed, in fact turned out to have happened to Mr Elliott's money. She said that about a fortnight after the police charged her, at the conclusion of the formal record of interview, her husband found a satchel in a drawer in a filing cabinet in the office of the nursing home. In it was more than $7,000 in cash. It was the missing money. It contained not only Mr Elliott's money but money of other residents for whom she had opened the new accounts more than a year earlier on 5 March 1991 at the Newcastle branch of the ANZ Bank.
Some of those were "short" of amounts "much larger" than was Mr Elliott's account. This discovery having been made, it all made sense. She realised what had happened. On 5 March 1991 she not only was effecting these arrangements to have the bank accounts centralised at the Newcastle branch of the ANZ Bank but she also was taking a number of residents into Newcastle for them to do their own personal shopping. She left the residents at a street corner, which was the ordinary practice, with instructions for them to return to that corner at a nominated time. She then went to the bank to deposit the money which she had collected from the former accounts into the new accounts which were being opened. She also had banking to do for the company which already had its accounts at the Newcastle branch of the ANZ Bank. To avoid the risk of losing all the banking money by theft she split it between two bags, one being a handbag and the other being a satchel. When she got to the bank she realised that she had left the satchel in the minibus in which she had driven the residents to Newcastle. She did not have time to go back to the vehicle.
Accordingly, in respect of the new accounts for the residents, she opened each of them by paying in to it portion of such of the money which she had with her in her handbag from the accounts which she had closed. She used for that purpose all the residents' money which she had with her. When she returned to the corner she found that one of the residents was missing. That caused her considerable anxiety: and finding him took quite some time. Eventually he was found and she returned to the nursing home in the minibus with all the patients. By this time she was running extremely late to get to a new job she was starting that very night at a hospital. She must simply have taken the satchel inside the nursing home together with purchases which the patients had made. The satchel then completely escaped her attention or memory until her husband located it more than a year later.
Her husband gave evidence of finding the satchel.
In the course of argument the grounds of appeal were modified and enlarged for the appellant. As finally argued they are: 
The statement of Detective Carters dated 25 May 1992 was not admissible under <case> of the [Crimes Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/). 
If the statement was admissible it was so lacking in probative value that his Honour, in the exercise of discretion, should have rejected the tender of it. 
His Honour's directions to the jury as to the caution with which they should approach the probative value of the statement were inadequate. 
The verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory.
I turn to the first ground. It is argued that Detective Carters' statement dated 25 May 1992 was not a "prescribed statement" within the meaning of <case>(11) in that it was not admitted in evidence under [s 48A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48a.html) of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) at the committal. It is put that examination of the transcript of the proceedings at committal shows that although the "Police brief" was admitted, the brief did not include the statement of Detective
Carters. I would not draw that inference from the transcript.
Detective
Carters gave oral evidence at the committal. He was asked whether he made the statement. He agreed. What then appeared was recorded in the transcript as follows: "Q. I show you this Statement.
A. Yes that's the Statement I made.

Q. It bears your signature?
A. Yes.

Q. Are you familiar with the contents of your Statement?
A. Yes.

Q. You say what's contained in there is the truth?
A. Yes.

Q. Of course that Statement does it not Detective, it refers to a number of other documents, does it not?
A. Yes it does.

Q. You are the Police Informant in this matter, are you not?
A. Yes.

Q. Are you responsible for putting together the Police brief of evidence?
A. Yes.

Q. And you produce that brief of evidence to me this morning?
A. Yes.

Q. Of course that's the brief you prepared for these proceedings?
A. Yes.
 
Q. I show you the brief of evidence in this matter that you prepared.
A. Yes.

Q. That is your brief?
A. Yep.

Q. Now is Detective Sergeant McBride here today?
A. He is.

Q. As far as you're concerned he's available to give evidence in this matter?
A. Yes.

Q. I show you another - I tender that brief your Worship." 
Mr Kozlowski, who was appearing at the committal for the appellant, stated he had no objection. It is later recorded in the transcript that the brief was admitted without objection and marked exhibit 1.
Clearly if nothing else appeared the only inference reasonably open would be that the exhibit contained the statement of Detective Carters made on 25
May 1992. He had been the officer in charge of the investigation.
He was the informant. He was responsible for the preparation of the police brief for the prosecutor. It is absurd to suppose that it would not have included his own statement. It was suggested in argument that the fact that he was shown the statement, as recorded at the outset of the passage I have quoted, indicates that it was detached from the rest of the brief. I would not draw that inference.
If the police brief was going to be tendered there would be no point in first detaching from it the statement of the officer who had been in charge of the investigation. The principal point made for the appellant, however, is that after the brief was tendered
Mr Kozlowski asked the Crown prosecutor to enumerate the statements. I consider that that request would be understood to be directed to the statements other than that of Detective
Carters of 25 May 1992 which already had been identified by the detective.
Apparently
Detective Carters so understood it. He listed all the other statements contained in the brief - that is the "number of other documents" which he had previously indicated that the brief contained.
It clearly was the common understanding of counsel and the trial judge that the brief which had been received in evidence at the committal included the statement of Detective Carters of 25 May 1992.
Indeed his Honour specifically noted that all formalities for the application of <case> had been proven or admitted. The appellant was represented at trial by Mr Lord QC, a very experienced practitioner in the criminal law, well versed in formal requirements, and alert to defects. The ground of appeal now relied upon was not one taken by anyone who appeared at the trial but was raised, for the first time, immediately prior to the hearing of the appeal. It shows commendable diligence on the part of different counsel coming into the matter for the appeal and dredging through the papers to see if anything more could be found. It is not supported by any material other than the transcript to which I have referred.
Leave under rule 4 would be required to argue this ground.
If there were any substance in the ground I would grant the leave as it is fundamental to the application of <case> that the conditions precedent for its application were satisfied. But there is no substance in the ground. I would refuse leave.
I turn to the second ground of appeal. This involves a question of law of general importance. It is urged for the appellant that Detective Carters' evidence, as contained in the statement, as to the alleged admission made by the appellant in the interview which preceded the formal record of interview is so lacking in probative value that his Honour should have excluded the statement, or at least the part of it containing the alleged admission, in the exercise of his discretion. Four points are relied upon. They are: 
The value of the alleged admission depends upon the precision of the recording in Detective Carters' statement of the actual words used. Detective
Carters made no note at the time, either in his official notebook or elsewhere, of what it was that the appellant said. His statement of 25 May was made some six weeks after that interview and was compiled entirely from memory - with only the aid of the documents which were produced at the interview. 
Notwithstanding Detective Carters' experience as a detective he did not, in the formal record of interview, refer to the admission which she had made before the formal record was commenced and ask her to acknowledge that she made the admission. 
Detective Sergeant McBride had no recollection of the admission having been made - despite its obvious importance to the investigation. 
The probative value of Detective Carters' statement was greatly weakened by the fact that Detective Carters could not tested by cross-examination before the jury.
There is considerable force in each of those points. The question of law is whether <case>, properly understood, precludes reliance upon the fourth point.
S 409 deals, inter alia, with the situation where a person who gave evidence at the committal or who made a statement which was received in evidence at the committal pursuant to [s 48A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/s48a.html) of the [Justices Act 1902](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) (a "prescribed statement") is dead, or so ill as not to be able to travel or give evidence, or is so ill as not to be able to travel to give evidence without endangering his or her life or is absent from Australia.
As to evidence given at the committal s (1) provides, so far as relevant, that the "deposition" (the transcript) "may be read as evidence for the prosecution at the trial" provided that "the accused, or his counsel or attorney, had a full opportunity of cross-examining the witness" at the committal.
S 409(7) makes similar, although not identical, provision in respect of a prescribed statement received in evidence at the committal. It provides, so far as relevant, that "except insofar as the Judge otherwise orders, a prescribed statement may be read as evidence for the prosecution at the trial ...".
It is to be noted that in each of subsections (1) and (7) the operative provision is expressed in the same way namely, that the deposition or statement "may be read as evidence".
The leading case as to the construction of <case> is the decision of this
Court in Reg versus Lynch [(1979) 2 NSWLR 775.] That case was concerned with a deposition given at committal. At that time <case> did not deal with "prescribed statements". Paper committals, as they came to be called, were not introduced until 1983 by the Justices (Procedure) Further Amendment Act of that year.
Street CJ said (at 778-779): "I confine myself, in expressing my views upon the existence or otherwise of a discretion under s. 409, essentially to the question of the proper construction of s. 409 ... It is to be observed that the opening portion of s. 409(1) is cast in terms appropriate to confer upon the Crown the right to read a deposition as evidence, if the ingredients set out in the ensuing portion of the subsection are found to be established ... Upon this approach, there is no discretion available to the presiding judge, the only relevant inquiry being whether the factual ingredients set out in the section are proved." 
Later in his judgment Street CJ said (at 780): "There is no room ... for any ultimate residual discretion remaining with the trial judge apart, of course, from the ordinary principle governing admissibility, where it is contended that the undue prejudicial significance of the proffered evidence outweighs its probative value." 
Reynolds JA said (at 784): "... s. 409 is concerned with the admissibility of evidence and the conditions precedent with which the trial judge has to be satisfied before the material becomes admissible. Once these conditions are satisfied and the material does become admissible, provided it is relevant, the only discretions are those which always reside in the presiding judge as to evidence presented in any form, such as the overriding discretion in criminal cases as to prejudice and probative value. There is no additional general discretion imposed upon, or granted to, the judge under s. 409. The admissibility of evidence does not, in general, depend upon the discretion of the judge, for otherwise the preparation of trials would become extremely hazardous." 
Nagle CJ at CL agreed with the reasons both of Street CJ and of Reynolds JA.
It is apparent that in referring to "the ordinary principle governing admissibility" Street CJ would not have intended to limit the reference to the only principle he specifically referred to - namely "where it is contended that the undue prejudicial significance of the proffered evidence outweighs its probative value." What Reynolds JA said more clearly conveys the meaning - namely the discretions "which always reside in the presiding judge as to evidence presented in any form, such as the overriding discretion in criminal cases as to prejudice and probative value." That Lynch is so to be understood is borne out by the fact that Nagle CJ at CL agreed with Street CJ and
Reynolds JA. An obvious further example of such an overriding discretion would be the discretion to reject evidence procured by police in conscious defiance of legal restraints (Bunning versus Cross <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 54:]
There can be no doubt that one of the ordinary discretions, the exercise of which is not precluded by <case>, is the discretion to exclude evidence where that is necessary to ensure a fair trial. In R versus Farquhar (CCA, unreported, 29 May 1985) this Court, in reference to <case>, cited with approval the statement of Viscount Simon in Harris versus DPP [(1952) AC 694] (at ): "The duty of a Judge when trying a charge of crime is to set the essentials of justice above the technical rule if the strict application of the latter would operate unfairly against the accused."
The same approach was taken by the Privy Council in Scott versus The Queen [(1989) 1 AC 1242.] That was an appeal from the Court of Appeal of Jamaica in respect of convictions for murder. Depositions had been admitted at the trial pursuant to a statutory provision of the same general type as <case>. In its advice the Privy Council stated (at 1255): "Their Lordships accept ... that no statutory discretion is bestowed upon a judge by section 34 to exclude a deposition if a witness is dead or too ill to attend court." 
They agreed, however, that the judge still had the power to refuse to allow the prosecution to adduce a statement in evidence. They referred to Lord
Salmon's statement in Reg versus Sang <case>; [(1980) AC 402] (at 445) that in a criminal trial a judge can always reject evidence which is technically admissible on the ground that it would make the trial unfair. The Privy Council added, however, a qualification which is fundamental to the approach which must be taken to such a statutory provision. They said (at 1258-1259): "... their Lordships are satisfied that the discretion of a judge to ensure a fair trial includes a power to exclude the admission of a deposition. It is, however, a power that should be exercised with great restraint. The mere fact that the deponent will not be available for cross-examination is obviously an insufficient ground for excluding the deposition for that is a feature common to the admission of all depositions which must have been contemplated and accepted by the legislature when it gave statutory sanction to their admission in evidence."
In my opinion there must be a clear differentiation, when applying <case>, between: 
Rejection of a statement (or part of it) merely because it might by considered procedurally unfair that the maker of the statement cannot be cross-examined before the jury; and 
Taking into account in the exercise of general discretionary principles for exclusion, such as the prejudicial effect outweighing the probative value, that the probative value of the evidence is weakened because of the unavailability of the maker of the statement for cross-examination.
The first is proscribed by <case> as considered in the authorities to which I have referred. The second is not (see also R versus Brotherton [(1992) 29
NSWLR 95] per Hunt CJ at CL at 101). It is not the law that a general discretionary principle of exclusion of evidence is to be applied, in respect of evidence which <case> provides may be admitted, as if the evidence was being given orally before the jury and was subject to cross-examination before it.
The probative value of the evidence is affected by the lack of opportunity for the maker of the statement (or the deponent) to be tested before the jury.
That can be a consideration relevant to the exercise of discretion.
It follows that in the present case the fact that Detective Carters was no longer available for cross-examination was a relevant factor to be taken into consideration in considering whether the evidence of Detective Carters or part of it, as contained in his statement, should have been excluded.
As was stated by Mason, Wilson, Brennan and Dawson JJ in Phillips versus The
Queen <case>; [(1985) 159 CLR 45] at 51 "the basic discretion (is) inherent in all criminal trial judges to exclude evidence otherwise admissible if it would unfairly prejudice the accused person." As Gibbs J said in Driscoll versus The
Queen <case>; [(1977) 137 CLR 517] at 541: "The exercise of this discretion is particularly called for if the evidence has little or no weight, but may be gravely prejudicial to the accused."
The argument for the appellant, however, is founded upon a false understanding of the nature of the discretion. In Reg versus Sang [(1980) AC 403] (at ) Viscount Dilhorne described the nature of the discretion of the trial judge being to "disallow the use in any trial of admissible relevant evidence if in his opinion its use would be accompanied by effects prejudicial to the accused which would outweigh its probative value." The probative value is not itself such a prejudicial effect (Scott versus The Queen at 1256-1257). For the purposes of the present appeal the relevant law was clearly stated by King CJ in The Queen versus Duke [(1979) 22 SASR 46] (at 47-48) as follows: "The prejudice there referred to must, of course, be a prejudice additional to or distinct from the detriment to the accused's interests involved in the probative force of the evidence ...
It was said in this case that the evidence was of such little weight that it was too dangerous to allow it to go to the jury.
Generally speaking the fact that the weight to be attached to a piece of evidence is slight does not render its introduction to the jury dangerous. It must be assumed that the jury will give the piece of evidence the weight that it deserves. The danger arises only if there is something in the nature of the evidence or the manner of its presentation which would render it gravely prejudicial in the sense referred to above. Where does the suggested prejudice lie? There is nothing in the intrinsic nature of the evidence which would give rise to prejudice. In this the case differs from those cases in which the evidence discloses a criminal record, or conduct or circumstances which may show the accused in a bad light in relation to matters which are extraneous to the issues in the case, or features of the case which might inflame the minds of the jury and thus deflect them from a dispassionate consideration of the issues."
The appellant complains that what the Crown relies upon as an admission in what, according to Detective Carters, the appellant said to him in the initial interview at the police station, is ambiguous and that it could be understood in an innocent way. That is simply a matter which goes to its probative value. It is a matter for the jury. Likewise the appellant complains that some portions of the transcript of the cross-examination which also went into evidence, in elaboration of the statement, contained references to various parts being untranscribable. Having looked at those omissions I see nothing to indicate that the meaning has been significantly affected. In any event that, too, is a matter going to the probative weight of the evidence. It is analogous to evidence being given of a conversation certain words or phrases in which were not heard by the listener giving evidence of what the conversation was.
The second ground of appeal fails. In coming to that conclusion
I have not overlooked that <case>, in providing that a prescribed statement may be read as evidence, commences with the words "except insofar as the Judge otherwise orders". In substance the refraining of the judge from so otherwise ordering is a condition of a statement being read - just as a full opportunity of cross-examining the witness at the committal is a condition of a deposition being read.
The conditions, however, are not identical. S 409(7) affords a degree of flexibility not available under <case>. I agree with Hunt
CJ at CL that this distinction is a "sensible one". The provisions relating to cross-examination in paper committals are incomplete and are, in any event, procedurally clumsy in comparison with a straight-forward choice of whether or not to cross-examine a witness who has given evidence orally and accordingly is subject to cross-examination in the ordinary way. Further, opportunity for cross-examination might be lost through procedural oversight or error. It is appropriate that the condition of admissibility be expressed in terms of a discretion. The discretion is given in general terms. But it is not a carte blanche. In the exercise of discretion under <case> a trial judge must take into account that it is manifest that the legislature considered that as a matter of policy it should be highly pertinent to whether material at committal should be read at trial that there was, if it be the case, a full opportunity, in a realistic and practical sense, of cross-examination at the committal. If a statement is to be excluded there must be good cause for doing so. To adapt the observation of the Privy Council in Reg versus Sang, the mere fact that the maker of the statement will not be available for cross-examination at the trial is an insufficient ground for excluding it - because that is a feature of every statement with which <case> deals. In the present case it would not have been a proper exercise of discretion for the trial judge to have excluded the statement of Detective Carters. He had been cross-examined at length at the committal and there was no basis for exclusion of the statement in the exercise of any of the ordinary general discretionary grounds for excluding admissible evidence in a criminal trial.
I turn to the third ground. Leave is required under rule 4 to argue this ground. There was no complaint at the trial in respect of his Honour's directions as to how the jury should approach assessing the probative value of
Detective Carters' statement.
I see no error in what his Honour said. In respect of what occurred at the police station not only did he give directions in accordance with McKinny versus The Queen <case>; [(1990-1991) 171 CLR 468] but he also specifically instructed the jury that those directions applied to the interview which preceded the formal record of interview.
Further, he instructed the jury as follows: "At the committal proceedings counsel for the accused was not obliged, or required to cross-examine Crown witnesses, either in detail or at all. And that fact that a particular matter was not put to Detective
Carters in that cross-examination is of no relevance in these proceedings, and any such consideration must be put aside completely.
There may be many reasons for not cross-examining or limiting cross-examination at committal, and no inference adverse to the accused is permissible based on any lack of cross-examination of Detective Carters.

I should warn you that because Detective
Carters' evidence at committal was read to you, you had neither the benefit of seeing
Detective Carters give his evidence, nor of hearing his evidence tested in cross-examination, even though the deposition which was read to you included some cross-examination.
And you must take that lack of observation into consideration when evaluating the reliability of the evidence."
That direction sufficed (R versus Mendemham [(1993) 71 A Crim R 382] at 388).
His Honour's charge to the jury as a whole, a commendably clear one, would have left the jury in no doubt whatever either as to the differences between
Detective Carters' account and that of the appellant or as to the significance of those differences.
Nothing more was needed.
I would not grant leave under rule 4 in respect of the third ground.
I turn to the final ground - namely that the verdict was unsafe and unsatisfactory. Having independently assessed the whole of the evidence I am left with no doubt that this conviction was not unsafe. There is no significant possibility that an innocent person has been convicted (M versus The
Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487).] The statement of Detective Carters was only part of the Crown case. The Crown case, overall, was a strong one.
This ground of appeal also fails.
As to the application for leave to appeal against the severity of sentence I can see no error in his
Honour's remarks on sentence. The sentence imposed clearly fell well within the limits of a proper exercise of sentencing discretion having regard, particularly, to the abuse of trust which was involved in this crime. Indeed the sentence was lenient. I would not grant leave to appeal against sentence.
JUDGE3
DUNFORD J In this case I have had the opportunity of reading in draft form the judgments prepared by Hunt CJ at CL and Allen J respectively. In respect of the grounds of appeal so far dealt with by this Court, I agree for the reasons given by Allen J that leave pursuant to r 4 of the Criminal Appeal
Rules 1952 should be refused to permit the appellant to rely on the first and third of those grounds and that the fourth of them should be rejected. I also agree for the reasons given by Hunt CJ at CL that the second of such grounds should also be rejected. In respect of the application for leave to appeal against sentence, I agree with Allen J, for the reasons which he has given that leave to appeal should be refused but that time served, if any, should count, and I agree with the orders proposed by Hunt CJ at CL for the further disposition of the appeal.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/41.html  
