

Grilz versus Lane [1996] NSWSC 202 (18 June 1996) 
GRILZ versus LANE /95 40387/95; DC 15325/79 DC 15327/79 
Tuesday, 18 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
PRIESTLEY JA, HANDLEY JA, COLE JA 
JUDGMENT 
PRIESTLEY JA: I have had the benefit of reading in draft Cole JA's reasons for upholding this appeal, and agree generally with them.

I am also influenced by an additional reason for reaching the conclusion that the appellant was more severely and permanently incapacitated by the two accidents for which liability was admitted than the trial judge held.

This reason is that before the two accidents the appellant was a man with an established history of being a regular hard worker. Afterwards he was not. The sequence is not conclusive, but is highly suggestive. If the accidents, and back injuries, did not cause the change, what did? No reason appears from the evidence. It does not seem plausible to me that the noticeable change in the appellant's life was due to a deliberate plan to milk the insurance scheme for all that could be squeezed from it, a plan moreover which the planner took twenty years to bring to pass. The accidents, on the evidence, seem to me to be the only likely cause of the plaintiff's behaviour after them.

As to the figures used by Cole JA in reaching his conclusions, they seem to me to be reasonable, on the evidence, and in the circumstance, that in this case, even more than in most of its kind, any figures must have an element of the arbitrary about them.

On the claim for loss said to have been caused by the sale of the appellant's taxi plates, the appellant's counsel was asked in argument whether he could point to any material suggesting that the amount the appellant got for his plates when he sold them was less than their market value at the time. The court was not directed to any such material. It was suggested that after the plates were sold, changes in the rules concerning their negotiability made them, in absolute terms, more valuable. It turned out there was no evidence of this either, though I am doubtful whether it would have helped the appellant on this point in any event.

Whether that be right or not, the absence of material made it impossible for this court to tell whether the appellant ever in fact suffered damage from the sale of the plates. The point is not that there was damage difficult to quantify, but the prior point that there was no evidence on which damage could be found at all. The result is that I agree with Cole JA that no allowance should be made to the appellant under this head of damages.

I agree with the orders proposed by Cole JA.
 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Cole JA.

COLE JA: The appellant was injured in two accidents on 15 and 17 March 1975. He sought to claim against two separate defendants instructing his solicitors about a three weeks after the events, that is, by early April 1975. His then solicitors, Messrs S D Ratner & Co., did not issue writs in the District Court until 25 June 1979. Defences in the two actions were filed in September and November 1979. Apparently Mr Grilz complained to the Law Society about his then solicitors in about 1980, no doubt concerning the delay. Those solicitors then refused to act for him and a new firm was engaged. The new firm , Messrs Markham Geikie & Farrugia, acted for him for "about 12 years". The case was not brought on. Unsurprisingly Mr Grilz complained to the Law Society about those solicitors. 
He then endeavoured to resolve the matter with the Government Insurance Office acting on his own behalf but was unable to do so. Messrs Markham Geikie &
Farrugia ceased to act for him and he sought other legal presentation but was unable to obtain it because, according to him, once solicitors found that he had two previous solicitors they would not accept him as a client. He made a complaint regarding that to the Law Society. The matter was listed before
Judge Kitchington in the District Court during 1994 when Mr Grilz appeared unrepresented. Judge Kitchington suggested he contact the Law Society which he did and Mr M Stack agreed to act as his solicitor. The matter was brought on for hearing but, owing to Mr Grilz's being in hospital having a bowel cancer operation, the matter had to be adjourned. It finally came on for hearing before McLoughlin ADCJ on 26 April 1995, 20 years and one month after the accidents. Liability was then admitted. That is unsurprising because in the first accident Mr Grilz was stationary in a motor vehicle at a zebra crossing when he was struck in the rear by the defendant's vehicle, and in the second accident Mr Grilz's vehicle was struck on the passenger's side after he had been stationary at an intersection waiting for a green arrow to permit him to turn right. Once the arrow turned to green and he commenced the turn to the right, the second defendant's vehicle came through what must have been a red light and struck the passenger side of the vehicle.

Had these matters been handled with a modicum of efficiency, writs should have been issued in 1975, liability should have been admitted by, at latest, the end of 1975, and the damages claim could no doubt have been resolved in 1976 or 1977. 20 years later this Court is called upon to hear appeals from a judgment given in 1995. As McLoughlin ADCJ correctly pointed out this has disadvantaged both the plaintiff and the defendant for memories are now unclear, true assessment of the condition of the plaintiff and the effect of the accidents upon him is difficult, and witnesses who might have assisted are no longer available. The Court is constrained to place more weight upon written documentation regarding the appellant's condition that otherwise would have been the case. The trial judge was faced with an invidious task of endeavouring to do justice between the parties. This Court is faced with a similar problem.

THE JUDGMENT APPEALED FROM 
McLoughlin ADCJ awarded the appellant $139,000 for both accidents with the verdict, by agreement of the parties, being divided equally between each case. The verdict was made up as follows: 
General Damages $ 30,000.00 
Interest on past general damages of $20,000 @ 2% $ 4,500.00 
Out of pockets $ 542.00 
Economic loss to age 65 $ 44,200.00 
Interest on economic loss @ 7.5% for 15 years $ 49,725.00 
TOTAL $128,967.00 
This was rounded to $129,000, the verdict being entered in each case for $64,500.

The appellant challenges items (i), (ii), (iv) and (v). In addition the appellant contends that he should have been awarded a sum being the damage allegedly suffered from early sale of his taxi cab and taxi cab business. The sum claimed on appeal is $79,570.

THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE 
The appellant was 49 at the date of the accidents in 1975. He is now 70. He owned his own taxi and drove it for long hours as he did not employ a driver.
He worked 6 days a week with the daily work period varying between 12 and 16 hours. He sold his taxi cab and licence in January 1977. He did so, he said, because the two motor vehicle accidents so disturbed his lumbar spine that he no longer could drive a taxi cab for those hours. Having regard to the fact that he lived on five acres beyond Liverpool it was impracticable for him to employ a driver or to work a short shift, even if his back permitted him to do so. He gave evidence that in those circumstances it was simply uneconomic to employ a driver.[1] That evidence was not challenged.

Further, the appellant gave evidence that his treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr
Segelov recommended to him that he "get out of the business"[2]. The appellant said Dr Segelov "suggested I sell it"[3]. Those statements were not challenged in cross-examination and Dr Segelov was not called as a witness, if he was then still alive.

The appellant was asked: 
Q. "You see, after you have sold the cab you didn't intend to go back to work, did you?" 
A. "Well, I was hoping to find some other employment, some light sort of work".[4] 
He gave evidence that he regularly went to the Commonwealth Employment Service seeking employment but was granted only one interview by an employer. His evidence was: 
Q. "Did you look for any work during that period?" 
A. "I used to go to the unemployment." 
Q. "Did you look for work." 
A. "Work was not available for my age and my condition because I would have to tell the employer that I had back problems and they wouldn't entertain you." 
Q. "Well, there were plenty of jobs that you could do that didn't involve lots of bending?" 
A. "There is a lot of people out of work and I don't think there were plenty of jobs." 
Q. "Did you ever get to go for an interview with an employer?" 
A. "I did have one interview, yes." 
Q. "One, when was that." 
A. "Gee, I don't know, somewhere in the 70s or 80s. They wanted to make me a nightwatchman, open and shut the schools, I had to be there three times a day and I had to travel 20 miles to get there." 
Q. "You are saying you couldn't have done that job?" 
A. "It's not practical to drive 20 miles a day three times a day to something with schools, open and shut them and be there to direct the garbage." 
Q. "You weren't trying to get a job?" 
A. "I certainly was. I was on no income, I was unemployed."[5] 
In the result the appellant did not obtain employment and remained upon unemployment benefits until he obtained the age of 60 years. Being a returned serviceman he was then given a service pension which presumably continues.

Three major injuries were asserted at the trial arising from the accidents.
The first was an injury to the left knee, the second to the neck area, and the third to the lumbar spine. The trial judge held, on the balance of probabilities that, as there had been no complaint of neck pain for almost four years, and in the absence of contemporaneous medical records linking the neck pain with the motor vehicle accident he was not satisfied that the causal relationship between any neck pain and the motor vehicle accident was established. I agree with the trial judge's finding.

Regarding the knee injury, that received little mention in the judgment. It is of comparatively minor significance, and as general damages are not challenged it is unnecessary to consider it further.

The major claim related to the lumbar spine because it was that which the appellant claimed stopped him working his taxi. The trial judge recited the findings of Dr Segelov, to whom the appellant had been referred by his local practitioner shortly after the accidents. Having reviewed Dr Segelov's medical reports from 1975 to 1980, the trial judge said: "I do accept, however, that the plaintiff did injure his lumbar spine by way of aggravation (of) pre-existing degenerative changes."[6] 
However, his Honour continued: "Dr Segelov reported that the plaintiff had settled down in February 1979. As the plaintiff did not attend any doctors in the 1980s, it is my view that the plaintiff was in a fairly settled condition during that period, and if he did not do much he had very little pain or difficulty with his lumbar spine."[7] 
His Honour then reviewed Dr Hodgkinson's reports, he having seen the appellant on behalf of the GIO between 1978 and 1981. His Honour interpreted Dr
Hodgkinson's reports as expressing "his view that the plaintiff was fit to drive a taxi"[8]. His Honour then said: "I accept most of what Dr Hodgkinson has to say. Although I find that the plaintiff could not drive a taxi to a certain degree before the accidents, but he was still capable of doing many shifts work and doing a range of other light work." 
The trial judge then reviewed other doctors who had seen the appellant for medico-legal reasons about a decade later. Ultimately the trial judge expressed his conclusions as follows: "I accept that the plaintiff has had pain in his lumbar spine on and off since the accident and I accept to a degree that the accident has continued to play some part of (sic) his symptoms. I also accept that there is a significant part in the plaintiff's symptoms played by the development of arthritic changes flowing from the degenerative changes observed in the x-rays to which the trauma from the motor vehicle accident makes no contribution ... (I) do accept that the effect of the accident superimposed upon the degenerative lumbar spine has brought intermittent painful lumbar spine that restricts the plaintiff to more sedentary forms of employment.

I do not accept that the plaintiff made any effort to work since he sold his taxi in 1977 and (was) content to abandon the work force and live on social services and do little. So this was brought about because of the plaintiff's own approach to life and not as a result of the effects of the motor vehicle accidents, although I do find, as I have indicated, that the motor vehicle accidents precluded the plaintiff from doing (as) much taxi driving work as he was capable (of) doing before the accident. I find that the plaintiff was not fully fit to work the many hours he had been driving prior to the accidents but was capable of doing a range of other lighter work and doing a number of taxi driving shifts although perhaps not quite as many as before. I find that he was well capable of earning a reasonable income if he had so desired from onwards."[9] 
In those circumstances the trial judge found the appellant totally unfit for work for "probably eighteen months in the period 1976, 1977 and early 1978; thereafter, partially unfit but improving and fitter for a wide range of activity by mid-1979". The trial judge found that the appellant "has a significant residual capacity which he has failed to exercise having had no desire to be employed since 1977".[10] 
As the quantum of economic loss is in issue the trial judge's finding regarding capacity to work and desire to work are obviously critical. They are challenged by the notice of appeal.

MEDICAL EVIDENCE 
Whilst there were many doctor's reports tendered, it is clear that the trial judge properly relied upon his view of the evidence of Dr Segelov and Dr
Hodgkinson as they were in truth the only doctors, apart from the local doctor, who saw the plaintiff at times modestly proximate to the accidents, and the time when the appellant ceased work. Neither Dr Segelov nor Dr
Hodgkinson were called as witnesses and thus this Court is in a position the equal of that of the trial judge to assess those reports. I have come to the view that his Honour misunderstood the import of the evidence of each of Dr
Segelov and Dr Hodgkinson.

Having seen the appellant on three occasions prior to 16 October 1975, in a report dated 23 January 1976 Dr Segelov stated that: "This man had reached the stage where he still had some symptoms and was likely to be troubled by them, but he needed to learn to live with his problem and to adapt his life to this. I spent some time explaining this to him and advised him to avoid excess activity and to use the support as necessary".

The support was a lumbar corset. His conclusion was: "I think this man has shaken up a degenerative lumbar spine in his accident and this has rendered it painful. He has settled down to a large degree, but is likely to have some trouble in the future and may need some treatment in the form of analgesics, physiotherapy and the continued use of the support,.

No operative treatment is necessary and he is fit to drive a taxi."[11] 
It is not clear when Dr Segelov next saw the appellant. On 23 February 1977 he wrote a memorandum "To Whom I May Concern" stating that `Mr Grilz has been under my care for approximately two years with the current episodes of back pain and left sciatica, associated with a disc lesion in his spine. He is unfit for work that involves bending, lifting, stooping and climbing"[12].
That was after the taxi had been sold in January 1977. The evidence of Mr
Grilz was that Dr Segelov advised him to sell the taxi and he did so in consequence of that advice. Dr Bornstien who saw Mr Grilz in October 1987, 10 years later, recorded the fact that Mr Grilz had said: "His doctor apparently advised him that he should give up driving or else he could land in a wheelchair."[13] 
Mr Grilz's evidence on this point was not challenged.

Dr Segelov saw Mr Grilz again on 28 February 1977 and wrote: "he is settling slowly. I have asked him to take things quietly and to return for review in two weeks time".[14] On 10 March 1977 Dr Segelov wrote of Mr Grilz that he "continues to have trouble with his back. He is at present unfit and is resting at home and using a support, He is not yet in a position to return to work and it may be some months before he can do so."[15] He said he did "not know for how long he will be incapacitated".

Dr Segelov saw Mr Grilz on 27 October 1977 . He wrote: "At that stage, it was quite apparent that this patient was still troubled greatly by his back. He remained unfit and needed to use a support and have analgesics from time to time.

I think it is unlikely that he will work again. No further active treatment is necessary, except for the use of the support and analgesics."[16] 
It is apparent that from early 1977 until October 1977 Mr Grilz was, in Dr
Segelov's opinion, unable to work, and thereafter was unlikely to work again, but that nothing could be done for him other than the provision of lumbar support and the use of analgesics.

Dr Segelov saw him again on 8 January 1979 and on 2 February 1979. It was the report dated 5 February 1979 on this latter visit that the trial judge relied on in expressing the view that as the appellant had not seen doctors during the 1980s he was "in a fairly settled condition during that period, and if he did not do much he had very little pain or difficulty with his lumbar spine".
Dr Segelov wrote: "He has settled down with his physiotherapy treatment ... I have not asked to see him again unless there is a change in his symptoms." 
Dr Segelov's report dated 5 February 1979 is to be understood against the background of his report of 22 February 1978 which stated that Mr Grilz was unlikely to work again and that there was nothing further by way of treatment that could be done for him. Dr Segelov makes clear in a report dated 29
January 1982 that he had seen the appellant on 31 July 1980 and that at that time he thought "this patient still had some symptoms as a result of his accident and these were unlikely to improve".

The appellant gave evidence that during the 1980s he saw doctors to obtain pills for his painful back.

In my opinion a proper understanding of Segelov's reports indicates his opinion that from early 1977 the appellant was unfit for taxi work and would be unfit in the future. That accords with Mr Grilz's unchallenged evidence that Dr Segelov told him to sell the taxi.

Dr Hodgkinson did not express the view that the appellant "was fit to drive a taxi" as the trial judge found. In his report of 17 August 1978 he said: "As he is at present I would think he should be capable of owning and driving a taxi cab. He would complain that prolonged sitting in a cab would give him discomfort but I would think at the moment he would be capable of doing some periodic exercising, certainly light work, and hence I think he should be able to drive a cab."[17] 
That is not a statement that he is capable of driving a taxi cab. In his report of 4 August 1980 Dr Hodgkinson said that the appellant "is much the same as he was before, and I would think probably is fit to drive a taxi".
In his final report of 1 September 1981, Dr Hodgkinson said that: "I would think, as far as his back is concerned, he would be fit to work as a taxi driver."[18] 
Dr Hodgkinson expressions of opinion are qualified and uncertain. They do not amount to an expression of view that the appellant was fit to drive a taxi between 1978 and 1981.

Accepting the views of Dr Segelov, and noting the uncertainty in the views of
Dr Hodgkinson, in my opinion the proper finding on the medical evidence, coupled with the appellant's evidence that he sold the taxi on medical advice and because of the difficulties of sitting in a taxi cab for long periods of time,[19] was that the aggravation of his pre-existing degenerative back caused by the two motor vehicle accidents resulted in him being unable to work as a taxi driver and unable to maintain ownership of his vehicle in circumstances where it was impracticable and uneconomic for him to employ a driver or drivers.

Nor do I think that the trial judge's finding that the appellant did not make any effort to obtain work after selling the taxi can be sustained. The proposition that he did not wish to work was put to him and rejected. The trial judge did not say he did not believe the appellant. Further, the unchallenged evidence accepted by the trial judge was that he went frequently to the Commonwealth Employment Service but was unable to obtain employment. He had no qualifications to fit him for a variety of employments. Whilst it may be true that he could have done a job, such as that of a gatekeeper or a watchman, his evidence that, having regard to his age of 52 years by the time he sold his taxi, the fact that his back disability made him an unattractive employee from an employer's point of view, and the circumstance of there being many others applying for jobs, in truth rendered him unlikely to obtain employment. It was not put to him that he was "content to abandon the workforce and live on social services and do little"[20]. All of the appellant's evidence was to the contrary. If it was intended by the respondent to submit such a proposition to the trial judge, in my opinion the proposition should have been fairly put to the appellant. Absent that having been done I do not think it was open to the trial judge to accept a proposition from the respondent to that effect, or to make a finding to that effect absent such a submission.

It follows in my opinion that the appellant was entitled to be awarded the value of the diminution in his earning capacity from the date on which he sold his taxi cab and licence in January 1977. From that date, in consequence of the accidents, he was in truth unemployable.

Senior Counsel for the appellant, Mr Webb QC conceded that, in this case, there was a relationship between general damages and the quantum of economic loss in the following sense. The appellant had, in truth, been unable to obtain employment since selling the taxi in 1977. Thus he was not obliged to work. It was to be recognised that, had he been so obliged he would have suffered more pain to his back whilst working than was the case because, not being able to obtain employment, he was able to spend more time resting. Thus it was accepted that if he was remunerated for his loss of income earning capacity that would have an ameliorating effect on the quantum of damages to be awarded to him for general damages. Counsel claimed that the quantum of general damages should be $80,000.

In my opinion the amount of $30,000 awarded to the appellant for general damages was inadequate. An appropriate figure is $50,000 having regard to the general pain and suffering occasioned by the injuries but taking into account the circumstance that the appellant has not worked since 1977 and thus has been able to reduce the pain he otherwise would have suffered.

Having regard to the time which has elapsed since the accident, and the fact of the appellant's present age, $35,000 general damages should be attributable to the past and $15,000 to the future. The past general damages attract interest at 2% for the period of 20 years between accident and trial in 1995.
The interest factor on past general damages is thus $14,000.

Mr Webb claimed economic loss to the age of 65 years. That is a conventional claim and no satisfactory submissions were advanced to reduce the period of claim.

There was a paucity of evidence regarding the quantum of the appellant's economic loss derived from diminution or effective elimination of his capacity to work. Some of the appellant's tax returns, and notices of assessment were tendered. They disclosed the following income: 
Year ended 30 June 1973 $3191.00 
Year ended 30 June 1974 $4810.00 
Year ended 30 June 1976 $4751.00 
Year ended 30 June 1977 $2358.00 
In the year ended 30 June 1976 gross receipts from the taxi business were shown as $10,440 with deductions of $5,689. Expenses were thus approximately % of gross receipts. The figures from these tax returns showed that in 1974 and 1976 the appellant earned approximately $90 per week.

At trial the appellant presented a case that the manner in which his loss flowing from reduced earning capacity should be calculated was by reference to the estimated earnings of an employed taxi driver calculated by reference to an industrial agreement reached in 1984 between the Transport Worker's Union and various owners of taxi cabs. There was tendered calculations based on an award rate for an employed taxi driver of $25,917 per annum before tax or $18,495 after tax for the year 1984. That was deflated by the consumer price index back to 1975 to produce a net calculated earnings for such an employed taxi driver of $13,254 after tax for 1975 and $13,940 after tax for 1976. From to 1990 the increase in the award rates was shown resulting in a net income by 1990 for such a driver of $29,345. Those calculated figures were coupled with evidence from a Mr Bowe from the Taxi Industry Association to the following effect: 
Q. "And is it the case that if one had an owner driver driving for himself he could generally expect to receive twice the amount that a daily driver would be paid?" 
A. "Generally that represents 50% of the take on the shift." 
Q. "Out of which he would have to pay his expenses?" 
A. "Yes." 
Q. "And would you say generally the expenses would amount to something in the order of 25% of the takings?" 
A. "That's a rough rule of thumb, yes."[21] 
This approach was rejected by the trial judge but it was argued again on appeal.

There are a number of difficulties with the appellant's approach. First, there was no evidence which related the earnings the appellant in fact made from conducting his taxi business in the way he ran it with the earnings of an employed driver. Because he did not employ a driver but drove himself for between 12 and 16 hours per day six days per week, and from those earnings bore all the expenses of the vehicle, it is not possible to relate his earnings to the pay-in amount of an employed driver, or the earnings of an employed driver calculated on a shift basis. Second, such scant evidence as there is shows that the appellant's costs were approximately 55% of gross takings. This does not accord with the evidence of Mr Bowe. Third, deflating the 1984 award figures for an employed driver by CPI results in an after tax earning calculated at $13,940.50 for the year 1976. The appellant's taxable income from his tax return that year was, however, $4,751. It was thus approximately one third of that produced by the calculation, and certainly not twice that of an employed driver as Mr Bowe suggested.

The trial judge, notwithstanding the figures, made an assessment of $150 per week as being the loss due to reduced earning capacity for the period 1976, and for part of 1978. That finding of $150 per week is generous to the appellant upon the basis of the earnings shown in his tax returns which for the 1974 and 1976 were approximately $92 per week. The trial judge from 1978 reduced the sum to $50 per week. Having regard to the lengthy period which has elapsed, and the paucity of evidence regarding actual earnings around the time of the accident, in my opinion, doing the best one can, the appellant would be fairly compensated for his diminution in earning capacity if the trial judge's assessment of $150 per week was continued from the approximate date of the accident in 1975 when he was aged 49 years to the approximate time he obtained the age of 65 years, say a period of 15 years. The multiplier for 15 years is .2, and accordingly the figure to be awarded for loss of income earning capacity is $94,830.

In my opinion the appellant is not entitled to any damages for early sale of his taxi cab and licence. That was the capital which he used to earn his income. As he is to be compensated for his loss of income, he is not entitled also to be compensated for any loss he suffered from early realisation of the asset which earned in part his income. There was no evidence to support the calculation of $79,570 claimed, in that the interest rate used in the calculation was not proved or agreed. Further, credit would need to be given for any profit made from investment of the capital sum received on sale of the taxi. This claim fails.

INTEREST 
At trial the parties accepted that the appropriate interest rate was 7.5% on past economic loss. Instead of allowing interest for 20 years, the trial judge allowed it for 15 years because "the delay in the prosecution is the fault of the plaintiff's earlier solicitors, the government has changed the legislation of three occasions since this accident occurred ... the defendant has no fault in the delay ..."[22] In my opinion the appellant is not to be punished by denying him interest because of the conduct of his solicitors. I see no basis for successful opposition to the appellant's claim for interest.

Allowing interest for 20 years at 7.5% produces and interest factor of $142,245.

DAMAGES 
In my opinion the appropriate amount of the damages to be awarded to the appellant is as follows: 
General damages $ 50,000.00 
Interest on general damages $ 14,000.00 
Out of pocket expenses $ 542.00 
Past economic loss $ 94,830.00 
Interest on past economic loss $ 142,245.00 
Total $ 301,617.00 
ORDERS 
I would propose the following orders
Judgment of McLoughlin ADCJ in matters number 15325 of 1979 and 15327 of be set aside.
In lieu thereof judgment be entered in favour of the appellant in each action in the sum of $150,808.50.
In each action the respondent is to pay the appellant's costs of the
District Court proceedings and of this appeal.
 [1] Appeal Book, p.40.
 [2] Appeal Book, p.37R.
 [3] Appeal Book, p.38S.
 [4] Appeal Book, p.37Y.
 [5] Appeal Book, p.42G-T.
 [6] Appeal Book, p.151K-M.
 [7] Appeal Book, p.151W-152C.
 [8] Appeal Book, p.151G.
 [9] Appeal Book, p.154-155.
 [10] Appela Book, p.156M-N.
 [11] Appeal Book, p.60.
 [12] Appeal Book, p.61.
 [13] Appeal Book, p.141Y.
 [14] Appeal Book, p.62.
 [15] Appeal Book, p.63.
 [16] Appeal Book, p.64.
 [17] Appeal Book, p.129.
 [18] Appeal Book, p.132.
 [19] Appeal Book, p.45S-T.
 [20] Appeal Book, p.154O-P.
 [21] Appeal Book, p.49.
 [22] Appeal Book, p.156S-Y.
 * * * 
