

Regina versus Webster Matter No 60407/96 [1998] NSWSC 14 (10 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 April 1998 
REGINA versus DANIEL JAMES WEBSTER /96 March 1998 
Hunt CJ at CL, Smart J, Howie AJ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Appeal against Sentence 
FILE NO/S: 60407/96 
STATEMENT OF REASONS DELIVERED: Tuesday, 10 March 1998 
HEARING DATE AND ORDERS MADE: Friday, 10 October 1997 
PARTIES: REGINA versus Daniel James WEBSTER 
JUDGMENT OF: HUNT CJ at CL, SMART J, HOWIE AJ 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: I Barker, Q.C. * Crown: P G Berman * Dept of Corrective Services: P M Strickland 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: Legal Aid Commission * Crown: S E O'Connor * Dept of Corrective Services: I V Knight 
CATCHWORDS: DISTRICT AND LOCAL COURTS HAVE POWER TO ISSUE WARRANTS FOR ARREST PRIOR TO CANCELLATION OF PERIODIC DETENTION ORDERS AND SENTENCING 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reasons Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Allowed 
NO. OF PAGES: 29 
REGINA versus Daniel James WEBSTER 
HEADNOTE 
W was sentenced in the District Court to 12 months periodic detention. This order was subsequently cancelled, by another District Court Judge, for failures to attend the periodic detention centre, and a full time custodial sentence was imposed. Due to his failure to correctly notify the Department of
Corrective Services of his change of address, W was neither present nor represented at the latter proceedings. On 29 July 1997 the Court of Criminal
Appeal allowed an application for extension of time to appeal against the order cancelling W's periodic detention and the sentence imposed, but dismissed the appeal. W then appealed against the original sentence and sought to re-open the hearing of the appeal against the sentence imposed pursuant to the cancellation order.

Held: - The appeal against the original sentence being allowed, it was unnecessary to deal with the application to re-open the hearing of 29 July 1997.
 - As a result of the original sentencing judge's apparent failure to take into account the pre-sentence custody of Mr Webster, the judge making no reference to it, and, more importantly, the events subsequent to the sentence a miscarriage had occurred.
 - The New South Wales Courts of Quarter Session enjoyed at least the same powers as the their English equivalents. A judge exercising the criminal jurisdiction of the District Court, thereby possessing the powers formerly enjoyed by a Chairman of Quarter Sessions, has the power to issue bench warrants to bring accused before them where necessary to be dealt with.
 - The Supreme Court having power to issue a bench warrant to bring an accused, a person convicted of an offence or a detainee before that Court, the
District Court has the same power by virtue of [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s171d.html) of the [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) .
 - It is usually necessary for detainees to be before the court when a judge is cancelling an order for periodic detention and deciding whether to fix minimum and additional terms and the length of each.
 - On the non-appearance of a detainee on a cancellation application and the
Department of Corrective Services establishing a prima facie case, the Local
Court has implied power, prior to the making of the cancellation order, to issue a warrant or cause a warrant to issue for the arrest of the detainee and to bring him before the Court.

Orders made on 10 October 1997 
Extend time for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by Judge Ford on Mr Webster on 13 October 1995 of 12 months periodic detention.
Grant leave to appeal against that sentence.
Appeal against that sentence allowed. In lieu thereof Mr Webster is sentenced to penal servitude of nine months consisting of a minimum term commencing on 10 April 1997 and expiring on 9 October 1997 and an additional term of three months commencing on 10 October 1997. Order that Mr Webster be released on parole on 10 October 1997 subject to the supervision of the
Probation and Parole Service.

REGINA versus Daniel James WEBSTER 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the reasons given by Smart J for the orders which were made at the conclusion of the hearing of the appeal. 
I also agree with what Smart J has had to say about the implied power of the
Local Court to issue a warrant for the arrest of any detainee who has not appeared for the setting of minimum and additional terms following the cancellation of a periodic detention order, in order that he or she will be before that Court when those terms are set.

REGINA versus Daniel James WEBSTER 
JUDGMENT 
Smart J: On 10 October 1997 this Court extended the time for leave to appeal against the sentence imposed by Judge Ford on Mr Webster on 13 October 1995 of 12 months periodic detention commencing on 27 October 1995. This court granted leave to appeal, allowed the appeal and quashed that sentence. In lieu thereof, Mr Webster was sentenced to a term of penal servitude of 9 months consisting of a minimum term commencing on 10 April 1997 and expiring on 9 October 1997 and an additional term of 3 months commencing on 10 October 1997. It was ordered that he be released on parole that day (10 October 1997) subject to the supervision of the Probation and Parole Service. Special circumstances existed. The court considered this course was better than making orders on Mr Webster's application to re-open the earlier hearing of this court on his appeal against Judge Flannery declining to fix minimum and additional terms when he cancelled the periodic detention order. I now give my reasons for joining in those orders. 
On 13 October 1995 Judge Ford imposed the sentence of 12 months periodic detention on Mr Webster in respect of 2 charges of breaking, entering and stealing. On another matter (using an offensive instrument to prevent or hinder his lawful apprehension) the judge deferred passing sentence and ordered Mr Webster to enter into a recognizance in the sum of $500 for 3 years. The judge took into account some 4 other offences of the break, enter and steal variety and the offences of assaulting a police officer and resisting arrest. All the offences occurred on 28 and 29 November 1994. The judge took the view that there were circumstances which warranted leniency.

On 9 May 1996, Judge Flannery cancelled the periodic detention order because he was satisfied that Mr Webster had not attended the Malabar Periodic
Detention Centre for 16 periods and that Mr Webster had been served by post with the requisite notices. Mr Webster did not attend, and was not represented at, the ex parte hearing before Judge Flannery as he had not received any of the Departmental notices or the Notice of Hearing from the Court. Mr Webster had changed his address. The Department of Corrective Services asserted that it had not received any notice of change of address. Mr Webster asserted that he had advised an officer at the Periodic Detention Centre of his change of address and had written his new address on a piece of paper for that officer.
The written notice of the proposed hearing had been posted to the last residential address known to the Governor of the Prison. That was Mr Webster's former address. It was the one recorded in the prison files.

Judge Flannery declined to set minimum and additional terms as he had no material on which he could exercise his discretion favourably to Mr Webster.
Judge Flannery further ordered that Mr Webster serve the unexpired portion of periodic detention by way of full-time imprisonment for 41 weeks and that a warrant issue for his apprehension and detention. Mr Webster had served 13 weekends but 2 penalty weekends had been added for non-attendance.

Mr Webster knew nothing of the cancellation proceedings until his arrest on 9
June 1996 when he was taken into full time custody. On 16 July 1996 he filed a
Notice of Appeal against the order cancelling his periodic detention and the sentence imposed along with an application for an extension of time in which to appeal. He was released on bail on 2 August 1996. On 19 March 1997 Mr
Webster was advised that legal aid for his appeal to this Court had been refused because his income put him above the legal aid means test.
Unfortunately, he then had to prepare written arguments and appear for himself. He faced a daunting task, given the complexities in this area of the law.

On 29 July 1997 this Court, differently constituted, ordered that the application for an extension of time be granted, the application for leave to appeal be refused and that Mr Webster be returned to custody to serve the unexpired portion of his term. James J, with whom Grove and McInerney JJ agreed, held that there was no appeal from the order cancelling the periodic detention order. James J expressed no view on whether administrative review proceedings could be taken in the Supreme Court successfully. He did, however, hold that the utility of adopting such a course would be slight because Mr
Webster was on 4 July 1996 convicted of another offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment for more than one month thus bringing into operation [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s24.html) of the [Periodic Detention of Prisoners Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/) (virtually automatic cancellation). Unfortunately, the Court was not told that on 14 November 1996 the Campbelltown District Court had reduced the period of imprisonment to 30 days and noted that the sentence had been served. The
District Court files, for which we sent, further reveal that on 15 April 1997
Judge Ford directed that no action be taken on the breach of the recognizance.

James J took the view that, on a correct reading of Judge Flannery's remarks, that judge after adverting to the discretion, proceeded to exercise it, but in so-doing decided, on the material before him, that he should not direct that a minimum and an additional term be set.

In Wilson v. Department of Corrective Services, [(1997) 93 A Crim R ], the Court of Appeal sitting concurrently with this Court, referred to the substantial difficulties which often arise when a court, in the absence of the detainee, cancels the periodic detention order and sentences him. We have observed that hitherto some District Court judges have declined, in such circumstances, to set a minimum and an additional term while others follow the usual principle of sentencing to a minimum term which is three quarters of the term imposed, the additional term making up the remaining quarter.

Counsel for the Department of Corrective Services informed us that the
Department was now inviting all District Court judges to adopt the course suggested in Wilson as it avoided many difficulties and unfairness to the detainee.

The relevant full time custody history of Mr Webster is as follows: Nov 94 - 6 Mar 95 3 months 8 days (Judge Ford was told of this (p 2 of transcript of 13/10/95 but did not refer to it in his judgment. It was not stated as allowed for in the sentence) Jun 96 - 2 Aug 96 1 month 23 days (arrested on warrant issued by Judge Flannery) Jul 97 - 9 Oct 97 2 months 11 days (follows order of this Court on 29 Jul 97) --------------------- months 11 days less 30 days in custody for driving offence 6 months 11 days 
Thus out of 41 weeks Mr Webster has served 27 weeks 4 days. He also served 13 weekends of periodic detention. Judge Flannery was not told of the pre- sentence custody of 3 months 8 days. This was a case where there were special circumstances, including good rehabilitation prospects after a bad record, and a medical condition, of some gravity, requiring treatment.

Application to Re-open Earlier Hearing of this Court 
The orders of this Court of 29 July 1997 have not been perfected. As at 4
August 1997, the date on which the application to re-open the hearing on 29
July 1997 was filed, this Court's registry had not forwarded the official notification of this Court's decision to the District Court. The registry delayed doing so pending the hearing of the application to re-open. Thus the orders of this Court have never been entered on the Indictment or on any of the other relevant records of the District Court.

It is established that where an appeal has been heard and determined by this
Court on the merits and this Court's orders have been perfected, this Court has no jurisdiction to hear a second appeal. However, there is a limited opportunity to have the first appeal re-opened where there has been a denial of procedural fairness in the hearing of the first appeal. Where the orders of this Court have not been perfected, this Court has power to re-open the hearing of the appeal or hear a second appeal. Whether it should do so is another matter. The cases have been collected in Regina v. Mario
Postiglione, CCA, unreported, 4 December 1997.

The transcript of the argument before the Court of Appeal on 29 July 1997 revealed that Mr Webster was not able to deal adequately with the issues which arose. Senior Counsel who was present in Court in another matter offered to assist and rendered valuable assistance to Mr Webster and to the Court. At the luncheon adjournment the Court excused counsel, who was acting as amicus curiae, from further attendance, unless he wished to return. After the luncheon adjournment, counsel for the Department put a number of substantial arguments and strongly pressed the argument that the judge had considered exercising his discretion and had declined to do so. Mr Webster was unable to reply adequately.

Senior Counsel for Mr Webster contended that, unwittingly in the unusual course of events, Mr Webster had been denied procedural fairness. That was not an easy proposition to sustain when a party had received assistance from
Senior Counsel and had been invited to make any reply which he wished. Senior
Counsel analysed the transcript of what had occurred before this Court on 29
July 1997 in some detail. The Court invited Senior Counsel to take what appeared to it to be a simpler course and to deal with the application for leave to appeal against the original sentence of Judge Ford.

Because of the view the Court formed on that application it became unnecessary to return to the application to re-open the hearing of the first appeal or hear a second appeal from Judge Flannery's decision.

Application for Leave to Appeal against Judge Ford's Decision 
It is well established by R v. Sommerville [(1995) 36 NSWLR 184] and subsequent cases that the cancellation of a periodic detention order and the making of, or refusal to make, an order under [s (4)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s27.html) does not quash or expunge the original sentence which itself remains subject to appeal or potential appeal in the ordinary way.

Sommerville and Wilson also establish that, while usually the question which arises on an application for leave to appeal against sentence centres on whether the sentencing judge has made an error, there are exceptional cases in which leave should be given by reason of what had happened following the original sentencing amounting to a miscarriage of justice.

This is one of those exceptional cases where although the original sentence was not unjust, subsequent events have, in their totality, resulted in a miscarriage of justice.

The evidence reveals: the applicant was credited with serving 13 periods of detention between 27
October 1995 and 26 April 1996; on some 6 occasions he was absent marked "sick without certificate" and on another 7 occasions he was treated as "away without leave"; during his period of periodic detention he was working, attending
Alcoholics Anonymous and receiving medical treatment. His medication produced unfortunate side effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, weight loss, headaches, emotional highs and lows and difficulty sleeping; the sentencing judge did not advert to his pre-sentence custody; allowing for 30 days spent in custody for driving offences he has spent 27 weeks and 4 days in custody as well as being credited with 13 weekends of periodic detention; he did not attend at court as he did not receive any of the notices. This flowed from his failure to advise of his change of address with sufficient formality [that is, with a letter to the Superintendent of the Periodic
Detention Centre (PDC)]. When he attended at the PDC on 19 and 26 April and 3
May 1996, nobody told him of the pending cancellation proceedings listed for hearing on 9 May 1996 although the Department appears to have instituted action by its letter of 4 April 1996. The date on the letter is not entirely clear; 
Mr Webster was remiss in telephoning the centre when he was ill and suggesting that the centre contact his doctor if necessary, rather than producing a medical certificate; 
While Mr Webster failed to follow the correct procedures, the materials suggest that he had real difficulties which explained, but did not excuse, his failures. Despite some unsatisfactory features of his service, his attendance on 19 and 26 April and 3 May 1996 strongly suggests that he was not trying to avoid serving his periodic detention.

It is a pity that, by proceeding ex parte, Judge Flannery was not able to be put in possession of the full facts. Mr Webster has now spent far longer in custody than was intended by Judge Ford.

At the hearing I was satisfied that, as a result of the judge's apparent failure to take into account the pre-sentence custody of Mr Webster, the judge making no reference to it, and, more importantly, the events subsequent to the sentence a miscarriage had occurred. The appellant was concerned to be released immediately and I thought that he was entitled to be so released but that he should spend a short period on parole. Accordingly, I joined in the orders made.

Procedures to be Followed on Cancellation of Periodic Detention 
The Corrective Services Department supported the approach which this Court proposed in Wilson when the question of cancellation of periodic detention arises and the detainee does not appear at the hearing. The Department was concerned to identify the source of the power which entitled the District
Court to issue a warrant prior to dealing with the detainee. The Department also raised the question whether a magistrate has a similar power.

The [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) , which abolished Courts of Quarter Sessions and conferred a criminal jurisdiction on the District Court, provides: "166 (1) The Court has the criminal jurisdiction conferred or imposed on it by or under this Act, the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) and any other Act; 
The Court has generally the same criminal jurisdiction as each Court of
Quarter Sessions had immediately before the commencement of this Act except as regards any offences prescribed for the purposes of [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s5.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/)." 
The Criminal Procedure Regulation 1995, clause 4 provides that the offences referred to in [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s12.html) and [19A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s19a.html) of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) , being treason and murder, are not within the jurisdiction of the District Court.

The [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) further provides: "169(1) A Judge exercising the criminal jurisdiction of the Court has, in relation to proceedings in the Courts in that jurisdiction, the same powers, authorities, duties and functions as a Chairman of Quarter Sessions would have had, in relation to the like proceedings in a Court of Quarter Sessions, had this Act not been enacted." 
An extensive rule-making power is conferred on the District Court Rule
Committee but the powers and the rules made do not touch upon the present enquiry.

The statutory predecessor of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/index.html#p4) of the [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) , governing the criminal jurisdiction of the District Court, is found in ss -571 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) . Section provided: "(1) Every Court now existing, proclaimed, or known, as a Court of `Sessions of the Peace', or of `General Sessions of the Peace,' or of `General
Sessions,' or of `Quarter Sessions,' or of `General Quarter Sessions,' or of `General or Quarter Sessions,' or of `General and Quarter Sessions,' shall after the passing of this Act be called a Court of Quarter Sessions.

Every such Court now existing shall be deemed to be a Court of Quarter
Sessions established under the authority of this Act.

Every such Court of Quarter Sessions, and every Court of Quarter Sessions hereafter established, shall have jurisdiction in respect of all crimes and misdemeanours (other than a crime or misdemeanour which is punishable with death or which was so punishable immediately before the commencement of the [Crimes (Amendment) Act, ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1955162/)), and generally shall have the same jurisdiction, and authority, civil and criminal, as each and every Court of `Sessions of the Peace,' `General Sessions of the
Peace,' `General Sessions,' `Quarter Sessions,' `General Quarter Sessions,' `General or Quarter Sessions,' or `General and Quarter Sessions,' now possesses in New South Wales.

All references in any Act to any such Court shall be deemed to be references to a Court of Quarter Sessions within the meaning of this Act." 
Under <case> the Governor was empowered to establish additional Courts of
Quarter Sessions and, under <case>, appoint any judge of any District Court to be the chairman of the Courts of Quarter Sessions. Under <case> every such chairman was to be the sole judge at the trial.

Section 566 enabled any court to issue a warrant for the arrest of any witness bound by a recognizance or served with a subpoena who had not attended at the trial.

Courts of Quarter Sessions are of ancient lineage. A brief historical survey of them and the powers of the chairman is useful. By 4 Geo IV C 96 (1823) (UK) section XIX, it was enacted that Courts of General or Quarter Sessions should be held in New South Wales. The Governor was to establish them by proclamation. It was provided: "the said Courts of Sessions respectively shall have Power and Authority to take Cognizance of All Matters and Things Cognizable in Courts of General or
Quarter Sessions in England so far as the Circumstances and Condition of the said Colony shall require and admit." 
This was amongst many other important provisions for the administration of justice and the making of laws for the government of New South Wales. The Act was intended to continue until 1 July 1827 and to govern the situation until more detailed provision could be made. In R v. Windeyer, 1 Legge (Supreme
Court Cases in NSW 1825 - 1854) 366 decided in 1847, Stephen CJ, speaking for the Full Court, said, at 370: "It is, indeed, a great error to suppose that every doctrine of every kind established for a settled and ancient kingdom, is to the applied, under all possible circumstances, to things and persons in new and distant dependencies.
In this colony, the erection of Courts of Quarter Sessions was provided for; but with a new and unprecedented jurisdiction, and an equally novel species of trial." and at 370-371: " ... various Acts of the Legislature have from time to time been passed, in which the existence and powers of Justices, and of the Courts of Quarter
Sessions, have been recognised. By the 9 Geo IV, C 83, <case> and the Acts 10
Geo IV, No 7, and 3 Will IV, No 3, <case>, Courts of General and Quarter
Sessions were established. By the 5 Will IV, No 17, their summary jurisdiction is recognised and confirmed. By other Acts, provision is made for the election of a chairman for such courts. By the 5 Will IV, No 22, the exercise of the powers of the Justices out of Sessions, is regulated. By the 4 Vic, No 22, s , the Quarter Sessions Courts have power given to them to make rules. By the Vic, No 6 the power of a Justice of the Peace, in this Colony to take examinations, and hold to bail, in criminal cases is expressly recognised. By the 7 Vic, No 17, <case>, every Justice of the Peace within the colony, is enabled to act as such at any Court of Quarter Sessions in Sydney." 
Act 9 Geo IV C 83 (UK), <case> empowered the Governor of NSW, with the advice and consent of his Legislative Council, to institute Courts of General and
Quarter Sessions by Ordinances and to give and grant to such Courts power and authority to take cognizance of all matters and things cognizable in courts of
General and Quarter Sessions in England so far as the circumstances and condition of the colony required and admitted.

Section 17 further provided that all crimes offences and misdemeanours should be prosecuted and tried before the said Courts of General and Quarter Sessions respectively "in such and the same manner and subject to all such and the same
Rules and Regulations in every respect, as are hereinbefore made and prescribed with respect to trials" before the Supreme Court. Under <case> the
Supreme Court could make rules on a wide range of matters including the forms and manner of proceedings, the practice and pleadings upon all indictments and informations, actions, suits and other matters to be therein brought and the form and manner of bail. Further, the Supreme Court judges had the same jurisdiction, powers and authorities for New South Wales as the judges of the
Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas and Exchequer in England. The Courts of
Quarter Sessions could not make rules but the Governor, with the assistance of the judges of the Supreme Court, could make rules as to the practice and procedures of the Courts of Sessions.

By Act 10 Geo IV No 7 Courts of General and Quarter Sessions were established in New South Wales and were given the power and authority earlier mentioned. The justices were to elect as Chairman a person possessing competent knowledge of the law. Act 3 Will IV C 3, <case>, constituted Courts of
Petty Sessions, defined their powers and authorities and the matters which they could entertain.

In Sweeney v. Fitzhardinge <case>; [4
CLR 716] at 729
Griffith CJ dealt briefly with the jurisdiction of the Courts of General or
Quarter Sessions to hear appeals from one or two Justices exercising their summary jurisdiction. He remarked: " ... the Act 5 William IV C 22 in effect gives Courts of Quarter Sessions in New South Wales the same powers and duties as the Courts of Quarter Sessions in England ..." This aspect is not presently relevant.

Dickinson, A Practical Guide to the Quarter Sessions, 4th Edn 1838, at pp -184 deals with the various ways an alleged offender could be brought before the Court of Quarter Sessions in England. Where the grand jury found a bill for felony, if the party indicted be not in custody, or under recognizance to appear, the court, on application to the clerk of the peace, issued a "capias", tested by the two senior justices present, directing the sheriff to arrest and detain the offender. After a bill was found at the
Sessions for a misdemeanour, if the defendant did not appear and the sheriff returned that he had summoned him, the prosecutor had the right during the session at which the bill was found to have a bench warrant issued against the offender to apprehend him.

At 184 Dickinson states that where the party indicted is under a recognizance to appear at the Session at which the indictment is found and does not do so, the prosecutor may bespeak a bench warrant during the Session. If the prosecution did not do so, a justice, on application, could issue a warrant for the person's arrest.

There are passages to like effect in Pritchard, The Jurisdiction, Practice & Procedure of The Quarter Sessions, 1875. Dickinson and Pritchard make it plain that warrants may be issued for the attendance of the person required to answer to the charges made. In some instances the warrant was issued at an early stage of proceedings by a justice to procure the attendance of the accused. In other cases bench warrants were issued when an accused did not attend as required before the Sessions.

Since the enactment of 9 George IV C 83 (UK) and 10 George IV No 7, Courts of
Quarter Sessions have had the jurisdiction and powers of the ancient Courts of
Quarter Sessions in England. Prosecutions and trials were to follow the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court. I acknowledge that there were changes in New South Wales, for example, grand juries may never have been used in New South Wales: Grassby v. The Queen <case>; [168 CLR 1] at 13.
Nevertheless the power of the Courts of Quarter Sessions, and now the District
Court, to issue bench warrants to bring accused before them where necessary to be dealt with seems never to have been doubted and to have been exercised for a very long time.

The appeals which have come before this court have demonstrated how necessary it is for detainees to be before the court when a judge is cancelling an order for periodic detention and deciding whether to fix minimum and additional terms and the length of each. This is an important matter and it exposes the accused to more serious consequences than the order imposing periodic detention.

Reliance was also placed upon [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s171d.html) of the [District Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) which reads: "Subject to this Act and the rules, the procedure and practice of the District
Court when exercising its criminal jurisdiction shall, so far as practicable, be the same as the procedure and practice of the Supreme Court when exercising similar jurisdiction." 
This section was inserted in 1984 along with a series of other provisions designed to improve the procedures of the District Court. The amending Act enabled the District Court through its Rule Committee to make rules governing the practice and procedure of the District Court. In the Second Reading Speech in the Legislative Assembly the Minister stated "In summary, the bill gives the District Court a much greater degree of control over its procedures, removes a few anomalies and gives the court a few new powers that should considerably assist it." 
The Second Reading Speech of the Minister responsible for the legislation in the Legislative Council was more detailed than that of the responsible
Minister in the Legislative Assembly but in neither House was there any reference to [s
D.](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s171d.html)
It was acknowledged that "Criminal procedure is at present as developed under the common law." Neither the [District Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) nor the amending Act of 1984 sets out the powers and authorities of the District Court in criminal matters in a comprehensive way. One effect of [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s171d.html) is to require the District Court to use or rely on the practice and procedure of the Supreme Court where the District Court finds that there are gaps in its procedure and practice. The issue of a bench warrant to bring an accused, a person convicted of an offence or a detainee before a Court so it can deal with a person fairly falls within the powers conferred by [s
D](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/s171d.html) as the Supreme Court may certainly do so.

Counsel for the Department informed us that the acute problems, already exposed in cancellation proceedings in the District Court, existed in relation to the cancellation of periodic detention by the Local Court. However, the problems in the Local Court were even more acute as many magistrates felt that they did not have power to issue a bench warrant in respect of a detainee who had not appeared, prior to cancelling the periodic detention and setting or deciding not to set minimum and additional terms. The view was taken that the only warrant which they could issue was one for the arrest and commitment of the detainee after the cancellation of the periodic detention order and the setting of minimum and additional terms or declining to do so.

Local Courts do not have inherent powers. In Grassby, supra, at 16, Dawson J pointed out that notwithstanding that the powers of the magistrate's court may be defined, "every court undoubtedly possesses jurisdiction arising by implication upon the principle that a grant of power carries with it everything necessary for its exercise ... Those implied powers may in many instances serve a function similar to that served by the inherent powers exercised by a superior court but they are derived from a different source and are limited in their extent." 
At 17 Dawson J continued: "It would be unprofitable to attempt to generalize in speaking of the powers which an inferior court must possess by way of necessary implication.
Recognition of the existence of such powers will be called for whenever they are required for the effective exercise of a jurisdiction which is expressly conferred but will be confined to so much as can be `derived by implication from statutory provisions conferring particular jurisdiction'. There is in my view no reason why, where appropriate, they may not extend to ordering a stay of proceedings" 
Dawson J held that there was no room in the face of the magistrate's statutory obligations, which were in mandatory terms, for the implication of a discretionary power to terminate proceedings in a manner other than that provided in <case> of the Justices Act 1981 .

In Stanton v. Abernathy [(1990) 19 NSWLR 656], Gleeson
CJ at 671 referred to the implied powers of a magistrate as being based on general principles concerning the proper administration of justice. They enable the magistrate to ensure that fairness prevails.

Many of the local cases rely on the statement by Lord Morris in Connolly v.
Director of Public Prosecutions [[1964] AC 1254] at 1301 that there "can be no doubt that a court which is endowed with a particular jurisdiction has powers which are necessary to enable it to act effectively within such jurisdiction." 
Most of the local cases are collected in John Fairfax Group v. Local Court of
NSW [(1991) 26 NSWLR 131.] Many of these are concerned with prohibitions on publication.

The question for decision is whether the issuing of a bench warrant to apprehend a detainee who does not appear because he has left his last notified address and does not receive notification of the hearing by post or otherwise is necessary to enable the court to act effectively and fairly within its jurisdiction. Is it really necessary to secure the proper administration of justice in the proceedings? 
The present problem would probably not exist to any substantial extent if there were no service by post. Detainees change their address and contrary to their obligation, do not notify the Governor of the Prison (or Superintendent of the PDC) as required by the Regulations.

The difficulty is that without the detainee (and his evidence) the court does not usually have all the facts and, in the past, this has led to unfair results.

It is necessary to return to the terms of the [Periodic Detention of
Prisoners
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/).
[Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s26.html) provides: "(1) Where an order for periodic detention is cancelled under [section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s24.html) or [25](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s25.html), a justice may - if the person in respect of whom the order was made is not before the court or in prison at the time at which the order is cancelled, issue a warrant, in or to the effect of the prescribed form, for the apprehension and detention of that person; or in any other case, issue a warrant, in or to the effect of the prescribed form, for the detention of that person, to serve any unexpired portion of the sentence to which the order applied by way of full-time imprisonment.

This section does not apply to an order for periodic detention under [section
C."](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s5c.html) 
The forms of warrant have been prescribed.

During argument members of the Court canvassed the possibility of the
Department of Corrective Services giving an undertaking upon the issue of a warrant for apprehension and commitment that upon the arrest of the detainee such person will be brought as soon as possible before the court so it could set a minimum and an additional term. The Department explained that this would not be a practical system. Detainees are arrested by many different officers and taken to police stations and gaols which are nearby. Sometimes human error intrudes into the computer system. The detainee's name may not be entered or not entered correctly or there may be a few days' delay. There is also the risk that, at some point, a detainee may be missed in the system. It may not be appreciated that the detainee has to be taken back before the magistrate.
Entries into the computer system would be made from a number of points by a variety of officers. The Department would do its best to avoid mistakes but the risk of some errors would remain. Given the substantial number of detainees and officers involved that risk could not be regarded as minimal.
Administratively, it would be much better if warrants were issued for people to be arrested and taken before a judge or magistrate as the case may be. It is not realistic to expect perfection in the operation of the system when so many are involved. The practical difficulties to which the Department referred are important. The Department was concerned about the potential difficulties resulting in unfairness to some detainees. I was grateful for the Department's frankness and co-operation in discussing the practical problems. The
Department, by its counsel, indicated that it would prefer to follow the procedure suggested in Wilson in the local courts as well as in the District
Court.

Magistrates do not have a general statutory power to issue bench warrants.
Their common law power to do so seems to have fallen into disuse in New South
Wales as a result of the potential problems which attend its exercise if a mistake is made. There are a number of specific statutory provisions. [Section ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/s31.html) provides that a warrant for the apprehension of a person may be issued if that person does not appear when served with a summons. This relates to an indictable offence in respect of which committal proceedings will be held.
There are similar provisions in respect of indictable offences which may be dealt with summarily and summary offences - see <case>, issue of warrant in first instance on an information substantiated on oath; <case>, issue of warrant on non-appearance to a duly served summons; <case>, adjournment of hearing and issue of warrant on non-appearance to a duly served summons or attendance notice. In certain instances the magistrate may proceed ex parte (ss 75, 75A,
B). Section 80AA provides that a Justice shall not by any conviction order that the defendant be imprisoned unless the defendant is present at the time the order for imprisonment is made. Section 80 AA(2) provides that where a
Justice convicts an absent defendant the Justice may issue a warrant for the apprehension of the defendant for the purpose of the defendant being brought before a Justice for sentence. There are also provisions for the arrest of a witness who, when duly served, fails to attend court to give evidence or produce documents.

I have touched upon the various provisions of the Justices Act enabling magistrates to issue warrants to bring people before them. A magistrate may issue a warrant, in the first instance, where the information is on oath for the arrest of the defendant so he can be brought before the Court and where he does not appear in answer to a duly served summons or attendance notice and the magistrate does not proceed ex parte. There are also the provisions of s
AA; where a person is convicted ex parte a warrant must issue to bring a defendant before the court if it is proposing to impose a gaol sentence.

It is necessary to consider how ss 25(3A), 26 and 27 operate together. Section (3A) requires the court to cancel the periodic detention order upon the detainee not reporting for 3 detention periods without leave or an exemption.
By <case> "court" includes a judge, magistrate or a justice (or justices) sitting as a Local Court. Under <case>, where an order for periodic detention is cancelled under <case>, a justice (defined to mean a justice of the peace) may, if the detainee is not before the court or in prison at the time, issue a warrant for the apprehension and detention of the detainee or in any other case for the detention of the detainee to serve the unexpired portion of the sentence to which the order applied by way of full time imprisonment. The warrant is for the apprehension and detention or detention alone of the detainee to serve the unexpired portion of the sentence in prison. It is upon the cancellation of the periodic detention order that a minimum and an additional term are set. This section envisages that the Local Court will cancel the periodic detention order and that a justice will thereafter issue a warrant. On the way the legislation is framed that is primarily an administrative function. Even if the detainee is in prison there is no express obligation to bring him before the court on the cancellation of the periodic detention order.

There will be many cases where the Local Court will not be able to deal fairly with a detainee if he is not before the Court, and will not have sufficient material to decide whether to set a minimum term and an additional term and the length of each.

As the warrant issues after cancellation and a non-parole period is fixed on cancellation the course suggested during argument is of doubtful validity and involves the practical difficulties earlier mentioned by the Department.

I conclude that it is necessary for the proper, fair and effective administration of justice and the Act to imply a power that on the non- appearance of a detainee on a cancellation application and on the Department establishing a prima facie case the Local Court has the power to issue a warrant or cause a warrant to issue for the arrest of the detainee and to bring him before the court. Otherwise, it is not possible to deal fairly with the detainee on the cancellation. The implied power arises out of the statute and the nature of the matter with which it deals. The Local Court has specific powers to bring people before it to answer charges, give evidence as witnesses and for sentence when they do not appear. It would be anomalous if in proceedings which almost necessarily involve a period of imprisonment, the
Local Court had no power to bring detainees before it so it could deal with the critical aspects of a minimum and an additional term. This is all the more important when it is recalled that the period of periodic detention is often longer than if a full-time custodial term were imposed. The justice who issues the warrant after cancellation by the Local Court has no power to set minimum and additional terms and the Local Court has exercised its functions by that stage and cannot re-open the matter.

This does not represent any general extension of magisterial power. It is important to confine the power to arrest within strict limits. The arrest of the detainee after the Local Court is satisfied that a prima facie case for cancellations has been made out but prior to actual cancellation only advances the time of arrest to allow a detainee to show why a minimum term should be set and make submissions as to its length.

The observations as to the position of the Local Court are obiter but the
Department wanted the matter clarified. It is highly desirable that the power of all Courts, dealing with the cancellation of periodic detention where detainees do not appear, to issue a warrant for their arrest prior to cancellation should be put on an express statutory footing. This would relieve the unease which, understandably, magistrates are currently feeling.

It is anomalous that to ascertain the powers of the District Court in its criminal jurisdiction resort has to be had to legal history of some antiquity, however exciting and engrossing the research might be. Perhaps the time has come to amend the [District Court
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/dca1973187/) and, for ready reference, to set out in a comprehensive way the powers of that Court when exercising its criminal jurisdiction. Any amending legislation could provide for resort to be had to the powers of the Supreme Court and the ancient powers of Courts of Quarter Sessions in England to fill in any unforeseen gaps.

REGINA versus Daniel James WEBSTER 
JUDGMENT 
Howie AJ: I have had the benefit of reading the draft judgment of Smart J in this matter. I agree with the reasons he has recorded for the orders made on 10 October 1997 in which I joined. 
I also agree with the remarks made by his Honour with respect to the procedure to be adopted in both the District and the Local Courts for the cancellation of orders for periodic detention. However, I should record that I have only come to accept that the Local Court has implied power to issue a warrant for the arrest of the periodic detainee in order to bring him or her before the court with considerable hesitation. I have concluded that such a power should be implied from the provisions of the [Periodic Detention of Prisoners
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/) only because I am satisfied that such a power will be of benefit not only for the administration of Part 4 of the Act generally but also to the detainee in respect of whom an order of cancellation is made.

My hesitation in implying such a power stems chiefly from the nature of the power being implied. The power of a court to issue a warrant for a person's arrest is such a serious matter that it is hard to imagine that the legislature would grant such a power by implication. The absence of an express power to issue a warrant to bring a periodic detainee before the court seems prima facie to indicate that the legislature did not believe that any express power was necessary for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction conferred under Part 4 of the Act. That may be because the legislature did not believe such a power was necessary or that it should be exercised. It may also be because the legislature assumed that the courts generally have power to issue a bench warrant where it is necessary that a person be brought before a court in order that it can effectively exercise its criminal jurisdiction. As Smart
J has shown, that assumption is correct in respect of the District Court, but it is erroneous in respect of the Local Court. The existence in the Local
Court of a general power to issue a warrant to bring a person before it seems inconsistent with the specific provisions of the [Justices Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/ja1902119/) providing for the issue of warrants and, in particular, with the introduction into that Act in 1985 of <case>.

Section 80AA provides in effect that the Local Court should not sentence a person to a term of imprisonment in the absence of that person, but rather, where a person is convicted ex parte, the court may issue a warrant to bring the person before the court for sentencing. The fact that the legislature saw fit to enact <case> leads me to two conclusions: firstly, that the legislature believed it was necessary to expressly confer a power on the Local Court to issue a warrant in the circumstances to which the section relates, and, secondly, that it appreciated the importance of a person being before the court before a sentence of imprisonment is passed upon the person. The first of those conclusions perhaps tells against finding an implied power in the provisions of [Part ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/index.html#p4) of the [Periodic Detention of Prisoners
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/pdopa1981332/) because it supports the argument that if the legislature wished the court to have such a power it would have expressly conferred it. The second conclusion, however, suggests that the legislature would not have intended that the court should exercise the discretion to fix minimum and additional terms under s (4) of the Act in the absence of the periodic detainee.

When consideration is given to the benefit of ensuring that the periodic detainee is before the court so that the jurisdiction under <case> can be effectively and fairly exercised and also to the fact that the legislature has provided that upon cancellation the court must issue a warrant for the person's apprehension to serve the sentence in any event, it seems to me that a power to have the periodic detainee arrested and brought before the court following cancellation can be implied from the jurisdiction conferred on the court by Part 4 of the Act in general and <case> in particular. The fact that it is unnecessary to imply such a power in respect of the District or Supreme
Court does not detract from the implication of that power so far as the Local
Court is concerned. There is no apparent reason why the legislature would have intended that the Local Court alone should not be able to exercise such a power.
 * * * 
