

Regina versus Garry John Salisbury [1996] NSWSC 632 (18 December 1996) 
REGINA versus GARRY JOHN SALISBURY /96 
Wednesday 18 December 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Grove J, Bruce J, Cooper AJ 
CATCHWORDS: CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - REDETERMINATION OF LIFE SENTENCE - NO POINT OF PRINCIPLE RAISED - NO ERROR BY RESENTENCING JUDGE 
RESULT: Application refused.
 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for extension of time for seeking leave to appeal against sentence. The relevant sentence is an imposition of a total term of twenty years penal servitude consisting of a minimum term commencing on 16 April 1984 and expiring on 15 April 1996 together with an additional term of eight years. That sentence was imposed by Blanch J on 15 April 1994 in substitution for a sentence of penal servitude for life earlier imposed by Yeldham J on 18 December 1984 following the conviction of the applicant for murder and other offences. This application for extension of time is dated 26 March 1996 and hence was lodged nearly two years after the applicant was sentenced. 
The applicant is not legally represented before this Court. The pro forma notice of application contains the following explanation for the notice not being lodged within ten days (which is the period specified in the form): "It was not lodged at the time as I was happy with the minimum term but on seeing some of the worst offenders getting eight year additionals and less I no longer felt happy with this sentence. I would be looking now for an additional at 3-4 years instead of the eight year term." 
The applicant's minimum term has, of course, now expired. The Court has been informed that the Offenders Review Board has not been prepared to grant the applicant parole. The terms of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s17.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) would be relevant in this regard. An adjustment to the additional term - which is specifically what the applicant seeks - could only occur as a consequence of intervention to vary the total sentence. The application should not however turn upon procedural matters and it is appropriate to turn to the matters of which the applicant makes complaint.

Some background should be sketched. The applicant and three others embarked upon a venture seeking to rob persons in the vicinity of Newcastle beaches.
Two young men had been camping in the surf pavilion near Newcastle South beach. They were set upon by the marauding band of which the applicant was a member and the death of one victim resulted. All four were convicted of murder; robbery with striking and wounding and robbery with striking. At this juncture it is relevant only to refer to the longest term received by each offender.

The presiding judge (Yeldham J) found that the applicant was the ringleader in the events which led to the death and found that his culpability was not significantly diminished or "indeed, diminished at all" by any mitigating circumstances. As the relevant law then stood the applicant was liable to the sentence of penal servitude for life which his Honour proceeded to fix. In relation to each of the other three accused he found that there were such circumstances as diminished culpability and he sentenced each of them to respective terms of fourteen years penal servitude. It is worth observing that the applicant made an unsworn statement to the jury at his trial which concluded with these words: "I am prepared to be punished for what I have done but the other three are in no way as guilty as I am." 
In response to the conventional directions of the Registrar to provide written submissions the applicant has set out five grounds of complaint. I deal with each of them.

The first matter seeks in substance to raise the question of parity between the applicant and his co-offenders. At the time the original sentences were received, the applicable legislation had the consequence of making available remissions against sentence which could be earned. With the change in sentencing law brought about by the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) coming into operation in September 1989, potential remissions for prisoners then under determinate sentence were converted into reality. The applicant has offered some arithmetical projections demonstrating the comparative leniency thereby received by his co-offenders when compared with himself. In oral submissions he offered further calculations projecting his current redetermined sentence into an "unremitted" head sentence and non-parole period. That exercise does not create a consequent source of guidance. The comparisons are necessarily otiose when it is observed that a basic factor was that he was being sentenced for undiminished culpability for murder whereas his co-offenders had a finding in each case that their culpability was significantly diminished. There can be no justifiable sense of grievance arising out of harsh treatment being meted out to the most culpable offender.

The second proposition asserts that there are other cases where offenders have committed similar crimes but received less punishment. At best, this proposition reflects a perception which is subjective to the applicant. Today, he referred to the sentences received by nominated fellow prisoners - some of whose identities, and their crimes, are familiar to members of the court - and sought to invite contrasts. This Court is a court of error and intervention in relation to sentence would be provoked in the case of demonstrated legal error or imputed error where a sentence is either so high or so low as to be outside of the range of the exercise of sound judicial discretion. The sentence imposed in this case upon redetermination is well within that range.

The third matter is a variation upon the same complaint and relates to more violent crimes receiving similar punishment of twenty years penal servitude in total. Such a perception omits entirely matters which a sentencing court may need to take into account in individual cases including "discounts" for acknowledgment of guilt particularly if this is done early and saves witnesses the ordeal of testifying, cooperation with authorities and a myriad of possible subjective factors which may be present in any particular case.

The fourth complaint addresses directly the eight year additional term. In setting a determinate sentence in substitution for an existing sentence of penal servitude for life, Blanch J was not bound by general provisions as to the division of total sentence into minimum and additional term which are specified in [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of that
Act. It can be noted in passing that division of a total term of twenty years in accordance with that provision would have resulted in a longer minimum term component so that the applicant would not yet be eligible for consideration for parole. In written submissions tendered to the Court on behalf of the
Crown reference was made to some staffing considerations relative to the
Probation and Parole Service but I do not accept that such matters ought be weighed by this Court. This has led to some apparent misunderstanding. It may be that supervision on parole is likely to extend for a limit of three years but that does not restrict the length of additional term nor does it mean that release will only occur in the last three years of a longer term. The significant matter which should be noted is that actual release is not a matter for the sentencing court. Once the minimum term component of sentence has been served it is a matter for the Offenders Review Board to determine actual release. The making of a release order on parole is conditioned upon the provision set out in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s17.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) significant amongst which is the requirement that there be satisfaction that the prisoner if released will be able to lead a normal lawful community life.
The report of the Serious Offenders Review Council and updating evidence was before Blanch J and the material then available would suggest that it would be unsurprising that the applicant's lack of progress towards rehabilitation would inhibit a parole order being made in his favour.

I should note, however, that the applicant today produced an impressive array of course achievement certificates and he informed the Court that he had retained C3 classification. These matters might hold out some promise for the future. We were told that the next Board consideration would be in late
February next.

The fifth matter raised by the applicant concerns the material which was advanced at the redetermination hearing. This material was referred to by
Blanch J and it suffices for present purposes to observe that the applicant is unable to point to any omission to consider that material nor can he demonstrate any erroneous approach or finding.

None of the grounds sought to be put forward by the applicant is sustainable.
Had there been substance in any of them I would be reluctant to allow failure to comply with time requirements, even gross failure, to operate finally to the disadvantage of the applicant. The situation is, however, that there is no substance in any of the matters raised and the absence of any acceptable basis for granting the extension of time is implicit in the candour of what the applicant included in his form notice when he stated that he was originally happy with the minimum term but he has since become dissatisfied. He expressly seeks a reduction of the additional term by four to five years and as I have already stated this could only be achieved by reduction in the total sentence.

Although in sensitivity to the position of the applicant all the matters raised have been allowed to be canvassed and have been considered, I am of opinion that the application is without merit and the matter can be disposed of by declining extension of time.

I propose the application be refused.

BRUCE J: I agree.

COOPER AJ: I agree also.

GROVE J: The order of the Court is that the application for extension of time to apply for leave to appeal against sentence is refused.
 * * * 
