

Crowe versus DPP [2015] NSWSC 747 (16 June 2015) 
Last Updated: 16 June 2015 
Supreme Court 
New South Wales  
Decision: 
Summons dismissed with costs.  
Catchwords: 
CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE - Plaintiff committed for trial on murder charge - claim magistrate failed to properly exercise discretions under <case> [Criminal
Procedure Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) -
Plaintiff sought judicial review by Supreme Court - danger of fragmentation of criminal process - as DPP had found a bill of indictment quashing the committal would be futile - analogous relief available from pre-trial processes - no case made for intervention by Supreme Court.  
JUDGMENT
HIS HONOUR: 
Nature of proceedings 
The plaintiff has been charged with the following offences: 
That on or about 29 October 2013 she did murder Mahmoud Hamzy. 
That on or about 29 October 2013 she did cause grievous bodily harm to
Omar Ajaj. 
That between 1 October and 30 October 2013 she did conspire and agree to murder Mohammed Hamzy.
In the course of committal proceedings on 10 March 2015, the plaintiff made an application to cross examine a number of prosecution witnesses under [s 91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s91.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) (the [s 91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s91.html) application).
On 16 March 2015 his Honour Still LCM refused the plaintiff's application and delivered his reasons. The committal proceedings were adjourned to 15 April 2015. On 15 April 2015 his Honour committed the plaintiff for trial in the Supreme Court.
By a Further Amended Summons filed 26 May 2015, the plaintiff seeks judicial review under [s 69](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s69.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) in relation to the refusal of the [s 91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s91.html) application. The plaintiff seeks to quash the order of the learned magistrate, together with a further order remitting the committal to his Honour to be dealt with according to law.
This judgment relates to that Further Amended Summons.

Factual background
In order to understand the application, it is necessary to provide the context within which the Crown alleges that the plaintiff's offending occurred. The following is taken from the Crown Case Statement. It is not a statement of fact per se, but sets out the allegations of fact upon which the Crown relies.
The Brothers for Life (BFL) gang was started in gaol by Bassam Hamzy and his cousins, including Ghassan Hamzy and Mohammed 'Hamoudie' Hamzy. The BFL became a well known criminal group mostly comprising Islamic males of Afghani and Middle Eastern background.
In 2013 the BFL had two main factions, Bankstown and Blacktown. At that time, Mohammed 'Hamoudie' Hamzy ran the Bankstown faction and one of the co-accused, Farhad Qaumi had the leadership of the Blacktown faction.
When Farhad Qaumi took over the leadership of the Blacktown faction, he was able to control and direct its criminal activities. He did so with the assistance of his two brothers, Mumtaz and Jamil. During his time in charge, the criminal activities of the BFL Blacktown faction comprised shootings at individuals, home invasions, other firearm offences, the supply of prohibited drugs and a "contract murder".
By late 2013, in addition to this offending, the BFL Bankstown and Blacktown factions became involved in a conflict as a result of Farhad Qaumi attempting to exert stronger influence over the entire BFL.
A close confidant of Farhad Qaumi during this period was the plaintiff, who also had strong affiliations with members of the Bankstown BFL faction. It is the Crown case that during this struggle between the two factions, Farhad Qaumi and/or his brothers Jamil and Mumtaz, along with the plaintiff were involved in, and directed, other members of BFL Blacktown to commit multiple shootings, including a second murder, in a bid to overpower the Bankstown faction, whose members were primarily of Lebanese background.
A large part of the Crown case against the plaintiff depends upon witnesses "A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "G", "I", "J", "K" and "L", who were also members/associates of the Blacktown BFL. Those persons are expected to give evidence about their knowledge of the background and the "general" nature of the activities of BFL Blacktown in the time they were involved such as conducting "drug rips". In addition, they are expected to give first hand evidence of "specific" criminal offending that they played a role in, along with the relevant co-accused including the plaintiff, as reflected in the counts on the indictment.
It is the Crown case that on 28 October 2013 the plaintiff approached Farhad Qaumi and told him that Mohammed 'Hamoudie' Hamzy was trying to have him killed. After making some inquiries, Farhad Qaumi told a group of the BFL Blacktown faction, which included witness L, Jamil Qaumi and Mohammed Zarshoy that Mohammed 'Hamoudie' Hamzy had to be killed. It was decided that the plaintiff would drive those three persons to Mohammed "Hamoudie" Hamzy's residence because she had been to the house previously and knew the area well. The plaintiff is said to have advised the group that they would have to wait until later in the evening as Mohammed Hamzy had bail conditions requiring him to be home before 11pm. She also advised that Mohammed Hamzy and his associates always sat in the garage of his home to socialise after the curfew came into effect.
At 11.30pm on 28 October 2013 Mahmoud Hamzy and Omar Ajaj had visited their cousin Mohammed 'Hamoudie' Hamzy at his residence. They were socialising inside the garage with some other persons including Mehmet Yarar. The plaintiff is said to have driven the vehicle close to the residence. Jamil Qaumi, Zarshoy and witness L alighted from the vehicle and walked towards the residence. When they reached the front of the residence, they ran into the garage and began firing their firearms. As they did this, Mohammed 'Hamoudie' Hamzy and Mehmet Yarar ran for a door leading into the house and escaped unscathed. Both Mahmoud Hamzy and Omar Ajaj fell to the ground after being wounded by bullets. Jamil Qaumi is said to have approached Mahmoud Hamzy and fired at least one bullet into his head from close range.
Jamil Qaumi, witness "L" and Zarshoy then ran back to the vehicle driven by the plaintiff, which was waiting at the front of the house. The plaintiff sped off in the vehicle and while she did so, Zarshoy fired at least one further shot in the direction of the residence. As they were driving away, the group removed their gloves and balaclavas and placed them into a plastic bag which was handed to witness "L". They wiped their fingerprints off the firearms and placed them in another bag which was given to the plaintiff.
It was against that background that senior counsel for the plaintiff made the following submissions to his Honour in the course of the committal: "TERRACINI: That is in relation to witnesses D, G and I. There is nothing new in the authorities that they put forward, there is nothing new in the authorities that we put forward either by the same token, but this particular type of evidence that we seek to cross-examine on falls within the standard parameters. These are, in effect, co-offenders, criminals in a criminal enterprise specifically in relation to the one that is before the Court.
Thirdly, they have got various induced statements or potential indemnities, criminal records, et cetera, et cetera. ...  ... 
TERRACINI: Now, in the circumstances of the type of witness, these are very, very basic matters that are always permitted and if they are going to call informers and co-offenders, and they are - and I think my friend will concede -that they don't have a case without these witnesses. They are in a percentage term probably 95 per cent of the case against my client and they all fall within the same category. They give different versions and I note that there is a lot of police in the back of the Court, and I don't want to tell them how to fix up some of their statements, but there are a number of differences in the statements which are significant.  ..." (10.03.2015 - T.18)  "TERRACINI I mean, I don't act for them, I don't - the point is that these requests are not unusual, they are regularly provided in cases where the bulk of the Crown case comes from criminal informers that are closely related in either a relationship, or an association, or a club style atmosphere. 
As we go down, F - I mean that is generally disclosed in relation to all of these witnesses. As we further go down the page, the relationship with the accused, the victim, the co-offender, et cetera, again fairly standard sort of questions. 
What we want to be able to do, naturally enough - assume worst case scenario that they are committed for trial, and these fellows give evidence.
Because we won't get a trial until 2016, there is sufficient time if we get certain differences and inconsistencies to make our own inquiries and it creates a significant procedural unfairness that if we don't get to cross- examine them until trial, we are not in a position to investigate any errors or inconsistencies that are established by questioning. Then that creates problems with the trial process, itself, where we'd almost be compelled to make an application for certain inquiries to be made, and then you're criticised by the trial Judge saying you should have done them before." (10.03.2015 - T.20)  "TERRACINI: As a result - and the reason why I mention it because I checked thinking, well, occasionally there is a new case on it, but there doesn't seem to be. So we are all at ad idem as to what is the test and here it is important to go back to the basis that we are not asking for witnesses to be put forward in the special category. We only need substantial reasons. 
As to the fact that some of these witnesses may be intimidated and what have you, that's just nonsense. They're all allegedly members of whatever is quite  allegedly a vigorous association of violent people and it is hardly suggested that they are going to be intimidated by coming to Court where the standard procedures are if there was a prospect of that then they can be provided with a screen, or you know, et cetera, et cetera and I just don't, with great respect, think that is a valid point in relation to the personnel associated in a case like this.  ... 
Very briefly, the Crown's just not in a position to say that we are not going to get any benefit out of the cross-examination. History tells us demonstrably that rollover witnesses at times are both inconsistent and self- serving. With respect to 16, the possibility of us being taken by surprise, that is the very point that I adumbrated before to your Honour. 
If we do establish some inconsistencies, then we can make inquiries before the trial because we know the extent, both the statement and the cross- examination, we know the extent of the information that we have to meet. 
Now, these witnesses are fundamental to the Crown case, and I am not putting it too high They can't get a conviction without these witnesses and there will be significant warnings given by the trial Judge because they obviously fall within 165 as being potentially unreliable, not just they are criminals generally, but they are involved allegedly in the very same criminal activity with an interest which cannot be denied, with an interest to save their own skins. So potentially unreliable. 
In relation to the last paragraph of that page, paragraph 17, I concede that the failure to cross-examine witnesses of this type is always prejudicial where the Crown seeks to say that, in effect, we have to demonstrate undue prejudice. Well, that case does not deal with rollovers and informers. They are in a special category and that is why warnings are given about them. 
My final paragraph is the claim by the Crown. We haven't demonstrated - not demonstrated any prejudice Well, our final submission is we are significantly prejudiced They are basically the only witnesses against us, they all fall within a particular category, and we need to be able to cross-examine them so that we can be in a position to meet the evidence at trial if we are committed. 
There is a possibility - there is a possibility that they would be so discredited that we may not even be committed for trial and I have put those details in my submissions - the law in respect of that." (10.03.2015 -
T.21-22).
His Honour delivered judgment in the following terms: "HIS HONOUR: Yes, sure. Okay, well it's a difficult task in terms of assessing whether there are substantial reasons for requiring witnesses for cross-examination. It requires the assessment of each brief, each witness and each submission for each defendant in situations where they are markedly different. 
Let me assure you that I have read the briefs and the submissions and the replies to those submissions at least twice. 
The test is set out in [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s91.html) in relation to substantial reasons and in Hanna and Kearney which says that, "The section has as its primary aim the limitation of the time occupied in committal proceedings". But it also says in Studdert's judgment: "The application to cross-examine requires identification and consideration of the objective of the cross examiner and the framework of the prosecution case. To require a witness for cross-  examination without a definite aim but in the hope of eliciting some  evidence that might prove useful to the defence would not constitute  "substantial reasons". It is for the applicant to clearly define the purpose or purposes of the cross-examination which he seeks.  ... 
In a number of cases including the reading speeches allusion is made or reference is made to what constitute substantial reasons. That is where cross- examination may result in the discharge of the defendant, where it might undermine the credit of an important witness. Where it may narrow the areas in dispute between the prosecution and defence. Where it might clarify and marshal evidence which is vague and illusory. Where it allows the defendant a proper understanding of the nature of the Crown case or an opinion held by a witness. Where cross-examination may ground a no bill application. To explore an area which slightly to be made an application would be made by the defence for exclusion of evidence. To clarify conflicting or inconsistent stories. To assist in bringing relevant issues into focus. To narrow areas in dispute. To avoid surprise at trial and to gain a precise knowledge of a case against a defendant." 
Let me state generally at the outset, the evidence relied by the Crown is from either co-accused or persons said to be members of the Brothers for Life gang. The majority of those statements are induced and disclosure made by the prosecution. One or two have not been the subject of disclosure but that must be done by the prosecution before trial. There is nothing in my view to demand same at committal level nor should that fact alone justify application to cross-examine. The applicant must clearly define the purpose of cross-  examination sought. The whole purpose of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s91.html) is to limit cross-examination to legitimate and defined areas assessed against the strength of the prosecution case having regard to the administrative functions the Court is performing in committal proceedings and acknowledge the restrictions imposed by 270 of the [Criminal Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) in relation to the power to exclude admissions and matters arising under [pt .11](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/index.html#p3.11) of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/).
Both of which are factors in play in relation to these matters. 
It also must be recognised that <case> of the [Evidence
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/) has restricted operation at committal but is a legitimate assessment task at trial. Any request must be focused to the task and delineated clearly. It cannot be so broad as to defeat examination or the aim for cross-examination. 
I note further in relation to the testing of witnesses at trial the majority will be examined separately by a number of defendants and their evidence tested over and over. I intend to examine the alleged offences in the manner they have been grouped." (16.03.2015 - T.3.47 - 5.6) 
In relation to the Hamzy murder an application has been made on behalf of
Amanda Crowe. Sought in relation to that matter the calling of "L" and Fazil
Bari. The areas of cross-examination are set out in that submission. They are the same for both witnesses and identical. The proposed grounds of cross- examination are membership and or involvement in the group known as Brothers for Life. His precise involvement in the offence, his credibility and history, criminal antecedents, his own criminal activity, inducements, indemnity benefits, any significant inconsistencies between his various statements provided to police. As to the inconsistencies between his evidence and the evidence of other Crown witnesses as to the precise and detailed nature of all alleged conversations with the accused and any co-accused, plus his relationship with the accused, as to his relationship with the victim, as to his relationship with either co-accused, as to his identification of alleged motor vehicles used in the offence. As to his capacity to recall events considering the delay in providing a statement. 
The areas of proposed cross-examination are very wide, non-specific, non- exhaustive and it is not my role to sift through and choose those that may be  of relevance. The generic nature of the application in relation to both witnesses is noted. In relation to witnesses, aside from "L" and Bari, but included in the statements of "L" and Bari, is evidence of planning and meetings and conversation, the sourcing of vehicles, the assembly of resources, the arming of shooters, the travel of those shooters, who they were and direct observation of meetings, dispersion of parties and admissions. 
It is said while "L" is an induced witness "L" is said to be the shooter with Jamil also present and Zarshoy also present. The areas said to warrant cross-examination in such broad terms are also set out in the application.
That is the prospect of discharge, the testing of the reliability of protected witnesses, the testing of credibility of witnesses to clarify issues, to clarify vague assumptions and conflicting and inconsistent statements regarding their exact roles, records, conversations and address the problems related to delay. It is said this will allow the accused to know with precision the case against her and test the evidence of the witnesses. It is said to be crucial for a number of reasons, that is the nature and seriousness of the allegations, the penalty if proven, the assistance in identifying issues that will be in dispute at trial and to promote the efficient conduct of the matter in the Supreme Court following committal. It seems to me that is a one size fits all submission. The cross-examination is too broad and almost amounts to an unlimitable examination. The evidence available to the accused contained in the brief is clear. Clearly set out as to her involvement at each step and there cannot be any surprise in relation to the matters identified.
They have been identified with precision. It is a strong Crown case. It is corroborative and it is corroborated by other accounts and surveillance. In my view the request fails to make out substantial reasons to require the calling of a witness for cross-examination and that failure is in both respects. 
IN RELATION TO THAT MATTER THE APPLICATION IS DECLINED. 
In relation to the Chikolatta Bankstown shootings of 7 November 2013 Ms
Crowe's representatives seek witnesses D, G and I. That submission in terms of the areas of proposed cross-examination and reasons are identical in every respect with that made already in relation to the persons required for cross- examination in relation to the murder of Hamzy. 
Again this is not a one size fits all jurisdiction. I rely on the same reasons for dealing with that application to decline the application in this matter. Again it seems to me it lacks specificity, analysis of evidence in the brief and the nature of the test in these proceedings. The case is strong and supported by intercepts. 
THAT REQUEST FAILS 
A similar application is made in relation to Jamil Qaumi. That application seeks witnesses C and D as to event planning, possession of firearms, the shooting, the events afterwards, credit. The reasons set out for that request is that it will undermine their credit or result in discharge. On the Crown case that is already referred to, that cannot be the case. 
In this matter C is said to be present when the vehicle was hired so any evidence he gives is quite restricted. I have made observations already in relation to witness D whose evidence covers a number of allegations. The precise grounds said to fit substantial reasons are not stated. It is rather a shopping list is supplied which lacks direction and focus. Nor is there a clear connection between what is sought and the general list of matters sought to be examined. 
IT IS TOO GENERAL AND UNRELATED TO THE PROPOSED CROSS-EXAMINATION TO BE
SATISFACTORY AND IN RELATION TO THAT MATTER THE APPLICATION IS DECLINED." (16.3.2015 - T.7.7 - 8.32)
On 15 May 2015 the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) found a bill and an Indictment was filed against the plaintiff and the other co-accused involved in the murder. Although this has not yet happened, the plaintiff will be arraigned in due course with other co-accused named in the indictment in the Supreme Court.

Plaintiff's submissions
The plaintiff submitted that despite the finding of a bill against her by the DPP, the interests of justice required that the committal proceedings be re-opened and that important witnesses upon whom the Crown case depended be available for cross-examination. This was particularly so when these witnesses were persons who had been directly involved in the criminality and who were receiving benefits for providing such testimony. The plaintiff submitted that the rationale behind a committal hearing remained valid. In that regard, she relied upon the observations of Dawson J in Grassby versus R <case>; <case>: "19 The importance of the committal in the criminal process should not, however, be underrated. It enables the person charged to hear the evidence against him and to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses. It enables him to put forward his defence if he wishes to do so. It serves to marshal the evidence in deposition form. And, notwithstanding that it is not binding, the decision of a magistrate that a person should or should not stand trial has in practice considerable force so that the preliminary hearing operates effectively to filter out those prosecutions which, because there is insufficient evidence, should not be pursued. Indeed, the significance of the magistrate's decision is clearly reflected in the requirement now contained in [s 41(6)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/s41.html) of the [Justices Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ja119/) that the magistrate should discharge a defendant if he is of the opinion that, having regard to all the evidence, a jury would not be likely to convict."
The plaintiff accepted that the introduction of the "paper" committal was capable of reducing the capacity for the committal to perform its traditional filtering function. Nevertheless, she submitted that [s 91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s91.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) with its requirement that a witness should attend to give oral evidence if there were substantial reasons why that should occur in the interests of justice, preserved an important element of the filtering process referred to by Dawson J. This was particularly so where the witness sought to be cross-examined was of critical importance to the prosecution case and where the reliability of that evidence was or might be effectively tested and possibly undermined by cross-examination at an early stage. The plaintiff submitted that in the case against her, the Crown was reliant upon the evidence of five witnesses. Those witnesses were criminally concerned with the matters charged. She submitted that oral examination of these witnesses would not only disclose the details of the Crown case against her and the nature of the supporting evidence but would also enable a testing of those witnesses' credibility and reliability.
The plaintiff submitted that the "filtering" features of the committal procedure were neither nullified nor reduced by the residual capacity of the Director of Public Prosecutions to file an ex officio indictment. There remained a general right of an accused person to face a committal hearing before any trial on indictment, irrespective of whether an ultimate trial followed a decision by the magistrate to commit or whether a trial followed the Director's decision to file an ex officio indictment. She submitted that the Director's capacity to file an ex officio indictment reflected the executive (i.e. non-judicial) nature of the decision to prosecute. It also recognised the potential imperfections in the ordinary course of committal proceedings and deprived the Local Court of what would otherwise amount to a total control over the executive decision to prosecute. The plaintiff submitted that notwithstanding that circumstance, it would be erroneous to conclude that a committal procedure was a secondary or non-essential feature of the justice system, e.g. its operation as a filter against unsuitable prosecutions as referred to by Dawson J in Grassby.
The plaintiff submitted that the laying of an indictment against her by the Director did not "overtake" the committal proceedings. While accepting that the laying of the indictment was not merely confirmatory of any decision made by a magistrate at committal, the plaintiff submitted that the Supreme Court retained jurisdiction to remit the matter to the Local Court. If the Supreme Court did so it would, in effect, invite the Director to reconsider his own executive decision to indict.
The plaintiff submitted that there remained real utility in the orders sought in the Further Amended Summons in that remitting the matter to the Local Court would serve to re-establish the real possibility that she would be discharged at that stage of the process. This was because a magistrate's decision at the conclusion of a committal proceeding had "considerable force" despite the fact that it did not bind the prosecuting authorities. The plaintiff submitted that to effectively set to one side the prospect of holding committal proceedings on the basis that a bill had already been found, would be to deprive the plaintiff of the real possibility of an early discharge. The plaintiff submitted that this was the reason why the potential availability of a Basha inquiry before trial would not be a sufficient substitute for a committal proceeding heard in accordance with the [s 91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s91.html) application.

Consideration
In circumstances where an indictment has been found, the statement of principle in Sergi versus Director of Public Prosecutions (Court of Appeal, unreported, 10 September 1991) (Kirby P, Meagher and Handley JJA) remains applicable.
 "1 Courts of high authority have repeatedly stressed the great circumspection which should be exercised in the provision of relief which would have the effect of disturbing the conduct of a criminal trial. There is no doubt that this Court, as a supervisory court, has a wide jurisdiction to grant such relief where justice requires it. See Barton versus R <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 75], 96. However, it is a jurisdiction to be sparingly exercised. Lamb versus Moss <case>; [(1983) 49 ALR 533], 545; Bacon versus Rose [(1972) 2 NSWLR 793], 797;
Cain versus Glass (No 2) [(1985) 3 NSWLR 230], CA. In part this restraint arises out of an historical respect for the jury which takes charge of the accused once the trial commences. In part, it derives from a recognition by appellate courts of the difficulties attending the conduct of complex criminal trials. In part it follows from the large provisions to challenge a conviction on appeal if at the end of a trial the accused is convicted and still complains about an interlocutory ruling. In part it is based upon a recognition of the dangers of the "fragmentation in the criminal process". This last consideration was mentioned most recently by Mason CJ in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal versus Bond <case>; [(1990) 170 CLR 321] at 328 and 329. It is essential that more than lip service be paid to these injunctions of restraint. They apply in this case.  Courts have also taken pains of late to stress the authority of the DPP to find a bill of indictment and the discretion which is there involved separate from the (usually anterior) exercise of discretion to commit an accused person for trial. See Director of Public Prosecutions versus Kolalich [(1990) 19 NSWLR 520], 527 (CCA). In the present case, the DPP has now found a bill. The order of the magistrate although historically anterior was a necessary pre-condition or a legal foundation for the DPP's actions - see R v
Leslie Robert Butler, CCA, unreported, 16 August 1991 (per Gleeson CJ, p 4).
That action stands on its own footing. The decision of the magistrate committing the claimant for trial has, thus, now been overtaken by the DPP's decision. Any order directed to the magistrate to re-open the committal proceedings could not of itself affect the DPP's exercise of discretion to find a bill. To the contrary, the magistrate would be entitled unless the DPP elected to withdraw and revoke the bill so found, to regard the re-opened committal as entirely futile. A later finding by the magistrate on a reconsideration of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s6.html) properly construed that there was no evidence to warrant committing the claimant for trial would leave the DPP's bill of indictment completely unaffected. The DPP has made it clear to this Court that he intends to present and prosecute his bill when the trial opens. Courts will not usually review the decision of a prosecutor to find a bill, at least in circumstances such as the present. See Grassby versus R; R versus Woolcott Forbes <case>; [(1944) 44 SR 333], (FC). Therefore the relief sought by the claimant in this Court would not provide a useful basis for any order having the practical effect which the claimant seeks, namely the delay of the commencement of his trial."
The decision of the Court of Appeal in V versus McDonald and Ors [1995] NSWCA 487 (Mahoney, Handley and Powell JJA) is important because it integrates the effect of current legislation with a statement of principle to the same effect as that in Sergi.
 "In Barton versus The Queen <case>; [147 CLR 75], the
High Court referred to the advantages which committal proceedings provided for an accused person and views were expressed as to the prejudice apt to flow from proceedings commenced by an ex officio indictment or otherwise without appropriate committal proceedings. In Barron: at 222-224; I referred to what had there been said. Samuels JA and Hunt AJA: at 216, 233; and I: at 222-224; considered the weight to be given to the absence of committal proceedings or proper committal proceedings in determining the fairness of the accused's trial. It was the view of all members of the Court that the absence of committal proceedings was a matter to be taken into account but it did not of itself establish that the trial of the accused would be unacceptably unfair.
In that case, criminal proceedings based upon an ex officio indictment were not stayed. 
In recent times there have been at least two changes affecting criminal proceedings relevant for present purposes. Committals are now ordinarily paper committals: the evidence to be adduced at the trial is reduced to writing, the writing is tendered to the magistrate, cross-examination is allowed only in the circumstances permitted by the magistrate and/or in accordance with the existing legislation, and the magistrate determines whether a case has been made out for committal for trial upon the material which, in the result, is before her. The result of this is that, in some cases, the opportunity to explore the evidence of potential witnesses does not exist: the accused loses both the legitimate opportunity to explore the evidence and its potential ambiguities prior to the trial and he is deprived of the (perhaps less legitimate) opportunity to involve those witnesses in ambiguities, errors or inconsistencies which may be turned to account at the trial. 
In addition, the occasions for the exercise of this Court's supervisory jurisdiction have in practice been restricted. As indicated in Jago and in other cases, the assessment of the injustice apt to affect the trial of an accused is to be made generally upon the assumption that the trial judge will do what he can and should do in order to remove or mitigate the suggested injustice at the trial. Provision is now made for the trial court to deal in advance with such of these matters as may appropriately be so dealt with.
Directions may be given and steps taken at the pre-trial stage for the purpose of removing or mitigating prejudice affecting the fairness of the trial and, during the course of the trial, special procedures may be adopted for that purpose, eg, by affording an opportunity for cross-examination of a witness in the absence of the jury: see, eg, the case of Joseph Anthony Basha (1989) 39
A Crim R 337. 
The power of this Court to intervene in the exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction so as to ensure that the trial of an accused is not unacceptably unfair remains to be exercised in appropriate cases. However, as has been pointed out on many occasions, it is not every prejudice suffered by an accused which will render a trial unacceptably unfair so as to warrant the intervention of this Court: see Barron at 226-227. Stated broadly, it is necessary to consider whether, there is in a particular case prejudice such that, notwithstanding what may be expected to be done at the trial or otherwise, the trial will be unacceptably unfair. 
In my opinion this is not such a case. Mr Andersen QC, for Mr V, relied essentially upon the absence of (as he claimed it to be) proper committal proceedings. He did not, in his oral argument, press that the absence of the right to cross-examine the child should weigh heavily: it was, I think, seen as unlikely that such an opportunity would exist in proper committal proceedings. Mr Andersen stressed in particular the failure (as he asserted it to be) of the magistrate properly to consider the competence of the child to give evidence and whether the child's evidence should have been excluded from consideration in the committal proceedings. He submitted that in this context there was a case for intervention by this Court. 
The mere absence of committal proceedings does not in itself establish that this Court should intervene. As I have indicated, that was referred to in
Barron. In the present case an indictment has been found and, as Mr Andersen rightly concedes, that indictment cannot be set aside in the present case. The
Court has the assurance of Mr Johnson for the Director that the Director proposes to proceed to trial upon that indictment. In Sergi versus Director of
Public Prosecutions (Court of Appeal, 10 September 1991, unreported) the circumstances were different but the principle applied by the Court illustrates that matters of this kind are not such as to warrant intervention."
The approach in V versus McDonald & Ors was endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Bagshaw versus Carter & Ors <case> at <case> - [17] (Ipp JA, with whom Giles and McColl JJA) agreed.
A further analysis of the relevant principles was undertaken in Director of Public Prosecutions versus PM <case>; [67 NSWLR 46.] The background to this matter was that the Director of Public Prosecutions appealed pursuant to [s 5F](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/s5f.html) of the [Criminal Appeal Act 1912](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/caa1912137/) against an order by the District Court "remitting an indictment containing one count of aggravated sexual assault [(s 61J(2)(d)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/s61j.html) of the [Crimes Act 1900](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/)) to the Children's Court". The Notice of Appeal sought an order vacating the order made by the District Court. The appeal by the DPP succeeded. In the course of reaching that conclusion, Latham J (with whom Whealy J agreed) said: "82 it is clear that the Director of Public Prosecutions (the DPP) has power to present an indictment regardless of the fact that there may have been some defect in the committal proceedings and the finding of an ex officio indictment in those circumstances will not produce an abuse of process, unless it would result in unfairness to the accused at trial: [s (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s8.html) of the [Criminal Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/); [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/doppa1986343/s7.html) of the [Director of Public Prosecutions Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/doppa1986343/) and see generally R versus Sepulveda <case>; R versus Janceski; Grassby versus The Queen <case>; [(1989) 168 CLR 1]; Barton versus The Queen <case>; [(1980) 147 CLR 75.] Moreover, the Court cannot go behind the issue of an ex officio indictment: Barton versus The Queen.  Even assuming that the magistrate in the Children's Court found that there was no evidence to justify a finding of guilt on a "serious children's indictable offence", any ex officio indictment issued by the DPP would remain completely unaffected: Sergi versus Director of Public Prosecutions (Court of
Appeal, 10 September 1991, unreported).  By the operation of r 10D of [Pt ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/dcr1973236/index.html#p53) of the [District Court Rules ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolreg/dcr1973236/) and [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s127.html) of the [Criminal Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/), that indictment was presented in the District Court when it was filed in the
Registry. [Section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s130.html) of the [Criminal Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/) vests the
District Court with jurisdiction with respect to the conduct of proceedings on an indictment, as soon as the indictment is presented and the accused is arraigned. This Court was informed by senior counsel for the respondent that he did not plead to that indictment on arraignment, but again, that is of no consequence given that a plea of "not guilty" will be deemed to have been entered where the accused stands mute: [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s155.html) of the [Criminal Procedure
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/).  Thus, the District Court had jurisdiction to try the respondent on the indictment filed in the Registry. I do not understand the respondent's counsel to have argued to the contrary. Had the Crown presented that indictment at trial, the submissions by the respondent's counsel below and in this Court suggest that no objection would have been taken. The submissions to McGuire
DCJ proceeded on the basis that the respondent had been deprived of the committal procedures mandated by the Children (Criminal Proceedings) Act in respect of the charge of sexual intercourse without consent in circumstances of aggravation, being the fact that the complainant was under the age of 16 years.  ...  I am driven to the conclusion that the ex officio indictment presented at the respondent's trial was procedurally valid. I can see no other basis for distinguishing between committal proceedings conducted in the Children's Court and committal proceedings generally, for the purposes of determining the availability and validity of an ex officio indictment. The special procedures thought appropriate to an essentially protective jurisdiction such as the
Children's Court jurisdiction cannot, in my view, displace the undoubted power of the DPP to ensure that a person accused of an indictable offence is brought to trial, in circumstances where that accused has been discharged at committal."
I am not persuaded that any miscarriage of justice will occur if the committal proceedings are not re-opened and the plaintiff is not allowed to cross-examine the witnesses whom she nominated in the committal proceedings. I have reached that conclusion on a number of bases.
Because a bill has been found, there is no practical utility in remitting the matter to the Local Court when it is now in the Supreme Court. There was little specificity in the identification of the issues in relation to which the witnesses were to be cross-examined. It is not sufficient that the nominated witnesses were involved in the criminality. Section 91 still requires "substantial reasons" for why the witnesses should be required to attend and be cross-examined. As the learned magistrate found, the proposed cross-examination was of a wide ranging and very general kind with almost no parameters or boundaries.
As the authorities make clear, the fact that a bill of indictment has been found in the Supreme Court weighs heavily in favour of a refusal of any relief in this case. The learned magistrate's decision to commit the plaintiff for trial has been overtaken by the decision to find a bill. The consequences of that decision were succinctly set out in Sergi and subsequent cases.
It is also not without significance that there are available in the Supreme Court pre-trial procedures, which enable significant aspects of the prosecution case to be identified and refined. As is clear from the submissions before his Honour and from the Crown case statement, the plaintiff has already been provided with most, if not all, of the statements taken from Crown witnesses, both induced and otherwise. This would seem to be the very sort of case where there are good prospects of a Basha inquiry being conducted if and when the plaintiff makes such an application.
As was pointed out in Sergi, there are powerful policy considerations to the effect that circumspection should be exercised in providing relief which would have the effect of disturbing a criminal trial and which might involve "fragmentation in the criminal process". In any event, as all the authorities make clear even if the committal were to be re-opened and if his Honour were to find that there was no evidence to warrant committing the plaintiff for trial, this would have no effect on the bill of indictment which has been found.
I have concluded that in the exercise of the Court's discretion, the orders sought in the Further Amended Summons should not be made.
In view of that conclusion, it is not necessary to consider the issues raised by [s 91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s91.html) of the [Criminal Procedure Act 1986](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/). Were that necessary, however, by reference to the decisions in Hanna versus Kearney (Studdert J, 28 May 1998, unreported) and Director of Public Prosecutions versus Losurdo & Anor [(1998) 44 NSWLR 618 (Priestley] and Handley JJA, Sheppard AJA) I would not have been satisfied that the pre-conditions set out in [s 91](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/cpa1986188/s91.html) had been satisfied so as to require the attendance of the witnesses required by the plaintiff for cross-examination. I am not persuaded that the reasons put forward on behalf of the plaintiff amount to "substantial reasons" as contemplated by those decisions and that on this issue, his Honour's conclusion was correct.
The Summons should be dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
