

Headland Securities P/L and Anor. versus MacArthur and Anor. [1997] NSWSC 317 (20 August 1997) 
HEADLAND SECURITIES P/L & ANOR. V. MacARTHUR & ANOR.
 /96 
Thursday 10th April 1997 
SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
HODGSON, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: The plaintiffs in these proceedings, Headland Securities Pty. Limited (which I will call "Headland") and Ronald Cameron, claim to be entitled to a 75% interest in Australian Patent Application PM8421, filed on 26th September 1994 in relation to an invention known as a contra-rotating propeller unit. 
The second defendant, Bryan Larkin, is the inventor of this propeller unit, and the original applicant for the patent. On 27th February 1997, Mr. Larkin became a bankrupt. The Official Trustee has been notified of these proceedings, and of the possibility that an order under s.58(3)(b) of the
Bankruptcy Act would be required. I took the view that, because the proceedings related inter alia to a mortgage securing a provable debt, they were arguably proceedings "in respect of" such a debt, and gave leave to the other parties to continue the proceedings to judgment.

The first defendant, Ross MacArthur, claims to be entitled to a 25%, or alternatively 20%, interest in the patent application.

By their Amended Summons and Statement of Claim, the plaintiffs seek orders restraining Mr. MacArthur from representing that he is authorised to negotiate for the exploitation of the invention and from actually undertaking any such negotiations; a declaration that Mr. MacArthur holds any interest in the patent application on trust for Mr. Larkin; and consequential orders, including an enquiry as to damages.

By his Further Amended Cross-Claim, Mr. MacArthur seeks a declaration that he has a 25%, or 20%, interest in the invention, a declaration or rectification concerning the terms of a document dated 17th May 1996, declarations and orders concerning a business name Marine Contratech Australia, and consequential relief.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
The plaintiffs' interest in this patent application has its origins in loans made to Mr. Larkin from about October 1994 by Headland and also Norths
Securities Pty. Limited (which I will call "Norths"), another company associated with Mr. Warren Moore, who is the principal of Headland. Prior to th March 1995, loans totalling $32,603.00 had been made; and on that date,
Mr. Larkin executed an agreement recognising those loans and providing for interest, and also a "Patent Mortgage" charging Mr. Larkin's interest in a number of patent applications (including the subject application) with the amount due under that agreement. Clause 2.1 of the mortgage was in the following terms: .1 In consideration of the premises BJL as beneficial owner will forthwith at its cost transfer or procure the transfer of the Property to the Mortgagee and will procure the registration of such transfer provided always that if BJL has duly paid to the Mortgagee the Moneys Hereby Secured and BJL shall not be in default in performance of any of his obligations under this deed then the Mortgagee will thereafter at the request and cost of BJL retransfer the Property to BJL or as it may direct.
 "The Property" was defined so as to include Mr. Larkin's interest in the subject patent application and any resulting patent.

I note that the copies of the documents of 20th March 1995 which are in evidence do not appear to be executed; but no issue was taken on this, and these documents are referred to in later agreements, executed copies of which are in evidence.

On 12th April 1995, an agreement was made between Mr. Larkin, Norths,
Headland, and Mr. Cameron, whereby Norths and Headland agreed to lend Mr.
Larkin a further $20,000.00 on the security of the mortgage of 20th March
Of this amount, $8,000.00 was to be paid to Mr. Larkin, and $12,000.00 was to be spent on the subject patent application in ways specified in the agreement. This agreement also provided that 20% of the patent application was transferred to Headland, so that Headland and Mr. Larkin were to become tenants in common in relation to any resulting patents. The agreement noted that, of this 20%, one-half was held on trust for Mr. Cameron; and also that
Mr. Cameron guaranteed payment to Norths and Headland of one-half of the amounts due under the mortgage.

On 21st April 1995, Mr. Larkin executed an assignment to Headland and Mr.
Cameron of 20% (10% each) of the benefit of the patent application and the resulting patent and rights arising therefrom. Clause 7.1 of this assignment contained an agreement to co-operate in the development and financing of the project; and cl.8.1 was in the following terms: .1(a) Neither party shall sell or assign its interest in the Application or the Patent without first offering it to the other parties.

The said offer shall be in writing and shall state the consideration and all material terms of the proposed sale or assignment.

If the said offer is not accepted or is refused within a period of thirty (30) days from the date the offer is made the offeror may sell or assign its interest in the Application or the Patent to any other person or persons on terms no less favourable than the terms of the offer made under the foregoing provisions of this subclause provided that the sale or assignment is effected within three (3) months after the date of the said offer. 
If the offer referred to in paragraph (a) and (b) of this subclause is accepted the offeror shall upon payment being effected by the offeree assign all its right title and interest to and in the Application of the Patent together with all rights of action powers and benefits thereto belonging or accrued.
 
On 20th August 1995, Mr. Larkin executed an assignment to Headland and Mr.
Cameron of a further 30% interest in the subject patent (15% each) in consideration of $15,000.00, $7,500.00 payable on or before 5th September , and $7,500.00 payable on or before 27th September 1995. Those amounts were in fact paid respectively on 4th September 1995 and 27th September 1995.
This assignment contained clauses in similar terms to cls.7.1 and 8.1 of the assignment of 21st April 1995.

On about 9th November 1995, Mr. Larkin wrote to Mr. Moore in the following terms:- 
This letter is to confirm the offer I have discussed with Ron Cameron as you have been overseas or busy on other matters. I have checked my diary notes and confirm I first made Ron aware of an offer to sell 25% shareholding for $25,000.00 to Ross MacArthur on 12.10.95. As per your agreement I have offered your company the same deal.
 
This money would help me complete other technology I am developing which I have international parties wanting to buy licences but I have to complete my prototype. 
Could you please let me know your intentions so I can finalise my negotiations. Ron Cameron suggested payments of $2,000.00 per month but Ross MacArthur can pay me in one payment which is the way I need to proceed.
 
This letter was headed Re Larkin Propulsion System, and it is common ground that it related to the subject invention.

Following a discussion or discussions involving Messrs. Moore, Cameron, and
MacArthur, Mr. Moore drafted a letter dated 4th December 1995 to Mr.
MacArthur, in the following terms: 
I set out the proposal I understand you have put to Ron Cameron and me: . Ross MacArthur purchase 20% of the Patent No. PM 8421 for $20,000.00 from Bryan Larkin.
 . Ron Cameron and Warren Moore/Headland Securities Pty Ltd purchase 5% of the Patent No. PM 8421 for $5,000.00 from Bryan Larkin.
 . Ross MacArthur guarantees $20,000.00 repayment of the existing mortgage agreement which Bryan Larkin has with Headland Securities Pty Ltd, a copy of which mortgage agreement Ron Cameron has provided to Ross MacArthur.
 . Ross MacArthur agrees to become as a result of the purchase, a party to the Patent co-owners agreement and is responsible for his own contribution, as agreed by the parties, from 30 November, 1995 onwards.
 . Ross MacArthur and Bryan Larkin acknowledge the debt to 30 November, 1995 for the attached account including interest since 30 June, 1995)(sic) the subject of the mortgage guarantee agreement to be $62,821.74 and of which $1,999.50 was spent in protection of the patent over the $12,000.00 required.
 . Ross MacArthur guarantees repayment of $20,000.00 at the due date of the above mentioned mortgage loan to Bryan Larkin.
 
The schedule to this letter showed payments and interest totalling $62,821.74, not including the $15,000.00 paid during September 1995. Mr. Cameron noted his agreement to this letter on one copy on 5th December 1995; Mr. MacArthur noted his agreement on one copy on 11th December 1995; and Mr. Larkin noted his agreement on one copy on 12th December 1995. A copy of the document was signed by Mr. Moore for Headland on 19th December 1995.

According to Mr. MacArthur, between about October 1995 and December 1995 he paid Mr. Larkin amounts totalling $20,000.00, initially as loans, but following the agreement or arrangement of December 1995 as consideration for a transfer of a 20% interest in the subject patent application.

On 3rd January 1996, Mr. Larkin executed an assignment to Mr. MacArthur, purporting to be of 20% of a patent described as PM8421, for a consideration expressed at $1.00. The existence of this assignment was not known to the plaintiffs until much later.

Meanwhile, Mr. Henty, a solicitor acting for the plaintiffs, prepared documents intended to give effect to the agreement or arrangement in the letter of 4th December 1995. These documents were passed by Mr. MacArthur to an adviser, Michael Seymour, who wrote to Mr. Henty a letter dated 17th
January 1996, raising certain matters in relation to the drafts.

On 28th February 1996, there was a meeting involving Messrs. MacArthur,
Cameron, and Moore. At this agreement, it was agreed to form two syndicates to clarify which parties were responsible for expenses; to form a company to be called Contratech Pty. Limited, which would be the marketing vehicle for the invention; and that after agreements had been signed and Contratech Pty.
Limited incorporated, Messrs. MacArthur and Cameron would approach nominated potential licensees.

On 1st March 1996, Contratech Pty. Limited was registered. Messrs. MacArthur,
Cameron and Moore became directors. 110 ordinary shares (55 each) were issued to Headland and Mr. Cameron, 50 ordinary shares were issued to Mr. Larkin, and were issued to Mr. MacArthur.

On 20th March 1996, Mr. Moore wrote a letter in response to Mr. Seymour's letter of 17th January 1996. On 22nd April 1996, there was a meeting between
Messrs. MacArthur, Cameron and Moore. The agenda and minutes for that meeting are on Contratech Pty. Limited letterhead. Mr. Moore's letter of 20th March was discussed; and the plaintiffs assert, and this appears not to be disputed, that agreement was reached as to the terms of the documents to be signed, along lines proposed in Mr. Moore's letter.

Subsequently, amended documentation was submitted to Mr. MacArthur. On 29th
April 1996, Mr. MacArthur raised further drafting points, and also suggested that his interest may be in his name as trustee for each of his children.

On 9th May 1996, Mr. Hordern, a solicitor acting for Mr. Larkin, wrote to Mr.
Henty, noting his instructions that notice had been given by Mr. Larkin of his intention to sell a 25% interest, that there had been no acceptance of this offer within 30 days, and that accordingly Mr. Larkin was at liberty to sell a % interest.

On 10th May 1996, Mr. Moore sent a facsimile to Mr. MacArthur disputing that assertion in Mr. Hordern's letter. However, Mr. MacArthur, on 13th May 1996, sent a cheque for $5,000.00 to Mr. Hordern, and on 17th May 1996, Mr. Larkin executed an assignment, for a consideration expressed to be $25,000.00, of an interest in the subject patent application and patent. The interest assigned was expressed differently in the recitals and in the operative part of the assignment. Recital B was in the following terms:- 
B. Larkin (the assignor) has agreed to assign, transfer and set over to Macarthur (the assignee) TWENTY FIVE PER CENT (25%) of his right, title and interest in and to the patent and patent application including the right to apply for or obtain corresponding letters patent in any country of the territory.
 
However, cl.2 of the assignment was in the following terms:- . As consideration for the payment by the assignee to the assignor of the sum of Twenty Five Thousand Dollars ($25,000), the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, the assignor as the beneficial owner assigns to the assignee: all the benefit of the patents and all rights arising from them in the territory together with; all corresponding rights obtainable in the territory in respect of the inventions the subject of the patent application and in the priority dates of the patent application, and all know-how and technical information relating to the patents; and all rights, powers, liberties, and immunities arising or to arise from any applications and from any letters patent granted in relation to the patents to hold unto the assignee absolutely from the date of the deed.
 
Shortly thereafter, Mr. MacArthur advised Mr. Cameron that he now had a 25% interest in the patent. Also in late May 1996, Mr. Cameron became aware that
Mr. MacArthur was corresponding with and meeting representatives of a significant number of companies which were potentially interested in the invention.

Following a discussion between Mr. Cameron and Mr. Moore, Mr. Moore wrote to
Mr. MacArthur on 30th May 1996 in the following terms:- 
Until such time as the agreements which we have provided are completed and you obtain, and Bryan Larkin obtains, written agreement from us under the mortgage, you are not properly entitled to any share in the syndicate and the agency company Contratech P/L has no authority to act.
 
I hope when we meet on Monday we complete those arrangements which you agree to complete and which were lodged in writing for completion. Otherwise we shall require B. Larkin to pay over the $20,000.00 or $25,000.00 now received by him due to us under the mortgage agreement.
 
I suggest very strongly that you do not act in any way as a director of Contratech Pty. Limited or a member of the syndicate until such time as the agreements provided are properly completed. 
We look forward to completing the matter as agreed.
 
For his part, Mr. Cameron wrote to Mr. MacArthur on 31st May 1996 in the following terms:- 
I am pleased with the response from OMC.
 
Both Warren and I request that a reply is not sent until all of us meet on Monday to discuss the way ahead.
 
On 3rd June 1996, Mr. MacArthur, writing as a director of Contratech Pty.
Limited, responded to two communications received from parties potentially interested in the invention, namely OMC Marine Engineering and LIPS BV. On 4th
June 1996, Mr. MacArthur sent a facsimile to Messrs. Cameron and Moore in the following terms:- 
Warren, thank you for your fax of May 30. Sorry for not replying sooner. I respectfully disagree with what you claim in para 1. The matter raised in para 2 is one between Brian (sic) Larkin and yourselves. For the sake of harmony I will comply with your request in para 3 but courtesy and good business practice would suggest that I continue to maintain a dialogue with those parties from whom responses have been received.
 
Here is a copy of a response I have received from LIPS in Holland. The matter of the confidentiality agreement looks like being a recurring one but, nevertheless, one for which we have no acceptable alternative. Meanwhile, if there is one to be found, we have our own domestic problem to sort out.
 
On 14th June 1996, Mr. MacArthur requested the Commissioner of Patents to direct that the subject patent application proceed in his name as well as the name of Mr. Larkin, on the grounds that he had purchased an interest of 25% in that patent.

By letters dated 6th June 1996 and 19th June 1996 from Mr. Henty to Mr.
Seymour, it was made clear on behalf of the plaintiffs that the plaintiffs regarded any arrangement with Mr. MacArthur as at an end, and considered that
Mr. MacArthur had no further interest in the patent.

On 15th August 1996, there was a further assignment from Mr. Larkin to
Headland of a 25% interest in the patent application and patent, for $25,000.00. An agreement of the same day extended the time for repayment of the mortgage debt to 20th August 1997.

The plaintiffs have continued negotiations with persons interested in the invention, using the business name Marine Contratech Australia and the company name Marine Contratech Australia Pty. Limited.

ISSUES 
As contested, the case raised the following issues.
The credit of Mr. MacArthur, particularly concerning the alleged payment of $20,000.00 to Mr. Larkin in respect of the subject patent in late 1995.
Did the letter of 4th December 1995, and the agreement of the parties noted on it, amount to a concluded contract?
Did fiduciary obligations arise between the parties at around this time?
Was there a repudiatory breach by Mr. MacArthur of any such contract or fiduciary relationship, either by reason of the assignment of 3rd January , or the assignment of May 1996? Involved in this issue there is a subsidiary question as to the true effect of the assignment of May 1996, in the light of its contradictory wording concerning the interest dealt with.
What was the effect of the plaintiffs' acceptance of any such repudiation?
Have the plaintiffs the right to undo any assignment or transfer that was effected prior to any such repudiation and acceptance thereof?
Has Mr. MacArthur an equitable right to the patent application and patent which could justify him entering into negotiations with prospective parties interested in the invention?
What, if any, relief should be granted? 
Written outlines of submissions have been provided by Mr. Ireland QC for the plaintiffs and by Mr. Podleska for Mr. MacArthur. I will be brief in outlining the submissions for the parties.

DID MR. MACARTHUR PAY $20,000 FOR A 20% INTEREST? 
According to Mr. MacArthur's oral evidence, he paid $20,000.00 to Mr. Larkin towards the end of 1995, such payments being made in the course of three, four, or five visits to Mr. Larkin at his home at Batemans Bay. Mr. MacArthur could not remember the size of the instalments. He said that they were all paid prior to the execution of the assignment on 3rd January 1996, because Mr.
Larkin would not execute the assignment until all money had been paid. He said that he got receipts for the money, he believed four receipts for $5,000.00 each, but that he could not now find them. He said that the first payment was made about six weeks before he signed the letter of December 1995 on 11th
December 1995: most of the payments were made before that letter, although there may have been one after it.

Initially, Mr. MacArthur produced no documents in support of his claim.
However, on the second day of the hearing he produced his cheque book, which relevantly contained the following cheque butts: 
Date  
Amount 
Notation on Cheque Butt  ---  th November 1995 
Bryan Larkin - Loan  $1,000.00  th November 1995 
Bryan Larkin - Loan  $1,000.00  th November 1995 
Bryan J. Larkin  $3,000.00  th November 1995 
B.J. Larkin  $1,000.00  st November 1995 
BJL $7,000  $1,000.00  th December 1995 
R.Cameron, B.Larkin  $1,000.00  
R.MacArthur & W.Moore  th December 1995 
R.Cameron, B.Larkin,  $1,250.00  
R.MacArthur & W.Moore  th January 1996 
BJL Loan  $1,000.00  
It seems to be common ground that the two payments apparently made on 7th
December 1995 were on account of expenditure to be made on behalf of a proposed venture involving the parties specified (or perhaps Headland in lieu of Mr. Moore), in respect of the subject patent.

Mr. Podleska for Mr. MacArthur submitted that, on the basis of Mr. MacArthur's evidence, and the cheque butts, together with the acknowledgement of payment of $25,000.00 made in the assignment of May 1996, I should be satisfied that
Mr. MacArthur had paid Mr. Larkin $20,000.00 in late 1995 or early 1996 in return for the assignment of the 20% interest.

Mr. Ireland submitted that I could not rely on Mr. MacArthur's evidence. He submitted that Mr. MacArthur was evasive and unstraightforward in his evidence: for example, his claim that most of his payments to Mr. Larkin were in cash, and the convenient unavailability of any records in relation to such cash payments; his denial that he made a secret deal with Mr. Larkin; his evidence concerning actions between 30th May 1996 and 14th June 1996 in the face of the request of Mr. Moore and Mr. Cameron not to communicate further with third parties; the attempt to explain the references to "loan" in the cheque butts; and his evidence concerning the consideration of $1 expressed for the transfer of 3rd January 1996.

In my opinion, there is force in Mr. Ireland's submissions; and I find myself unable to be satisfied, by Mr. MacArthur's uncorroborated evidence, that payments of cash were made by him to Mr. Larkin in late 1995 in respect of this invention. I do not believe that the acnowledgement of payment of $25,000.00 in all, contained in the May 1996 assignment, is sufficient corroboration to satisfy me concerning this matter. On the other hand, it is clear from the cheque book that $7,000.00 was paid by Mr. MacArthur to Mr.
Larkin in November 1995, and on the balance of probabilities I find that that was a payment in respect of an interest in this patent, originally made as a loan but converted to an outright payment when the assignment was given. I am unable to be satisfied as to the payment of $1,000.00 on 10th January 1996: that was made after the assignment, and yet is noted on the cheque book as a loan.

WAS A CONTRACT MADE IN DECEMBER 1995? 
Mr. Podleska for Mr. MacArthur submitted that the letter of 4th December 1995 merely set out a proposal, and was no more than the bare bones of what was proposed. The letter was, as Mr. Moore acknowledged, inaccurate in that the proposal did not come from Mr. MacArthur but from Mr. Cameron. The signatures indicating agreement to the letter only showed agreement as to the outline of what was proposed: there was no intention to make a binding agreement until such time as formal documentation had been prepared. Mr. Podleska relied also on a letter dated 19th December 1995 sent by Mr. Moore to Mr. Henty, asking for documentation to give effect to the letter of 4th December.

In my opinion, as submitted by Mr. Ireland, the document of 4th December set out all the essential terms of the agreement between the parties, and the signatures were intended to indicate adherence to those terms as an immediately binding agreement. It was contemplated that there would be formal documentation, but that was not inconsistent in the circumstances of this case with there being an immediately binding agreement. In my opinion, the case falls within either the first or second category described in Masters v.
Cameron <case>; [(1954) 91 CLR 353] at 360.

DID FIDUCIARY OBLIGATIONS ARISE? 
Mr. Podleska submitted that this was a case of on-going commercial negotiations between the parties, which did not give rise to fiduciary duties.

However, in my opinion, the agreement or arrangement contained in the letter dated 4th December 1995, and the steps taken pursuant thereto in setting up the company Contratech Pty. Ltd., having shares issued, and sharing and making arrangements for dealing with confidential material concerning the patents, amounted to sufficient steps in pursuance of a proposed joint venture to give rise to fiduciary obligations. I have held that there was a concluded agreement in December 1995; but I believe that fiduciary obligations arose whether or not that view of mine is correct: see United Dominions Corporation
Ltd. v. Brian Pty. Ltd. <case>; [(1985) 157 CLR 1.] 
As in that case, the proposed relationship was essentially one of partnership, but in my opinion, the interests of the various parties in the subject patent application did not become partnership property.

DID MR. MACARTHUR COMMIT A REPUDIATORY BREACH? 
Mr. Ireland submitted that the taking of the purported assignment of 3rd
January 1996, in secret, and also the further assignment dated 17th May 1996, constituted repudiatory breaches, both of the agreement of December 1995 and the fiduciary obligations which Mr. MacArthur had undertaken. He took these assignments even though he had not provided the guarantee of Mr. Larkin's debt which was an element of the agreement.

Mr. Podleska submitted that the assignment of 20% was entirely consistent with any agreement entered into in December 1995 and any fiduciary obligations. At all times thereafter Mr. MacArthur was negotiating bona fide to reach a finality in relation to the documentation of the venture, and was certainly not stalling or trying to avoid any obligation to give a guarantee. In pursuance of the proposed venture Mr. MacArthur had done extensive work in negotiating with interested parties, and was certainly not attempting to obtain any unfair advantage. He finally dealt directly with Mr. Larkin out of a sense of frustration at the delays which had occurred.

In relation to the May 1996 assignment, Mr. Podleska submitted that the evidence was clear that what was intended was that this assignment should be of the 25% interest which was the subject of the notice given in November : accordingly, Recital B to the assignment was in error in that the proposed assignment was not of 25% of Mr. Larkin's then interest, but of a 25% in the totality of the patent and patent application; and cl.2 of the assignment was in error in that the assignment was not of all the benefit of the patent, but rather a 25% interest in the totality of the patent and/or patent application (including the 20% interest already assigned or purportedly assigned on 3rd January 1996).

In my opinion, the defects of drafting of the assignment of May 1996 could possibly be regarded as falsa demonstratio, and the assignment construed so as to give the effect which Mr. Podleska submitted was intended. However, in circumstances where the intention is clear from all the circumstances, in my view it would be appropriate, out of an abundance of caution, to rectify the document to make it clear that it does have the effect submitted by Mr.
Podleska.

On the question of repudiation, I do not believe that the assignment of 3rd
January 1996 constituted a repudiation, either by Mr. Larkin or by Mr.
MacArthur. Even though it was given without disclosure to the plaintiffs, it was consistent with the agreement contained in the letter of 4th December
On the basis that there was a contractually binding agreement in the terms of that letter, Mr. MacArthur's failure to sign a guarantee would not have relieved him from the obligation to give the guarantee referred to in the letter, so that I do not see that the taking of the assignment without signing a formal guarantee could be repudiatory.

On the other hand, in my opinion the May 1996 assignment was a repudiation of the agreement of December 1995, and also a repudiation of Mr. MacArthur's fiduciary obligations. It was entirely inconsistent with the agreement, undertaken without notice to the plaintiffs, and directly contrary to the rights of the plaintiffs.

WAS THE REPUDIATION ACCEPTED, AND IF SO, WITH WHAT EFFECT? 
In my opinion, Mr. Henty's letters of June 1996 did amount to an acceptance of Mr. MacArthur's repudiation. 
Mr. Ireland submitted that the assignments obtained by Mr. MacArthur were voidable at the instance of the plaintiffs, having been granted by Mr. Larkin and received by Mr. MacArthur in breach of fiduciary duties owed to their co- venturers: see UDC v. Brian 157 CLR at p.13. Mr. Ireland submitted that Mr.
MacArthur gained collateral advantages in consequence of the assignments, which went to the very sub-stratum of the joint venture structure.
Accordingly, the assignments could not stand. Mr. Ireland conceded that Mr.
MacArthur would be entitled to credit for any sum which he could demonstrate that he paid to Mr. Larkin to procure the assignments; but submitted that the only acceptable evidence of payment related to $5,000.00 paid in May 1996. I would interpolate here that, having regard to my earlier finding, I would hold that Mr. MacArthur had established payment of $12,000.00 in all.

In my opinion, acceptance of the repudiation meant that any contract was discharged for the future: see Greig & Davis, The Law of Contract, p.1276. So far as contractual obligations are concerned, in my opinion the repudiation and acceptance thereof did not give rise to any right in the plaintiffs to have the assignments set aside.

So far as fiduciary obligations are concerned, if the plaintiffs were seeking to rely on and continue the fiduciary relationship, or alternatively seeking an account of matters arising out of the fiduciary relationship, the case of
UDC v. Brian suggests that property taken by Mr. MacArthur might have been considered as held on trust for the venture: it certainly does not suggest that property acquired by Mr. MacArthur would be held on trust for the plaintiffs, and indeed the plaintiffs do not now suggest that. The plaintiffs do not seek any order winding up any partnership, or any account taken in respect of any partnership or quasi-partnership. Accordingly, I do not see how, on the basis of fiduciary obligations alone, the plaintiffs are entitled to have the assignments set aside. However, there is a further matter on which the plaintiffs may be able to rely, namely the right of pre-emption in their own assignment agreements, and I will consider that under the next heading.

The other matter involved in the acceptance of the repudiation is the status of Contratech Pty. Ltd., and the claims which Mr. MacArthur is now making to restrain the plaintiffs from using the business name Marine Contratech
Australia.

In my opinion, the company Contratech Pty. Ltd. was in substance partnership property, and any rights associated with that company would have to be dealt with as being in substance property of a partnership that has come to an end.
However, Contratech Pty. Ltd. did not have as one of its assets any established right to market the patent, although it was proposed that this would be its role. In my opinion, in circumstances where interests in the patent application and/or resulting patent were never partnership property, the termination of any partnership or quasi-partnership and of any continuing fiduciary obligations means that Contratech Pty. Ltd. has no continuing claim to any right to market the patent. Accordingly, I do not believe that any breach of fiduciary duty is involved in the plaintiffs' use of the business name Marine Contratech Australia or the company name Marine Contratech
Australia Pty. Ltd.

HAVE THE PLAINTIFFS A RIGHT TO SET ASIDE THE ASSIGNMENTS? 
The case has been conducted on the basis, which I believe is correct, that Mr.
Larkin's letter of November 1995 was a valid notice for the purpose of cl.8.1 of the assignments of 21st April 1995 and 20th August 1995. The offer contained in that notice was not in fact accepted within the period of thirty days from the date of Mr. Larkin's letter, but this was in circumstances where all relevant parties had entered into the agreement contained in the letter of th December 1995. That agreement has been repudiated by Mr. MacArthur, and the plaintiffs have accepted his repudiation.

Quite apart from the agreement of 4th December, I note that cl.8.1 requires that any sale to a third party be effected within three months after the date of the offer. In this case, that would mean any sale or assignment in reliance on non-acceptance of the offer contained in Mr. Larkin's letter of 9th
November 1995 would have to have been effected by about 9th February 1996.
Accordingly, the assignment of May 1996 was on any view in breach of cl.8.1 of the assignments of 21st April 1995 and 20th August 1995. In my opinion, Mr.
MacArthur was on notice of those provisions, and the plaintiffs are entitled, in reliance on their rights under cl.8.1, to set aside the assignment of May or procuring the repayment to Mr. MacArthur of $5,000.00 (perhaps with interest). However, if only this assignment is set aside, and the assignment of January 1996 is allowed to stand, this would only divest Mr. MacArthur of a % interest in the subject patent. The plaintiffs have not indicated whether or not they would wish, in return for a payment of $5,000.00 (perhaps with interest), to set aside an assignment in respect only of a 5% interest.

As regards the assignment of 3rd January 1996, I have already held that this was not a repudiation of any agreement or in breach of any fiduciary obligations, at the time it was made. In order to be entitled to set aside this transfer, the plaintiffs must say that they are entitled to treat the
December agreement as not having happened, and accordingly are entitled to enforce cl.8.1 as if there had been no such agreement.

I note that such assertion appears to be inconsistent with the plaintiffs' claim to be entitled for damages arising from the breach of the agreement contained in the letter dated 4th December 1995. Furthermore, even if the plaintiffs had been consistently arguing that the matter should be approached as if there never had been an agreement that 20% be transferred to Mr.
MacArthur, I believe that, for this to be fair, the plaintiffs would have needed to take very prompt steps towards a restitutio in integrum. The plaintiffs did not do this: the first time that this was expressly offered was at the hearing of the case.

In all the circumstances, in my opinion, the plaintiffs are not entitled to set aside the assignment of 3rd January 1996; so that their only entitlement would be to set aside an assignment effective as to 5%.

HAS MR. MACARTHUR ANY CURRENT RIGHT TO NEGOTIATE IN RESPECT OF THE PATENT? 
In my opinion, unless Mr. MacArthur is able to rely on the agreement contained in the letter of 4th December 1995 to relieve his interest of this liability, any interest which Mr. MacArthur holds in the subject patent or patent application is subject to the mortgage given to Headland and Norths. Mr.
MacArthur was on notice of this mortgage at the time he took the assignment, so that his interest would be subject to the mortgage at least unless he can say that the mortgagee's rights were given up in return for his guarantee referred to in the 4th December 1995 letter. However, that contract is at an end, and so, in my opinion, is any continuing guarantee given by Mr. MacArthur in accordance with that agreement. In my opinion, it follows that any interest that Mr. MacArthur has in the patent application and patent is subject to the mortgage to the same extent as it was in the hands of Mr. Larkin - at least, up to the most recent assignment by Mr. Larkin to the plaintiffs of 25% of the patent application.

The relevance of this assignment is this. Prior to this assignment, an amount of about $60,000.00 was secured on a 50% interest in the patent application.
Mr. MacArthur, owing half of that interest, was entitled to have the other half (owned by Mr. Larkin) applied in reduction of the debt, of which Mr.
Larkin was the principal debtor. I have not heard submissions on the effect of the transfer of Mr. Larkin's half to the plaintiffs; but assuming that the consideration of $25,000.00 was a fair price for Mr. Larkin's half, it would seem that this would have to be deducted from any amount considered as being secured on Mr. MacArthur's half. On that basis, something like $35,000.00 would now be secured on Mr. MacArthur's interest in the patent application. If either side wishes to make further submissions on this, I will allow this to be done.

It is also clear that the mortgage is in default, if only by reason of Mr.
Larkin's bankruptcy: see cl.9(d). The mortgage is by way of assignment with an equity of redemption; and in those circumstances, it seems to me that the mortgagees are entitled to present possession and exercise of rights associated with the interest, subject always to Mr. Larkin's (and Mr.
MacArthur's) right to redeem. In the circumstance of Mr. Larkin's bankruptcy, there seems no prospect of redemption by Mr. Larkin.

Assuming that what I have said about the effect of the most recent assignment is correct, unless and until Mr. MacArthur takes steps to redeem the mortgage, by tendering $35,000.00 or thereabouts, in my opinion he is not entitled to exercise any rights associated with the patent application or resulting patent. The mortgagee will be obliged in due course to account to Mr.
MacArthur for any proceeds realised from use of his 20% share and must keep full and proper accounts to make sure that this can be done.

WHAT, IF ANY, RELIEF SHOULD BE GRANTED? 
In my opinion, subject to any further submissions that may be made on the point raised above, the plaintiffs are entitled to orders restraining Mr.
MacArthur from representing that he is authorised to negotiate for the exploitation of the invention and from actually undertaking any such negotiations, until Mr. MacArthur redeems the mortgage to which I have referred. The plaintiffs are entitled, if they seek, to orders requiring Mr.
MacArthur to transfer a 5% interest in the patent application and patent back to Mr. Larkin upon the plaintiffs paying to Mr. MacArthur $5,000.00, possibly with some interest.

Mr. Ireland has submitted that his clients are entitled to an enquiry as to damages, the damages relating to the loss of a chance of funding from a government organisation, and delay in commercialisation. In circumstances where the plaintiffs have not been fully successful in establishing their contentions in relation to title to the patent, I do not believe that any entitlement to an enquiry as to damages has been shown.

As regards the cross-claim, I am prepared to make appropriate orders for rectification of the document of 19th May 1996. I am not prepared to make a declaration as to entitlement to a 20% or 25% interest in the invention: such a declaration could be seen as conclusively establishing that Mr. MacArthur has paid the full consideration for such an interest, and, for the reasons given above, I am not satisfied that he has done this. For the reasons given above, I do not believe Mr. MacArthur is entitled to any relief concerning the business Marine Contratech Australia, or in relation to the company Marine
Contratech Australia Pty. Ltd.
 * * * 
