

Barry Needs versus Andrew Keith Coxon [1996] NSWSC 410 (6 September 1996) 
BARRY NEEDS versus ANDREW KEITH COXON /95 
FRIDAY 6 SEPTEMBER 1996 
REVISED THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an action seeking damages for injuries alleged to have been sustained in an accident which occurred late in the evening of 30 May 1994. The plaintiff was riding a light motor cycle on his way home from work. He had been on an evening shift. He was riding north in the Pacific Highway near the village of Heatherbrae, just south of Raymond Terrace. At the time it was dark. I am satisfied that the headlight on his cycle was illuminated. After the collision it was suggested to him by the defendant, who had not seen him approach, that his lamp was not lit. I regard the plaintiff as having a complete answer to that in his suggestion that in near midnight conditions he simply would not have been able to progress from Hexham to Heatherbrae without a headlight on his vehicle.

The accident occurred at an intersection which no longer exists but at the time the Pacific Highway had one northbound and two southbound lanes. There was a street called Masonite Road entering the highway from the east. About metres along the road was a CSR plant, and no doubt from that the road acquired its name. The defendant was driving a 1975 kombi wagon. He also had been working on night shift and was on his way home.

The plaintiff stated that as he proceeded north along the highway he became aware of the lights of a vehicle through the trees to the east, and I infer that he concluded that there was a vehicle coming along Masonite Road and, to use the vernacular, he kept his eye on it. I accept that the plaintiff was not riding at any excessive speed.

The plaintiff saw the defendant's vehicle stop at a stop sign governing vehicles entering the intersection from Masonite Road. He also became aware that that vehicle, after stopping, was moving across the lanes available for southbound traffic. At the intersection there was a second lane available for northbound vehicles wishing to turn east from the highway into Masonite Road; hence, there was a widening of the trafficable portion of the carriageway along which the plaintiff was riding.

I am satisfied that the plaintiff, as he testified, did release pressures from his accelerator and placed his foot in an appropriate position to be able to brake if necessary. He was, as I have said, keeping an eye upon the vehicle.
It moved towards him, but I accept his explanation that he thought that it was going to yield precedence to him and in effect enter a line of traffic with himself in front and the vehicle behind.

Mr Dodd for the defendant did not seek to argue the primary issue of negligence; indeed, the rules of the road favour the precedence of the plaintiff. Mr Dodd, however, referred to the judgment of the High Court in
Sibley versus Kais <case>; [(1967) 118 CLR 424.] As their Honours there pointed out, the right-hand rule of precedence, or the species of it created by the existence of stop or give way signs, cannot be the be-all and end-all of driver responsibility in relation to civil actions. Nevertheless, it is incumbent upon the defendant to prove the contributory negligence of the plaintiff. This the defendant has sought to do.

Evidence was tendered from Mr Alan Joy, an engineer. He necessarily relied upon estimates given by various witnesses, and his mathematical and other calculations are derived from those estimates. Without going through the detail of all the factors that he assumed to be correct, I am unpersuaded that the resources which he used were essentially reliable, and I derive no assistance from that testimony.

I return, however, to the issue of contributory negligence. Whether the plaintiff contributed to his own damage depends largely in these circumstances upon whether he ought to have appreciated the imminence of collision at a time when he had an opportunity reasonably to take some steps by swerving, braking or otherwise, to avoid the collision. I am persuaded that by the time the plaintiff could reasonably have appreciated that the defendant was not going to do as he assumed, and enter the line of traffic behind him, it was for all practical purposes too late for anything to be done.

I reject the evidence of the defendant that the collision occurred either twenty or thirty-five metres north of the intersection. I do not believe that that represents the reality of the occasion. I note that the defendant in testimony indicated that he now wears contact lenses, but on the occasion in question he was wearing heavy spectacles. He indicated that there was some light mist about and he never at any stage saw the plaintiff's cycle. Indeed, he first became aware of it when he heard the noise of collision. I am not satisfied that the defendant had completed his turn at that time, but rather I think the probability is that he was in the process of turning and that his failure to see the plaintiff was the sole practical operative cause of this accident. The plaintiff is therefore entitled to an assessment of damage undiminished by any consideration of contributory negligence.

This leads to a primary question as to what injury the plaintiff sustained. In the early days after the accident the plaintiff complained of some shoulder symptoms, but these do not appear to have been continuing, and it suffices for present purposes that I focus attention upon the claimed injury to the left leg. I should say at the outset that the impression I gained and the conclusion I have formed is that the plaintiff is seeking to make much more of this injury than in reality the extent of disability is.

I have had oral testimony from Dr Lindsay Laird, an orthopaedic surgeon who has been treating the plaintiff throughout. I have also had oral evidence from a surgeon, Dr Peter Wearne, who examined the plaintiff on two occasions on behalf of the defendant. The responses of Dr Wearne, particularly in cross- examination, caused me to have apprehensions concerning the objectivity of Dr
Wearne, and his argumentative responses to counsel have had the consequence that I find his testimony less than compelling.

I have, however, also tendered by the defendant, reports from Assoc Prof
Richard Jones and Dr Gordon Kerridge. These medical practitioners were not called. I find, however, that there is a considerable acceptability in the conclusions that they express, having regard to what I believe to be a realistic assessment of the plaintiff's situation.

The plaintiff had, throughout his life, followed a pattern of frequent job change. Included in it were some apparently extensive periods of unemployment.
He had, however, by the time of this accident, obtained what ought be regarded as a good job with the BHP. As well as doing this work the plaintiff was what has been described as multi-ticketed, and he had authority to work as a dogman/crane chaser and for the driving of various implements. He therefore had capacity to be employed in a number of ways.

After the accident he came under the care of the works' doctor, Dr
Hollingsworth, and it was he who referred the plaintiff to Dr Laird. Some significant occurrences intervened. The plaintiff underwent an arthroscopy, and I shall in due course make some reference to the detail of this. With the co-operation of his employer, he was given work which I am satisfied was well within his capacity post-operation. He had been informed that the mill in which he was employed was to close down, and in the course of time this occurred. I accept that he was informed that any new work was likely to involve his being required to work twelve hour shifts. He testified that he had made a judgment that his capacity was not sufficient to do this.

I do not regard that as a reasonable conclusion. I observe that he was not even prepared to try it. What he did do was apply to his employer for voluntary early retirement. This involved his receipt of a figure of about $9,000 or $10,000. Concurrently the evidence shows he had made an application for payment of a lump sum pursuant to a workers compensation entitlement, which no doubt derived from the circumstance that he was on a periodic journey between his place of work and home at the time of injury.

Some cross-examination was directed at him concerning evidence that he gave in that court. At the time he gave evidence about personal problems, which I have no doubt were of concern to him. His marriage was in the process of breaking down, and he had concerns about his two small children, the elder of whom was afflicted by cerebral palsy.

Mr Capelin of Queens Counsel for the plaintiff has urged me to look at the whole context of the proceedings in the other jurisdiction and assume that the reasons expressed by the plaintiff there for wanting early retirement impliedly included disability in relation to his leg. When asked at that tribunal why he had left, there was a significant omission to mention trouble with the leg as a reason for leaving. If trouble with the leg played any part in his decision to take redundancy, I am satisfied that it would have been to the forefront of his mind and to the forefront of any observation that he made, yet he did not do so. I am satisfied that the plaintiff's election to change employment had to do with his own personal circumstances rather than the direct consequences of injury.

That is not to say, however, that I regard the plaintiff as entirely unaffected by his injury. I should return to make some observations about the progress of it.

Shortly after the accident, when first examined by Dr Laird, that examiner found definite crunch and crack in the knee with flexion and extension. He observed some anterior cruciate ligament laxity and very localised acute tenderness over some swelling overlaying the lateral joint line, which he thought to be consistent with a tear of the lateral meniscus and an associated meniscal cyst. The doctor noted some swelling.

He arranged for admission to hospital and on 21 June undertook the arthroscopy of the left knee to which I have made earlier reference. Dr Laird found some full thickness articular cartilage loss in the lateral femoral condyle. He thought the plaintiff had a complex tear in the lateral meniscus and he removed this arthroscopically. He also noted that there was a tear in the medial meniscus and this required partial arthroscopic medial meniscectomy.
The doctor's opinion was that these indications were likely to have been traumatically caused.

I should interpolate that radiological and other examinations have indicated that there must have been some underlying pre-existing constitutional problem in the knee, but when I say "problem", I have no evidence that the plaintiff was suffering any symptoms provoked thereby.

On 18 August 1994 the plaintiff saw Dr Laird for follow-up, and Dr Laird then noted that most of the swelling seemed to have resolved. Later he saw him again, and upon complaints of the plaintiff that there was some problem there, he observed some slight effusion and gave him a local steroid injection.

The plaintiff has continued to complain of difficulties, but I should observe that in April 1995 - that is to say, a month before the plaintiff elected to take early retirement and the month before, coincidentally, he appeared in the
Workers Compensation Court - Dr Laird expressed the view that the plaintiff was presently fit for work as a labourer, although he noted that he was having a few problems with this. The plaintiff was in fact employed working, as I understand it, as a crane chaser and was well able to perform the duties required of that task. Again, in the following month, the doctor said that the plaintiff was able to get by with some pain in his knee.

The only report by Dr Laird subsequent to the events of May 1995 is that of 2
August 1996, although of course I have his oral testimony given in court yesterday. Dr Laird thought that the plaintiff needed to consider having anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction of his knee. The doctor reported that at this stage the plaintiff was unable to proceed with this operation due to some difficulties with his compensation, but he expressed the view that the plaintiff would have some difficulty in returning to his previous type of work. He said the degenerative changes in the knee were progressing and he strongly advised the plaintiff to consider having the reconstruction procedure.

I said earlier that I had the benefit of reports from Prof Jones and Dr
Kerridge. Dr Kerridge saw the plaintiff in December last year. He had a history, of course, at that stage which included the arthroscopic findings and activity by Dr Laird. Dr Kerridge, amongst other things, said this: "I would suggest that in view of the fact that he has had damage to both the medial and the lateral meniscus a 10 per cent loss of the efficient use of the leg at and above the knee, which includes everything below the knee, would be appropriate. As far as work is concerned, I would have to know the type of work he was doing at the stage where he resigned and to compare that with whatever his pre-injury work was, but again I would point out that many international rugby players continue to perform at the highest possible level with injuries much worse than those suffered by him. Taking into account the symptoms from which he suffered (according to him) I would have great difficulty in suggesting a job that he would not be able to do if in fact he wished to do it. It is not, of course, to suggest he might not suffer some pain. This is quite different from being physically unable to." 
Prof Jones saw the plaintiff in June this year. His conclusion was expressed in part in these terms: "He (referring to the plaintiff) has had a procedure on the left knee, presumably to remove some damaged material. He now complains of discomfort in the left knee. He is independent in personal care and activities of daily living and has been doing various jobs, including working on a clutch of a four wheel drive vehicle and working on his motor bike and various cars. I believe Mr Needs would be capable of full-time employment and would not, on the face of it, seem motivated to such a return to work. He could work in the various jobs mentioned above in this report and his preference would depend upon the perceived limitations in function of the left knee. I am not of the view that he requires any formal vocational rehabilitation but would recommend his seeking and returning to work expeditiously." 
I have also some evidence from vocational assessors. In their report there is some reference to various jobs advertised in the Newcastle area. One of the difficulties with which I am presented is the absence of any realistic evidence that I find acceptable that the plaintiff has made, up to date, any genuine attempt to find himself employment within his capacity. He is, however, as I have said, entitled to an assessment of damage, and doing the best I can with the material before me I propose to include in the damages the following ingredients.

The out-of-pocket expenses are agreed at $5,135.10.

Evidence from Dr Laird is that the proposed operation would cost between $5,000 and $8,000. The plaintiff was less than assertive about his intention to undergo surgery, but he did say that if Dr Laird recommended it, he thought he should undertake it. I do not know how soon this will be arranged. Assuming that there will be some delay, it will do justice between the parties if I select the lower of the figures and include $5,000 for the cost of the operation.

I then come to the difficult question of assessing the plaintiff's economic loss, both past and future. In a schedule with supporting documents which have been tendered there have been some calculations made in relation to the losses during the periods up until May 1995, when, as I have indicated, the plaintiff resigned his employment for reasons which were personal to him. I see no reason why I should not include in the damages the losses up to that point, and they include four items numbered 1 to 4 in ex C, the total of which is $11,096.

That leaves, of course, the time between May last year and the present. The plaintiff's calculated claim is premised upon a total incapacity for the whole sixty-seven weeks at the rate of $613 per week nett, being the earnings of comparable employees who elected to remain in the employ of BHP. I am unpersuaded that the plaintiff's tort induced disability has been productive of total economic loss during the whole of that period. Nevertheless, having regard to the whole of the circumstances, I am persuaded that there must have been some significant economic loss during that period, and having the figure of $613 per week as a guide, I propose to select just under half of that figure - $300 per week - as a fair estimate of the tort caused loss to the plaintiff. Sixty-seven weeks at $300 per week is $20,100 and I will include that in the damages.

It is submitted on behalf of the defendant that the defendant ought not have to compensate the plaintiff for any economic loss in the future. This submission is based in part on the opinions of Dr Kerridge and Prof Jones, and of course upon Dr Wearne, whose evidence I have set to one side for reasons already given. The plaintiff is, on the evidence, likely to have the surgery that I have postulated and compensated him for. Obviously if he has that surgery he will be totally incapacitated for a period, not only for the operation itself, but for recuperation from it.

I am unpersuaded that as a result of this injury the plaintiff should be regarded as probably partially incapacitated for work over the balance of his working life. I emphasise that the plaintiff had employment for which he was fit, from which he resigned. I also emphasise that in my finding he is fit for a vast range of employment which he has made no genuine attempt to acquire.

That is not to say, however, that he should be left bereft of damages for the future. Various calculations can be made on hypothetical bases, but what in effect I must ultimately find is some fair damages which will compensate him for the losses that he will sustain if he has the operation and the need to recuperate from it, and any small incapacity over the balance of his working life which is productive of some economic loss.

I had selected over the past sixty-seven weeks a figure of approximately half the earning rate of employees who remained at the BHP in employment comparable to that undertaken by the plaintiff. If one were to continue to postulate a loss at that rate over the next five years, the appropriate discount rate would involve using a factor of 231.5 and this would give a present capital loss of $300 a week for five years of $69,450.

I emphasise that I do not suggest that the plaintiff is incapacitated to the extent of half of his capacity for the next five years. What I am seeking to do is to find an appropriate economic cushion which will take into account some total loss during his operation, some partial loss, somewhat smaller than that that I have indicated until such time as he has it, some small partial loss while he undertakes recuperation and the chance of a small loss extending over the balance of his working life.

I notice that the figure which I have calculated, which I have not failed to observe I have not discounted for the conventional vicissitudes, of some $69,000, $20,000 and $11,000, adds up almost to a round sum of a little over $100,000. As an exercise of judgment, it seems to me that that is a fair figure as between the plaintiff and the defendant for the totality of any economic damage which the plaintiff has or will suffer as a result of this accident.

I turn then to the final element of damage, which is for non-economic loss. It was submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that his injury, allowing for his age and his complaints, represented something in the order of 30 to 35 per cent of a most extreme case. I reject that submission as extravagant, having regard to the observations in particular of Dr Kerridge, which I have quoted.

These proportionalities are necessarily matters of impression, but in my view it takes a generous view of the plaintiff and the reality of his condition to estimate his loss at 15 per cent of a most extreme case, and I propose to assess his damage accordingly. 15 per cent of the maximum award is $35,250 but there is a statutory requirement that this be reduced by $19,500, so that the element of damage would be $15,750.

The ingredients of damage which I have assessed can be tabulated for convenience. They include the out-of-pocket expenses at $5,135.10; the cost of the operation at $5,000; the first period of economic loss up until May 1995 at $11,096; the period since then up to the present at $20,100; future economic loss at $69,450; and non-economic loss at $15,750. The total is $126,531.10.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff for $126,600. I order the defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs.
 (Mr Dodd made application that interest on the judgment be stayed, pending the issue of a certificate from the Health Insurance Corporation.) 
COUNSEL ADDRESSED (Mr Capelin sought interest on past economic loss.) 
MR CAPELIN ADDRESSED 
FOR JUDGMENT ON INTEREST SEE SEPARATE TRANSCRIPT * * * 
