

Cohen versus National Mutual Life Association of Australia Matter No 11088/97 [1998] NSWSC 196 (6 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 10 June 1998 
COHEN versus NATIONAL MUTUAL LIFE ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA /97 March 1998 
Master Malpass 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT 
MASTER: Proceedings were brought in the Local Court by National Mutual Life Association of Australia ("the insurer" which is now the defendant) against two defendants. The claim did not proceed against the first of the two defendants (Portfolio). The second defendant is the plaintiff in these proceedings. Judgment was recovered on a monetary claim ($7,828.97 plus interest). The presiding Magistrate was Barnett LCM. 
The Determination was made on 8 May 1996. A Stated Case was signed on 12
February 1997. These proceedings were commenced by Summons filed on 14 April
The plaintiff seeks to disturb the decision made by the Learned
Magistrate.

The Stated Case sets out the Determination, the Facts, the Grounds of
Determination and the Appellant's Contention. The Stated Case recites some fifty grounds on which the Determination is challenged.

I do not propose to make specific reference to each of the grounds. There are grounds that were obviously untenable. Mercifully, some were not argued. In due course, I will refer to certain of the arguments that were put.

As is now common place, the Stated Case has its deficiencies. However, a pursuit down that road would not be a productive exercise in this case. It was not taken up by the parties and the Court was left to do its best in the circumstances.

In addition to the Stated Case, the Court had before it the transcript, the pleadings and certain of the exhibits tendered in the lower Court. The transcript was in fact made part of the Stated Case (see paragraph 3 (vi)).
The irregularity of that course need not be pursued in this case. The other material was placed before the Court by consent.

At the outset, it may be helpful to make some brief comment concerning the remedy pursued by the plaintiff. The authorities make it clear that the remedy of case stated provides a limited avenue of appeal. It has been described as a cumbersome process long recognised as unsatisfactory (Waterloo Holdings Pty
Limited versus Timso (Court of Appeal, unreported, 28 August 1997)). The Court has jurisdiction to determine only questions of law and only such questions of law as are submitted to it (Allen versus Kerr & Anor [(1995) Aust Torts Reports -354] and The Australian Gas Light Company versus The Valuer-
General <case>; [(1940) 40 SR 126).]
The matter of what is a question of law (as opposed to a question of fact) was considered, inter alia, in Allen and Azzopardi versus Tasman UEB Industries Ltd [(1985) 4 NSWLR 139] at 155-156. The facts stated are to be taken as the ultimate facts for whatever purpose the case is stated (Press versus Mathers <case>; [(1927) VLR 326] at p 330).

The time has come for the taking of steps to provide a different form of appeal which can be dealt with in the District Court (see Timso). This case, which involved about $7,000, occupied a valuable day of hearing time in this
Court.

The Learned Magistrate effectively determined that the plaintiff and the defendant had entered into a valid guarantee and that the judgment moneys were due and payable under that guarantee. The moneys related to matters of what has been described as "write backs". This description relates to moneys which are repayable by the agent in circumstances such as where a policy has lapsed.
The effect of the determination was that the moneys were found to be payable by the agent as principal debtor under the agency agreement.

Portfolio was the agent. The plaintiff was, inter alia, a director, shareholder and employee of that company. There was a written agency agreement. It was dated 14 August 1989. A copy of the document is Exhibit B.
It seems to be the case that Portfolio never attained the status of "Qualified
Agent". The question of whether or not it had attained that status does not seem to have been an issue in the lower Court. The agency agreement was terminated in November 1992.

The plaintiff signed a document which purported to be a Deed of guarantee. It is dated 7 July 1989. A copy of that document is Exhibit A. It purported to guarantee the payment of all reasonable debts incurred by Portfolio through any cause whatsoever. Clause 3 of the Deed provided as follows:- "3. In the event of the Company's Commission agency appointment being terminated or surrendered by either party the guarantor HEREBY GUARANTEES to the Association the payment of all reasonable debits due to the Association by the Company on demand by the Association." 
The plaintiff does not dispute that the document bears his signature. There was some dispute as to the attestation signature. In my view, the finding that the plaintiff had entered into a valid guarantee was open to the Learned
Magistrate.

There is evidence indicating that, as at 9 February 1992, Portfolio was owed moneys by way of deferred commissions. Apart from the tender of this document, little was done by the plaintiff to found the arguments that he proposed to develop from it. The amount claimed by the insurer purported to be a balance struck after deferred commissions had been set off against moneys payable by
Portfolio as principal debtor in respect of write backs. The plaintiff correctly points to the conflicting amounts advanced by the insurer on various occasions as representing the sum due to it. There is evidence of a financial summary (as at 19 September 1993). A copy of this document forms part of
Exhibit 1. It records the amount in respect of which judgment was given. I shall return to this document shortly.

As he had done in the lower Court, the plaintiff appeared in person. During submissions that lasted for some hours, the plaintiff propounded a plethora of arguments. It would not be productive to embark on the exercise of identifying each and every one of them. There were arguments that were misconceived. There were arguments which were simply not open to the plaintiff in the light of the issues agitated in the lower Court. There were arguments that were merely repetitious. Save as to one matter, I am not satisfied that there was error of law justifying the disturbance of the judgment.

I shall now briefly refer to some of the submissions that were made. I make no attempt to be exhaustive.

It was said that the Learned Magistrate failed to consider all of the plaintiff's arguments. It was said that he failed to give adequate reasons. It was said that he failed to make findings.

I have previously referred to the task presented by the multiplicity of arguments. It is not necessary for each argument to be specifically addressed.
The judgment may have been more expansive. Perhaps, it may have been more helpful if aspects of the judgment had been differently expressed. However, I am not satisfied that the reasoning process has not been sufficiently expressed and that findings which were not expressly made were not sufficiently implied from what was said by the Learned Magistrate. I do not accept the plaintiff's arguments on these matters.

It was argued that the plaintiff had been denied natural justice or procedural fairness. The Court was taken to various passages in the transcript which were relied on to support this submission. In my view, a reading of the transcript demonstrates that there is no substance in this submission.

The finding that there was an indebtedness in the sum of $7,828.97 was challenged. It was challenged in various ways largely in a manner not involving any question of law.

The Learned Magistrate did not have an easy task. He did not have the most helpful evidence placed before him. The plaintiff chose to present his case without the benefit of legal representation. If there had been legal representation, his case may have been conducted differently with steps being taken which would have better advanced it. The case had the potential for some complexity. In such circumstances, the hearing process can be expected to be difficult with the Court being left to resolve a messy dispute.

There is both oral and documentary material to support the finding that was made. There was no real challenge made to the oral evidence given by Mr
Kellard on this question. The documentary material is that which I have referred to as being contained in Exhibit 1. In my view, it was open to the
Learned Magistrate to find that there was indebtedness in the sum of $7,828.97.

Apart from the challenge to the validity of the guarantee, it was said that this indebtedness did not fall within the terms of the guarantee. It was said that there was no valid agency agreement. In my view, these submissions also fail.

The plaintiff contends that his liability under the guarantee is dependent upon a prior demand having been made. This submission is supported by the terminology of the guarantee. Indeed, the need for a prior demand did not seem to be really in dispute.

The plaintiff sought to make a submission to that effect before the Learned
Magistrate. What happened is recorded on pages 29-30 of the transcript. The solicitor for the insurer took objection to the making of that submission on the basis that it had not been raised in the pleadings. The Learned Magistrate ruled that the matter had not been raised in the pleadings and therefore could not be agitated before him. He further took the view that, in any event, "the statement of claim amounts to a demand". Both of these determinations are set forth in paragraph 3 of the Stated Case.

The Amended Statement of Liquidated Claim contains the following allegations:- "12. A demand has been made on the Second Defendant PHILLIP LAWRENCE COHEN for the payment of monies refundable to the Plaintiff pursuant to the said Agency
Agreement. The Second Defendant PHILLIP LAWRENCE COHEN has refused or failed to pay the amount demanded in breach of his Guarantee." 
In the Amended Defence, the plaintiff (as second defendant in those proceedings) did not admit the contents of paragraph 12.

Whilst it may be said that the failure to make the requisite demand was not expressly pleaded in the Amended Defence, the non-admission of the allegation of demand operates as a traverse of that allegation and raises it as an issue in the proceedings. Accordingly, there is no alternative but to conclude that there has been error on the part of the Learned Magistrate.

Counsel for the insurance company was unable to refer me to any authority which gave support to the Learned Magistrate's view that the Amended Statement of Liquidated Claim amounted to a demand. In my view, it is unlikely that he would find any such authority.

These are not ejectment proceedings where the service of originating process is treated as a re-entry. In this case, the Amended Statement of Liquidated
Claim cannot assist the insurer. There needs to be an existing indebtedness at the time of the commencement of the proceedings. The liability to pay does not arise until the demand has been made.

It is with some hesitation that I take the course of disturbing the judgment.
The transcript records statements made by the solicitor for the insurance company to the effect that he had documentation which demonstrated that demand had been made. If there was such material, the ruling by the Learned
Magistrate discouraged any attempt to tender the material. The plaintiff now vigorously denies that any demand has been made. Ultimately, he may be unsuccessful on this issue. In the circumstances in which it was placed, this
Court was not in a position to determine that issue for the parties.
Accordingly, it must go back to the Local Court.

The matter is remitted to the Local Court for determination according to law.
The defendant is to pay the costs of the Summons. The exhibits may be returned.

It is indeed unfortunate that the parties should now have to proceed to a fourth hearing over a dispute involving such a modest amount. This appeal was preceded by an arbitration and a rehearing. It is to be hoped that some resolution may take place before further valuable Court time is taken up and more grossly disproportionate legal costs are incurred.
 * * * 
