

Fajwul versus Molina [1996] NSWSC 341 (8 August 1996) 
FAJWUL versus MOLINA /94 ED 4356 AUGUST 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
GLEESON CJ, PRIESTLEY JA, HANDLEY JA 
CATCHWORDS: [DE FACTO RELATIONSHIPS ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/dfra220/) -  
PROPERTY INTERESTS 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED [DE FACTO RELATIONSHIPS
ACT](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/dfra220/) - appeal from orders of Cohen J adjusting property interests of former de facto partners - appellant submits trial judge erred in understanding of contributions by parties to assets acquired or increased during relationship - submission that exercise of discretion miscarried - 
Held: no error going to exercise of discretion shown or to be inferred - appeal dismissed with costs.

ORDERS 
Appeal dismissed with costs.
 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: I have had the benefit of reading in draft form the judgment of Priestley JA. I agree with the orders proposed by his Honour and with his reasons for those orders.
 
PRIESTLEY JA: This is an appeal against two of the principal orders and consequential costs orders made by Cohen J on a claim under <case> of the De
Facto Relationships Act 1984 (the Act) by Ms D. Molina as plaintiff against Mr
E. Fajwul as defendant.

So far as relevant in the present case, <case> says: "20(1) On an application by a de facto partner for an order under this Part to adjust interests with respect to the property of the de facto partners or either of them, a court may make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as to it seems just and equitable having regard to: the financial and non-financial contributions made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of the de facto partners to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the partners or either of them or to the financial resources of the partners or either of them; and the contributions, including any contributions made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, made by either of the de facto partners to the welfare of the other de facto partner ..." 
The plaintiff and the defendant were de facto partners from either 1977 or until 1988.

The plaintiff commenced her proceedings in 1990. Cohen J heard and decided the case in 1994.

He found that at the time of trial the parties had the following assets: "Jointly owned
Proceeds of sale of Bede Street, held in trust 117,845
Bareena Street Strathfield 375,000 
Less mortgage 45,492 329,508
Waterview Street Woy Woy 265,000 
Plaintiff
Volvo car 15,000 
Defendant
Ettalong home units 300,000
Shares in Merel's (Aust) Pty Ltd 335,554
Shares in Fajwul Deehan Pty Ltd 46,986
Superannuation credit 89,154
Loan to Power Trust 57,209
Long Service Leave 13,711
Loan to Australian Wholesome Food Pty Ltd, recoverable 97,148 
Total 1,667,115 
Less loan accounts with Merel's 
Defendant (105,915) 
Plaintiff (34,047) (139,962) 
Nett assets value 1,527,153" 
On 23 March 1994 Cohen J made the following orders: "1. The Defendant Transfer to the Plaintiff his one half interest in the property at 67-69 Waterview Street, Woy Woy.
The Plaintiff transfer to the Defendant her one-half interest in the property at 28 Bareena Street, Strathfield upon the payment to her of $164,750.00. That payment is to be made by the Defendant not later than 30th
June 1994.
The Defendant execute and procure the execution of such documents as are necessary to discharge the Plaintiff from further liability under the mortgage over the said property at Strathfield and to indemnify her against any claim in respect of that mortgage.
The parties authorise the payment from the trust account held by Mr
Terence Stern, containing the balance of the proceeds of sale of the property at Bede Street, Strathfield, of one-half of the balance of that account to each of the plaintiff and Defendant.
The Plaintiff transfer to the Defendant or his nominee the share held by her in Merel's (Aust) Pty Limited.
The Defendant execute or cause to be executed such documents or take such steps as are necessary to discharge the Plaintiff's loan account with Merel's
Pty Limited.
The Defendant pay the Plaintiff's costs of the proceedings." 
In his appeal the defendant asked the court to set aside that part of order 2 requiring payment by the defendant, and thus to reduce the plaintiff's overall entitlement by $164,750. He also asked that order 4, order 7, which dealt with costs, and also a further order for costs made on 27 May 1994, be set aside .
In place of order 4 the defendant proposed that the plaintiff receive an amount in the order of $43,600, a reduction of about $14,900 from what she would have received under Cohen J's order.

No point was taken in the appeal about the date as at which Cohen J listed and valued the assets of the parties. This accorded with the way the case had been conducted before him. The defendant's complaint on appeal was directed to the way Cohen J had approached the questions of adjustment under <case>.

Detailed evidence had been given before Cohen J of the relationship between the plaintiff and the defendant, of the work done by each of them during the relationship and of the assets acquired by them during the relationship. There had been some factual matters in dispute as well as some matters of valuation, and considerable areas of agreement. The list of assets and values set out above was arrived at by Cohen J on the basis of his findings on disputed matters and the matters agreed between the parties.

In his reasons for judgment Cohen J set out all the relevant particulars of the case. In the appeal, the argument put for the defendant did not criticise
Cohen J's primary findings of fact, nor, with one exception, his valuations of the assets of the parties.

The defendant's notice of appeal contained twelve grounds. Grounds 6-10 were abandoned. A further ground was added by leave at the hearing. This and grounds 1-5, 11 and 12 were the subject of written submissions. In oral argument the case for the defendant, as well as relying on the written submissions, was put more generally, in two principal forms.

The first way of putting it was that in arriving at his appreciation of the overall situation, Cohen J had based himself on erroneous inferences and conclusions drawn from the basic facts he had found which meant that his final assessment was flawed and that this court should substitute its own opinion of the eventual property adjustment. The second way of putting it was that (a) his Honour should have approached the reaching of his decision by the following steps: (i) establish what the property of the de facto partners was at relevant times; (ii) having done that, evaluate their separate contributions to that property; and (iii), pursuant to <case> of the Act, having regard to such contributions, "make such order adjusting the interests of the partners in the property as to [the court] seems just and equitable"; it was then submitted that Cohen J had not properly performed step (ii) because he had taken into account neither contributions made by the defendant nor the fact that in regard to particular assets no contribution had been made by the plaintiff.

The second way of putting the argument was really a more elaborate form of the first leg of the first way. It focussed heavily on par (a) of subs (1) of s
It paid little attention to par (b) of the subsection. The way in which this approach was sought to be justified can be seen by reference to the separate grounds of appeal.

The first ground took up the position of the Ettalong home units, item 5 in
Cohen J's list. The submission was that since no financial contributions were made by the plaintiff to the acquisition of this asset it should have been altogether excluded from his Honour's consideration when making his eventual conclusion adjusting the interests of the partners in their property. The written submissions said that his Honour, however, appeared "to have taken that property into account by his reference to the [plaintiff's] contributions `to the acquisition of the properties' without excluding the
Ettalong property". It was submitted that this showed error on the trial judge's part.

The citation from his Honour's reasons of the phrase quoted in the written submission above reproduced came from the following sentence towards the end of his Honour's reasons: "In my opinion, justice and equity, bearing in mind the contributions made by her to the partnership and to the home, and her earlier contributions to housekeeping and, to a limited extent, to the acquisition of the properties, justify her in taking the whole of the interest in the property at Woy Woy, where she is now living, and where she will be able to have the benefit of the rent being paid for the second house." 
In this sentence and in the whole passage in which it appears, it is in my opinion clear that Cohen J, having surveyed the whole of the contributions by both of the parties under both pars (a) and (b) of <case> was proceeding to make the necessary judgment under the subsection. I do not think that he was showing any error in his understanding of the respective contributions of the two parties under the two relevant paragraphs of the subsection in the way contended for in the written submission.

The second ground of appeal concerned the part played by the defendant in the operations of Merel's (Aust) Pty Limited (Merel's). This was a company in whose business the defendant was undoubtedly the driving force. The plaintiff, in a subordinate capacity, also worked hard in it. The complaint of the defendant was that Cohen J overlooked his contribution to the value of the business. I do not think this complaint is justified. Although Cohen J makes no explicit reference to the defendant's contribution to this aspect of "the property of the de facto partners or either of them" it seems to me virtually beyond argument, from a reading of the whole of his Honour's reasons, that he thoroughly understood the part played by the defendant in regard to the whole of the property discussed in his reasons and that he reached his final conclusion on the basis of this understanding.

I am of the same view in regard to grounds 3 and 5 which raise the questions of contributions made by the defendant towards items 2 and 8 in Cohen J's list of assets set out above.

Ground 4 raised the one primary finding of the trial judge which was challenged by the defendant. This concerned the valuation of the defendant's shares in Merel's. Much time had been taken up before Cohen J concerning the valuation of these shares. An expert who gave evidence for the defendant had assessed their value at $251,453 and an expert for the plaintiff at $634,555.
The judge accepted both valuers as expert in the relevant field. He dealt in detail in his reasons with the various components of the valuation, accepting in large part the approach adopted by the defendant's valuer. Using this approach, he said: "The valuation of the company can thus be made with the use of these figures.
As I have accepted the adjustments to the balance sheet proposed by Mr
Borthwick [the defendant's valuer] the most convenient way of assessing the valuation of the company is by using the figures set out on p 14 of his report but by substituting for the amount set out as goodwill one or other of the two figures which I have calculated above. On the capitalisation rate of 221/2 per cent this gives a total value of the company of $335,554 and on the 17 per cent rate the value is $450,968. In my opinion the best that can be done in the circumstances is to accept that this is the range of valuation. If experts such as those who have given evidence differ to this extent then it might be assumed that purchasers with different accounting advice would also differ, and within the same range of figures, when assessing the value of this company. I will use the lower figure for the valuation of Merel's but I will assume it may be increased by an amount of $115,400." 
In the appeal it was said for the defendant that it was not open to the trial judge to take into account a greater possible value than the $335,554 figure which he had arrived at in the way he had explained. I do not think there is anything wrong in the approach adopted by his Honour. As I understand what he said he was indicating that he would regard the $335,554 figure as the valuation but would bear in mind in making his final assessment of adjustment between the parties that it was possible, within the limits he mentioned, that the shares might, in fact, be sold for a higher figure. The reasons he gave for taking this approach seem to me to be eminently realistic.

Ground 11 asserted that Cohen J's reasons did not sufficiently explain the process of reasoning by which he arrived at his conclusion and were thus in breach of the rules stated in Housing Commission of NSW versus Tatmar Pastoral Co
Pty Limited [(1983) 3 NSWLR 378.] 
In the written submission in support of this ground reference was made to a statement made by Cohen J towards the end of his reasons that "the starting point for any consideration should be the fact that the plaintiff is entitled to a one half interest in each of the properties at Woy Woy and Strathfield and to the fund held in the trust account". This statement was said to show an error of principle on the part of the judge. It was this point that was made the subject of the further ground of appeal which was added by leave at the start of the hearing of the appeal. It was said that the provisions of s did not provide a fetter on the exercise of the discretionary power by reference to "a starting point" of entitlements.

In my opinion the whole of the paragraph in which the criticised statement appears shows that the trial judge was not adopting his nominated starting point as a matter of principle or something that he was required by the section to do. Rather, it seems to me to be clear, that having made his survey of all the facts relevant to a decision under <case> he was saying that in the circumstances of the case before him, and in light of considerations which he mentioned subsequently in the paragraph in which the criticised "starting point" appeared, he would deal with the case in the way he described. I do not see any error of principle in this. It simply seems to me to be a consideration of the facts as he had found them in light of the requirements of the section.

As to the complaint made under ground 11 itself, I can say little more than that I do not agree with it. In my opinion Cohen J has made his reasons for his conclusion quite sufficiently clear.

Having said this much in regard to the submissions put in support of the individual grounds of appeal, I can return to the way in which the general submission was put, as outlined above, which was to the effect that the trial judge had not properly taken into account contributions made by the defendant to the relevant property nor properly taken into account that in regard to certain assets no contribution had been made by the plaintiff. It follows from what I have said concerning the individual grounds of appeal that I do not accept that Cohen J made the errors complained of. It seems to me that he did take the contributions of both parties properly into account and in doing so gave proper recognition to the provisions of both pars (a) and (b) of <case>.

It was acknowledged on behalf of the defendant that the orders made by Cohen J were discretionary, and that for the defendant to succeed in the appeal against orders 2 and 4, the rules concerning appeals against discretionary orders were applicable. In my view no error has been shown by the defendant on the part of Cohen J either as to the principles to be applied in arriving at his decision, or in his appreciation of relevant factual matters.

Ground 12 in the notice of appeal raised the costs orders made by Cohen J in favour of the plaintiff. It was argued that since the expert share valuer relied on by the defendant had, to a significant extent been preferred to the plaintiff's expert and since considerable time was spent at the trial on the share valuation issue, this should have been reflected in costs orders more favourable to the defendant.

In light of what actually happened concerning the evidence of the two experts and the trial judge's eventual conclusions concerning the share valuation issue and generally, I cannot see that his Honour made any error of an appellable kind in his costs orders.

A final matter that should be recorded is that the case was argued in this court by both counsel on the explicit footing that the court need not be concerned in this appeal with the issue that divided the members of the court in Wallace versus Stanford [(1995) 37 NSWLR 1.] 
In my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
 
HANDLEY JA: I agree with Priestley JA.
 * * * 
