

Terrence Stanley Johns Matter No 72008/98 [1998] NSWSC 740 (25 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 19 January 1999 
TERRENCE STANLEY JOHNS /98 June 1998 
Greg James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division 
JUDGMENT (On application for bail) 
HIS HONOUR: In the matter of Terrence Stanley Johns, after receiving the affidavit of Mr. Hall and of Mrs. Johns, and seeing the Crown's material, it became apparent that Mr. Johns is serving the balance of an additional term arising from the re-determination of a life sentence, and has now been charged with offences to which s.8A of the [Bail Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ba41/) applies. 
I am informed that an application has been made to the Attorney General by way of petition, to re-open Mr. Johns' original conviction on grounds that the evidence of certain police officers was corrupt, and that petition is being entertained, albeit things appear to be moving somewhat slowly.

Mr. Johns has indicated to the Serious Offenders' Review Board that since he has received an advantageous classification he did not want his parole situation disturbed in the event that the bail application was not going to succeed, but would seek, when and if it is appropriate, to make a bail application which might have some chance of success. It is clear that at present the combined force of the sentence he is serving and s.8A would render this present application misconceived. When this was elicited in the dialogue on the application, Mr. Hall, who appears for Mr. Johns, sought to obtain some further instructions and has sought on his client's instructions that the present application be marked withdrawn and dismissed so that there might be no impediment for an application properly so brought, should the circumstances change. The Crown does not oppose that application.

I make these short remarks so that the context of the matter might be available in the event that it should ever be sought to pray in aid this application and the extent to which it has come before the court in support of an argument based on s.22A.

The application is marked withdrawn and dismissed.
 * * * 
