

William Tan versus Crystal Pools Pty Limited [1997] NSWSC 150 (18 April 1997) 
William TAN versus CRYSTAL POOLS PTY LIMITED /96 
Friday 18 April 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
JUDGMENT 
HIDDEN J: This is an appeal by way of stated case from the decision of a magistrate at Manly Local Court in an action for breach of contract brought by the respondent, Crystal Pools Pty Limited, against the appellant, William Tan.

On 6 June 1994 Mr Tan entered into a written contract with Crystal Pools for the construction of a swimming pool at his home in Seaforth. Work commenced later in that year but, by a letter of 1 December 1994, Mr Tan terminated the agreement. Crystal Pools took proceedings in the Local Court for recovery of its expenditure to that point and loss of profits. Mr Tan defended the action, and cross-claimed for damages, on the basis that by 1 December it was apparent that the pool could not be completed within the time specified in the contract. Alternatively, he contended that he had been induced to enter into the contract by a statement made to him by a representative of Crystal Pools that the pool would be finished by Christmas 1994, that statement amounting to misleading or deceptive conduct within the meaning of <case> of [Fair Trading
Act, 1987](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

For the purpose of the appeal, the following material was before me: * The stated case.
 * The learned Magistrate's judgment.
 * The transcript of the evidence of the representative of Crystal Pools to whom I have referred, Mr Andrew Rona, and of the appellant.
 * The pleadings in the Local Court.
 * The written contract and correspondence between the parties, including the letter of 1 December 1994, which were exhibits before his Worship.

The written contract provided that Crystal Pools would obtain the necessary approvals of public authorities for the construction of the pool within sixteen weeks of the signing of the contract, and that the pool would be completed within sixteen weeks of those approvals being given. The relevant clause provided for extension of the period for completion in a number of circumstances, none of which is applicable here. It provided also that, in addition to all of its other obligations under the contract, the company was liable for liquidated damages if the pool were not completed within the time contracted for.

In the Local Court, Mr Tan gave evidence of a conversation with the company's representative, Mr Rona, on the day the contract was signed. According to Mr
Tan, he explained to Mr Rona that his children did not live with him but they were to visit him at Christmas, as were other members of his extended family who were coming from overseas for the occasion. He told Mr Rona that, for that reason, he did not wish to engage the company's services unless he could be assured that the pool would be finished by Christmas. Mr Rona gave him that assurance. Mr Rona then explained the written contract to him and he said that he would like to think about it. However Mr Rona told him that, if he wanted the pool completed by Christmas, he would have to sign the contract that day, which he did.

Mr Rona did not have a clear memory of his dealings with Mr Tan and gave evidence that he had no recollection of any such conversation. He said that it was not the company's practice to guarantee dates for completion because of the variable factors in the process of pool construction. The written contract had originally provided for twelve weeks for completion of the pool after obtaining the necessary approvals, but Mr Rona recalled that he altered that by hand to sixteen weeks because he anticipated that the pool would take longer than usual to build.

Certainly, the written contract makes no reference to completion by Christmas, although the document makes provision for the insertion of special conditions.
According to Mr Tan, Mr Rona told him that he could not put a specific completion date in the contract because it was not known how long it would take to get Council approval, and construction might be delayed by factors over which the company had no control, such as the weather.

As observed, the contract provided for sixteen weeks in which to obtain the approvals of the relevant statutory authorities and a further sixteen weeks thereafter to complete the pool, a total of thirty-two weeks. Given that the contract was signed on 6 June 1994, that period would have expired on 16
January 1995. As it happened, the approvals were obtained on 2 September 1994, earlier than provided for by the contract, and the further period of sixteen weeks for completion of the pool expired on 22 December.

Nevertheless, it became clear that the pool would not be completed by that date or, indeed, by Christmas day. Late in November, Mr Tan denied workmen access to the site for the purpose of delivering formwork. He had telephone conversations with two directors of the company, Mr Harvey and Mr Bradshaw, both of whom acknowledged that the pool would not be ready for use by
Christmas (although both denied that the company had undertaken that it would be). As already observed, Mr Tan terminated the contract by letter of 1
December.

In the course of his judgment, the learned Magistrate set out the matters to be determined in this way: "The issues before the court primarily are whether Mr Rona by reason of his statements (if accepted they were made) about completion of the pool by
Christmas induced Mr Tan to enter the contract and accordingly relief can be granted under the statutory provisions of the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) or alternatively or in addition to the claim made by the Defendant that the completion of the pool by Christmas was a condition of the contract and when it became obvious that the pool could not be completed he was entitled to anticipate the breach and terminate the contract." 
Having reviewed the evidence, his Worship concluded that Mr Tan had a considerably greater knowledge of the operation of the law than he was prepared to admit, and that Mr Rona would not have been able to induce him to enter into a contract of the nature alleged. His Worship declared himself satisfied that, if completion of the pool by Christmas were essential as far as Mr Tan was concerned, he did not communicate that to the company in such a way as to render it "an essential term or condition" of the contract. In the stated case, his Worship expressed the grounds of his determination as follows: "Contract 
Completion of the pool before Christmas was not an essential term of the contract and as at 1 December 1994, Tan was not entitled to terminate the contract.
 [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/) 
On the evidence I was not convinced Rona would be able to induce Tan to enter a contract of the nature alleged." 
For the appellant, Mr Tan, it was argued that the learned magistrate fell into error in a number of respects, which might be summarised as follows:
His Worship approached the question whether Mr Tan was entitled to terminate the contract for anticipatory breach on the basis that the relevant term of the contract, said to be essential, was that the pool be completed by
Christmas. In fact, Mr Rona's statement that the pool would be completed by
Christmas was relied upon as the inducement for Mr Tan to enter into the contract, and related only to the claim under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/). The relevant term of the contract was clause 7 which, in the circumstances, required the pool to be completed by 22 December. In any event, his Worship misapplied the test of whether a term of the contract was essential.
As to the claim under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/), his
Worship failed to make any finding whether the statement attributed to Mr
Rona, that the pool would be completed by Christmas, had been made. Further, there was no evidence for his Worship's finding that Mr Tan would not have been induced by any representation of Mr Rona to enter into the contract.
Certain findings of fact by his Worship were not supported by the evidence.

It is convenient to deal with the last of these matters first, as an appreciation of the facts fairly to be concluded from the evidence is essential to the determination of the legal issues raised.

Fact Finding.
 
I have already referred to the evidence that Mr Tan wanted the pool to be completed by Christmas because of the anticipated visit of his children and other relatives. The price for the completed pool was to be $48,000. His
Worship found that the effect of Mr Tan's evidence was that he entered into a contract for a pool of substantial value, which was to be used on one occasion only during Christmas 1994, and for which thereafter he had no personal use.

Counsel for Mr Tan submitted that this was not the effect of what his client had said and, accordingly, it is necessary to examine his evidence. He agreed (page 22 of the transcript) that the family gathering was "the motivating purpose" for his wanting the pool complete by Christmas 1994. He gave evidence that he had had holes in his yard which had been made for the purpose of construction of the pool filled in, but agreed that he had not since had the pool constructed (pp 11-13). In cross-examination, he gave the following evidence (pp 14-15): "Q. Can you explain to the Court why you have not bothered to complete the pool since November 1994? 
A. Because the reason the pool was there is for the families to enjoy, as far as for my personal use, I don't swim that often and I could have gone down to the bottom and swim in the middle harbour, which I have.

Q. So the intention was to have the pool there for Christmas 1994 only? 
A. Year, for the children.

Q. Do you think that the $48,000 is an enormous investment for one day of the year, one day of a life time, in fact? 
A. No, no. Is not - it is an investment right which will add value to the house. Is not something that you throw away and has no value after that.

Q. Mr Tan, I put to you that if you were serious about wanting a pool you would have taken steps to have completed the pool in the interim, since
November 1994, surely? 
A. Because since November 1994 there are no family gatherings, right, there is really no point in having pool completed for my own personal use.
 ......

Q. How much enjoyment have you lost, if you haven't even taken steps to complete the pool? 
A. The enjoyment I've lost is the family gathering and seeing all the children enjoying the pool.

Q. You appreciate you are under a duty to mitigate your loss in these sorts of circumstances, aren't you? 
A. I don't get it? 
Q. If you were genuine about needing a pool, wouldn't you have taken steps to complete it in this now year and a half since the construction was ceased? 
A. I wanted a pool for specific reason, right, which is a family gathering in
December 1994 and then I express that concern to Mr Rona because if it is not - if he can't - if the pool can't be ready by December 1994, there is not much point in me building a pool because I was the only one who is going to live there. It is not justified, as you say, spending $50,000." 
From these passages it does appear that his Worship's summary of the effect of
Mr Tan's evidence may have missed some of its nuances. What Mr Tan was saying, it seems, is that the pool would in any event have increased the capital value of his home, but that it was intended for the use of his children at family gatherings and had not since been completed because there had not since been any family gathering such as that organised for Christmas 1994. Nevertheless, the evidence admits of the interpretation that the primary focus of the pool was the gathering at Christmas 1994, and his Worship's assessment of its effect, although rather bald, is not materially inaccurate. What his Worship said must be read in the context of his reasons for judgment as a whole, and to this matter I shall return.

As observed above, the contract provided for 16 weeks in which to obtain the approvals of statutory authorities, and a further 16 weeks thereafter to complete the pool. At the time the contract was signed, that total period would have expired in the middle of January 1995 so that, on its face, the contract did not require completion by Christmas 1994. Mr Tan was cross examined about this and, according to his Worship, the effect of his evidence was that he took a chance that both the pool builder and the relevant authorities would attend to their tasks in time for the pool to be completed by Christmas. It is contended that, again, this is not a fair summary of what
Mr Tan had to say.

The relevant evidence appears at pages 15 to 16 of the transcript. According to Mr Tan, Mr Rona told him that normally Council approval would take only six to eight weeks and that he would do everything he could to expedite the approval process. The cross examination proceeded (p 16): "Q. But you have signed a contract in which the potential is there to allow a pool builder to take until 16 January 1995 to complete the pool, haven't you? 
A. Yes, I took a chance.

Q. You took a chance? 
A. Well, if everything went to the full extent and it had a lot of problem with the council, then obviously it is not the pool builder's fault.

Q. Isn't that the case, isn't it Mr Tan, exactly in this case, you took the chance. You were told that it was hoped that you could have the pool completed by Christmas -- 
A. No I took the chance -- 
Q. And you have taken a chance? 
A. I took a chance on the basis that the pool builder will comply with, will do what they are contracted to do, right.

Q. Well, they were contracted to build a pool within a time frame that could take it could (sic) through to 16 January, is that not true? 
A. They were contracted to build a pool 16 weeks after final approval.
 .....

Q. At the time you signed the contract you did not know how long approval would take, did you? 
A. That's the chance I took, I did not take a chance with the pool builders.

Q. Yes, but how can you be taking a chance when you don't even know when construction would commence after approval? 
A. Because I trust Mr Rona, he told me it is only going to take 6 to 8 weeks." 
His Worship's summary of the effect of that evidence appears to me to be entirely accurate. At the relevant part of the judgment (page 3) his Worship noted Mr Tan's evidence that he had trusted Mr Rona, but correctly saw the effect of his evidence as being that he had taken a chance that events would permit the completion of the pool by Christmas, although the contract at the time he signed it allowed for completion in January.

I shall return to his Worship's finding, referred to previously, that Mr Rona would not have been able to induce Mr Tan to enter into the contract.

Termination of the Contract.
 
It is common ground that, by 1 December 1994, it was apparent that the pool could not be completed before Christmas. Accordingly, if it were a term of the contract that the pool should be completed within that time frame and that term could properly be classified as essential: Tramways Advertising Pty
Limited versus Luna Park Limited (1938) 38 SR 632, then Mr Tan was entitled to terminate the contract, even though the time for performance had not then expired: Universal Cargo Carriers Corporation versus Citati [[1957] 2 QB ], per Devlin J (as he then was) at 438. The argument before me, as in the Local
Court, centred upon whether completion prior to Christmas was an essential term in the relevant sense.

The law on this matter has been the subject of a deal of judicial exegesis over the years but, for present purposes, it is sufficient to refer to the passage dealing with it in the judgment of Jordan CJ in Tramways Advertising (upon which his Worship relied). At pages 641-2 of the report, the Chief
Justice considered the legal consequences which might flow from a breach of contract and, drawing the familiar distinction between conditions and warranties, said: "The nature of the promise broken is one of the most important of the matters.
If it is a condition that is broken, i.e., an essential promise, the innocent party, when he becomes aware of the breach, has ordinarily the right at his option either to treat himself as discharged from the contract and to recover damages for loss of the contract, or else to keep the contract on foot and recover damages for the particular breach. If it is a warranty that is broken, i.e., a non-essential promise, only the latter alternative is available to the innocent party. ...

The question whether a term in a contract is a condition or a warranty, i.e., an essential or a non-essential promise, depends upon the intention of the parties as appearing in or from the contract. The test of essentiality is whether it appears from the general nature of the contract considered as a whole, or from some particular term or terms, that the promise is of such importance to the promisee that he would not have entered into the contract unless he had been assured of a strict or a substantial performance of the promise, as the case may be, and that this ought to have been apparent to the promisor. ... If the innocent party would not have entered into the contract unless assured of a strict and literal performance of the promise, he may in general treat himself as discharged upon any breach of the promise, however slight. If he contracted in reliance upon a substantial performance of the promise, any substantial breach will ordinarily justify a discharge." 
As earlier observed, the necessary approvals from the statutory authorities were obtained by 2 September 1994, that is in less than the 16 weeks for which the contract had provided, so that the further period of 16 weeks during which the pool was to be completed expired on 22 December. It was completion by that date which counsel for Mr Tan contended was essential, such that the company's inability to do so entitled his client to terminate the contract.

The difficulty with that proposition is that, at the time it was signed, the contract provided for a variable date for the start of work, depending on when the necessary approvals were obtained, and allowed for a completion date as late as 16 January 1995. As pointed out earlier, even that date could have been extended in certain circumstances provided for in the contract. Before me, counsel for Crystal Pools also relied upon the fact that the relevant clause provided for liquidated damages in the event of failure to complete by the required date, but as that provision was expressed to be in addition to all the company's other obligations under that contract, I am not persuaded by that argument.

Counsel for Mr Tan also relied upon the pleadings in the Local Court.
Paragraph 3 of Mr Tan's cross claim asserted that it was a condition of the contract that the pool would be completed within 16 weeks of the date on which the necessary approvals had been given. In its defence to the cross claim,
Crystal Pools admitted that paragraph. Counsel seized upon the use of the word "condition" and the fact that no issue was taken with it on the pleadings.
However, I have no doubt that the word was being used loosely and not with an eye to the distinction between conditions and warranties elucidated by Jordan
CJ in Tramways Advertising (supra). Certainly, I do not construe the admission in the defence to the cross claim as an acknowledgment that the clause in the contract about completion was an essential term such as might justify termination for anticipatory breach.

It is true that Mr Tan's evidence of seeking and obtaining an assurance from
Mr Rona that the pool would be completed by Christmas was directed to the question whether Mr Tan had been induced to enter into the contract by misleading or deceptive conduct, so as to be the foundation of the cross claim under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
Nevertheless, in the circumstances of the case, that evidence was equally relevant to whether the clause of the contract providing for time for completion was an essential term in the relevant sense. Accordingly, the fact that the learned magistrate saw completion by Christmas as the issue in the claim on the contract, while strictly inaccurate, is not to the point. His
Worship expressed his conclusion on the evidence in this way: "This court is more than satisfied that Christmas was an essential term or condition of the contract, however it only became an essential term and condition in the mind of one of the parties and that was Mr Tan, and only became an essential term of (sic) condition at some point in time during the currency of the contract. In addition this court is more than satisfied that essential term or condition in the mind of Mr Tan was communicated to the plaintiff (Crystal Pools) only in the form of a request and not in the form or at a time whereby it could form part of the contract initially entered between the parties, .... " 
In effect, his Worship found that on the occasion when the contract was signed
Mr Tan did not convey to Mr Rona that it was vital for him that the pool be completed by Christmas. There being nothing in the written contract itself to that effect, there was no basis upon which it could be concluded that a pre-
Christmas conclusion date was an essential term of the agreement. Such a finding was clearly open to his Worship. Mr Tan's own evidence, to which I referred earlier, that he was prepared to "take a chance" that the pool would be completed by Christmas, even though the written contract did not require it, is telling. It is in this context that his Worship's observation about Mr
Tan's evidence, also referred to earlier, to the effect that he had entered into a contract for the construction of a very expensive pool for one occasion only, must be understood.
 [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).
 
Counsel for Mr Tan complained that his Worship made no finding whether Mr Rona had in fact assured Mr Tan that the pool would be completed by Christmas.
Strictly this is true, although it must be said that the passage from the judgment quoted above may well amount to such a finding. If Mr Tan did not tell Mr Rona, prior to signing the contract, that he required the pool to be completed by Christmas, it seems unlikely that Mr Rona would have assured him that it would be.

Be that as it may, his Worship was not satisfied that Mr Rona would have been able to induce Mr Tan to enter into such a contract and, as observed, it is contended that there was no evidence to support such a finding. Although expressed in terms of Mr Rona's inability to induce Mr Tan to enter into a contract of the kind in question, clearly his Worship's finding was that there had not in fact been any such inducement on this occasion.

Equally clearly, the evidence did support such a finding. His Worship had the opportunity to hear the evidence of Mr Tan and to observe his demeanour. Mr
Tan is a chartered accountant by occupation. His Worship observed that the correspondence between Mr Tan and Crystal Pools, particularly Mr Tan's letter of 1 December 1994 terminating the contract, disclosed not only an excellent command of English but, as his Worship put it, "a better than average understanding of contractual law". His Worship expressed surprise that a person with such an understanding, to whom completion of the pool by Christmas was essential, would enter into a written contract which not only did not expressly provide for completion by that time but, by its terms, allowed for completion at a later time. Having referred to a number of aspects of Mr Tan's evidence in such a way as to imply his incredulity, his Worship continued: "When one reviews the totality of the evidence and assesses the witnesses this court can say that it is of the view Mr Tan has a considerably greater knowledge of the operation of the law than he is prepared to admit and this court further states unhesitatingly that it is not of the view after hearing, observing and observing written material under the hand of Mr Tan that Mr Rona would have been able to induce he (sic) to enter into a contract of the nature alleged." 
As I read them, the effect of his Worship's reasons as a whole is that Mr Rona gave no undertaking that the pool would be completed by Christmas but, even if he had, Mr Tan would not have entered into a written contract which did not expressly provide for it. Those findings were open on the evidence and either of them was sufficient to dispose of the cross claim under the [Fair Trading
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/fta1987117/).

Conclusion.
 
For these reasons, I am of the view that the learned magistrate's determination should be affirmed and the summons dismissed.

I shall hear the parties on costs.
 * * * 
