

Regina versus Kevin James Sams [1997] NSWSC 193 (14 May 1997) 
REGINA versus KEVIN JAMES SAMS /96 
Wednesday 14 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
STEIN JA, STUDDERT J, LEVINE J 
JUDGMENT 
STUDDERT J: The applicant Kevin James Sams pleaded guilty to an offence of assault with act of indecency. His Honour Acting Judge Nader sentenced the applicant to a fixed term of two years imprisonment to be served by way of periodic detention. His Honour directed that that sentence commence on 29 September 1996 immediately following on the expiration of an existing sentence being served by way of periodic detention.

The applicant now seeks leave to appeal against the sentence imposed.

The offence in respect of which the applicant was convicted and sentenced is in a category attracting a maximum penalty under <case> of the Crimes Act of five years imprisonment.

On the day before the applicant's plea of guilty to the offence for which he was sentenced an indictment had been presented charging the applicant with the more serious offence under <case> of the Crimes Act of having sexual intercourse with the complainant without her consent. That offence carried a maximum penalty of fourteen years penal servitude.

The applicant pleaded not guilty to that offence and his trial commenced before the District Court judge but for reasons it is irrelevant to record here the trial judge discharged the jury and on the following day the applicant pleaded guilty to the lesser offence. I record this background because it is relevant for consideration of one of the grounds of appeal sought to be raised. It is also relevant in the sense that once the lesser charge was laid the applicant pleaded guilty promptly and this was a circumstance which it was proper for the sentencing judge to take into account in the applicant's favour, and his Honour expressly did so.

Before considering the various grounds that have been argued, it is appropriate to refer briefly to the facts.

The victim of the assault was the applicant's sister-in-law, she being the younger sister of the applicant's wife. The victim was at the time thirty-two years of age. She was staying at the applicant's home and on the night of 28
October 1995, during which the offence was committed, the complainant was sleeping with her daughter in the bottom bunk in a bedroom in the applicant's home. The top bunk was occupied by a daughter of the applicant and the applicant himself was sleeping with his wife in a separate bedroom. According to the complainant she slept in a pair of the applicant's pyjamas with some underclothing underneath. She said that she woke up when she felt a hand inside her clothing and she said she could feel fingers in her vagina. She saw the applicant kneeling on the floor beside her.

When interviewed by the police the applicant denied ever having his hand anywhere near the complainant's vagina. He said he did enter the bedroom to see if his daughter needed covering and whilst he was in the room he observed that the doona covering the complainant had been caught up between her legs thereby uncovering the complainant's daughter. According to the applicant, he was trying to reposition the doona so as to cover the complainant's daughter.

The statement by the complainant from which I have drawn in the above outline was plainly prepared in advance of the trial for the more serious offence but it was tendered upon the sentencing hearing, as was the record of interview from which the applicant's version was drawn. The transcript records that the
Crown informed the sentencing judge that it was desired to make it "abundantly clear that the Crown, in accepting the plea of indecent assault, effectively abandons for the purpose of sentence the concept of penetration." His Honour is recorded as having said: "Yes, I understand." 
This brings me to a consideration of the grounds of appeal argued by Mr
Skinner, and it is convenient to deal with grounds 1 and 2 together. They are: that his Honour erred in not stating the facts as found by him and upon which he sentenced the applicant; and that his Honour should have found as one of the facts relevant to sentence that the assault consisted only of the applicant touching the complainant in the general area of her vagina.

The sentencing remarks are relatively short and it is true to say that those remarks incorporate no detailed statement of the circumstances of the offence.
What his Honour did say was this: "Having regard to the fact that the sexual assault upon the victim...did not involve the penetration which was implicit in the charge preferred in the indictment [referring to the original charge], I can also exercise a degree of leniency for that fact as well." 
Mr Skinner has submitted that his Honour was obliged to determine the facts which were relevant for sentence and he referred to Pilley [(1991) 56 A Crim
R 502] and to the dicta of Finlay J at 203-204. The principles are, of course, well established and it is desirable that the sentencing judge narrate the facts such as are relevant to be related for the purpose of the sentencing task to be undertaken.

However, in the present case the version of events available for the judge's consideration was the version of the complainant which, as his Honour expressly recognised, had to be treated as modified for sentencing purposes by elimination of the digital penetration. When one looks at the applicant's version in the account to the police it contained no basis for finding any act of indecency at all and the applicant gave no evidence before the court.

In these circumstances there was one available basis upon which the judge could have proceeded to assess the facts and that was on the basis that the applicant placed his hand somewhere in the vicinity of the complainant's vagina but, of course, without any penetration.

Mr Skinner has submitted that the judge should have found as a fact for the purpose of his sentencing that whilst the assault was a touching in the general area of the complainant's vagina he should not have been satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the applicant put his hand inside the complainant's underwear.

It seems to me that it was entirely appropriate for the judge to find the assault was the assault outlined by the complainant save only such as to exclude the reference to digital penetration and indeed it does not appear that the applicant's counsel who appeared on the sentencing proceedings made any submission such as Mr Skinner now makes. What the sentencing judge had was the complainant's account with the deletion of the digital penetration.

As I say, the material placed before the judge was very limited indeed and in the circumstances reviewed I do not consider there is any substance in these two grounds.

In his thoughtful written submissions Mr Skinner argued that the sentence was excessive in the light of the subjective facts.

The applicant was thirty-nine years of age at the time he was sentenced. He was, as earlier mentioned, entitled to the benefit of the early plea to the lesser offence, a circumstance which, as I observed, his Honour expressly took into account. He had prior convictions and was serving the latter part of a sentence for offences under the Social Security Act. He had also been ordered to pay back over $30,000 by way of compensation at the rate of $50 per week. The total period of periodic detention that had been imposed in relation to those offences against the Commonwealth had been six months commencing on March 1996. The applicant also had previous offences for assault and for assault occasioning actual bodily harm. The more serious of those offences had resulted in the applicant being placed on a bond for a term of two years and that recognizance was current when the present offence was committed.

It was submitted that against all the above circumstances, both objective and subjective, this sentence was manifestly excessive and that this was particularly so having regard to the fact that the applicant had not at the time of sentence completed serving the term of periodic detention for the
Commonwealth offences. Of that feature and the circumstance of the case his
Honour was well aware.

This court has recognised in a number of cases that a sentence to be served by way of periodic detention, whilst strictly a custodial sentence, has a very significant element of leniency built into it: see in particular Hallicoglu [(1992) 29 NSWLR 67], Overall [(1993) 71 A Crim R 170], esp at 180 and Roberts & Ors [(1994) 73 A Crim R 306] at .

I am unpersuaded by the submission that the sentence was manifestly excessive.
Mr Skinner has referred to some sentencing statistics in his argument before the Court but I must say that I do not find them helpful in this case. Nor do
I accept that this offence was, as Mr Skinner submitted, in the "mildest category of criminality relevant to indecent assault". It was committed by stealth upon a victim who was a member of the applicant's extended family who was entitled to assume that she was quite safe in the domestic situation in which she found herself. It was committed whilst she lay helpless in her bed.

There was one further matter argued and that was expressed in these words: "His Honour erred in approaching his sentencing task as being in respect of the more serious offence of sexual intercourse without consent." 
In advancing that ground, Mr Skinner relied upon the passage from his Honour's remarks on sentence which are referred to earlier. It was submitted that those remarks indicated that the judge took into account factors which warranted conviction for the higher offence and offended the principles expressed in De
Simoni <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 383.] I do not agree. Whilst the remarks could have been more happily expressed, it seems to me that his Honour was doing no more than to remind himself that he was not dealing with the more serious category of offence and that therefore the applicant was not to be punished as though he had been convicted of the more serious offence. Indeed, had he been convicted of the more serious offence, a sentence of two years periodic detention would, in my view, have been inadequate.

In the result, notwithstanding Mr Skinner's thoughtful submissions, it seems to me that the sentencing process has not miscarried. I would therefore propose that leave to appeal be granted but the appeal be dismissed.

LEVINE J: I agree.

STEIN JA: I agree with the orders proposed by Mr Justice Studdert and his reasons. Accordingly, therefore, leave to appeal is granted but the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
