

Regina versus Bennett Matter No Cca 60012/97 [1997] NSWSC 370 (3 September )

Last Updated: 16 February 1999 
REGINA versus NEIL BENNETT 
CCA 60012/97 September 1997 
Newman J, James J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
JAMES J: This is an application by Neil James Bennett, also known as Daniel Lee Hardie and Neil James Hill, for leave to appeal against sentences imposed on him in the District Court on 6 December 1996 by his Honour Judge Downs. The applicant had pleaded guilty to all of ten charges consisting of five pair of charges, each pair comprised of one charge of breaking entering and stealing and one charge of stealing a motor vehicle committed on the same occasion as the offence of breaking entering and stealing. In sentencing the applicant Judge Downs also took into account five further offences, being two offences of maliciously damaging a motor vehicle, one offence of stealing, one offence of unlawfully using a motor vehicle and one offence of possession of housebreaking implements. On each of the ten charges his Honour imposed a sentence of penal servitude for four years, consisting of a minimum term of two years six months commencing from 24 January 1997 and an additional term of one year six months. As is obvious from this statement of the sentences imposed, his Honour found that there were special circumstances within [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). 
The applicant had been arrested on 26 October 1995 and was in custody exclusively referable to the present offences until 25 January 1996, when in the Newcastle Local Court he was sentenced on each of four charges of breaking entering and stealing, two charges of stealing, two charges of stealing a motor vehicle, one charge of possession of housebreaking implements and one charge of possession of a shortened firearm, to a term of imprisonment of eighteen months consisting of a minimum term of twelve months and an additional term of six months. Judge Downs made the sentences he imposed commence from 24 January 1997, being the date or at least the approximate date of the expiration of the minimum terms of the sentences imposed in the
Newcastle Local Court.

Each of the five pairs of offences involved breaking and entering residential premises at night, stealing items from inside the premises and also stealing a motor vehicle parked at the premises. The statement of the facts of the offences set out in his Honour's remarks on sentence was derived from a statement of facts prepared by a police officer and was not subjected to any criticism on this application. In his remarks on sentence his Honour stated the facts of the offences as follows:- "The facts which gave rise to the first and second charges may be briefly summarised as follows. At approximately 2.30am on Wednesday 23 August 1995 the prisoner went to premises situated at 54 Jacaranda Avenue, Figtree Heights.
The roller shutter door of the garage of these premises was open and the prisoner entered. There he found a 1985 Nissan Gazelle parked and unlocked with the keys in the ignition. He opened a door leading upstairs to the premises and so entered the home. He stole a wallet containing $500 cash and he returned to the garage. He then stole the Nissan and at the time this offence was committed the occupants of the premises were asleep.

When arrested he was interviewed by way of an ERISP interview and he admitted to entering the garage and stealing the vehicle and wallet, although he denied going upstairs into the premises. The motor vehicle was valued at $10,000.

The facts which gave rise to the third and fourth charges may be briefly summarised as follows. Between 12 midnight and 6am on Wednesday 4 October 1995 the prisoner went to premises at 4 Parish Avenue, Mount Pleasant. He entered the rear of the premises and broke into the house by means of a rear window.
Inside the house he stole $240 in cash, some clothing, a wallet, a handbag and car keys. Apparently these articles were in the kitchen. At the time the offence was committed the occupants of the premises were asleep.

The prisoner then left the premises and using the keys that he'd stolen he entered a white Commodore sedan which was parked outside. He stole the vehicle. A short time later the vehicle was driven into steel gates at Mount
Keira Boy Scouts Camp. He was seen to decamp from the area. When he was interviewed at the time of his arrest he stated that he remembered driving the car but could not remember much else of the incident as he said he was, and I quote, `stoned'. The motor vehicle was valued at $9000.

The facts which give rise to the fifth and sixth charges may be summarised as follows. At approximately 6.15am on Thursday, 12 October 1995 the prisoner forced open the front window of premises situated at 65 Greenslopes Avenue,
Mount Ousley. He entered the premises by this window and stole a ladies handbag, a Samsung brand colour television set and a set of keys to a motor vehicle. He then went to the motor vehicle and drove it out of the driveway.
When he returned to the premises he was seen by Mr and Mrs Dalla Valle. When seen he left the area".
 * * * "Briefly stated, the facts relating to the seventh and eight charges together with the item now numbered 1 on the Form 2 are as follows. At approximately am on Wednesday 18 October 1995 the prisoner went to premises situated at 201
Gladstone Avenue, Mount St Thomas. The prisoner broke into these premises by forcing the front window with a screwdriver and then he opened a sliding door.
The prisoner entered the premises and stole a Samsung video recorder, 15 compact discs, a set of car keys, a handbag, a mobile telephone, a wallet and $70 in cash. At the time the occupant of the premises, Alison Berry, was asleep.

The prisoner then went to a Hyundai sedan which was parked at the front of the premises and stole it using the keys that he had taken from inside the house.
Some time later the prisoner removed the radio from the console of the vehicle. The radio and damage to the console was valued at $500. At the time of his arrest the prisoner made full admissions in relation to all the matters that the police dealt with, and that completes a short summary of the facts concerning charges 7 and 8 and item 1 on the Form 2.

I pass now to the facts concerning charges 9 and 10 and the items numbered 2, and 4 on the Form 2. At approximately 3.45am on Thursday, 26 October 1995 the prisoner went to premises situated at 1 Robwald Avenue, Coniston. He went to the rear yard of the premises and gained entry to a Falcon utility that was unlocked. He found the keys were still in the ignition.

He then went to a Toyota vehicle which was parked in front of the other vehicle which was in the carport, he smashed a rear window and gained entry.
He released the handbrake and attempted to push the vehicle out of the carport. The prisoner then went to the rear door of the premises and using a key he had found in the utility he opened the door and entered the house. At the time the occupants were sleeping.

He stole a set of keys of the Toyota and a ladies handbag. He returned to the
Toyota and once again entered it. He went to the Ford utility and started it.
He drove it into the rear of the Toyota forcing it forward and sideways into the side of the premises. At this stage he drove the Ford from the premises.

He was observed by police a short time later in Woonona and was arrested after a short chase on foot. At the time of his arrest he was found to be in possession of four assorted screwdrivers and a torch. These are the items which refer to the matter number 5 in the Form 2.

When spoken to by the police the prisoner admitted that the screwdrivers and the torch were used to break into premises. As I have already indicated, he made full admissions. The damage to the Toyota was valued at $2000 and the damage to the Ford utility was estimated to be $100. That completes the summary of all the facts".

In his remarks on sentence the sentencing judge, after stating the objective facts of the offences, noted that the applicant had been born on 27 October
He was accordingly eighteen years old, approaching his nineteenth birthday, when the offences were committed and was twenty years old at the time he was sentenced. The applicant had a previous criminal history in both
Queensland and New South Wales. Judge Downs found that "the use of drugs lies at the root of all the prisoner's problems because he stole in order to finance his use of drugs".

While the applicant was in custody awaiting sentence he was interviewed by Ms
Anna Robilliard, psychologist, and her report of 27 November 1996 was before his Honour. His Honour set out much of the substance of this report in his remarks on sentence and because of the importance to this application of the report and how his Honour dealt with the report I propose to set out verbatim what his Honour said in his remarks on sentence about Ms Robilliard's report.
His Honour said:- "On 6 November of this year Anna Robilliard, a psychologist, interviewed the prisoner at Parklea Prison and she not only obtained information from the prisoner, but she also had the benefit of information from the prisoner's mother who is present in court today, and I am told that upon his release from prison she would be prepared to take him into her home.

The psychologist's report refers to many tragic things that have happened to the prisoner during his relatively short life. He was born in Wollongong 20 years ago and he has an older brother. His parents separated when he was three and 18 months later his mother re-married and the family moved to Queensland where her second husband worked in the mining industry.

Apparently the prisoner's stepfather was extremely physically violent towards the prisoner and it was said that he was in the habit of hitting and kicking the prisoner for failing to do well enough at school. The prisoner also alleged that he was sexually abused by his stepfather from mid childhood until the age of 13. The prisoner often ran away from home but was always returned by police. His mother stated to Mrs Robilliard that she admitted she wanted to protect the prisoner from the physical abuse of his stepfather but she was afraid to do so because it caused so much trouble.

When the prisoner was aged 11 a school counsellor contacted the family expressing real concern because the prisoner appeared to him to be depressed and suicidal. The report sets forth many details, but it would seem that when the prisoner was aged approximately 13 he, in the early hours of the morning, set alight to the house in which his mother and his brother, Rodney were sleeping. Apparently he decamped and when he was caught the following day he was found to be in a very disturbed state and had, it is said, self-mutilated his genitals. The prisoner told Mrs Robilliard that he had hoped people would assume that he had been killed in the fire. So far as I am aware no one was injured in the fire.

At or about this time the prisoner was required to give evidence in a court case. What happened was the prisoner informed the police about the prolonged sexual abuse he said he had suffered at the hands of his stepfather. The stepfather was charged and he was found not guilty of the charges that were laid. It was said that this caused the prisoner to be devastated and remain angry and bitter. He refused to return to the home of his mother and stepfather and then he was taken into foster care for a time. Apparently this was unsuccessful and then his grandmother cared for him for a time.

The evidence given in the trial of the stepfather destroyed the relationship between the prisoner and his grandmother. At this time he was aged 14 and a half years. He went to live in Melbourne with his natural father, however that only lasted for a couple of weeks and he was returned to a maternal uncle at
Wollongong. Following this he returned to live with his mother in Caloundra and in 1991 they moved to Brisbane to be near the prisoner's brother, Rodney.

In 1994 the prisoner discovered that his father had separated from his second wife and he thought it might be a good opportunity to go and live with his father. He left to try and find him and in the meantime his mother received a telephone call to say that the prisoner's father had committed suicide on
Father's Day, September 1994 by burning himself to death in his car.

This distressed the prisoner greatly, and within 24 hours he had been arrested and imprisoned on drug related matters. He was sent to Mount Penang where he served eight months and he was released in July 1995. Upon his release from
Mount Penang he went to live with his mother who tried to support him but she could not cope with his drug dependence.

So far as his physical health was concerned, the prisoner has alleged that when in Goulburn gaol he was raped by a group of inmates. The gaol records that were subpoenaed and produced contain details of these allegations.

The prisoner told Mrs Robilliard that he sleeps poorly and is often troubled by disturbing dreams about being stabbed or suffocated. His appetite is poor and he has suffered significant weight loss. The symptoms described by the prisoner strongly suggested to Mrs Robilliard that he suffered from clinical depression. Indeed, as to his mental health she found that all his signs were that of clinical depression. He told Mrs Robilliard that he feels very suicidal but he added that his mother would not allow it. Upon speaking to his mother, Mrs Bennett verified that the prisoner often begs and pleads with her to agree to let him commit suicide.

The prisoner has been seen in prison by a psychologist on several occasions.
He is on medication, the intention of which is to help him sleep and treat his depression. He is aware that he suffers from Hepatitis C positive, this was diagnosed in Goulburn Gaol. He assumes it is the legacy of the pack rape he experienced there.

As to his use of drugs, he does not like alcohol. He smoked marijuana from about the age of 13 and shortly thereafter began to use cocaine and amphetamines. He stopped smoking marijuana for a brief period when aged 14. He described many other drugs that he had used including LSD, Ecstasy, hashish and ox blood(?). He said he was using whatever he could obtain prior to his imprisonment at Mount Penang. Upon his release from there he tried to stay off drugs but he did not succeed for very long. He was using marijuana and heroin when he was arrested.

The psychologist then performed some tests and she came to the conclusion that the prisoner is a young man who is severely depressed and suicidal. I quote: `The impact of his cumulative life experiences has damaged Neil and he will need intensive and supportive psychotherapy to effect any measure of repair.
He is emotionally unstable and fragile and his coping mechanisms are exhausted'.

She considers that he should be in a supervised psychotherapeutic setting. `He needs intensive support and counselling'. She considered that the management partly to date had not been productive, and she stated that the Special Care
Unit at Long Bay may be an appropriate setting for him in the short term because of his condition. She went on to add that: `Upon release from prison he would be advised to attend long term residential drug rehabilitation where he could also receive psychotherapy to help him'.

That shortly summarises the contents of her report".

The sentencing judge also had before him two poems written by the applicant and a copy of a letter written by him to his mother. His Honour considered that the poems and the letter demonstrated the applicant's disturbed state of mind and tended to confirm the history which had been given to Ms Robilliard.

On the hearing of this application the Court provisionally received two affidavits by a solicitor employed by The Legal Aid Commission. To one of these affidavits were annexed documents relating to the prosecution of the applicant's stepfather for various offences of a sexual nature under the
Queensland Criminal Code allegedly committed against the applicant. The documents included copies of the indictment, the back sheet to the indictment which shows that the jury returned verdicts of not guilty on all charges and the applicant's witness statement in the proceedings. I have already set out his Honour's summary of the part of Ms Robilliard's report dealing with these proceedings. The documents annexed to the solicitor's other affidavit were copies of a fairly brief preliminary report by a psychiatrist dated 21
November 1995, a report by a psychologist who interviewed and tested the applicant on 8 July 1997 (that is just before the hearing of this application) and various Corrective Services Commission notes and reports on the applicant.
As regards the Corrective Services Commission records, I infer that many at least of these documents were among the documents described by the sentencing judge as "gaol records that were subpoenaed and produced" at the hearing of the proceedings on sentence. During the hearing of the application the Court ruled that it would actually admit the two affidavits by the solicitor into evidence only if the Court decided that it should re-sentence the applicant.

In his written submissions counsel for the applicant submitted that the sentencing judge had made an error which could be described as "a failure to administer individual justice". Counsel referred to what Mahoney ACJ said in
R versus Lattouf (unreported Court of Criminal Appeal 12 December 1996) at p 7, namely:- "... It is important to recognise the nature of the interests involved in the sentencing process. There is a public interest in the adoption and articulation of sentencing principles which will deter the commission of serious crime and punish those who commit it.... But there are other interests to which the sentencing process must have regard; there are other objectives which the sentencing process must seek to achieve. Paramount amongst these is the achievement of justice in the individual case. To see the sentencing process as involving no more than stern punishment for each offender is not merely simplistic; it damages the public interest. A sentencing process which is seen by the public merely as draconian and not just will lose the support of those whom it is designed to protect. If a sentencing process does not achieve justice, it should be put aside. As I have elsewhere said, if justice is not individual, it is nothing....".

It was submitted that the sentencing judge had not recognised, or had not sufficiently recognised, that the applicant's experiences in childhood were the cause of his criminal behaviour and that his use of drugs, which the sentencing judge described as "the root of all the prisoner's problems" itself stemmed from his experiences in childhood. It was conceded that a sentence of penal servitude was required; however, it was submitted that a shorter term of imprisonment should have been imposed, with a short minimum term and a lengthy additional term.

The applicant, being eighteen years old when he committed the offences, was not a "child" within the meaning of that expression in the Children (Criminal
Procedure) Act and hence that Act did not apply to him. His youth remained an important consideration in sentencing him. Nevertheless in sentencing the applicant, the sentencing judge was required to keep in mind that the ten offences of breaking and entering five homes and stealing from those homes and of stealing five motor vehicles parked at the homes were offences of considerable gravity.

I do not consider that there was any failure by the sentencing judge "to administer individual justice". As I have shown, his Honour in his remarks on sentence painstakingly summarised the parts of Ms Robilliard's report which recounted the particular subjective circumstances of the applicant and I am satisfied that his Honour took those circumstances into account in sentencing the applicant and took them into account, not merely as "background history", but as helping to explain the applicant's criminal behaviour. His Honour explicitly recognised that this was "a tragic case".

In my opinion, counsel for the applicant sought to place too much weight on the extract from Mahoney ACJ's judgment in Lattouf. Lattouf pleaded guilty to a single charge of armed robbery and was sentenced to periodic detention for three years. The proceedings before the Court of Criminal Appeal were a
Crown appeal against sentence and in dismissing the Crown appeal all members of the Bench were influenced by the special principles of restraint which govern this Court in determining Crown appeals against sentence. The subjective circumstances of Lattouf were quite different from those of the applicant. As noted by Mahoney ACJ Lattouf was "young, his family circumstances were such as to provide hope for his future in the community.
And there were those who were prepared to trust him with employment".
Furthermore, what Mahoney ACJ said in Lattouf has to be accommodated to the principle often stated by this Court, for example in R versus Dodd [(1991) A Crim R 349] at 354, that it is always important in seeking to determine a sentence appropriate to a particular crime to have regard to the gravity of the offence viewed objectively for without this assessment the other factors requiring consideration in order to arrive at a proper sentence to be imposed cannot properly be given their place.

As already indicated, Ms Robilliard was of the opinion that the Special Care
Unit at Long Bay might be an appropriate "setting" for the applicant. In concluding his remarks on sentence Judge Downs said:- "Pursuant to the psychologist's suggestion, I strongly recommend that you serve your minimum term at the Special Care Unit at Long Bay Gaol" 
However, the applicant has not in fact served any of his sentence in the
Special Care Unit at Long Bay Gaol. As his Honour clearly recognised by the language he used, an expression of opinion by his Honour as to where the applicant should serve the minimum term of the sentence his Honour was imposing could be no more than a recommendation. I have given consideration to whether his Honour, in imposing the minimum term he did, did so on the basis that the minimum term would be served in the Special Care Unit at Long Bay, so that, this basis not having come to pass, his Honour's sentencing discretion should be regarded as having miscarried. I have, however, come to the conclusion that his Honour was conscious he could do no more than make a recommendation which might or might not be carried out and that the serving by the applicant of the minimum term of his sentence in the Special Care Unit could not be treated as being an essential basis of the sentence pronounced by his Honour.

It was submitted on behalf of the applicant that his Honour, having found that there were special circumstances, should have imposed a longer additional term and a shorter minimum term than he did. However, in my opinion it is not possible to say that his Honour, having determined the total length of the sentence he would impose, was required by the circumstances of the case to apportion it otherwise than he did.

In my opinion leave should be granted to the applicant to appeal against sentence but the appeal against sentence should be dismissed. I would recommend that the applicant serve the minimum term of his sentence in some part of the prison system where he could receive treatment for the serious problems revealed in Ms Robilliard's report 
NEWMAN J: I have had the advantage of reading in draft form the judgment of James J and I agree with both the reasons he gives and the orders he proposes. Further, I endorse the recommendations made by James J as to the need for the applicant to receive appropriate treatment within the prison system. * * * 
