

Ultra Refurbishing and Construction Pty Limited versus John Goubran and
Associates Pty Limited [1997] NSWSC 161 (24 April 1997) `ULTRA REFURBISHING & CONSTRUCTION PTY LIMITED versus JOHN GOUBRAN & ASSOCIATES
PTY LIMITED` `1634/97` ``THURSDAY 24 APRIL 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by a builder for an interlocutory injunction to prevent a proprietor from calling up a security guarantee from the builder's bank. (In actual fact there are three plaintiffs and two defendants, but this complication is of no present concern).

I am quite sure that if either the plaintiffs' case or the defendants' case was put in front of a journalist conducting a current affairs program and only that case was put forward, it would be a case which would attract considerable sympathy. Unfortunately, I must not just consider the case of the plaintiffs in isolation nor the well-being of the plaintiffs in isolation. I must not just consider the case of the defendants in isolation nor the well-being of the defendants in isolation. I have to adjudicate between the two cases.

I have no doubt at all that, no matter which way this decision goes, hardship will be caused to one side or the other. Part of the reason for this is that building projects often balloon out. Parties involved in building projects are stretched to the ultimate of their resources so that questions such as those in the present case, which to a detached observer may seem relatively trivial, are, in fact, of vital financial importance. I appreciate all of that.
However, when the parties cannot come to some commercial arrangement, I have to solve the problem that is raised according to law.

It is rare these days that this court hears a contested application for interlocutory injunction. Most cases can be dealt with by giving an early hearing or suggesting some interim "win-win" solution. The present is the exceptional case. The parties are locked into what appears to be a complex building case and it will take, I would think from my experience with these sort of cases, and from what I have been told from the bar table, some three or four months for the parties to put all the evidence on in their final dispute and to arrange for an arbitrator to adjudicate upon it. Accordingly, any interlocutory relief will probably last for four months or thereabouts.

Mr Brender for the plaintiff builder says that he would be content with a shorter injunction with his clients coming back to the court to extend it, if necessary, because he feels that if given a few more weeks, his clients' evidence would be in a stronger position. I think there are three answers to this. First, there is a great tendency for courts to just renew interim injunctions without a further full hearing and this would work against the defendants. Secondly, the initial application was made to the court about five weeks ago. The plaintiffs put their case on hold when the defendants gave an undertaking not to enforce the relevant security without giving seven days' notice. Seven days was inadequate to provide the court with all the evidence because a lot of the documents are not in the hands of the former controller of the first plaintiff, Mr Turner. The problem there was that work was stopped on the case during the lull when it should not have been stopped. I realise that the plaintiffs are very short of funds but if they take the gamble of not continuing to prepare their case, then any detriment is at their own feet.
Thirdly, even if the plaintiffs' evidence was expanded, the court would still be faced with the same question as today, namely, is there an arguable case? 
When a court of equity is considering whether or not to grant an interlocutory injunction, pending the hearing of the dispute, it has been traditional to say that three factors are involved, namely, (A) has the plaintiff shown a prima facie case; (B) does the balance of convenience favour the grant rather than the refusal of an injunction; and (C) are damages an adequate remedy? In more modern days, the court has reached the position that verbal formulae should not get in the way of the administration of justice. In some cases, the dividing lines between the three aspects of the case can very often be blurred and merge one into the other. Thus in the end result the real question is: is it more just to preserve the status quo pending the hearing than not to do so? 
Strictly speaking, the court should ask whether the injunction is sought in aid of a legal right or an equitable right. If the injunction is asked in aid of a legal right, the early authorities are of very little assistance, because up until about 1851 the Chancery Court had no jurisdiction to decide questions of law, so that the option was either to allow the case to proceed at law, without an injunction, or to grant an injunction in the meantime without assessment of the strength of the case, the only exception being that if there were a short point of fact or a point of law, which the Chancery Court could conveniently dispose of, it might do so. See Bramwell versus Halcomb <case>; [(1836) 3 My & Cr 737]
Kerr on Injunctions, 7th ed (Sweet & Maxwell, London 1927) gives little guidance on this question, and it would seem that the exact principles on which interlocutory injunctions were to be granted have not developed much since the pre-1851 days.

Is there are prima facie case? 
The modern law is contained in the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Shercliff versus Engadine Acceptance Corp Pty Ltd [[1978] 1 NSWLR 729], a case in which Mahoney JA, with whom Glass and Samuels JJA agreed, discussed the way in which a court assesses whether the plaintiff has made out a prima facie case.
The matter was further considered in detail and depth by McLelland J in
Appleton Papers Inc versus Tomasetti Paper Pty Ltd [[1983] 3 NSWLR 208], 214 and following; by Dawson J in A versus Hayden (No.1) [(1984) 59 ALJR 1] at 4-5; and in the context of a Mareva injunction by myself in Ausbro Forex Pty Ltd v
Mare [(1986) 4 NSWLR 419.] 
The four decisions I have just mentioned seem to me to be authority for the following propositions as to how the court assesses a "prima facie case", sometimes referred to as an "arguable case":
The court does not involve itself in the exercise of a preliminary trial.
A prima facie case does not mean one where it is, at least, 50.1 per cent probable that the plaintiff will succeed.
The court takes into account not only the evidence presented by the plaintiff, but also the evidence presented by the defendant.
The degree of likelihood of success to be demonstrated is that which the court thinks sufficient in the particular case and the particular circumstances.
The vulnerability of the plaintiff's case is a factor which the court can take into account.

In the instant case, there are two categories of plaintiff. The first plaintiff is a company which was formerly controlled by Mr David Turner, which went into administration under the Corporations Law in February 1997 and which was wound up (the winding-up being a voluntary winding-up under <case> of the
Corporations Law) on 18 March 1997. The second set of plaintiffs is Mr Turner and his wife. The statement of claim makes various allegations of a contract, variation of a contract, conduct which is actionable under the Trade Practices
Act and the Fair Trading Act, conduct which might constitute an estoppel, and matters which might lead to the restitutionary claim of quantum meruit.

The background facts are that the first plaintiff, as the builder, and what I will loosely call the defendant, entered into a contract for the plaintiff to build twenty-nine industrial units at number 43 College Street, Gladesville.
The contract embodied the terms of a building works contract, JCC-D 2nd ed of
August 1994. However, the plaintiff says there were variations to that contract, some of which were oral, and certain estoppels operate which mean that a completely different regime was adopted for that contract.

Pursuant to the contract, a security bond was provided. This was provided by the Colonial State Bank at the request of both the company and Mr and Mrs
Turner. As is not uncommon in such a situation, the bank obtained a charge over the company's assets to secure it, should it be called upon to pay the bond, and it also obtained a mortgage over Mr and Mrs Turner's home, again as security should it be called upon to pay the bond.

The contract provided under cl 12 that should the builder have an administrator appointed, then the proprietor may determine the builder's contract. There is no doubt that the administrator was appointed. There is no doubt that the defendant purported to act under this clause. The security bond, were it not for cl 12, was, in accordance with cl 10.25: "Available to the Proprietor whenever the Proprietor shall be entitled to the payment of moneys by the Builder under or in consequence of this Agreement ..." 
However, under cl 12.05.02, in addition, if the builder's contract had been terminated under cl 12, the proprietor had rights to pay moneys necessary to complete the project, as well as pay nominated subcontractors and: "Payments made under this clause 12.05 may be deducted from or paid out of the proceeds of any security provided by the Builder under this Agreement ..." 
In March, the first defendant gave notice that it intended to claim on the bond. That caused the plaintiffs to come to this court and obtain from the
Duty Judge an injunction to prevent that happening. This injunction was obtained ex parte and lasted for a few days. On the return day, an agreement was reached between the parties that the proprietor would not call on the deposit without giving the plaintiffs' solicitors seven days' notice. That notice was given last week, and it was clear today that the defendants would not agree to extend the concession that had been made earlier.

In the circumstances, are the plaintiffs entitled to an interlocutory injunction? 
Mr Brender, for the plaintiffs, says that cases such as Pearson Bridge 
Pty Ltd versus State Rail Authority (1982) 1 Australian Construction Law Reports and Barclay Mowlem Construction Ltd versus Simon Engineering (Australia) Pty
Ltd [(1991) 23 NSWLR 451] indicate that, in a case such as the present, one construes cl 10.25 as a negative stipulation by the proprietor, that the proprietor will only call upon the bond where it is clear that it is entitled to receive payment of monies by the builder. I am not completely sure that cl .25 is in the same plight as the clause in the Pearson Bridge case and the Barclay Mowlem case because the drafter of cl 10.25 has turned the clause round from the previous standard using a "whenever" clause instead of an "if" clause, and it seems to me that it is a little harder to argue that cl .25 is a negative stipulation.

However, one need not stay too long on that because cl 12.05 would cover the situation and that clause is not trammelled with any negative promise not to enforce except under certain circumstances, and it would seem that, under the principles considered in cases such as Australasian Conference Association
Ltd versus Mainline Constructions Pty Ltd <case>; [(1978) 141 CLR 335], the proprietor is entitled to have recourse to the bond. In a situation where the proprietor is entitled to have recourse to the bond, one gets into the line of cases of which Woodhall Ltd versus Pipeline Authority <case>; [(1979) 141 CLR 443] is the prime example, that as the parties had intended that the proprietor should have ready access either to cash moneys or to the equivalent of cash moneys the courts should adopt a "hands off" policy and not restrain the commercial effect of what the parties have agreed to. See also my consideration of the matter in Hortico (Australia) Pty Ltd versus Energy Equipment Co (Australia) Pty
Ltd [(1985) 1 NSWLR 545.] 
Accordingly, so far as the contract case is concerned, it is difficult to see on the guidelines I have set out above that a prima facie case has been made out.

However, as Mr Brender points out, the contract case is not the only one he mounts. There is the trade practices case and the estoppel case.

I have read the evidence of four witnesses, given on behalf of the plaintiffs and seven witnesses, given on behalf of the defendants. I have also read the exhibits or, at least, the pertinent parts of the exhibits being the contractual documents, the minutes of site meetings, the progress claims, the invoices and the minutes of construction meetings. The plaintiffs' case on trade practices and estoppel has very great difficulties in that the exhibits not only do not confirm it but, indeed, weaken it. Moreover, of the persons whom the plaintiffs say may support their case, some of them have actually sworn affidavits which have been read by the defendants, which weaken the case.

I do not conduct a preliminary trial. I do not evaluate the evidence but I do take into account that the plaintiffs' case is vulnerable because of the factors I have just referred to. See my decision in the Ausbro case .

It cannot be the case that merely because a plaintiff swears that a certain state of affairs exists the court automatically says that there is a prima facie case. If that were the situation, one would find it difficult to reconcile this with what Mahoney JA said in Shercliff's case.

Mr David Williams, who appeared for the defendants, put the example that a plaintiff might, in a case for interlocutory injunction, depose to the fact that a certain conversation took place, but the defendant might tender a tape recording of the conversation, which showed that the conversation was completely different. Would the court in that situation, he asked rhetorically, merely meekly say that there was a prima facie case because the plaintiff, if believed at the trial, would succeed? I think the situation really is that the judge hearing the interlocutory injunction would consider that the plaintiff's case was so wounded by the tape that he or she would assess the plaintiff's case as being unlikely to succeed or, to use the jargon, one which would not probably succeed at the trial. The judge would do this without evaluating the evidence or by conducting a preliminary hearing, but by using common sense.

I think, in the instant case, that the plaintiffs' case has very much been affected by the defendants' evidence, and it is a borderline situation as to whether or not there is a prima facie case.

As I said earlier, one should not examine all three considerations separately because they really do merge. Where there is a strong prima facie case, the question of balance of convenience may not assume so much importance. Where there is a weak prima facie case, it assumes greater importance; see Emap
Elan Ltd versus Pacific Publications Pty Ltd [(1997) 37 IPR 1.] 
The balance of convenience.

When dealing with the balance of convenience, what the court must, at least notionally, do is to make two columns on a piece of paper, one listing the detriment to the plaintiff if the injunction is not granted and the second listing the detriment to the defendant if the injunction is granted. The court must weigh the respective detriments.

There is no doubt, in the present case, that there are detriments each way. So far as the plaintiffs are concerned, there is obvious detriment. The corporate plaintiff, according to the evidence, is in a position to pay all its unsecured creditors fully, but if the bank has recourse to its charge to secure the payout under the bond, then the unsecured creditors may not be paid or not be fully paid. So far as Mr and Mrs Turner are concerned, they very much fear they will lose their house, which is part of the bank's security.
They have no other assets of note and at the moment Mr Turner, because of the collapse of the first plaintiff, is unemployed and Mrs Turner is only earning a moderate wage.

Again, so far as the plaintiffs are concerned, it is significant that if an injunction is granted it will be subject to an undertaking as to damages so that theoretically any real prejudice that flows to any party by the injunction will be atoned for in money. On the other hand, if there is no injunction, then if Mr and Mrs Turner lose their house, their loss will probably not be one which could be laid at the feet of any of the defendants.
This is because there is no cause of action, in either contract or tort, to allow that loss to be claimed. There might be some restitutionary action, but that is a rather speculative matter. Accordingly, it is better, it is said, to grant the injunction. On the other hand, the defendants say that the only asset that Mr and Mrs Turner have is their house. It is not known what the full value of that house is, nor the value of that house on a forced sale. It is not known how much the company would bear of the loss and how much the
Turners personally. The damages that could be recoverable under an undertaking as to damages might be wide-ranging and be very considerable, and there must, at least, be uncertainty as to whether the plaintiffs can meet the undertaking.

On the defendants' side, they say that they need funds to complete the project. It may be that they can borrow further but if they do, query what the price of the money will be, and the financier will almost certainly require further security, probably a third party security. Why should the defendants, who have contractually stipulated for the bond moneys to become available, have to resort to putting further assets at risk? 
Further, it is said that the risk to Mr and Mrs Turner's house is not as great as the plaintiffs would have me believe for three reasons. First, the company has some assets and it may very well be that the bank would proceed against the company's assets ahead of the assets of Mr and Mrs Turner. Secondly, if the Turners are proceeded against, they would have rights of subrogation against the company and may indeed be able to have a successful holding action against the company to make it indemnify them; and, thirdly, in any event, the bank, to proceed against the home, would first have to pay and then give a notice under <case>(b) of the [Real Property
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/rpa178/) and then proceed in ejectment through the court. It would be unlikely that that process would be finalised within the four months that it should take the adjudication of the current dispute to be dealt with by an arbitrator.

The final matter to take into account is that the parties have agreed that in these circumstances, that is the circumstances under cl 12.05, the security moneys should be made available to the proprietor and parties should, prima facie, be kept to their bargain. Furthermore, the commercial community in the construction industry relies on guarantees and bonds as the equivalent to cash and that, if there is too ready an interference with a resort to the bond, the only consequence will be that builders generally will be asked to put up cash and this will thwart, to a great extent, Australian entrepreneurship.

It is not easy to assess these matters.

Are damages an adequate remedy? 
The third factor is whether damages are an adequate remedy. Really this is a curtailment of the original principle that the court did not interfere by way of interlocutory injunction unless the plaintiff's case was one which sounded in conscience, and it would suffer irreparable damage. See Kerr on
Injunctions at p 25.

In the instant case, although there is in the statement of claim a claim for a declaration as to estoppel and for remedies under the Trade Practices Act, the prime thrust of the plaintiffs' case is a case for damages or for a money remedy. Indeed, in the ultimate, this case is more about money than anything else. On the evidence before the court at present, the defendants would have sufficient funds to pay to the plaintiffs any moneys that are found in the long run to be owing. The problem is, of course, that the plaintiffs' economic position is so weak that they may not last long enough financially to receive the fruits in due course.

The Corporations Law.

I will deal with the assessment of those factors in a moment but I should, before doing that, deal with one further argument that was put up by Mr
Brender. He relied on <case> and <case> of the Corporations Law. Section 471B provides that whilst the company is being wound up in insolvency, a person cannot proceed with enforcement process in relation to any property of the company. "Enforcement process" is defined in <case> of the Law as "execution against the property or any other enforcement process in relation to that property that involves a court or a Sheriff". The company has not been wound up in insolvency because of s 446B, so <case> is not applicable but it is useful to know because of the contrasting wording in <case>.

Section 500(1) provides: "Any attachment, sequestration, distress or execution put in force against the property of the company after the passing of the resolution for voluntary winding up is void." 
This seems to be narrower than even "enforcement procedure". However, what is happening in the instant case is that the Colonial State Bank has given its bond to pay money to the defendants. That bond was granted at the request of the corporate and individual plaintiffs. No property of the corporate plaintiff is involved, even though the consequence is that a charge will be activated. Furthermore, there is no attachment within the meaning of <case>, which to my mind involves attachment under an order of the court. Accordingly, s 500 does not assist in the present case.

Conclusion.

In my view, there is a weak prima facie case in the instant matter. There are factors each way on the balance of convenience but, it seems to me, that the balance of convenience favours refusal of the injunction, which would leave the parties to their contractual rights and would enable the building to be completed with moneys provided by the builder through the bank. I appreciate this causes hardship to the plaintiffs but, as I said at the very beginning of this judgment, the present is a situation where hardship must be caused to somebody merely because there is just too little money to go around.

The best course the plaintiffs can now take is to get the case ready, either in this court or before some other tribunal, to have the underlying dispute dealt with as soon as possible.

Accordingly, the application for interlocutory injunction is refused.

The plaintiffs must pay the defendants' costs of the application. The exhibits may be returned.
 * * * 
