

Falzon versus Konwicki Matter No 1997/95 [1997] NSWSC 571 (21 November 1997) ` 
Falzon versus Konwicki` ` 1997/95` `21 November 1997` `Young J` `The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division` /95 FALZON versus KONWICKI 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: These proceedings concern a single-venture property development partnership between the plaintiff and the defendant with respect to the construction and sale of 8 villa units at Wentworthville. 
The proceedings have been before the court on a number of occasions since they commenced in 1995. On 22 September 1995 by consent the court made an order declaring there was a partnership, that the partnership had been dissolved and declaring what the assets of the partnership were. Essentially this latter was the monies held by Mr Azzopardi, solicitor, in his trust account.

The builder of the villa units was Dynpan Pty Ltd ("Dynpan"). It had a claim against the partners. The plaintiff considered that the claim was a valid one.
The defendant did not. The matter was litigated in the Commercial Division of this court and on the second day of the liability hearing, liability was conceded. In due course, the Commercial Division found an amount of money owing to Dynpan and ordered Mr Konwicki to pay the costs of the commercial proceedings. Dynpan was paid by the monies in Mr Azzopardi's trust account.
The plaintiff complains that because of Mr Konwicki's recalcitrance, the partnership suffered a loss of interest of approximately $30,000, that being the difference between the interest that was paid on the judgment in the
Commercial Division, less what was received from the investment of the monies in the meantime.

Today the issues are: what were the terms of the partnership? Although the plaintiff attempted to notify the defendant of the fact that the matter was in the list today, his attempts have been thwarted. The only credible evidence is that the defendant has sold up his property, has left the State and his name cannot be found on the electoral roll in any part of the State. The court should, therefore, dispense with further service.

Originally the plaintiff sought summary judgment. I did not consider that was appropriate, but considered that the matter really should now go to final hearing.

On the final hearing, the only evidence of the terms of the partnership was that the proceeds of the sale of the villa units were to be applied to pay off the mortgage and pay off the debts with the balance to be split fifty/fifty.

As there has already been a determination of what are the assets of the partnership, and as the debts are being paid, there appears to be no need to have any further accounting. There is about $91,366 left in Mr Azzopardi's trust account on behalf of the partnership. The defendant's nett indebtedness to the partnership is some $64,364. It would seem clear that the plaintiff is entitled to the balance in the trust account and is also entitled to half the amount owed by the defendant, that is $32,182.15.

Accordingly, there should be judgment in accordance with orders 2 to 9 and 11 of the short minutes. I think that the plaintiff's interest schedule should be marked MI03 and remain with the papers.
 * * * 
