

Regina versus Bilil Chaouk [1997] NSWSC 173 (5 May 1997) 
REGINA v. Bilil CHAOUK /96 
Monday 5 May 1997 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
SMART J, BRUCE J 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Bilil Chaouk seeks leave to appeal out of time against the severity of a sentence comprising a minimum term of three years and an additional term of two years for the offence of robbery in company. There is no objection to an extension of time and that is granted.

Mr Chaouk's appeal was precipitated by the judgment of this court in the case of the co-offender Zaoud and ascertaining from it that the judge had been misinformed and had misstated the penalty for the offence as twenty-five years instead of twenty years. The Crown conceded that this error had been made.

The second challenge to the sentence was based on lack of parity with the sentence imposed on the co-offender Hamed. The sentence was imposed after the judge had conducted a sentence indication hearing and the applicant accepted that indication. It will be an unusual case where a severity appeal succeeds after an accepted sentence indication. It was submitted that this was such a case because there was a common misapprehension as to the maximum penalty, as indeed there was.

The sentence indication proceeded on the basis that the applicant pleaded not guilty to a charge of kidnapping and guilty to a charge of robbery in company.
After the applicant accepted the sentence indication, he was indicted and pleaded as foreshadowed. The Crown accepted the plea of guilty to the charge of robbery in company in full discharge of the indictment.

At an early stage of his reasons for sentence, the judge referred to the applicant pleading guilty to "armed robbery in company" and to "armed robbery with wounding in company" carries a maximum penalty of twenty-five years' penal servitude. The judge added "the fact that the penalty has increased, demonstrates the Legislature's concern with the rising tide of violence and the prevalence of this sort of offence." The judge's remarks suggest that he was probably proceeding on the basis of an offence more serious than that charged.

The judge summarised the facts thus: "The facts in the matter are serious. Messrs David and John Codling, the managers of the Rogues Night Club in Oxford Street, Darlinghurst, returned to their club at approximately 9.30 am on the morning of Saturday 24 December
At the time there was some refurbishment taking place in the premises and when they encountered some disarray upon their arrival they put this down to the refurbishment work. So unconcerned were they that they then adjourned to nearby premises, had some coffee and then returned.

It is clear that the present offender and his companions were already on the premises at the time of the first visit of the Codlings. However, they had not been observed. When the Codlings returned to the premises they were confronted by these three men. One of these men, a man name Hamed, was in possession of a knife which he used to terrorise and threaten the two brothers. David Codling endeavoured to escape but was taken hold of by another of the offenders, not this prisoner. He received some slight injury as a result of that. The man Hamed, who appeared to be the principal offender and the leader of this group, ordered John Codling to lie on the floor whilst 
David Codling was questioned about the upstairs safe in the premises. John
Codling was bound with an electric cord and a tie by the person Hamed whilst the present offender and the third man attempted to open the safe - unsuccessfully as it turned out.

David Codling was questioned about the amount of money that was being then held in the safe. The man Hamed then took from John Codling his National
Australia Bank card, forced Codling to divulge his PIN number and Hamed then took that card to an automatic teller in nearby Oxford Street and there withdrew $500, the maximum that could be withdrawn in a single transaction. He then returned to the Rogues Night Club.

The present prisoner Chaouk, demanded the car keys to a hired motor vehicle then in possession of David Codling. These keys were given to this prisoner and he left the premises, apparently to obtain a welder or oxy acetylene torch to open the safe.

It is not clear precisely how long David and John Codling were tied up - John
Codling, it seems, for rather longer than David Codling. They were ultimately released by the third man, who was described as "the fat man" and the victims stated that it was that third person who they felt had acted to calm down the other two. The victims were obviously fearful of what might happen to them particularly as they were menaced by Hamed with a knife in the course of trying to force them to provide information as to the combination of another safe upon the premises, as well as earlier on to obtain other information.

The precise circumstances in which these three men came onto the premises is not clear. It seems that a door may have been left open and they may have strayed onto the premises, no doubt with some criminal behaviour in mind, but may well not have decided precisely what form that behaviour would take. It seems that they may have been making up their minds as they went along as to just what they were going to do. I am prepared to give the benefit of the doubt to the prisoner that that was the situation and that there was not more premeditation, although of course there could easily have been.

After the present prisoner left the premises he did not return whilst the other two offenders were on the premises, nor was he observed there any later time. In his absences certain further threats were made to the Codlings and certain other things were done, but I take the view that this prisoner was not in truth in any realistic way responsible for what happened there. In theory, his withdrawal may not have been from the joint criminal enterprise but merely from the premises for the purposes of obtaining equipment which would facilitate, upon his return, access to the safe.

The actual terms of the charge relate to the armed robbery of John Codling and the taking from him of his National Australia Bank card, driver's licence and wallet, but in my view it is relevant to have regard to the surrounding circumstances in which that was done.

The prolonged duration of this robbery helps to make it more serious and no doubt the victims were very troubled by thoughts of what might happen to them.
In the event, another person who came to the premises managed to make good her escape and alert the police which led to their visiting the premises and putting an end to the offence.

In terms of armed robberies this, in my view, falls around the middle of the scale, if not a little up from that, but I will treat it as a middle range matter.

After this narration of the facts, the judge paid careful regard to the applicant's personal features. The judge was troubled by the applicant having previously been convicted in Queensland in November 1993 of an offence equivalent to armed robbery and another offence. Because of his age and the special way young offenders were treated in Queensland, the applicant received a lenient sentence of six months. He served two months and was then released on probation for three years. He was thus on probation at the time of the subject offence.

The judge stated that had it not been for the applicant's youth and plea of guilty, the sentence would have been more substantial.

At the sentence indication, attention was devoted to the facts which revealed an offence of considerable seriousness. In his Sentence Indication the judge referred to the offence as an armed robbery, noting that there was no wounding. In s. 97 of the Crimes Act armed robbery and robbery in company are equated for the purposes of penalty.

After the sentence indication, the applicant was given an opportunity to consider his position and discuss it with his advisers. The judge's description of the charge was not raised with the judge. Attention would have been focussed on whether, on the facts, the accused would achieve a better result than that indicated if he went to trial.

There is doubt whether the inaccurate description of the offence played a part in the final outcome and the sentence imposed but it is unnecessary to take this matter further. I am of the opinion, absent any argument as to parity, that for the offence of robbery in company by the applicant, in the circumstances of this case, the sentence imposed was correct. It is the sentence I would impose on resentencing.

The applicant also relied on a parity argument, contending that when regard was had to the sentence imposed on the co-offender Hamed, the applicant was entitled to have a legitimate sense of grievance. The co-offender, it would seem, played a greater part in the criminal events. He was the organiser and he had a weapon.

He pleaded guilty to both counts in the indictment but he was also dealt with for another but earlier serious offence (armed robbery on 18 September 1994).
The position as to Hamed is set out in the reasons of this court in R v.
Zaoud, unreported, 24 July 1996. As to the earlier offence, Hamed received a minimum term of twelve months and an additional term of three months. On the two charges, the applicant received concurrent sentences comprising a minimum term of two years three months and an additional term of two years. Hamed had spent some seven weeks in custody. The effective minimum term was therefore three years four months and three weeks.

Based on the objective seriousness of the offences alone, there was disparity in the sentences imposed on Hamed and Chaouk. However, there were some very unusual and compelling features in relation to Hamed that do not exist in relation to Chaouk. The principal of these is the discount that Hamed must have received in respect of the information which he supplied. It was useful.
Further, as a result of supplying that information, petrol was thrown over him and he suffered gross injuries including major burns. He was hospitalised for some months. He was still seriously affected and suffering at the time of his sentencing. He required further treatment and surgery which was difficult to provide in the gaol hospital. The assistance which Hamed gave to the authorities would have resulted in a discount of at least fifty per cent and possibly a little more. The starting point for the sentence imposed on Hamed was considerably higher than the sentence which he actually received because of the discount for the assistance.

He had been further threatened with death. He was in strict protection. He had had a serious road accident in which he suffered injury. He suffered from hypomania. Hamed had pleaded guilty and was a young man.

Having regard particularly to the assistance, the resultant suffering and the discount, I am of the opinion that the argument based on parity should not succeed.

Leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal against the severity of the sentence imposed should be dismissed.

BRUCE J: I agree.

SMART J: The orders will be as I have proposed.
 * * * 
