

Regina versus Hoang Matter No Cca 60344/97 [1998] NSWSC 29 (4 March 1998) 
Last Updated: 3 April 1998 
REGINA versus VAN DUNG HOANG /97 March 1998 
Gleeson CJ, Sheller JA, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
CRIMINAL LAW - supply heroin - whether verdict unsafe or unsatisfactory - HELD - verdict not unsafe or unsatisfactory. 
SENTENCING - appellant sentenced for supplying heroin in exchange for $15,000 to minimum term of 3 years and additional term of 1 year. 
ORDERS Appeal against conviction dismissed.
 Leave to appeal against sentence granted; appeal dismissed.

REGINA versus Van Dung HOANG 
JUDGMENT 
GLEESON CJ: Following a trial before Taylor DCJ and a jury in the District Court, the appellant was convicted of the offence of supplying heroin. The alleged offence was said to have occurred on 19 July 1996 at Canley Heights. The appellant was sentenced to imprisonment involving a minimum term of three years and an additional term of one year. He appeals against his conviction and seeks leave to appeal against the sentence. 
When the appeal was called for hearing this morning, Mr Costello of counsel, who appeared for the appellant, and who had previously filed written submissions in support of the appeal, informed the Court that his client, who was born in Vietnam, does not speak English and would wish to have the services of an interpreter to translate for him what was being said in court, in the course of argument in this appeal. Mr Costello said that he had not made arrangements for the presence in court of an interpreter.

The Court inquired whether Mr Costello would wish the matter to be stood over until 2pm to give him a further opportunity to make such arrangements, indicating that one possible course that the Court might contemplate taking would be to have the argument and any decision fully transcribed so that it and the translation of it could be made available to the appellant; but Mr
Costello informed the Court that he would prefer, rather than following the course of having an adjournment until 2pm, to proceed with the appeal now.

Having so informed the Court, Mr Costello then stated that he found it unnecessary to address any oral submissions to the Court. He indicated that he was content to rely entirely upon his written submissions, which cover some nineteen pages of typescript.

The Crown Prosecutor, for his part, indicated that he did not wish to make any oral submissions either but was content to rely upon the written Crown submissions that had previously been filed. The Court has read the written submissions, and is in a position to proceed to judgment.

I direct that the reasons for judgment, when obtained by the Registrar, should be translated into the Vietnamese language and that the translation should be made available to Mr Costello for communication by him to his client.

There are two grounds of appeal against conviction. The first ground is that the verdict of the jury was unsafe or unsatisfactory. The second ground is that the conviction involved a miscarriage of justice arising out of what is said to be a violation of the human rights of the appellant. The argument that the verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory involved a combination of two different kinds of consideration. In the first place, it was argued that certain rulings on evidence were erroneous and that the summing-up contained misdirections and was inadequate in particular respects. In the second place, it was contended that there was an insufficiency of evidence, that the evidence contained discrepancies and inadequacies and that, accordingly, the principles in M versus The Queen [(1994) 181 CLR 487] came into play.

Insofar as the appellant's argument was based upon criticisms of the summing- up of the learned trial judge, it is to be noted that no complaints about the summing-up were made by trial counsel and there were no applications for any re-direction having any relevance to the present appeal. That, no doubt, explains why the matters in question are argued in the context of a submission that the verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory.

Before coming to the detail of the particular complaints and criticisms advanced on behalf of the appellant, and in order to put those complaints and criticisms in perspective in relation to an argument that the verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory, it is convenient to begin by stating in summary form the Crown case and the nature of the evidence called in support of the Crown case, and then analysing to some extent the defence case.

The present is one of those cases where any argument that could be advanced by way of criticism or challenge to the Crown case was at its most impressive at the close of the Crown case. The appellant was called to give evidence and, as not infrequently happens from the point of view of the defence, it was all downhill from there. There may have been some aspects of the Crown case which, if a plausible defence case had been made out, could have given a jury some cause for concern. However, the jury were entitled to regard the defence case, when it ultimately emerged, as utterly implausible. The explanation for this may have been that the appellant, in a record of interview following his arrest by the police, committed himself to a version of events to which he was substantially bound when he came to give evidence at the trial. He may have committed himself to that version when, for all he knew, the police had available to them corroborative evidence in the form of video or audio records of what had happened, whereas, in truth, such corroboration was not available.

Whatever be the reason, the appellant, in his record of interview and later in his evidence at the trial, gave a version of his movements over the half hour or so immediately before his arrest, which was, in many respects, in substantial accordance with the police evidence; and his attempt to place an innocent complexion on his conduct involved a number of assertions which, as I have indicated, a jury were likely to have regarded as extremely implausible.

The appellant was arrested in the course of what was said to be a drug deal, set up by the Drug Enforcement Agency. The three direct participants in the deal were the appellant, as supplier, and two purchasers, one of whom was an undercover operative named Dien, and the other of whom was a police officer,
Senior Constable Thanh. Both Dien and Thanh are, like the appellant, of
Vietnamese origin.

The principal Crown witness at the trial was Constable Thanh. The undercover operative Dien was not called as a witness. The evidence of Thanh was to the following effect. Pursuant to arrangements that had previously been made by others, including Dien, on the morning of Friday 19 April 1996, Thanh was handed a white plastic shopping bag containing $14,800 in cash. At about .30pm that day he drove, with Dien, to the car park of the Kookaburra Hotel at Canley Vale. The appellant approached the vehicle. Dien introduced the appellant to Thanh. Dien got out of the front passenger seat and went into the rear passenger seat. The appellant got into the front passenger seat with
Thanh. Thanh and the appellant had a conversation in Vietnamese. It is unnecessary to repeat the detail of that conversation. It concerned the proposed purchase by Thanh of a quantity of "stuff" from the appellant. Thanh handed the white plastic shopping bag to the appellant to enable him to count the money, and the appellant did that.

The appellant then returned the money to Thanh and instructed Dien to follow him to a location near the appellant's home where the heroin was to be obtained. The appellant then drove off in his own car and was followed by
Thanh and Dien. They parked about a block away from the appellant's home.

The appellant told them to wait for about twenty minutes. They did so, in the meantime communicating with other police officers and informing them of what was occurring. In due course the appellant returned and entered the vehicle being driven by Thanh. He showed them a clear plastic bag containing two white rock items. They agreed to drive off to another location and the appellant placed the bag under his right leg. They parked at another location and were in the act of exchanging the money for the heroin when other police officers arrived and arrested all three men, that is to say, the appellant, Thanh and
Dien.

About two hours later, back at the police station, Thanh prepared, in the
English language, an account of his conversations with the appellant. Other police officers gave evidence of surveillance operations, and of the arrest of the three men. The appellant was interviewed that afternoon. There was no challenge to the accuracy of the interview, which was electronically recorded.

The appellant did not deny that he had met Thanh and Dien at the car park in the hotel. He did not deny that he had taken Thanh and Dien to an address near his home. He did not deny that the three later drove off to another location.
He, of course, did not deny that the three men were arrested. As was noted, it may be that he was forthcoming about these matters because, for all he knew, there was video corroboration of police evidence as to his movements leading up to the time of his arrest. However that may be, the facts that he was prepared to admit produced the result that there was a fairly narrow area of disagreement with the essence of the Crown case.

The appellant, both in his record of interview and in his evidence at the trial, denied that there was any supply of heroin or other illegal substance involved in his activities, or that he was in the process of exchanging heroin for a substantial quantity of money. The obvious question that then arose was what he was doing in the company of Thanh and Dien; what was the reason why he met them at the car park; why had they followed him to an address near his home; why had Thanh and Dien waited for him for about twenty minutes outside his home; and why the three of them then drove off from that place to a nearby location? 
The explanation he gave was remarkable. The appellant said that two things had occurred several days before the day in question which explained the activities of the day. First, he said that Dien had borrowed from him an amount of $150. Second, he said that Dien had annoyed the appellant's wife in some way which produced the result that Dien would be reluctant to enter the appellant's house. The appellant said that the meeting at the car park at the
Kookaburra Hotel occurred because Dien had told him he was ready to pay the $150. The appellant said that when he met Dien he found that Dien had only two $100 notes with which to repay the debt. That meant that Dien was entitled to $50 change. The reason they drove off to the appellant's home was to get the $50 change for Dien. The reason they parked about a block away from the appellant's home was because of the antagonism between Dien and the appellant's wife.

It is not unreasonable to observe that if somebody wants to get change of a $100 note at a time when they are in a car park of a busy hotel, the most obvious way to do it is to go into the hotel. No explanation was given by the appellant about the counting of the money in the car that went on and it is not easy to understand what his explanation was as to why the men drove off together after they left the vicinity of the appellant's home to the place where they were ultimately arrested. However, the suggestion that the explanation of their movements from the car park up until the time of their arrest was that they needed to change a $100 note was not one likely to appeal to the commonsense of a jury. That is the background against which it is now said that the verdict of the jury was unsafe or unsatisfactory.

In the course of the Crown case at the trial a good deal was made of the failure of the police, who set up this operation, to arrange for Constable
Thanh to be wired for sound. The explanation that was given by the officer in charge was that time did not permit the making of an application for the necessary warrant. In any event, it was fair comment, and it was comment that was made over and over again at the trial, that this was an operation where the police failed to obtain corroboration of their evidence by making use of video or audio technology of a kind that is readily available. That would have been a more effective comment, however, if ultimately there had been a defence case of some plausibility.

Taylor DCJ declined an application to reject Constable Thanh's evidence of his conversations with the appellant and Dien, pursuant to section 137 of the [Evidence Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/ea80/). It was argued that the probative value of the evidence was outweighed by the danger of unfair prejudice to the appellant.

His Honour's reasons for judgment are dated 6 May 1997 and appear to me to contain no error. As his Honour rightly observed, the evidence was of very significant probative value. The risk of unfair prejudice relied upon was related to the inability of the appellant adequately to test the evidence.
This, in turn, was connected with two circumstances. The first was the absence of any recording of the conversation at the time it was made; the second concerned the note of the conversation made by Constable Thanh about two hours later, which was in the English language and not in the Vietnamese language, the Vietnamese language having been the language used in the conversation.

In due course, in his summing-up, Taylor DCJ warned the jury of the criticisms that had been made by defence counsel in relation to these matters and directed the jury of the need to scrutinise the evidence of Constable Thanh carefully and to exercise caution because of the matters referred to and because of certain other matters. I do not consider that Taylor DCJ was in error in admitting the evidence of Constable Thanh.

His Honour was not asked to give additional directions, apart from those to which reference has already been made. No complaint was made in any respect relevant to the present appeal about any aspect of the summing-up. The appellant should not have leave to complain at this stage about the matters concerning directions which were not raised at the trial.

It was rightly observed on behalf of the appellant that there were certain discrepancies in the evidence of the police officers. For example, their evidence as to their observations as to where they saw the heroin at the time of the arrest contained some inconsistencies. The learned trial judge warned the jury that what he described as the lynch pin of the Crown case was the evidence of Constable Thanh. He emphasised that unless the jury were prepared to accept beyond reasonable doubt the evidence of Constable Thanh, then they had to acquit the appellant.

In his remarks on sentence Taylor DCJ said that Constable Thanh was a very impressive witness. So far as a reading of the transcript shows, he was unshaken in cross-examination. However, from the point of view of considering an argument that the verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory, at least insofar as the argument is based upon insufficiency of evidence, what is important in addition to the apparent cogency of the evidence of Constable Thanh is the nature and quality of the evidence of the appellant himself. There was no dispute that a meeting occurred at a car park at the Kookaburra Hotel between the appellant, Thanh and Dien, or that Thanh and Dien followed the appellant to a location near the appellant's home. There was no dispute that the three men later drove off to another location, where they were arrested. The appellant denied any knowledge of any heroin or any transaction involving heroin, but the transaction which he claimed to have been occurring and to have been the explanation for the movements observed by the other police officers was one that fell apart when tested in cross-examination.

The warnings which Taylor DCJ gave the jury were appropriate and adequate to the circumstances of the case. There was ample evidence upon which a reasonable jury could properly be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of the appellant. There were no irregularities or deficiencies in the conduct of the trial which, in all the circumstances of the case, should lead this Court to the conclusion that the verdict was unsafe or unsatisfactory.
The first ground of appeal has not been made out.

The second ground of appeal turns upon the circumstance that the only record
Constable Thanh made of this conversation with the appellant, which was one made on the same afternoon, was made in the English language. In essence, the argument was that fairness to the appellant required that the conversation should have been recorded in the Vietnamese language and then subsequently translated into English; at least in that way, it was said, the appellant would have had a fair opportunity of meeting the case to be made against him.

Once again, as a practical matter, this argument might have been more impressive if it had not been for the circumstance that, at the same time as
Constable Thanh was recording his conversation, that the appellant, in a record of interview with the police, was giving a version of the relevant events which, upon critical examination, made it extremely difficult for him to challenge much of the case against him.

The area of dispute at the trial did not turn upon any fine shade of difference between the account of the conversations given by the appellant and that given by Constable Thanh. This was not a case where anything turned on nuances of expression or possible areas of doubt or difficulty about translation from the Vietnamese to the English language or vice-versa. This was not a case, for example, in which the appellant said that it was true that he had a conversation something like the conversation alleged by Constable
Thanh, but that Constable Thanh had misunderstood or misrepresented some of the words used by the appellant in the detail of his account of the conversation.

The appellant gave an account of his conversation with Constable Thanh and
Dien that was entirely different from that given by Constable Thanh. According to Constable Thanh, for example, they sat in the car at the car park at the
Kookaburra Hotel counting a large amount of money and discussing the possible supply of heroin. According to the appellant, on the other hand, the only transaction in which the appellant participated involved a repayment to him by
Dien of a loan of $150 and the discussion about how they could arrange to get $50 change for Dien. Nothing in the case turned upon any possible area of disagreement about the accuracy of the translation by Constable Thanh of what he claimed was his conversation with the appellant. For that reason there is no substance in the second ground of appeal. The appeal against conviction fails.

No error of fact or law is disclosed in the reasons for sentence advanced by
Taylor DCJ and the sentence imposed was well within the range of an appropriate sentencing discretion. It is true the appellant is a person without prior conviction and was entitled to be sentenced as someone of previous good character. However, the offence of supplying heroin was rightly regarded as objectively serious. The maximum penalty was fifteen years imprisonment. Taylor DCJ took into account, appropriately, the subjective factors urged on behalf of the appellant, in particular, he noted that this would be his first time in custody in a culturally unfamiliar environment. The sentence imposed was fair.

The appeal against conviction should be dismissed; leave to appeal against the sentence should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

SHELLER JA: I agree. 
BARR J: I agree. 
GLEESON CJ: The orders will be as I have proposed. * * * 
