

Regina versus G K Balfour [1996] NSWSC 292 (23 July 1996) 
REGINA versus GREGORY KEVIN BALFOUR /96 
Tuesday 23 July 1996 
IN THE COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
Mahoney P, Grove J, Ireland J 
RESULT: Appeal dismissed 
CATCHWORDS: SENTENCE - SEXUAL INTERCOURSE WITHOUT CONSENT KNOWING VICTIM NOT CONSENTING - HELD MINIMUM AND ADDITIONAL TERMS OF TWO AND ONE HALF YEARS AND TWO YEARS WELL WITHIN DISCRETIONARY RANGE IN THE CIRCUMSTANCES.
 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against the severity of sentence imposed by his Honour Judge Ducker in the Wollongong District Court on 16 February 1996. On that occasion the applicant adhered to a plea of guilty earlier tendered to a magistrate upon a single count of sexual intercourse without consent knowing that the victim was not consenting. His Honour sentenced the applicant to a term of four and a half years penal servitude which he divided into minimum and additional terms of two and half years and two years respectively.

The offence occurred on 27 August 1995. The applicant had been drinking at the
St George Leagues Club for some time but later in the evening had repaired to the Shellharbour Workers Club in company with his de facto wife. They apparently became separated and the applicant spent time in the company of the complainant, a single woman aged twenty three. The applicant was at the time aged twenty eight years. The applicant and the complainant had been casual acquaintances in the past, their encounters being at work, where she was a canteen hand and he was an engine shunter, and at the Shellharbour Workers
Club. Their acquaintanceship extended to engaging in sexual intercourse. The last occasion of their encounter was in dispute but it was either nine or eighteen months prior to the date of the offence. Conversation at the club between them led to a reasonable conclusion on the part of the applicant that the complainant would be willing to engage in sexual intercourse with him on that night. She had attended with a cousin in order to celebrate a birthday and was expecting to drive home. She had only moderately partaken of intoxicating liquor. The applicant was well affected. The complainant suggested that they would go to her place and they left the club in her motor vehicle.

Whilst driving towards her home the applicant commenced to fondle her with his hands. She objected and did a U-turn in the vehicle and told him that she was returning to the club. She commented to him that "It's just not going to work".

The applicant expressed his opposition to this at first verbally and then as they reached a roundabout by his action in pulling the steering wheel of the car until it came to a halt in an area away from likely residents or passers- by. The complainant told the applicant to get out and leave her alone and she commenced crying and struggling. The applicant at first overpowered her but she freed herself and commenced to run away. He prevented her escape by a football tackle. Comments which he made at the time clearly showed, as his
Honour found, that the applicant was well aware that the complainant was not consenting to intercourse at that stage. He tore her clothing and eventually engaged in penile penetration of her vagina during which he ejaculated. The offence occurred on the ground. After the act of intercourse the complainant again ran away and flagged down a passing motorist who drove her to the home of a girlfriend. The police were called.

At all relevant times including at interview with police and in evidence before the learned sentencing judge, the applicant claimed that due to the level of his intoxication he could not recall events from the time he left the
Workers Club until he arrived at his home at an unknown time later that morning. He did not dispute the complainant's version of events.

The argument in support of the applicant's contention was expressed in grounds as follows: "1. There is no apparent leniency in the sentence imposed to reflect the applicant's childhood sexual molestation;
His Honour erred in finding the applicant's intoxication at the time of the offence `irrelevant'; and
The sentence does not reflect the objective and subjective considerations as found." 
The first ground has reference to a claim made by the applicant to a psychologist who interviewed and tested him on one occasion that from mid childhood to early adolescence he was systematically sexually abused by a trusted male relative who also introduced him in his tender years to the consumption of intoxicating liquor. The psychologist Ms Robilliard opined that the claimed sexual abuse had had a profound affect on his psycho-social development and she thought it had also precipitated his excessive indulgence in alcohol. The matter was adverted to in testimony given by the applicant to the sentencing judge. He indicated that he had never complained of this treatment to police. He mentioned it to his mother, apparently for the first time, in 1993 when he would have been aged about twenty six years. She recommended that he seek counselling which he did but she described him as returning home totally devastated by that.

At the time of this offence the applicant's de facto wife was pregnant. She had previously miscarried an unplanned pregnancy but on this occasion it was planned and it was said that the applicant was apprehensive about doing anything which might damage her or the anticipated infant. The ground as expressed recognizes that the learned sentencing judge did not overlook the evidence concerning the applicant's childhood sexual molestation. He specifically accepted that the applicant was in fact the subject of such sexual assault and the consequential contribution to his drinking problems.
His Honour did not, nor was he required to specify in terms of months, years or percentage what discount to a sentence which he otherwise would have imposed, he had applied in order to reach the assessment which he did. I am unable to conclude that the present sentence is so high that his Honour must have fallen into error suggested. On the contrary, had it not been for findings which his Honour has made favourable to the applicant I would have thought that a much higher sentence ought to have been imposed. The argument on this ground was developed in relation to the element of general deterrence and I will turn to it later.

The second ground complains of his Honour's finding that the intoxication of the applicant at the time of the offence was irrelevant. The first thing that should be noted is that the context in which his Honour adverted to this matter was concerning necessary intent. I understand his observations to be no more than that, in circumstances which included the applicant pleading guilty to a charge which included the elements of intent to have intercourse and knowing that the victim was not consenting uncontradicted by the applicant, intoxication was irrelevant to criminal responsibility. The submissions on behalf of the applicant indicate that what is actually contended is that his
Honour ought to have taken the intoxication of the applicant into account as a matter of mitigation. It is recognized that as a matter of general principle the degree of deliberation by an offender is usually a matter to be taken into account and that intoxication can therefore be relevant in determining the degree of deliberation involved in the breach of the law. However in some circumstances it may aggravate the crime because of the recklessness with which the offender became intoxicated and in others it may mitigate the crime because the offender by reason of that intoxication acted out of character.
See R versus Coleman [1990 47 A Crim R 306]; R v
Leslie, unreported CCA 10 March 1995. I am unable to perceive that his
Honour fell into any error in this regard. His Honour had acknowledged that the sexual molestation previously referred to had been a contributing factor towards the applicant's alcohol problem but his Honour had to make some assessment of the relevance of that problem in the current circumstances. It was not without significance that the applicant was able to pattern his drinking binges so as seldom to drink during his rostered working time. At the time of this offence he was on a cycle of five rostered days off. He told Ms
Robilliard that he had been just as intoxicated on previous and indeed subsequent occasions. There is no error manifest in his Honour's approach nor in his conclusions.

The matter to which I indicated I would return is the suggestion that his
Honour ought not to have made the sentence imposed upon the applicant a vehicle for general as opposed to personal deterrence because of his psychological condition. The psychologist noted that the applicant had no history of psychiatric illness or treatment and his tests showed him as of average intelligence. The quantum of the sentence imposed does not indicate that there could have been any extravagant factor related to general deterrence included as an element of sentence. I would be disposed to reject the applicant's argument based upon the absence of that ingredient but, in any event, the reference to cases such as R versus Letteri, unreported CCA 10 March are misconceived. Cases such as that advert to the principle that persons who suffer a mental disorder or severe intellectual handicap may not be suitable vehicles for expression of general deterrence. Nothing in the evidence operates to place the applicant in such a category.

The final ground argued by the applicant, which appears to me to do no more than express in other words a complaint that too much weight was attributed to inculpatory circumstances and too little to mitigating ones - a ground which has obstacles when presented to a court of error - was sought to be supported by reference to a number of other cases in this Court. It suffices to say that none of them in my opinion provides a relevant applicable precedent. As the learned sentencing judge rightly observed "Although there was a flavour of consent early in the piece, this was an ugly, brutal assault involving the overpowering of a woman and the forcing of sexual intercourse, that is penile vaginal intercourse, upon her." His Honour carefully made reference to both objective and subjective factors and the sentence imposed is in my opinion well within the range of sound exercise of discretion.

I propose the application for leave to appeal be granted but the appeal dismissed and the sentence confirmed.

MAHONEY P: I agree with the remarks of Grove J. Notwithstanding the submissions of Mr Bellanto of Queen's Counsel (and I think he has said everything that can be said), I do not think the sentence or the sentencing process are affected by error.

The judge used the word "irrelevant" in relation to intoxication. I agree with the observations of Grove J in this regard. It is, of course, plain and every day common sense that intoxication can be relevant in relation to sentencing in a particular case. I do not think that the judge thought otherwise. If the situation were that he had treated it as irrelevant in the sentencing process and it fell to this Court to re-sentence, I would certainly not come to any conclusion different from the sentence imposed by the trial judge. The sentence I would impose would not be less.

In this case Mr Bellanto has properly stressed the subjective and objective factors in favour of the applicant. It may be that this will be the only significant offence that he will ever commit; that is to be hoped for. But taking into account all of those matters I still cannot see that the sentence imposed is less than it should have been or that it is affected by any of the errors suggested. I agree with the orders proposed.

IRELAND J: I also agree.

MAHONEY P: The order of the Court is that leave to appeal is granted but the appeal is dismissed.
 * * * 
