

Standard Chartered Bank Australia Ltd. versus Antico and Ors. No. 5965 of 1990 [1995] NSWSC 36 (8 September 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
EQUITY DIVISION
HODGSON J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 1 and 2 August 1995 #DATE 9:8:1995 #ADD 8:9:1995 
Counsel for the Plaintiff:    Mr. M. Tobias QC,
Mr. B. Oslington QC, 
Mr. T. Jucovic QC,
Mr. D. Robertson 
Instructed by:         
Mallesons Stephen Jaques,
Sydney 
Counsel for the Defendants:    Mr. T.E.F. Hughes QC,
Mr. P. Hely QC,
Miss R. McColl SC, 
Mr. J. Halley 
Instructed by:          Allen Allen and Hemsley,
Sydney
ORDER
Orders made.
JUDGE1
JUDGMENT (On question of interest)
HODGSON J:  In the judgment which I handed down on 31st May 1995,
I found that the defendants Antico, Quirk, Gardiner and Pioneer were liable to SCBAL in respect of certain interest under the agreement made on 25th July 1989. It was left to a further hearing to quantify that interest.
In addition to the facts found in the main judgment, the parties have agreed as to the SCBAL base rates of interest relevant to the calculation of interest, and have also agreed as to calculations made on the basis of those rates. It is common ground that Giant has not yet been dissolved, and that
SCBAL has not received any dividends in the winding up of Giant. It appears that there will not be a surplus in the winding up of Giant.
Both sides have provided written outlines of submissions, which I will leave with the papers; and in this judgment, I will summarise those submissions, as well as summarising oral submissions which have been put to me.
 
SUBMISSIONS FOR THE PLAINTIFF
Relying on what I said at pp.123-4, 128-9, 132, 145-6, 245 and 250 of the judgment, it was submitted that the debt for interest incurred by entry into the 25th July agreement was not merely for interest up to 31st December 1989, because repayment at 31st December 1989 was not a "real option" for Giant, and the obligation to pay interest thereafter was, as a practical matter, "unavoidable": Hawkins v. Bank of China [(1992) 26 NSWLR 562], John Graham Reprographics v.
Steffens [(1987) 12 ACLR 779.] suggested otherwise, they should be distinguished or not followed.
Next, it was submitted that the winding up (commencement on 27th April , winding up order on 27th June 1990) was not an appropriate cut-off point. The company's obligation was not released:
Jowitt v. Callaghan <case>; [(1938) SR 512] at 467; Companies Code, ss.553,
And the company's personal liability for debt and interest continues until dissolution: Midland
Montagu Australia v. Harkness [(1994) 35 NSWLR 150]; [(1941) 65
CLR 1] at 8-12.
Further, liability under s.556 extends to obligations that accrue after liquidation in respect of debts incurred before liquidation: Bans v. Ling [(1995) 16 ACSR 404.] And even if Giant's liability was extinguished, this would not discharge liabilities of directors under s.556: Glanville Williams,
Joint
Obligations, (1949) at 92, 155-6. The manifest purpose of s.556 (see Metal
Manufactures v. Lewis [(1988) 13 NSWLR 315] at 318, Hawkins at 577) would be subverted if liability for further interest ceased at winding up.
Accordingly, the plaintiff was entitled to interest at least to the date of judgment - or, since this was an arbitrary date, to dissolution or indefinitely.
Even if the dissolution of Giant released Giant from its obligations, this would not discharge the defendants: Williams, Joint obligations, at 92, 155-6. This was consistent with the law concerning guarantees: Re Fitzgeorge [(1905) 1 KB 462],
Quainoo at 166-71, Jowitt at 521-3.
As regards the rate to be applied, the default rate was appropriate, including compounding in accordance with the agreement: National Bank of
Greece v. Pinios Shipping [(1990) 1 AC 637.]
In oral submissions, Mr. Jucovic QC submitted that, in Bans v. Ling, the payment of rent had to be regarded as always being a realistic option, so that interest on unpaid instalments of rent must realistically be regarded as accruing from day to day. Accordingly, once the company went into liquidation, interest accruing on unpaid rent instalments after that date had to be regarded as incurred after liquidation, so that the directors could not liable for that interest under s.556. On that basis, the case was distinguishable from this case.
In response to a suggestion from me that liquidation was an appropriate cut-off point, because once the company went into liquidation, any difference between the company's liability to pay interest under the agreement of 25th
July, and such liability under the earlier agreement which it displaced, became entirely immaterial, Mr. Jucovic made a number of points. He referred me to pp.141-2 of my judgment, and my finding there that a debt for interest was incurred at 31st March 1989, because it was not possible to say what would have happened if an agreement had not been made on 31st March 1989, and because of relatively small differences between the new agreement then made and the old agreement. He pointed out that, at p.143, I found that the making of the agreement of 25th July put an end to liability for interest under the st March agreement; so that any liability to pay interest following upon liquidation had to be a liability under the 25th July agreement, and therefore incurred by entering into that agreement. (This point was stressed in written submissions which I gave leave to Mr. Jucovic to submit after oral argument concluded.) And the point remained that it was not possible to say what would have happened, in relation to the period after the commencement of liquidation, if the 25th July agreement had not been entered into. (This point too was stressed in the later written submissions, which pointed out inter alia that the 25th July agreement permitted Giant to continue to trade, and to cause detriment to creditors by incurring further debts and burdening and dissipating its assets.)
Finally, in relation to a suggestion that Baldry v. Jackson [(1976) 2
NSWLR 415] meant that no interest could be recovered for any period after the commencement of these proceedings, the cases showed that accruing sums, whether they be interest or mesne profits or wages, can be recovered up to the date of judgment: The Fairport [(1967) P 167] at 125, 129, Roban Jig and Tool Co. v. Taylor (1979)
Fleet Street Reports 130 at 134; Robinson v. Bland [(1760) 97 ER 715] at 722-3.
Indeed, if interest up to judgment was not obtained in such a case, it could not be obtained in later proceedings: Ex Parte
Fewings(1884) 25 Ch 338 at 351, -5.
 
SUBMISSIONS FOR THE DEFENDANTS
For the defendants, it was submitted that to treat directors as liable for interest until the principal had been repaid would mean that they could only secure a discharge by paying the principal, for which they were not liable. The change brought about to the legal situation by the agreement of th July 1989 gave rise to a contractual liability to pay interest up to 31st
December 1989. The words "incurs a debt" must be applied in a practical commonsense way. At worst, the statutory liability must have been capable of being discharged at the point of time when the s.556 cause of action accrued, namely the commencement of the winding up on 27th April 1990. This was supported by s.439 of the Code, which was in the following terms: "439(1) The amount of a debt of a company (including a debt that is for or includes interest) is to be computed for the purposes of the winding up as at the relevant date."
This displaced the general law position expounded in Midland
Montagu and in McKenzie v. Rees. At worst, Baldry v. Jackson meant that interest could not be recovered beyond the commencement of the proceedings.
In oral submissions, Mr. Hely QC submitted that there should be no liability for interest past the commencement of the winding up. He submitted that there was no material difference between Giant's liability for interest after the commencement of the winding up under the agreement of 25th July from what it would have been under the earlier agreement; and even though one could not be certain what would have happened in the 25th July agreement had not been entered into, it followed from my decision that what ought to have happened was that the company should have gone into liquidation: so that the quantum of post-liquidation interest was certainly no greater by reason of entry into the 25th July agreement.
Although a guarantee can be so expressed as to be a guarantee of interest only, which applies for so long as the principal is outstanding, and so could apply forever, a court would not construe a contractual guarantee in that way unless driven to it: see Ruddenklau v. Charlesworth [(1925) NZLR 161],
O'Donovan, Modern Contract of Guarantee, 2nd Ed., pp 195-6.
Realistically, the debt incurred as at 25th July was that amount of interest which could be extracted from the company by ordinary processes. This was supported by the consideration that s.556 contemplated joint and several liability with the company, which would not readily be interpreted as involving joint and several liability for a debt for which the company was not in a realistic sense liable.
Next, Mr. Hely submitted that the correct cut-off date was st December
He submitted that, immediately prior to 25th July, it was obvious that
Giant was liable to repay the principal of $30 million, and was liable to pay interest at default rates from the due date for payment, namely 30th June
By 25th July agreement, Giant bought six months more time for a consideration of a lump sum plus a promise to pay interest at a lower rate.
Accordingly, the correct measure of the obligation incurred was that of an obligation to pay interest for that six month period. The obligation to pay principal was constant, and the obligation to pay default interest was also a constant. The same reasoning process as showed that the liability for principal was not a new debt, would also show that the liability for default interest should the $30 million not be repaid on 31st December, was not a new debt either.
Next, Mr. Hely submitted that, if contrary to that submission, the obligation to pay penalty interest was incurred by the agreement of 25th July, that was contingent on future default, and accordingly was not "unavoidable" as that word was used in Hawkins at p.572. Mr. Hely submitted that while that word did apply to guarantees, which were obligations that by their nature could not be avoided by the person who assumed them, it did not apply to those obligations which might not as a practical matter be avoidable by the incurring party in the future. In any event, the company could have stopped the accrual of interest, as a practical matter, by going into liquidation. The fact that the directors as at 31st December did not choose to do so should not add to the liability of those responsible for the 25th July agreement.
Next, Mr. Hely submitted that s.556 contemplates that the quantum of the obligation can be calculated at the time when the obligation is incurred. At worst, the quantum should be within the "reasonable contemplation" of the persons causing the company to incur the obligation, as suggested at pp.1256 of my earlier judgment. It followed from my judgment that repayment of $30 million on 31st December was not outside the bounds of reasonable contemplation, so that liability for default interest thereafter was not incurred by entry into the 25th July agreement.
 
SUBMISSIONS IN REPLY
Mr. Jucovic submitted that there could be later events, following the actual incurring of the debt, which showed why, as a matter of substance and commercial reality, the quantum of the debt was a certain amount. Indeed, if at a later time the company has a real choice whether to submit itself to a liability or not, that would be a reason for saying that the debt was not incurred at the earlier time. Here, Giant could not have repaid the $30 million at any time after 30th July.
The only possible thing it could have done to avoid liability for the on-going interest was to go into liquidation.
There was no suggestion in s.556 that a debt would cease to accrue because a company goes into liquidation; and it was against the purpose of the section that the accruing of a debt ceased just because the company goes into liquidation. It would mean in effect that there could never be the incurring of a debt for ongoing interest, because liquidation is always an option open to a company.
Mr.
Jucovic also submitted that, although s.556 involved a criminal sanction, there was no need to read the words "incurs a debt" or "joint and several" any differently from what was contemplated by the general law; and the quantification of the debt, as distinct from the finding that a debt of some amount was incurred, was not necessary in relation to criminal liability.
 
DECISION
I do not disagree with the general propositions of law in the plaintiff's submissions. I accept that, in general, a company's debt and a company's liability for interest on that debt is not discharged by winding up; and that a fortiori liability of a person jointly and severally liable for such a debt and interest is not discharged. However, these considerations are not conclusive: the question here depends on the construction of the words "incurs a debt" in s.556, and their application to the particular circumstances of this case.
My general view as to construction is given at pp.123-4 of the main judgment, as involving three related and partly overlapping questions, namely whether the company had a choice, whether it was the company's act or omission which led to the liability, and whether the company would otherwise (in any event) have been liable. In relation to the agreement of 25th July, I have held that the company did have a choice as to whether to make it or not; and the question then is the extent of its liability for interest, having regard to the other two questions.
At pp.126-133, I set out my views on how these principles applied in relation to loans. I applied the principles to the 25th July agreement at p.145, and it appears there that the factors relevant to the second and third questions, which led to my finding that a debt for interest was incurred, were that (1) the obligation the pay interest was under a substantially different agreement, which displaced the earlier agreement; and (2) it was not possible to say what would have happened otherwise - there was some chance of Pioneer paying, some chance of some other deal, and some chance of an earlier liquidation, as well as a chance that matters may have proceeded otherwise much as they did.
Just one of these factors on its own would not I believe have been sufficient. Part of the importance of both factors, particularly the first, was that entry into this new agreement secured to Giant the ability to trade for a further five months as if it were a solvent company conducting business in the usual way, giving a very different face to things than if a mere moratorium had been sought in circumstances where
Giant was admittedly insolvent. But once the liquidation of Giant commenced, the difference between the nature of the 25th July agreement and the nature of the agreement it displaced (and indeed the nature of earlier agreements concerning the $30 million) became wholly immaterial: from that time, there was no question of the continued conduct of business as an apparently solvent company.
Accordingly,
I do not think that it could be said that, as a matter of substance and commercial reality, liability for interest on the outstanding principal as from the commencement of the liquidation was incurred by entry into the 25th July agreement. That liability was inevitable anyway, unless the principal was repaid; and there was no difference in the nature of the liability which, following the commencement of the winding up, would have any materiality whatsoever. There was no relevant difference in its amount due to the 25th July agreement: the rate was no greater than under the previous agreement, and the commencement of the winding up was not shown to have been any earlier than it would have been. Indeed, as pointed out by Mr. Hely, but for the 25th July agreement, the commencement of the winding up of Giant should, and probably would, have been earlier. It seems reasonable to regard the liability for interest after the commencement of the winding up as being linked to the liability for the principal.
There is force in Mr. Jucovic's submission that I have found that liability for interest under earlier agreements ceased upon the entry into the th July agreement. However, I do not think that requires me to hold, when I come to consider the substance and commercial reality of what was done by entry into the 25th
July agreement, that interest accruing after the commencement of the winding up should, as a matter of substance and commercial reality, be regarded as having been incurred by the entry into that agreement.
Accordingly, I need to consider whether the cut-off day is the commencement of the liquidation (27th April 1990) or the expiry of the term of the 25th July agreement (namely 31st December ). I accept Mr. Jucovic's submission that, in considering the substance and commercial reality of the situation, one can have regard to later events. I also accept that one should not consider putting Giant into liquidation as an option open to Giant such that any interest accruing following a failure to exercise that option must be regarded as incurred at that time rather than at some earlier time: going into liquidation would not in fact have stopped interest accruing, even though I would regard subsequent interest as having been incurred by earlier agreements rather than by the 25th July agreement. In my opinion, in circumstances where
Pioneer did not provide funds and Curragh was not sold, repayment was never a realistic option; so that there was no act or omission of Giant, after 25th
July 1989 and before 27th April 1990, as to which it had a choice, which rendered it liable to interest after 31st December
In my opinion, the whole of the interest up to 27th April 1990 can reasonably be regarded as having been incurred by the entry into the 25th July agreement.
As I understand it, Mr. Hely accepts that this means that the default rate of interest should apply after 31st December 1989. The plaintiff does not seek the default rate up to 31st December 1989. Based on the calculations which have been provided to me, it follows that there should be judgment in favour of Giant for $3,053,324.32, plus interest of $2,176,603.00, plus daily interest after 2nd August 1995.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/36.html  
