

Regina versus L R Kotzur; Regina versus B D McKenzie [1997] NSWSC 304 (13 August )

REGINA v. Lynn Ruth KOTZUR REGINA v. Brad Douglas McKENZIE /96 60092/96 
Tuesday, 17 September 1996 
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL 
HUNT CJ at CL, SMART, JAMES JJ 
CATCHWORDS: SUPPLY OF ECSTASY - APPEAL ON SENTENCE - CONSIDERATION OF APPLICANTS SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: Reserved 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: Kotzur (Dismissed), McKenzie (Allowed) 
HEADNOTE 
The appellants were convicted of supplying what is commonly called ecstasy. Each was sentenced to a minimum term of 15 months and an additional term of 5 months. The appellants applied for an extension of time and leave to appeal against the severity of those sentences.

Held: 
There was ample material to sustain the findings of fact made by the trial judge.

The judge erred with regard to the sentencing of the applicant McKenzie in not taking the view that there were special circumstances requiring a longer than usual additional term.

There is insufficient by way of special circumstances in the situation of the applicant Kotzur to warrant the court intervening in her case.

Orders: 
As to the applicant McKenzie 
Extend the time in which to seek leave to appeal; 
Leave to appeal granted; 
Appeal allowed; 
In lieu of the sentence imposed the applicant McKenzie is sentenced to a minimum term of 12 months imprisonment commencing on 14 December 1995 and expiring on 13 December 1996 and an additional term of 8 months commencing on December 1996 and ending on 13 August 1997. The applicant McKenzie is to be released on parole on 13 December 1996.

As to the applicant Kotzur: 
Extend the time within which to appeal; 
Leave to appeal granted; 
Appeal dismissed.
 
JUDGMENT 
HUNT CJ at CL: I agree with the orders proposed by Smart J, for the reasons which he has given.

Ms Kotzur made a well reasoned plea to this Court on behalf of herself and Mr
McKenzie. It was a plea which was impressive in its sincerity and in its content. If it had been made to me as the sentencing judge, it may well have been effective. But it demonstrated no error made by the judge who did sentence the two applicants other than that identified by Smart J in relation to Mr McKenzie's sentence. Without such an error being identified, this Court cannot substitute any other sentence for that which was imposed in relation to
Ms Kotzur herself.

SMART J: Lynn Ruth Kotzur and Bradley Douglas McKenzie have applied for an extension of time and leave to appeal against the severity of the sentences imposed upon them by Judge Kinchington. Both were found guilty by a jury of supplying what is commonly called ecstasy. They were acquitted of another charge of supplying another prohibited drug.

Each was sentenced to a minimum term of 15 months and an additional term of 5 months.

On 16 June 1994 the police executed a search warrant at the Kensington flat occupied by the applicants and another person. In the bedroom occupied by applicants the police found 45 capsules and 29 tablets of ecstasy weighing in total 11.04 grams, 6.9 grams of methyl-amphetamine, some other prohibited drugs and, in close proximity to those drugs, the sum of $24,580. There were a number of other items including plastic containers, plastic bags and three pieces of paper on which appeared figures and writing in the hand of Ms
Kotzur.

The judge thought it was clear from the verdicts that while the jury accepted that both applicants used methylamphetamine, which was in their possession, for their own use the jury rejected that ecstasy was in the applicants' possession for their own use alone.

The judge recorded that Mr McKenzie had asked the court to take into account charges of possessing 0.5 grams of cannabis leaf, possessing 34.7 grams of
Lignocaine and possessing 6.9 grams of methylamphetamine and that Ms Kotzur asked the court to take into account possessing 4 discrete dosage units of
Lysergide and possessing 6.9 grams of methylamphetamine.

The judge noted that the maximum penalty for supplying the prohibited drug ecstasy was 15 years imprisonment, and/or a fine of $200,000.

The judge acknowledged that there was extremely strong subjective material in favour of each applicant. He noted that they had an enduring permanent relationship despite their trials, that they were both persons of previous good character who over recent times had devoted a considerable amount of time and effort in helping others and in performing charitable and community services of an exceptional order. During the greater portion of their adult lives they had both been in full-time employment. They were both well respected and liked in the occupations in which they had engaged. Each had had a good education and had overcome the disadvantages which they had experienced.

The judge was satisfied that prior to their arrest they were regular users of soft drugs including cannabis, amphetamines and the drug ecstasy and that they had been involved in the rave party scene.

The judge was satisfied that following their arrest in June 1994 both had made "giant" strides towards their own rehabilitation and that at the time of their trial they had moved away from their former life style and their dependence upon drugs to get enjoyment out of life. The judge was also satisfied that both the applicants no longer had any dependence upon any form of illicit drugs, both were genuinely remorseful for their use of drugs in the past and both now had a full realisation of the detrimental effect that drug usage could have on their lives and the lives of others.

The judge thought that the applicants had the insight and resolve to refrain from using drugs in the future and that they were unlikely to re-offend.

It is not necessary to rehearse the material set-out in the pre-sentence reports, the reports of Ms J Goldstein, the psychologist and the reports of Ms
Eve Jansen, Senior Clinician, Royal Prince Alfred Report.

The judge was satisfied that the applicants were involved in a commercial sense in the supply of drugs and that they profited from that enterprise. The judge emphasised the need for public and private deterrence and punishment.
However, it does seem from what had happened up to the date of the trial that there was no need for any further private deterrent.

The judge's approach was that despite all that could be so strongly and correctly said in favour of both applicants the offences involved the supply of drugs for profit and that this necessitated a full-time custodial sentence.

Ms Kotzur, who appeared for herself, and whose submissions were adopted by Mr
McKenzie submitted that the judge had not stated that the ecstasy found was 4 or 5 various types in small amounts and contained separately. She contended that this showed small purchases for personal use rather than one type bought in a large amount with the intention of dividing it and selling it. It was also submitted that not enough consideration was given to the money found being accounted for and to the specific reasons it was kept personally.

This Court is not permitted to re-try the facts. There was ample material to sustain the findings which were made. While I can understand the disappointment of the applicants at the adverse findings, when quantities of drugs and substantial cash sums are found close together courts and tribunals reach adverse conclusions. There is no necessary inconsistency between being a heavy personal user and selling prohibited drugs.

The applicants submitted that the judge's assessment of special circumstances did not pay enough attention to the background problems experienced by both of them leading to drug use and the extent of their use at the time of arrest.
Although the judge did not elaborate on these he did refer to the disadvantages which they had overcome. There is a limited amount of weight which can be attached to such factors for the purposes of sentencing.

The applicants submitted that the judge should have attached more attention to their subsequent rehabilitation and continued full time work and community service throughout the 18 months period from their arrest to the trial. The judge emphasised these matters. Rehabilitation is important and many found guilty work hard between their arrest and trial to demonstrate that there are very good prospects of rehabilitation. The court encourages this. Where it is real and substantial the sentence imposed is quite often at the lower end of the sentencing range for the offence involved. This appears to be a case where this has happened.

It was submitted that the prospects of returning to full time employment are reduced with a longer minimum term to be served. I accept that employment is usually hard to obtain for anyone who has been in prison. There are many employers who are reluctant to employ someone who has been in gaol. From an employment aspect I would accept that a shorter sentence is better for the applicants. It is one consideration amongst many.

The essential complaint was that the judge should have found that there were special circumstances and fixed a lower minimum term. I accept that being in prison for the first time can be a special circumstance.

There is a further special circumstance. They were arrested at 6.30 pm on 16
June 1994 but not charged until 1.42 pm on Friday 17 June 1994. They were it seems not dealt with by the Local Court until about 4 pm. No explanation appears for the long delay in charging them or bringing them before a court.
Bail was granted but because of the lateness of the hour the matter could not be processed and they were taken to a police van. Part of the problem may have been due to waiting for an acceptable person to attend to enter into an agreement to forfeit the sum of $10,000. Mr McKenzie was taken to Parramatta
Gaol. On his second day there when he declined another prisoner's demand for "some weed" Mr McKenzie was assaulted by four men. The assault included pushing him against the wall and attempting to remove his trousers. He was saved by a whistle blown outside summoning the men to a meal. As they left he was further threatened. Fortunately, he was able to avoid these men by associating with another group. The psychologist has written that as he told her of these events he became agitated, his lips quivered, he began to cry, his voice became shaky, and his hands were tightly clasped. His distress was apparent and it was only with great difficulty that he was able to describe the events. She said that he was suffering from a Post Traumatic Disorder and that prison would exacerbate this.

Ms Eve Jansen, Senior Clinician, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital has reported that Mr McKenzie could benefit from treatment to deal with the trauma arising from being assaulted in prison.

It appears that Mr McKenzie was in gaol for four days after being granted bail.

Ms Kotzur told the Court that the assault on Mr McKenzie in goal was raised on sentence and dismissed by the Crown Prosecutor as something that often happens in gaol. The Crown Prosecutor would have intended no more than that acts of violence of varying severity occur in gaols quite often. All such acts of violence are to be deplored.

The judge has not referred in his reasons to the period in gaol or what happened to Mr McKenzie. It was a harsh experience in prison and it affected
Mr McKenzie markedly. This is a case where it was apparent that the applicant would need a longer than usual additional term. He needs supervision to ensure that he receives adequate counselling re-assurance and support after his release from gaol.

For the purpose of resentencing we received the report of 27 August 1996 of the Welfare Officer at Mannus Correctional Centre. After referring to the ongoing support and encouragement which he has provided he continued: "On initial reception at Mannus [the prisoner] was visibly distressed and apprehensive with further enquiries revealing he had experienced an incident while he was at Parramatta Correctional Centre, and was still experiencing symptoms associated with trauma ...
 [The prisoner] is an inmate who continues to require support and re- assurance." 
The Clinical Psychologist who visits the Mannus Correctional Centre wrote in her report of 28 August 1996: 
Mr Brad McKenzie was referred to me earlier this year for counselling. He reported an attempted sexual assault upon himself by a group of other inmates in Parramatta Remand Centre late last year, which was still causing him a great deal of anxiety when I saw him. Specifically, he could not settle at
Mannus Correctional Centre because of his fears that he would be attacked again by inmates. This and other symptoms he reported caused me to consider him to be suffering from a degree of post traumatic stress disorder, in that he was experiencing loss of sleep and appetite, distressing dreams and flashbacks to the event, feeling at times he could not keep it out of his mind. He also had a strong sensation of no longer having control over his own life, in particular, over his own physical safety. While these phenomena are common to victims of sexual assault, the aspect of having to remain in a correctional setting where the attack occurred must have been particularly fear invoking.

Once he was assisted to transfer immediately to a unit with Mannus where he felt physically safer, that is with other inmates he felt would not harm him, and given the opportunity to ventilate his feelings in the counselling context, which he did to a certain extent, Mr McKenzie settled over the ensuing weeks and has since done very well at Mannus. However in my opinion, he has not entirely dealt with the emotional repercussions of being attacked by a group of other males in this way, and the issue may trouble him again in the future if he finds himself in any situation where he feels physically or sexually at risk from others."  
I would not consider intervening in respect of the length of the total sentence. That was correct. I keep in the forefront of my mind the seriousness of the offence including the profit element. I am persuaded that the judge erred in not taking the view that there were special circumstances requiring a longer than usual additional term given the effect of the initial attack upon him, the effect of the gaol term and the time he will need supervision to ensure he receives support, re-assurance and counselling. This will be especially necessary while he seeks and tries to settle into employment. I have taken into account the offences mentioned in Form 2.

I propose the following orders as to the applicant McKenzie:
Extend the time in which to seek leave to appeal.
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed.
In lieu of the sentence imposed the applicant McKenzie is sentenced to a minimum term of 12 months imprisonment commencing on 14 December 1995 and expiring on 13 December 1996 and an additional term of 8 months commencing on December 1996 and ending on 13 August 1997. The applicant McKenzie is to be released on parole on 13 December 1996.

As to the applicant Kotzur she had had traumatic experiences some years ago and in the relatively recent past. They were of a domestic nature. It is true that this is her first time in prison. She and McKenzie support each other.
However, it does not appear that there is sufficient by way of special circumstances to warrant the court intervening in her case. The offence was serious with its element of profit and her sentence is at the lower end of the range of sentences for such an offence.

As to the applicant Kotzur I propose the following orders:
Extend the time within which to appeal.
Leave to appeal granted.
Appeal dismissed 
JAMES J: I agree with the judgment of Smart J.
 * * * 
