

Thomas versus Eyles Matter No Ca 40402/97 [1998] NSWSC 394 (10 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 6 October 1998 
THOMAS versus EYLES 
CA 40402/97 September 1998 
Priestley JA, Beazley JA, Stein JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: COMMON LAW DIVISION - SIMPSON J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40402/97; CLD 11020/90 
DELIVERED: 10 SEPTEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 29-30 APRIL 1998 
PARTIES: THOMAS versus EYLES 
JUDGMENT OF: PRIESTLEY JA, BEAZLEY JA, STEIN JA 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: L A LEVY SC / J LONERGAN 
Respondent: J D HISLOP QC / P JENKYNS 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: BESTON & COMPANY 
Respondent: J M CRESTANI 
CATCHWORDS 
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
NO OF PAGES :51 
THOMAS versus EYLES 
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES - a motor vehicle accident left the appellant severely and permanently quadriplegic - liability admitted - on damages, numerous heads in issue.

On appeal: questions were raised as to the trial judge's findings on several heads of damage by both the appellant in the appeal and the cross-appellant in the cross-appeal; two matters of principle that arose were: the approach to the assessment of economic loss in regard to the period between injury and trial; the width of the rule in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer.

Held: when considering the various heads of damage, Simpson J recognised the possibility of differing methods of calculation and was conscious of the unreality of keeping them strictly compartmentalised: Paul versus Rendell [(1981) ALJR 371]; when assessing the injury-to-trial situation a judge must act on the basis that hypothetical possibilities are being dealt with and not facts that can be treated as certain; Malec versus J.C. Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) 169 CLR 683, Ahmedi v Ahmedi [(1991) 23 NSWLR 288]; gratuitous provision of services under the rules in Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer may include money earning services; the trial judge was not in error in the present case in her approach to any of the contested heads of damage.

Ahmedi versus Ahmedi <case>; <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 327] [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) [ss ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s73.html), [79](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) [Fisheries Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/fa1968110/) (Vic) 
ORDERS
Appeal dismissed; no order as to costs.
Cross-appeal dismissed; no order as to costs.

THOMAS versus EYLES 
PRIESTLEY JA: 
Introduction 
This is an appeal by Mr C. Thomas (the plaintiff) against the judgment of
Simpson J (12 June 1997) awarding him the sum of $8,021,764. The judgment was for damages for injuries suffered by the plaintiff on 26 April 1989 when a car, in which he was a passenger and the driver was the defendant, went off the road. The plaintiff was thirty-six at the time. His injuries made him very severely, and permanently, quadriplegic.

The only issues at the trial, in which the defendant admitted liability, concerned the assessment of damages. The issues were however complex. Evidence was given during 13 days, there were several days of oral argument, and lengthy written submissions.

Some matters were agreed. The amount of damages for non-economic loss was subject to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) of the [Motor Accidents Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/). The defendant conceded that for the purposes of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s79.html) the plaintiff was a most extreme case and therefore entitled to the maximum then allowable, $247,000.

In the way the trial judge dealt with the matter, there were nineteen heads of damage for her to consider. These are shown in the following table together with the amounts she thought appropriate.
Non-economic loss ,000
Loss of earning capacity (past) ,030,283
Loss of earning capacity (future) ,667,397
Gratuitous services (past) ,830
Home modifications ,000
Landscaping ,415
Additional home maintenance and running costs ,445
Home maintenance - handyman ,773
Therapeutic equipment and supplies ,506
Maintenance of therapeutic equipment ,406
Computer ,540
Motor vehicle ,514
Future medical expenses ,634
Future pharmaceutical expenses ,305
Future care costs ,327,550
Future paramedical expenses ,355
Vacation expenses ,000
Out-of-pocket expenses ,811
Interest 
Nil $8,021,7645 
In the appeal it was submitted for the plaintiff that the judge had made errors in regards to heads 3, 8, 15 and 19. The defendant cross-appealed on the grounds that the trial judge had erred in the amounts she arrived at for items 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 and also on the general ground that the total award was excessive.

Loss of earning capacity.

The following is an abstract, in a slightly different sequence, of the trial judge's reasons for her assessments of the plaintiff's loss of past and future earning capacity.

First she outlined the plaintiff's working life up to the time when he became an abalone diver.

He was born on 2 January 1953 and left school in 1968. From then until 1974, he was apprenticed and worked as a welder. He then did a training course in diving and spear fishing, activities in which he had always been interested.
From then on he worked in jobs which used both his diving and welding qualifications. He worked in the North Sea as a saturation diver and sub sea welder. He worked as a diver in Australia, off the coast, in rivers and in harbours.

He saved money from his work, married in 1976, had two children, and established his family in a home at Kiah near Eden where they lived until the time of his accident and in which they still live. In 1985 he began working for Oceaneering Limited. Nothing before the court other than its name gave any indication of the work of that company. In 1988 he did a diving medicine course. He also undertook other forms of additional training and worked at commercial diving.

In the month before he suffered his injury, the plaintiff became an abalone diver in Victoria.

In Victoria, the taking of abalone in commercial quantities was controlled by a licensing system instituted under the [Fisheries Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/fa1968110/) of Victoria.
Evidence was admitted about the way in which the licensing system worked. The trial judge summarised the [Fisheries
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/fa1968110/) and the evidence in a way which was not criticised in the appeal 
Section 13 of the [Fisheries
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/fa1968110/) authorises the licensing of fit and proper persons to take abalone for sale. The Act divides the Victorian coast for abalone diving purposes into three fishing zones. The eastern zone, which runs south west from the New South
Wales/Victorian border is the one where the plaintiff began to operate. In this zone twenty-three annual licences were issued, renewable annually. Each licence authorised the harvesting for sale of an annually declared quota. At the time of the hearing before Simpson J (1995), the annual quota had for some time been twenty tonnes. The Act permitted up to half of the quota to be transferred to another licence holder, with the consent of the Director
General in charge of the relevant department. The evidence of the Abalone
Manager of the relevant department was that he did not know of any refusal to renew a licence. Licence fees were payable annually. The licences ran from 1
April to 31 March the following year. Licensees must have shown their fitness to dive for abalone. Licences might be transferred with the approval of the
Director General subject to payment of a significant transfer fee.

The legal personal representative of a deceased holder of a licence was deemed to be the holder of the licence and might apply for its transfer.

Her Honour made two findings about the abalone industry which were basic to her assessment of the plaintiff's economic loss. These were not contested at the appeal. Her Honour, after describing what has already been summarised, went on to say: "These circumstances, and what appears to have been relatively constant overseas demand for abalone, have ensured very secure and substantial incomes to those fortunate enough to hold licences," and also "The limited number of licences in the zone, their virtual automatic renewal, and their income earning potential and fairly ready transferability make each licence an extremely valuable asset." 
The trial judge noted that it had been said in evidence that a new Act was being introduced, but indicated that as there was nothing before her leading to the conclusion that it was likely to affect materially the financial circumstances of abalone divers, she would have to proceed on the basis of the then existing system.

Three heads of claim for loss of economic capacity. The plaintiff's case was that before his accident he had arranged to buy an abalone licence for $620,000 (the first licence) and that he intended to acquire and more probably than not would have subsequently acquired a second licence. He claimed first that he would have become entitled to all the income from the first licence, second, to later income from the second licence and third that he would additionally have continued to earn income from time to time from overseas diving assignments.

The defendant disputed each of these three claims.

The trial judge made a detailed examination of the evidence relating to the plaintiff's claims. In summary her process of reasoning and conclusions were as follows.

First head of claim for loss of economic capacity: the first licence - findings of fact. The first licence was one that had been held by Mr B.
McKenna. He died in January 1988 leaving the licence to his stepdaughter, Mrs
Eyles. She and her husband (who later, as the driver of the vehicle in which the plaintiff suffered his injuries, became the defendant) approached the plaintiff soon after Mr McKenna's funeral with a proposal that the plaintiff do the diving necessary to take the abalone permitted by the licence. The plaintiff decided to become an abalone diver and during the year prepared himself for this. There were negotiations with Mrs Eyles and Mr Eyles, ending in arrangements the terms of which were disputed at the trial. One version was to the effect the plaintiff would take the licence over, pay Mrs Eyles half the agreed purchase price and share the profits half and half with her until he paid the second part of the purchase price. Another version differed in that it did not include an agreement that the plaintiff would get any interest in the licence.

At the trial Mrs Eyles, Mr Eyles, the plaintiff and Mr Kellow (the plaintiff's accountant) all gave evidence about the arrangements that had been made.

By the time of the trial, Mr and Mrs Eyles had separated and there were proceedings between them pending in the Family Court. The evidence of Mr Eyles and Mr Kellow about the arrangements was different from that of the plaintiff and Mrs Eyles. The trial judge indicated that if the question of the arrangements rested solely on the oral evidence she would have preferred the evidence of the plaintiff and Mrs Eyles.

However, a number of documents had been executed by the plaintiff and Mrs
Eyles on 17 March 1989. Her Honour thought the documents were important in deciding what arrangements had been made, but that they did not entirely resolve the question. (One of the effects of the documentation (drafted by accountants in Melbourne) was to cast the proposed transaction into one involving a trust/company structure which is unnecessary to explain here as both at the trial and in argument in this court attention was focussed on the substance of the arrangements underlying the form into which they had been cast.) 
Eventually, in arriving at her conclusion on what the arrangements were, the trial judge took into consideration the evidence of what had been said before the documentation was executed, the documentation itself, and evidence of events following the plaintiff's accident. The trial judge thought the agreements contained in the documentation were arguably ineffective in various respects. She said however that it was not her task to evaluate the effectiveness of the documentation in translating the intentions of the parties into binding agreements but the somewhat different task of ascertaining what the financial position of the plaintiff would have been had he not been injured.

One of the relevant events, which took place shortly after the plaintiff's injury, and while he was in hospital, was that he reached an agreement with
Mrs. Eyles and Mr. Searle (another abalone diver) about the first licence. The effect of the agreement was that Mr Searle was to become the licensee and that otherwise he would take the place of Mrs Eyles in the arrangements previously agreed upon between her and the plaintiff. That is, by medium of the company/trust arrangement previously referred to, Mr Searle would do the abalone fishing, he and the plaintiff would share the profits and Mrs Eyles would be paid $620,000, $500,000 twenty-eight days after the date of the agreement and the balance on an agreed subsequent date. The agreement between the parties to this effect was embodied in a contract executed on 18 October
The licence was transferred to Mr. Searle in that month and from then on was used in accordance with this arrangement. It was still being so used at the time of the trial.

On the question of the pre-injury arrangements, the trial judge first expressed her conclusion as being that on the balance of probabilities the plaintiff had arranged before his accident to acquire the McKenna licence in his own right, and that he and Mrs Eyles had agreed on a price of $620,000, the date for final payment being left open. The judge added that her survey of the evidence persuaded her that the plaintiff's plans immediately before his injury were substantially as he contended for and that he had realistic prospects of bringing them to fruition. She then proceeded on the footing that the basis on which the parties were acting at the time of the plaintiff's accident was that he was to pay Mrs Eyles $620,000 for the licence, do all the diving work authorised by the licence, and share the profits with Mrs Eyles until he paid the purchase price.

There was an issue before the trial judge about when the plaintiff would have been able to pay. She accepted evidence that the plaintiff would have been able to obtain finance for $500,000 and said that, on the basis of the other evidence before her, her assessment was that the plaintiff would have made the final payment to Mrs Eyles within twelve months of the date of the documentation of 17 March 1989, that is by 17 March 1990. She said she would calculate his earning loss on the footing that until 17 March 1990 he would have been entitled to half the earnings pursuant to the licence and after that the whole.

First head of claim: first licence - quantification of loss to hearing.
Shortly after the plaintiff's injury, 50% of the quota transferable under the licensing system was transferred to other licence holders who volunteered to pay (and did) the net proceeds of their diving ($130,216) to the plaintiff.
The judge held that accordingly there was no loss of income in the licence year 1 April 1989 to 31 March 1990.

The plaintiff had put in evidence as Ex J calculations by Mr Kellow which were accepted by the defendant, who however submitted that 40 per cent only of all past losses be allowed. The judge rejected this submission in regard to first licence past losses at the same time mentioning her decision (which I have yet to summarise) to allow only 30 per cent of second licence losses.

The trial judge then found, basing herself on Ex J, that the plaintiff's pre- trial losses (1990 to 1995) flowing from his first head of claim (his inability to exploit his entitlement under the first licence) should be allowed at $504,529.

Second head of claim for loss of economic capacity - second licence: findings of fact. In considering what the chances were that the plaintiff uninjured would have obtained a second licence the trial judge began by noting that the plaintiff had said he had formed the intention to obtain a second licence before his accident. She went on by saying there was no legal difficulty to prevent one person holding two licences; nor was there any physical difficulty for a person with the physical abilities and diving skills of the plaintiff in harvesting the forty tonnes quota permitted by two licences; it appeared that in 1994 a man had done exactly that in seventy or eighty days.

The plaintiff had given evidence that he would have also used the reserve earning capacity he had while working his first licence to go overseas for periods to do the sort of work he had previously done, which together with the earnings he would have cleared from working the first licence would quickly have put him in a position where he could finance the purchase of a second one. The availability of licences for purchase from time to time in the eastern zone was thoroughly canvassed in the evidence. The trial judge was satisfied the plaintiff would have had available for his use sufficient security to embark upon the necessary borrowing.

Simpson J's conclusion was that the plaintiff had some chance of acquiring a second licence at some time during the 1990s. After a careful assessment of the probabilities in the light of the facts concerning the plaintiff, his capacities and his likely financial resources at the time of his accident, the trial judge said she thought the plaintiff's chances of getting a second licence in or by 1992 should be assessed at 30%.

Second head of claim: second licence: quantification of loss to hearing.
When she came to assess the value of the plaintiff's second head of claim (loss of chance to exploit the second licence which she had held was 30%) the trial judge again used the figures prepared by Mr Kellow, not criticised by the defendant, and which she herself thought were arrived at by a method of calculation as accurate and fair as was available. Applying 30% to these figures in accordance with Malec versus J.C. Hutton Pty Ltd (1990) 169 CLR 683, she arrived at a figure of $214,200.

Third head of claim for loss of economic capacity to trial: lost overseas earnings - fact finding. In dealing with the claim for an allowance in respect of lost overseas earnings, the trial judge said she was not persuaded that it was probable the plaintiff would have undertaken such work for more than a very few years at most or in times of financial need. She rejected this aspect of his claim. She pointed out however, that she had taken into account the plaintiff's capacity to work overseas partly in his favour when considering his prospects of being able to finance a second licence had he not been injured.

The trial judge's findings on this head of claim were not put in issue in this court and need not be mentioned further.

Economic loss between trial and judgment. Having dealt with economic loss to trial, the judge then had to assess figures for the period between the 1995 trial and the date of judgment. She did this by allowing for a further one and three quarter years calculated on the same basis but using the 1995 actual figures as a guide.

Conclusions on pre-judgment economic loss. The trial judge's figures for prejudgment economic loss were thus as follows: 
Losses arising from the inability to exploit the Eyles licence to 1995: $504,529 
Losses incurred by reason of the inability to exploit the Eyles licence -1997 204,979 
Losses incurred as a consequence of a loss of a chance of acquiring and exploiting a second licence to 1995 214,200 
Losses incurred as a consequence of a loss of a chance of acquiring and exploiting a second licence 1995-97 106,575 
Total $1,030,283 
Future economic loss: first licence. In calculating the future loss the trial judge first considered the age to which the plaintiff would have continued diving. There was considerable evidence on this topic. The trial judge thought that, to be fair to the plaintiff, `arbitrary as it may seem' she should find that the plaintiff would have worked as a diver until he was sixty-two.

The trial judge then again worked on the basis of figures prepared by Mr
Kellow. His method in regard to the post judgment calculations had been to average the losses incurred in previous years (an approach not criticised by the defendant) which led to a figure of net weekly loss of $1,870.33. The trial judge accepted this approach. In the course of giving her reasons for this acceptance she made some statements in one passage which became the focus of the first matter argued in the appeal by the plaintiff. This passage was as follows: "It may be that the calculation provided by Mr Kellow contains a flaw in that the net income from which the loss was calculated was reduced to a considerable extent by interest charges associated with funds borrowed from the bank for the purchase of the licence. At some stage, no doubt, this loan would have been fully repaid (the defendant's report assumes by 1998) and the profitability of the enterprise increased accordingly. However, there are no figures on which I could adjust the calculation, and in any event the exercise upon which I am engaged cannot be a precise one. I have concluded that the plaintiff should be compensated for losses of income to the age of sixty- two." 
The plaintiff's criticism was that the opening part of the second last sentence quoted was incorrect, in that, it was submitted, there were figures upon which the calculation could be adjusted.

Before dealing with this criticism I will complete the summary of the trial judge's assessments of future economic loss.

For the first licence, taking Mr. Kellow's weekly loss figure of $1,870.33 for the 18 years until the plaintiff was sixty two calculated on the 5 per cent tables, she obtained the figure of $1,169,143.

Future economic loss: second licence. In assessing the losses referable to the second licence, the trial judge accepted the figure of $4,226 net per week calculated by Mr Kellow, which she said was not the subject of challenge by the defendant. The present value of 30% of this figure (calculated on the 5% tables) over an eighteen year period was $792,501.

Total future economic loss. The total of the two figures for future economic loss was $1,961,644 which the trial judge discounted by 15% to account for vicissitudes, reaching the figure which she allowed, of $1,667,397.

Plaintiff's first appeal submission. As already mentioned, it was submitted for the plaintiff that the trial judge was wrong when, in the passage above quoted, she said that "there are no figures on which I could adjust the calculation". She had there been referring to the possibility that she had underestimated the likely profitability of the enterprise by not allowing for the probability that at some stage the loan would be fully repaid and the annual earnings would not be reduced by the annual interest.

For the plaintiff it was pointed out that paragraph 5 of Ex J (Mr Kellow's report and calculations) dealt with the exact point which her Honour raised in the passage above set out. It also supplied figures on which she could have adjusted the calculation. At first sight the submission of counsel for the plaintiff that the trial judge must have overlooked the figures contained in par 5 seems to have merit. The next step in the argument is that had the trial judge used the figures in par 5 of Exhibit J, then by the application of the same method that she had used until reaching the point in her reasons when she said there were no available figures, a further sum of $630,000 should have been allowed.

The answers made by counsel for the defendant to the foregoing submissions involved two chief points. First, it was submitted that the claim now being advanced that future earnings should have been allowed at a greater figure because of the reduced amount of interest to be paid in later years was put on a different footing from that advanced to the trial judge. It was conceded by counsel for the plaintiff that this was so, in the sense that the greater earnings because of less interest argument was, at the trial, only put to the judge in relation to the calculation for lost earnings on the second licence, whereas in the appeal it was now being put in regard to both licences. This concession was restated by counsel for the defendant in answer to a question from the bench "The way in which the submission was put to her Honour ... was that the whole of the interest was cast upon the second licence". Counsel for the plaintiff raised no demur to this.

Having made the concession, counsel for the plaintiff nevertheless argued that there was little difference in the outcome caused by the reformulation of the submission. This was because much the greater part of the interest in question related to the second licence.

Counsel for the defendant (in the appeal) in turn made the concession that had the submission as now put been put to the trial judge it would not have been a case where the defendant could contend that he had been deprived of the opportunity of putting further evidence before the court bearing on the question. Counsel for the defendant did however submit that the plaintiff, after such a long trial, should not be permitted to put submissions to the appeal court which the trial judge had not had an opportunity of dealing with.

The second point made for the defendant drew attention to the fact that in the criticised sentence of the trial judge's reasons she had said not only that there were no figures on which she could adjust the calculation but had continued, "and in any event the exercise upon which I am engaged cannot be a precise one" and had then drawn attention to her finding, which a little earlier she had said might seem arbitrary, that she was allowing damages to the plaintiff on the basis he would have continued diving until he was sixty two.

It was submitted that her Honour was there indicating that while she was not overlooking the argument the plaintiff had advanced supporting a greater earnings figure, she thought she could fairly leave it out of account in arriving at a reasonable assessment as a matter of judgment in assessing the present value of the impairment of the plaintiff's earning capacity. It was submitted that this was in accordance with what had been said by the Privy
Council in Paul versus Rendell [(1981) 55 ALJR 371.] That was a case in which the Privy Council pointed out the number of different factors that had to be taken into account in assessing future economic loss in a case such as the present and had pointed out also the essentially speculative nature of the process of quantifying each of the several factors, and that it was illusory to treat the result of the mathematical process as having any logical connection with reality.

Reflection upon the whole of her Honour's reasons has led me to think that as she considered the various heads of damage, and the intricacies of calculation involved in some of them, she was very conscious of the unreality of keeping them strictly compartmentalised; put another way, she was obviously aware of the number of separate evaluations she was making which had an element of the arbitrary in them and the need to keep a reasonable balance among them as she went along.

With this in mind I have come to accept the submission for the defendant that the judge was treating the interest question in regard to future loss on the second licence (as the plaintiff had asked) and was saying in effect, `as a matter of judgment, and bearing in mind the other judgments I am making, whatever the position is on the figures, in reaching an overall result, I think I should refuse this claim'. In view of the question in fact relating mainly to the second licence, I do not think the judge was in error in this approach. The apparent oversight of Ex J's paragraph 5 did not in my opinion lead to a mistake of the kind identified by the Privy Council in Selvanayagam v. University of the West Indies [[1983] 1 WLR 585], as requiring correction.

The defendant's cross-appeal on economic loss. The defendant's submissions concerning the trial judge's assessment of economic loss challenged both past and future aspects. There were criticisms of factual findings which, subject to the two matters with which I will deal specifically, in my opinion were all properly based on evidence before the judge.

The first of the two matters requiring more specific attention relates to the arrangements which her Honour found were in place concerning the first licence at the time of the accident. One of the bases on which the trial judge had resolved the issue created by the difference between the evidence of the plaintiff and Mrs Eyles on the one hand and that of Mr Eyles on the other was her preference for the evidence of the former two over the latter. For the defendant it was pointed out that the trial judge had made no reference to the evidence of Mr Kellow whom she accepted in other respects and whose evidence was to the same general effect as that of Mr Eyles. Additionally, she had not referred to an affidavit sworn on 23 November 1989 by Mrs Eyles for use in proceedings under the [Family Provision
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/fpa209/) in the Equity
Division of this court. It was submitted that what she said in this affidavit about the arrangements made earlier in the year with the plaintiff about the first licence was inconsistent with the account she gave before Simpson J.

In regard to the affidavit point, I do not think that what Mrs Eyles said in the affidavit helps the defendant to any great extent. There are some inaccuracies and inconsistencies in par 11, which appears to mix up to some extent the pre-injury arrangement Mrs. Eyles made with the plaintiff in early and the October agreement between Mrs Eyles, Mr Searle and the plaintiff.
I infer from the terms of this affidavit that at the time when it was made Mrs
Eyles did not have relevant documentation to assist her recollection, and that without it her memory was inaccurate. In contrast, in the trial before Simpson
J the relevant documentation was available and Mrs Eyles, along with the other witnesses, was thoroughly cross-examined. Simpson J's observation of the examination and cross-examination must have played a part in the formation of that judge's favourable impression of the witness which was a factor in her decision.

In regard to Mr Kellow's evidence, I find it hard to accept that it was overlooked by the trial judge. The reasons she gave for the conclusions she came to in regard to the pre-injury arrangements seem to me to be the product of careful consideration both of the evidence and of the competing submissions. I do not see anything inherently improbable in her conclusions nor do I think that she overlooked any material matters. What happened subsequently, both in regard to the diving by volunteers for half the licence quota for the plaintiff's benefit and the later transfer of the licence to Mr
Searle, in a way leaving the plaintiff in substance an equitable half owner, in my view tends to add to the probabilities as found by the judge.

The other argument which needs to be dealt with specifically was based on what was said by Clarke JA in the course of his reasons in Ahmedi versus Ahmedi [(1991) 23 NSWLR 288] at 302. The passage, which I think contains enough facts for an understanding of the point discussed, explained a step in Clarke JA's reasoning necessary for getting to his conclusion. Handley JA agreed with
Clarke JA's reasons. The passage is as follows: "The second ground for challenge goes to the fundamental finding that she was totally unfit for employment for seven years. There is an initial difficulty involved in considering this ground in so far as his Honour has failed to disclose why it was that he reached a conclusion that, although her employment with the Botanical Gardens indicated that she had been fit for work four years prior to the trial, she had suddenly become totally unfit for work after the date of trial. Nor did his Honour explain why it was that her condition rendered her unfit for any work during the ensuing seven years.

There is no doubt that the respondent suffers from manic depressive psychosis with episodes which occur when she neglects to take her medication. There were four flare ups after January 1985, that is, in April 1985, October 1985, April and October 1988. It seems to me that on the whole of the evidence, and consistently with his Honour's conclusions in relation to past economic loss, error is involved in a finding that for seven years immediately following the trial the respondent would be totally unable to work and would lose wages she otherwise could, or might, have earned. What emerges from the evidence is that the respondent was fit for work as a laboratory assistant or in similar fields, although there was a real possibility that from time to time she would suffer from flare ups and be exposed to the risk of losing time from work and, perhaps, losing jobs.

Any assessment in respect of the impairment of future earning capacity necessarily involves a consideration of possibilities and his Honour was, as it seems to me, in error in treating as certain the fact that she would lose seven years wages from the date of trial: see Malec versus J.C. Hutton Pty Ltd <case>; [(1990) 169 CLR 638.] What required evaluation in this case was the extent of the possibility that she might lose some time from work and the allowance of proper compensation in respect of that possibility. In my view his Honour erred in determining that, as a matter of certainty, she would not earn any moneys from employment for seven years and that this was consequential upon accident caused disabilities.
In my view the evidence did not support the latter conclusion and the former involved an error of principle.

I would conclude, having regard to his Honour's finding on past economic loss which I do not think is open to challenge in this appeal, that the evidence went no higher than showing that there was a real and significant possibility that the respondent may from time to time have lost wages which she otherwise could have earned. Such loss of wages would come from the need to take time off during upset periods and the possible loss of employment. It is quite impossible to compensate that possibility in this case by reference to the tables of loss. All that can, in my opinion, be done is to make an allowance which seems appropriate to meet the possibility to which I have adverted. The figure which is appropriate in my mind is $15,000." (at 302) 
Clarke JA's figure of $15,000 replaced a figure calculated by the judge on the basis of $250 per week for seven years.

For the defendant it was submitted that the trial judge in the present case had made an error analogous to the error the trial judge in Ahmedi had made when he treated as certain the fact that the plaintiff there would lose seven years wages from the date of trial. The asserted error in the present case was said to be of a like kind because for the period from 1990 to 1995 the trial judge took as certain the fact that uninjured the plaintiff would have made full profits from the licence which by then, in the judge's view, he would have owned. Although what did happen in that period was known at the trial, what would have happened had the plaintiff been uninjured involved the same kind of consideration of possibilities as meant chance had to be evaluated and precluded any assumption of certainty. "Hypothetical situations of the past are analogous to future possibilities" (per Brennan and Dawson JJ in Malec at 639); and see also the references in the joint reasons of Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ to `future' or `potential' events (at 642,643).

The idea behind this submission is logical, but does not take sufficiently into account the practical differences in the assessment of losses suffered between injury and trial on the one hand and after trial on the other. The
Privy Council pointed out in Paul versus Rendell (at 372) that the after trial assessment "involves a double exercise in the art of prophesying", one prophecy being what will in fact happen to the plaintiff in the future, the other being what would have happened to the plaintiff in the future, if uninjured.

In regard to the period between injury and trial the court must make entirely factual findings about what has happened to the plaintiff and then compare them with the court's assessment of what would have happened to the plaintiff, uninjured. The second of these operations is analogous to the second of the two after-trial prophecies. It is sufficiently analogous to the assessment of what would have happened to the plaintiff, if uninjured after the date of trial, to attract the "chance" approach described in Malec and Ahmedi.

However, this assessment will be made, in respect of the injury to trial period, against the background that the judge will know what in fact happened to the plaintiff in that period. In some cases this will give helpful guidance, not available in the post trial assessments, for the hypothetical injury to trial assessment, sometimes less.

What seems to me to be important in what Malec brought out about assessment of the injury-to-trial hypothetical situation, is that the court making the assessment must recognise that it is a hypothetical situation that is being considered and that it cannot be dealt with on the same factual basis (of finding facts based on the probabilities and then treating them as established) that the court conventionally uses in deciding what did happen to the plaintiff in the period between injury and trial. The judge must act on the basis that hypothetical possibilities are being dealt with and not facts that can be treated as certain. It will frequently be convenient to deal with assessments of this kind in terms of percentage chances, but I do not think it is obligatory to do so, so long as the trial judge acts on the basis I have just mentioned.

In the present case, it seems to me the trial judge did approach the hypothetical injury to trial assessment in this way, even if not directly in the terms of Malec and Ahmedi. This appears from language she used, such as "realistic prospects" (Reasons p 21) and "This assessment I consider ...
to err on the side of generosity to the defendant" (Reasons p 21-22), in regard to the first licence. (This approach was quite explicit in regard to the second licence, where the chance of acquiring a second licence was put at %). That this general approach is an acceptable one seems to me to be shown by the following passage in the reasons of Brennan and Dawson JJ in Malec: "Damages need not be assessed by first determining an award on the footing that the hypothetical situation would have occurred and then discounting the award by a selected percentage. Damages founded on hypothetical evaluations defy precise calculation." (at 640) 
I do not think this is inconsistent with anything said by the other three judges. It recognises that although the method used by the judge in the present case is one that need not be used, it may be. Here, in my view, the fact that she was dealing with a hypothetical assessment was taken into account by the judge, although she did not use the percentage version of this method at this stage in her reasons.

I mention here that the way the trial judge dealt with the second licence was one of the defendant's matters of complaint comprehended in my earlier statement that a number of such submissions failed because they went to an area of fact finding with which the judge dealt appropriately. In regard to the second licence, I add that the judge's findings was in a much more difficult area of prediction and I am not at all sure that had I been the trial judge I would have arrived at her Honour's 30% result. However, the point is that that is not the point. In my opinion, it was open to the trial judge, on the evidence, to reach the result she did; it does not seem to me to have exceeded the boundaries of a reasonable assessment, nor can I see any mistake in the way in which she arrived at it.

In the result I do not accept the grounds of the defendant's cross-appeal relating to economic loss.

The plaintiff's living circumstances.

Because the way the plaintiff and his family were living before the accident and the way in which their manner of living has been changed following the accident are relevant to most of the remaining matters argued in the appeal and cross-appeal I will mention them at this point by giving a summary of
Simpson J's full description.

At the time of his accident the plaintiff and his wife were in the course of completing the building of their home at Kiah. The house was on a twenty-two acre block of land and was built to a high standard. It stood at the top of a hill overlooking a river. At the bottom of the hill there was a small beach at the river's edge. The property is bounded on one side by the Princes Highway.
There is an unsealed road from the highway to the house. Since the accident a room, used by the plaintiff as his day room, has been built close to the main house. Much of the land is uncleared. There is another unsealed road to the day room building.

At the trial there were issues concerning claims made by the plaintiff for the cost of: the day room; modifications to the house; changes to the surrounding land; future modifications, equipment and facilities to enhance what the trial judge called, in an understated way, "the plaintiff's severely reduced amenity of life"; and a care regime to permit him to continue to live in his home.

The questions involved in quantifying the total amount to be awarded to the plaintiff were difficult at the trial, and, even in regard to the reduced area of dispute, for this court. The difficulty in regard to the matters I am about to come to led the judge to discuss the approach to be adopted and the general problem of balancing the competing interests of the plaintiff and the defendant. She said: "Because of the magnitude of the claims made under the various heads, I have found it necessary to return to the fundamental principles on which damages in personal injury cases are awarded. These were re-stated by Clarke JA, with whom Handley and Sheller JJA agreed in Blake versus Norris (unreported, Court of
Appeal, 11 February 1997). The starting point is that a plaintiff who has been injured by the negligence of the defendant should be awarded such a sum of money as will, as nearly as possible, put him in the same position as he would have been in if he had not sustained an injury. It does not appear to me that this principle is confined to the award of damages for loss of earning capacity which was there under consideration, but applies generally, so far as it can, to the various heads under which damages may be awarded. A second principle is that expressed in Sharman versus Evans <case>; [(1977) 138 CLR 563.] The plaintiff is entitled to compensation for those expenses he has reasonably incurred, or will reasonably incur in the future as a consequence of the defendant's negligence: Sharman versus Evans <case>; [(1977) 138 CLR 563.] The plaintiff's claims in many respects demand a close analysis of the reasonableness test. What is ideal is not necessarily reasonable; Arthur Robinson (Grafton) Pty Limited versus Carter <case>; [(1968) 122 CLR 649.] In weighing the reasonableness of a particular claim, a court may balance the cost against the potential benefit to the plaintiff. The two principles may not always sit easily together. Had the plaintiff not been injured, he would, for example, have been in the position to enjoy the benefits of his property; he would have had ready access to all of it, including the grassy slope, the animal sanctuary, and the beach area, as well as locations more distant from his house.

He is not necessarily permanently deprived of these pleasures, but the costs of restoring them to him, it was argued by the defendant, are beyond what is reasonable on the Sharman test. In weighing the competing claims of the parties, I have endeavoured to balance reasonableness with such restoration of his former amenity of life as is possible. It has not always been an easy task." 
This seems to me to be a well stated recognition by the trial judge of the considerations she had to bear in mind in making her assessments. In dealing with the arguments raised by the plaintiff and the defendant in the appeal and cross-appeal, I have approached the issues with the same considerations in mind.

Future care costs.

In regard to this item a number of competing contentions were put before the trial judge, most of which she decided in favour of the plaintiff. She held that the plaintiff required twenty-four hour care; that in deciding how this should reasonably be provided for she should not assume that the plaintiff's wife would be providing some of the care; nor that there should be a deduction for the possibility that the plaintiff might undertake the management of his own care regime. She accepted that the plaintiff's wife had already, by force of circumstance, provided many hours of dedicated service to the plaintiff and did not think such a burden should remain on her. She accepted what the plaintiff himself had said, that his wife was his wife not his nurse. The wife had a life of her own to lead and two young children to look after.

The trial judge accepted a point made on behalf of the defendant that it would not be necessary for the plaintiff to have a carer who remained awake throughout the night. In deciding what would be a reasonable weekly allowance for twenty-four hour care the judge had to consider two contrasting sets of figures put in evidence by the plaintiff and the defendant. The plaintiff relied on evidence from Ms Collins, a service co-ordinator for the Home Care
Service supplying the plaintiff's care regime at the time of the trial. The
Home Care Service was partly government funded and was then supplying care for the plaintiff for something over twelve hours a day. (Mrs Thomas had the burden of caring for the plaintiff from eight pm until eight am most days.)
The weekly figure quantified by Ms Collins was $4,520.

For the defendant, witnesses from two private enterprises providing care gave their quantifications. One of these executives proposed a method of caring for the plaintiff which the trial judge did not consider adequate. The other, Mr
Zammit, costed a regime, which the trial judge considered to be adequate, at $3,000 per week. This proposal involved paying an overnight carer $75 a night and paying $22 an hour for all other times. The evidence was that this organisation would be able to obtain carers at these rates. The trial judge saw no reason why his evidence should not be accepted.

The two main errors which counsel for the plaintiff submitted the trial judge had made were that the evidence did not justify her in concluding that the duties of the night carer would be less onerous than those of the daytime carers and that she had misunderstood the quantifications that had been put before her by the various witnesses, with the result that the kind of caring arrangements which she eventually costed were either unworkable or difficult to manage for the figures she was prepared to allow.

I do not think that the criticisms of the trial judge's reasons for arriving at her conclusion are strong enough to overcome the orthodox reply which was made by counsel for the defendant, that is, that the home care regime for which Mr Zammit was estimating the cost was one in accordance with the medical evidence in the case, one which was put forward by a witness the judge was prepared to accept after he had been tested under cross-examination and was one which, it was submitted, the judge was entitled to accept as producing an appropriate figure, reasonable between the parties, to cover reasonable future care costs accommodating the needs of the plaintiff. From all this it followed that her finding should not be disturbed.

I agree with this submission.

Home maintenance - handyman.

Under this heading the plaintiff at the trial argued he should be allowed $611,850 calculated on the basis of $750 a week. This was to pay for the help of a handyman to assist the plaintiff with maintenance on his home property, involving both the house and the twenty-two acres (mainly bush) on which it stood. The handyman would be needed to look after animals in an animal sanctuary on the property, cut wood, clean gutterings and windows, and do general maintenance on the property such as clearing, slashing, irrigating, and maintaining precautions against fire. The plaintiff had been using a local handyman, Mr. Westley who over a period of five years up to trial, had been doing work of the kind mentioned for about five and a half hours a week at a charge of $25 an hour. This worked out at approximately $7,300 a year.

The defendant argued against anything being allowed under this head of claim.
The trial judge thought that the claim made was excessive but the nature of the plaintiff's home and property required something more than the usual allowance for maintenance (which had been said to be four hours). She decided to allow seven hours a week (that is a cost of $175 a week, which she quantified at $135,773).

The submission for the plaintiff in the appeal was based on a detailed analysis of all the evidence. It emphasised that in the years that Mr Westley was providing handyman assistance, members of the plaintiff's family, his brother, his wife, his children and also on occasions his daytime carers, helped with the work. It was also submitted that the judge had underestimated the number of hours Mr Westley had averaged over the years.

Notwithstanding these arguments I do not see that the judge made any error in arriving at the figure she adopted. The figure was at a level which accommodated any error made in working out Mr Westley's average hours. The trial judge also took into account the nature of the twenty-two acre property, the amount of work which would be required to keep it in reasonable condition as well as what was appropriate for around the house itself. Although different judges might arrive at different figures in estimating the assessment, I do not see any error of principle or in understanding of the facts in her Honour's reasons.

Interest.

A brief history of [s.73](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s73.html) of the [Motor Accidents
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/) is given in Riddle v. McPherson [(1995) 37 NSWLR 338], where the section in the form relevant to the present case is set out. The section is blunt and to the point. Sub-s (1) makes it clear that in respect of motor accidents any common law right to interest on damages is abolished. The only right is that which is conferred by the section. Sub-ss (2) and (3) then prohibit payment of interest on a wide range of heads of damage. As Cole JA said in Riddle the only two categories not subject to the prohibition are out of pocket expenses and loss of income earning capacity (at 342). Those two categories are governed by sub-s (4) which is the only source of a court's power to include any interest component in an award of damages in respect of a motor accident.

The relevant parts of sub-s (4) are "(a) Interest is not payable (and a court cannot order the payment of interest) on such damages unless: information that would enable a proper assessment of the plaintiff's claim has been given to the defendant and the defendant has had a reasonable opportunity to make an offer of settlement (where it would be appropriate to do so) in respect of the plaintiff's full entitlement to all damages of any kind but has not made such an offer, or the defendant has had a reasonable opportunity to make a revised offer of settlement (where it would be appropriate to do so) in the light of further information given by the plaintiff that would enable a proper assessment of the plaintiff's full entitlement to all damages of any kind but has not made such an offer, or if the defendant is insured under a third-party policy or is the
Nominal Defendant, the insurer has failed to comply with its duty under [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/maa1988166/s45.html) and (2A), or the defendant has made an offer of settlement, the amount of all damages of any kind awarded by the court (without the addition of any interest) is more than 20% higher than the highest amount offered by the defendant and the highest amount is unreasonable having regard to the information available to the defendant when the offer was made.

The highest amount offered by the defendant is not unreasonable if, when the offer was made, the defendant was not able to make a reasonable assessment of the plaintiff's full entitlement to all damages of any kind.

For the purposes of this subsection, an offer of settlement must be in writing." 
Where the requirements of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of sub-s 4 are fulfilled, it seems that interest must then be included in the award of damages, calculated as prescribed in sub-ss (5) and (6). Sub-s (4) does not appear to confer any discretion on a court to withhold inclusion of interest in an award of damages when the requirements of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) are fulfilled.

In the present case it was submitted to Simpson J on behalf of the plaintiff that the requirements of the three paragraphs of sub-s 4 were fulfilled and that interest was payable on out of pocket expenses and loss of income earning capacity, to the date of judgment.

The trial had commenced in Eden on 3 April 1995. The plaintiff made an offer on 11 April following which offers were exchanged until the plaintiff's final offer was made on 6 October 1995 the day on which judgment was reserved. The final offer made by the defendant was made on 5 October and resubmitted on 20
November.

The plaintiff's final offer was $8,500,000 inclusive of costs or $7,600,000 inclusive of costs but clear of payments made by the defendant to that date.
The defendant's final offer was $6,500,000 inclusive of costs and of payments made by it to that date. The parties agreed that for the purpose only of the trial judge's consideration of the interest application she should treat the plaintiff's costs as about $150,000. The result of the agreement between the parties was that the trial judge treated the defendant's final offer as one of $6,350,000.

In light of the offers history, sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) of sub-s (4)(a) were not available to enable interest to be payable under paragraph (a). Nor was it suggested that sub-paragraph (iii) was available. It followed that the only source of power was sub-paragraph (iv). On the foregoing facts, it followed that interest would be payable if the defendant's highest offer was unreasonable having regard to the information available to the defendant when the offer was made.

Simpson J accepted that at the time when the defendant's highest offer was made he was in possession of all relevant information, had had the opportunity of making his own assessment of the credibility of witnesses, of the validity of the claims made by the plaintiff, and was in a position to make an educated and informed assessment of the outcome.

The difference between the amount awarded by the trial judge, exclusive of interest, and the defendant's highest offer was 26.3%.

For the plaintiff it was argued that the foregoing facts showed that the defendant's highest offer was unreasonable.

The trial judge's conclusion was that the defendant's highest offer was not unreasonable having regard to the information available when it was made. She reached this conclusion after referring to the wide variety of heads of damage in the plaintiff's case, all requiring individual assessment and many being the subject of legitimate argument. She thought it was not unreasonable for the defendant to base his quantification on the evidence which most favoured his case both in regard to a critical matter, the plaintiff's diminution in life expectancy, and in relation to other heads of damage. The judge did not think that in doing this the defendant's offer was based on an assumption that the result on each head of damage would fall at the lower boundary of the legitimate range. Such an approach would in her view invite the conclusion of unreasonableness. But her opinion was that the defendant had made proper although tending to low assessments of the outcome.

In this case the trial judge was in a particularly good position to form an opinion about the reasonableness of the defendant's last offer. She was better aware than anyone connected with the case of the many possibly different overall results of it flowing from the possible range of reasonable responses to the many elements of the claim which required evaluative assessments from her. Sub-paragraph (iv) required that the defendant's highest offer fall short of the damages awarded by more than 20% and additionally that it be unreasonable having regard to the information available to the defendant when the offer was made. That is, the provision contemplated that offers that were not relevantly unreasonable might fall short of the result by more than 20%.

It seems to me that when this court on appeal is considering the question whether the decision of a trial judge that an offer had been relevantly unreasonable should be reversed, the court should try, as far as it can, to form an objective opinion on the question whether or not the offer was unreasonable, but it also seems to me that the court should sensibly take into account, in forming its own judgment, the fact, if it is the fact, as I think it is in this case, that the question was one in respect of which the trial judge was better informed than this court could be.

Taking these various matters into account I do not see any sign of mistake in anything said by the trial judge in her reasons on the interest question, nor, doing the best I can to form my own view about the unreasonableness of the offer, do I come to the conclusion that it was unreasonable.

In my opinion this ground of appeal fails.

Conclusion on plaintiff's appeal 
In my opinion all the grounds in the plaintiff's appeal fail, and it should be dismissed.

The further grounds in the defendant's cross appeal 
Gratuitous services.

The sum of $295,830 allowed by the trial judge for past gratuitous services was made up of two figures. The first was $165,614 which was allowed, on the basis of the rules in Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer <case>; <case>; [(1992) 175 CLR 327] for the wife's services to her husband, of a domestic and nursing kind, which had been extremely onerous. The figure of $165,614 had been agreed between the parties and no question was raised in the cross-appeal concerning the judge's decision to allow it. The second figure was $130,216.
This was the amount received by the plaintiff from the five licensed divers who harvested half of the quota under the first licence. A claim for this was made on the same basis as the claim for the wife's services.

The defendant's submission to the trial judge was that the plaintiff received the money by way of gift and the five divers had not undertaken services to the plaintiff in the sense in which that word was used in the two High Court cases. Her Honour did not accept this submission. She cited the following passages from Griffiths.
 "The principle in `Donnelly versus Joyce" [[1974] QB 454] readily enables an injured plaintiff to recover damages for his accident caused needs met by third party subventions in those very cases most calling for it. I refer to those deserving cases concerned with charitable subventions by friends or relatives who, to benefit the plaintiff, and with no thought of relieving the wrongdoer, gratuitously provide him with funds, services or goods. In such cases the courts will clearly not treat the gratuitous subventions as properly to be debited against the plaintiff." (per Stephen J at 175) "The fact that a relative or stranger to the proceeding is or may be prepared to provide the service gratuitously is not a circumstance which accrues to the advantage of the [tortfeasor]. If a relative or stranger moved by charity or goodwill towards the [plaintiff] does him a favour as a disabled person then it is only right that the [plaintiff] should reap the benefit rather than the wrongdoer whose negligence has occasioned the need for the nursing service to be provided." (per Mason J at 192-3) 
It seems to me both Stephen J and Mason J were making the point that when a favour is done to a disabled person, whether by a relative or a stranger, where the favour consists of the gratuitous provision (that is, a gift) of funds, services or goods, then the plaintiff should reap the benefit rather than the tort feasor defendant.

From this starting point the trial judge reasoned that the plaintiff's need for assistance was caused by his loss of capacity, his damages for loss of earning capacity in the first year after the accident were diminished by reason of the donation of the diving services, this being on the footing that the product of the diving services was not a gift. There was no reason why the defendant should obtain the benefit of the services given to the plaintiff.

This reasoning seems to me to be correct. In saying this, I am agreeing with a step implicit in her Honour's reasoning that I should refer to explicitly.
That step is that the kind of services that may be gratuitously provided include services of the kind in the present case, that is, money earning services. I am not aware of any other case in which it has been necessary to consider this question but in my opinion there is no reason why money earning services should not fall within the Griffiths rule or an analogous rule having the same effect.

There could be a problem concerning the quantification of those services because it seems to me that probably the amount recoverable would not be the amount received by the plaintiff but would rather be the commercial cost of the services of the divers. However, her Honour said "There was no argument that the amount claimed [$130,216] does not represent the true commercial value of the services", and it was on that basis that she allowed the amount claimed by the plaintiff. In the defendant's written submissions in the appeal, there was no issue taken with the trial judge's statement just quoted.
In oral submissions counsel for the defendant (who had not appeared at the trial) said "we submit that that wasn't in fact conceded" and went on to submit that the value of the services would be something less than the amount awarded, even if her Honour was right in her approach. He said no more than that about her Honour's statement that there had been no argument about the amount claimed. In reply, counsel for the plaintiff, who had appeared for the plaintiff at the trial, said "I cannot concede what my learned friend ...
said concerning the concession over the appropriate method of valuation is in fact the case. I have no note of that. It's not in my submissions or from what
I can see took place". Nothing further was said about the point by either counsel. As the matter was left in this court, and to the extent that what was said here raised an issue about what happened at the trial, this court cannot resolve the matter, and in my view should proceed upon the footing stated by the judge.

This being so I do not think this court should interfere. I mention however, another thought, prompted by the judge's observation that had the product of the diving been properly classified as a gift the plaintiff's damages for loss of earning capacity would have been greater by an amount equivalent to the amount of the gift. That is a feature of the case that does not usually appear in claims of this kind. It seems to me that the logical result of the point thus made by the judge (which seems to me to be sound) would be that the $130,216 was not income, but a gift, that the plaintiff's damages for loss of earning capacity could properly been treated as including the $130,216, which was the difference between the gross proceeds of the sale of the abalone and the net proceeds after the divers had taken out their expenses, and that that difference between the gross and the net could in addition have been claimed under the gratuitous services heading, with a result more favourable to the plaintiff than that reached by the judge.

Because I think this court should, in the circumstances above set out, act on the trial judge's understanding that there had been no argument about the amount claimed under this head, it is not necessary to form a firm opinion on the further matters I have mentioned. They leave me in the position however of thinking there are various bases for the allowance by the judge of at least the claimed amount of $130,216, and I am not persuaded that she was wrong to have included this amount in her assessment.

Home modifications.

On this topic the trial judge said in her reasons that it had not been contested the plaintiff was entitled to a component in his award of damages that would permit him to modify his existing home to his needs. She recorded that an advance had already been made which had been used to build the day room earlier mentioned, which she noted was very large and well equipped. She noted also that she agreed with the defendant that the fact that the plaintiff had chosen to build to a particular style and standard should not necessarily have the result that he was entitled to the whole of the cost so incurred. An architect for the plaintiff and another architect for the defendant had considered what was reasonable in the way of home modification and had prepared estimates of the costs.

The trial judge then considered the issues that arose from the differing opinions and proposals of the architects, which had been examined minutely in the evidence. The items considered included the day room, the sealing of roadways and the providing of paths to the house, safety and security items, and a claim for an inclinator which would enable the plaintiff to go from the house on the high level of the land to a point about half way down to the beach where the animal sanctuary had been created. The trial judge for the greater part accepted the submissions for the plaintiff and allowed a total of $385,000 for the various items. Of the sum allowed, $45,800 related to the inclinator, this item under this heading being the only one challenged by the defendant in its cross-appeal.

At the trial it was submitted that this was an unreasonable expense for the defendant to bear since there were alternative modes of transport the plaintiff could use to move from the house to the animal sanctuary. The trial judge said this was a difficult item to decide, because if the inclinator were not installed the plaintiff would, in her view, have little if any opportunity of enjoying his property other than the immediate surrounds of the house, yet on the other hand there were the limits which she had previously noted upon what a defendant might be required to provide by way of compensation. It appears that the reason why she resolved the competing interests in favour of the plaintiff was that in her view he had few recreations open to him, almost none outdoors and mechanical access to one area of the property would "make a modest inroad into the almost total confinement he [would] otherwise suffer".

The argument for the defendant in the cross-appeal was that her Honour was in error in thinking the inclinator was necessary to give the plaintiff an opportunity of enjoying his property that he would not otherwise have. It was pointed out that a suitably modified four-wheel drive vehicle had been provided for which would give him some mobility in the property and that the claim was simply not soundly based in fact.

There is some force in this submission which presumably is what caused her
Honour to say she had found it a difficult part of the plaintiff's claim.
There are, however, some general and particular considerations relevant to this. In regard to the case overall her Honour had distinct advantages over this court in her approach both to various heads of damage and also to individual items for which claims were made in the plaintiff's case. This court has had to consider only the more limited claims raised by the appeal and cross-appeal. It is difficult for a court dealing with fragmented parts of the case to get the same overall view of it as the trial judge necessarily had. Some parts of the claim not contested in this court were linked with other parts that have been contested. The trial judge also had the benefit of considering the evidence relating to all these matters in light of her having visited the plaintiff's home. The particular consideration in regard to the claim now being considered is that the advantages I have mentioned must have had the effect of putting the judge in a better position than this court to understand the evidence concerning home modification, landscaping, the need for paths and roads and their sealing, all in relation to the ability of the plaintiff to make practical use of the various facilities provided or intended to be provided. It seems to me it must have been in the light of her Honour's enhanced understanding of the evidence flowing from (inter alia) the view, that she expressed the opinion that without the inclinator the plaintiff would have little, if any, opportunity of enjoying his property away from the house.
I cannot see any error in her having formed that opinion in the circumstances.

In the result I see no reason for accepting the defendant's submissions on this item.

Landscaping.

This was another item with which the trial judge felt difficulty. The animal sanctuary earlier mentioned had been established on a plateau about half way down to the river from the house. The plaintiff had kept geese and turkeys there and also grown some native plants. The judge noted he had always been interested in wild life and proposed an animal shelter closer to the house to which he would have access if the road was sealed in some way. Her Honour then said: "What he proposes, and the costings, are contained in ex PP, a quote from
Millingandi Landscaping. There was no dispute about the reasonableness of the costs, should the need for the landscaping be accepted. The question is whether reasonable compensation for the plaintiff's injury demands or permits an allowance for work to this extent. No submissions to the contrary were put on behalf of the defendant. The question I have to determine is whether the principles guiding the award of compensatory damages are such as to permit or require that the plaintiff be allowed this sum, or a sum to enable him to have access to parts of his property other than the specifically residential areas.
After some hesitation I have concluded that the sum should be allowed. In doing so I have had recourse to fundamental principles concerning the award of damages, to which I have earlier referred. I allow the sum of $57,415." 
The general point made for the defendant at the trial, and repeated here, was similar to that in regard to the inclinator. It was that in view of the other facilities available or to be available on the property, it was unreasonable to place the further burden on the defendant of providing compensation for the pathway to the proposed new animal shelter.

A second argument which at first sight lent force to the first was that her
Honour was wrong in saying in the passage quoted above that no submissions to the contrary had been put for the defendant. The defendant annexed to his written submissions part of written submissions which had been before the trial judge which showed that the claim had at all times been opposed, the only agreement being in regard to the reasonableness of the amount claimed for the proposed work in the event the court found the defendant should bear the cost of the proposed work.

On consideration however of what her Honour said about "no submissions" I do not think it can mean that the trial judge was acting on the basis that no submissions about the item had been put before her. Had she been of that view there would have been no need for her to consider, as she explicitly did consider, whether or not it was reasonable for the defendant to be required to compensate the plaintiff in respect of this item. Although I am not sure what the sentence in question means, I feel confident that whatever it means the trial judge considered the substantive submission made for the defendant on the point on its merits.

This means that this court must consider the same question the trial judge considered, the reasonableness as against the defendant of this particular claim. Broadly for the same reasons that I have given in dealing with the inclinator item, I am not persuaded that the trial judge made any appellable error in regard to this item either.

Damages excessive 
For the defendant it was submitted that there must have been some overlapping between the many separate heads of damage which will have had the effect of doubling awarding the plaintiff damages in some respects. Therefore, it was said, the trial judge should have applied a discount to a number of specified heads of damage of 15% as being reasonable in all the circumstances.

Earlier in these reasons I have indicated that I have the clear understanding from reading the whole of what her Honour said in this case that she had well in mind the kind of doubling up and over compensating possibilities referred to by the defendant and sought to be careful as she went along from head of damage to head of damage to avoid such over compensation. In my opinion, there is no combination of any of the various heads of assessment which stands out as effecting a doubling compensation. As far as I can judge it, the trial judge succeeded in avoiding that situation.

The defendant's second submission under this heading was to the effect that an objective look at the overall figure of damages arrived at by the judge shows that it was unreasonably disproportionate to the damage sustained by the plaintiff.

There are many cases where familiarity with awards currently being made in common categories of case makes such a final survey both practical and appropriate. Even in this case, I suppose, such an approach could be used if the sum for damages had been $100,000,000.

The present case brings together both a very severe example of one of the worst kinds of injury a person can suffer together with circumstances personal to the plaintiff which are unlikely to be repeated; his occupation, a high standard of home dwelling, his providing for his family at Kiah and the particular circumstances of living there, and his connection with commercial diving for abalone in the eastern zone of Victoria with the singular opportunities provided to licence holders there of earning very large sums of money by comparatively short bursts of skilled work, with the prospect of that opportunity stretching forward into the indefinite future.

General experience is of little help in trying to assess what is just and fair compensation in such a case. All that can be done is to do what the trial judge did here, that is to assess the claims presented for the plaintiff and contested for the defendant and to bring to the assessment a mind doing its best to achieve fairness between the parties.

Looked at item by item as contested in the appeal, and noting that a number of items were not the subject of contest, it seems to me that the trial judge approached the matter reasonably, as is shown by the opinion I have reached that none of the grounds of appeal and cross-appeal should be upheld, which has the consequence that I do not think the defendant's final general ground of appeal that the amount of over $8,000,000 is unreasonably disproportionate should be upheld.

Conclusion on defendant's cross appeal 
In my opinion all the grounds in the defendant's cross appeal fail, and it should be dismissed.

Conclusion 
My opinion that both the appeal and the cross-appeal should be dismissed leaves the question of costs to be decided.

There was considerable argument put to the court in support both of the appeal and the cross-appeal and there was some overlapping between grounds in the appeal and cross-appeal, and also of course considerable argument by each party in opposition to the other's grounds of appeal. In short, the argument in the appeals was considerable on both sides. In my estimation, the expenditure of time and effort on both sides will have been about the same.

In view of that and of the result I have arrived at, it seems to me that neither side should have to bear any part of the other side's costs of the appeals. For that reason I would propose that no order for costs be made in either the appeal or the cross-appeal.

The orders I propose are:
Appeal dismissed; no order as to costs.
Cross appeal dismissed; no order as to costs.

THOMAS versus EYLES 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Priestley JA. 
THOMAS versus EYLES 
JUDGMENT 
STEIN JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
