

Application of Theatre Freeholds Ltd and Ors [1996] NSWSC 189 (12 June )

APPLICATION OF THEATRE FREEHOLDS LTD & ORS /91 
Wednesday 12 June 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES EQUITY DIVISION 
YOUNG, J 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: This is an application by Theatre Freeholds Limited ("the Company") and certain of its members to convene a meeting of members for the purpose of considering a proposed scheme of arrangement between the Company and its members.
 
COMPANY HISTORY 
To understand the circumstances which have led the Company to propose a scheme of arrangement, it is necessary to consider the circumstances of the formation of the Company, and the circumstances in which shareholders came to contribute their money to it.

From 1939 to 1948 a theatre company, Independent Theatre Limited, was the lessee of theatre premises at 267-271 Miller Street, North Sydney ("the theatre"). Independent Theatre Limited had developed a reputation for excellence in the production of plays but by 1947 was experiencing financial difficulty and had been threatened with eviction by the owner of the theatre.
It became apparent that the theatre company would find itself without a venue, and might face decline and possible extinction. At the instigation of the late
Mr Justice Nicholas and other prominent citizens, the patrons of the theatre met and agreed to subscribe money to form a new company (which became the
Company) to purchase the whole of the property on which the theatre was located. This consisted of the theatre and two shops, each with an attached residence. It was the intention of the subscribers that the theatre be leased to Independent Theatre Limited for theatrical purposes and that the shops and residences continue to be leased to existing tenants. The Company was incorporated on 8 January 1948 with a nominal capital of 20,000 [sterling]1.0.0. shares. It distributed application forms, predominantly to patrons of the arts including patrons of Independent Theatre Limited. Within three months 1,019 [sterling]1.0.0. shares had been issued and further applications filtered in so that in due course there were 1,242 issued shares of [sterling]1.0.0. each.

The Company adopted the Regulations in Table A to the Companies Act 1936 as its Articles of Association with few modifications. One modification was made by Article 6A which restricted any person from holding more than 100 shares of any description in the capital of the Company and gave power to the directors to refuse to register a transfer if this restriction would be infringed.
Regulation 19 of Table A was also modified so as to provide the directors with a discretion not to register a transfer if they considered it would not be in the interests of the Company for the transferee to be a shareholder.
Regulation 54 of Table A was modified so that there would be one vote per member on a show of hands and on a poll, one vote for each share up to and inclusive of 10 and one vote for each 10 shares thereafter.

It is fair to say that the modification of the Articles of Association to which I have referred was aimed at preventing an accumulation of power in a small group of people.

The Articles of Association appointed the first directors, namely HS Nicholas, the former CJ in Eq, the gentleman who later became Hardie, JA and Mr W H
Travers, a company director who is one of the plaintiffs and who has given evidence in these proceedings. These people had been key members of the group which founded the Company and had made their views as to its purpose completely clear.

The Company purchased the theatre and associated shops and residences in 1948 for [sterling]8,500.0.0. The Company raised part of the purchase price by bank overdraft and an issue of debentures, but these have all been repaid.

Independent Theatre Limited continued its activities at the theatre from 1948 until 1976. Independent Theatre Limited became a tenant of the Company and some other parts of the building were let to individual tenants. From 1948 until the time the property was sold in 1988, the board of the Company adopted the policy that the rent being paid by Independent Theatre Limited and subsequent theatrical tenants was set at a level sufficient to cover its expenses including maintenance and repair. Rent paid by non-theatre tenants was at market rate.

During the whole of the period from 1948 until 1988, the sole activity of the
Company was the management and maintenance of the building in which the theatre was located. The Company is not engaged in any other business. The
Company always operated as a non-profit making venture and never declared any dividend. The directors and secretary of the Company provided their services without charge except for some accounting and legal expenses.

Independent Theatre Limited ceased operation on 18 July 1977 and gave the
Company notice of the termination of its tenancy on that date. The theatre was let to various theatrical producers from then until the mid-1980s. However, by the mid-1980s, the cost of maintaining the theatre had grown and the management of the theatre had become increasingly time consuming and difficult. A meeting of the board of directors on 1 May 1985, resolved to sell the building at the best obtainable price and to deal with the proceeds in accordance with the aims and objectives of the Company.

The theatre was sold by the Company to the Australian Elizabethan Theatre
Trust. The purchase price was secured by a mortgage back of $405,000.00. Up until 1993, the Company's sole asset, apart from a small amount of cash, was the proceeds of sale and the mortgage from that Trust.

In 1993, Seaborn Broughton Walford Pty Ltd purchased the theatre from the
Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust and repaid the mortgage debt. That company is the trustee of the Seaborn Broughton Walford Foundation ("the
Foundation") which Foundation was established by deed of 9 October 1986. The
Foundation is an active supporter of the arts and since acquiring the theatre it has commenced its restoration.

Following the sale of the theatre the Company adopted the practice of donating the net proceeds of its investments to bodies carrying out activities in the dramatic and performing arts. From the time the Company sold the theatre its income has been subject to income tax. Hence the net income available to be donated to other bodies is the income after the payment of tax.

The directors take the view that the continued operation of the Company is inconvenient and inefficient for the following reasons:- 
Since the theatre has been sold the only remaining assets of the company as at 30 June 1995 are invested funds of $453,387. In consequence the original focus of the Company's subscribers no longer exists.

Income earned from interest during the year to 30 
June 1995 was $35,129.

The only ongoing operation of the Company is the donation of funds to arts bodies.

There are numerous other bodies who conduct similar activities; and 
The ongoing activities of the Company would be uneconomic if secretarial, accounting and legal services were charged by officers of the Company at commercial rates.

In these circumstances, the board has concluded that the intentions and objects of the subscribers to the Company would best be served by transferring the remaining assets of the 
Company to a trust established for the purpose of promoting the dramatic and other arts.

An attempt was made to do this in 1991. On 30 April 1991, a meeting of the directors of the Company resolved to assign the assets of the Company to a newly established trust with at that time minimal assets whose objects include the promotion of the dramatic and other arts. That meeting of directors also resolved to convene a general meeting of the Company to ratify the assignment of the assets of the Company to that trust, to commence proceedings, the broad purpose of which was to ensure that the court saw no difficulty in the proposal, and then to wind up the Company. The proceedings were thus commenced, but on 10 December 1991, Kearney, J stood them over generally. I am told that the reason was partly because some doubts were felt about the power of the Company to engage in the transaction and the power of the general meeting to ratify such a resolution of directors, and partly because the directors came to doubt the practical wisdom of in effect setting up a new trust to administer the assets of the Company.

On 6 May 1992 a general meeting of the Company resolved to amend the
Memorandum of Association of the Company by adding a number of additional objects. Clause 3 of the Memorandum had added to it the following:- 
To transfer the whole undertaking and assets of the Company or any part thereof to a trustee to hold them for the benefit of the performing arts in Australia for all or any of the purposes set out in paragraphs (r) to (cc).

To enter into and seek approval of a scheme of arrangement and or a reduction of capital of the company and to take ancillary or other steps to facilitate or effect the objects referred to in paragraph above.
 
LOSS OF CONTACT WITH MEMBERS 
As mentioned earlier, there are now 1,242 issued shares. The register of shareholders of the Company today shows that there are exactly 150 registered shareholders. The largest shareholding is a block of 100 shares. The second largest is a holding of 91. The third largest is a holding of 80 shares, held by a company controlled by Mr Travers. The fourth largest holding is 60 shares registered in the name of Independent Theatre Limited. The vast bulk of the shareholders hold 10 shares or fewer. Of these, 41 people hold 5 shares, 16 people hold 2 shares and 34 people hold 1 share.

Over the years, the Company has lost contact with many of its members. Over the years a number of notices to shareholders have been returned to the
Company as having failed to reach the addressee. The Company secretary is aware that this has happened in relation to 102 of the Company's 150 shareholders. These "lost" shareholders hold 718 of the issued shares (which is 58% of the total issued shares). The Company recognizes that it may be the case that some of the addresses it holds for other members are also not correct. Some of the members, who were original subscribers in 1948, are known to have died. The executors of deceased members have not always sought to be registered as holder of that member's share or shares.

In the years from 1980 until 1986 inclusive, there were never more than six shareholders (apart from the directors) who either attended the annual general meeting or sent apology. From 1987 onwards, with one exception the persons attending the annual general meeting have consisted of the directors plus one other person (who holds 10 shares). The exception is the 1989 annual general meeting when two shareholders, apart from the directors, attended, each of which shareholders held 10 shares.
 
THE DIRECTORS' PROPOSAL 
The board of the Company continues to be of the view that the intention and objects of the subscribers would be best served by transferring the remaining assets to a trust established for the purpose of promoting the dramatic and other arts. The directors have resolved, after inquiry, that the Foundation would be the most appropriate recipient of those assets.

It is in the light of these circumstances that the directors of the Company formulated a proposal aimed at transferring the assets of the Company to the
Foundation. Under the directors' proposal, the Company was to enter into a scheme of arrangement with its members whereby the Company's assets were to be transferred to the Foundation subject to an "opt out" procedure whereby any individual member had the option to require the scheme administrator to pay to him or her an amount approximately equal to the sum that would otherwise be distributed to that member on a winding up of the Company. The proposal provided for the Court approving the scheme of arrangement and the reduction of capital effected by the scheme.

It is in these circumstances that the current application is brought before the Court. The application before me on 18 March 1996 was for an order under s (1) of the Corporations Law to convene a meeting of members to consider the proposed scheme of arrangement.
 
JURISDICTION TO APPROVE THE PROPOSED SCHEME OF ARRANGEMENT 
Section 411(1) of the Corporations Law provides, so far as is presently relevant:- "Where a compromise or arrangement is proposed ...
 between a Part 5.1 body and its members or any class of them, the Court may, on the application in a summary way of the body ... order a meeting or meetings ... of the members of the body or class of members to be convened in such manner, and to be held in such place or places (in this jurisdiction or elsewhere), as the Court directs and, where the Court makes such an order, the 
Court may approve the explanatory statement required by paragraph 412(1)(a) to accompany notices of the meeting or meetings." 
This application calls for a decision on how far the power conferred under s is limited by other parts of the Corporations Law or by reason of questions of public policy.

Prior to <case> of the Companies Act 1936, there was no statutory provision for the Court to sanction a compromise or arrangement between a company and its members. There was power in <case> for creditors to enter into an arrangement with a company about to be or in the course of being wound up. There was also power in <case> for a company that is proposed to be wound up to transfer the whole or a portion of its business or property to a new company in consideration of the issue of shares or debentures in the new company. Section sets out a regime whereby a proposal was sanctioned by a special resolution of the members but provided that any member who dissented from the special resolution had the right to demand that the liquidator abstain from carrying the resolution into effect or purchasing his interest at a price to be fixed under <case>.

In England, <case> of the Joint Stock Companies Arrangement Act 1870 provided further authority to deal with arrangements between the company and its creditors by authorising the Court to convene a meeting of creditors to consider an arrangement. It was only by <case> of the English [Companies Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1900107/) that there was legislative sanction to extend this procedure to arrangements between the company and its members. Section 2 of the 1870 Act became <case> of the NSW Act of 1899.

The procedure in England under the equivalent of NSW (1899) <case>, was to require meetings of contributories to be held; see In re English Scottish & Australian Chartered Bank [[1893] 3 Ch 385]; In re Tea
Corp Ltd [[1904] 1 Ch 12], 19. There was no statutory warrant for the calling of a meeting of members, but it was evidently done because the Judges thought it fair. It may be that this explains why at least three cases were dealt with before the 1900 [Companies
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/vic/histact/ca1900107/) in which orders were made compromising members' rights after a meeting of members where the safeguard under (1899) <case> was not included; see Re Imperial Property
Investment Co Ltd Vaughan Williams, J, August 1894, unreported, but noted
Palmer's Company Precedents 11th Ed (1912) p 1015; Re The Florida Land and Colonization Co Ltd, Wright, J, 18 February 1899, unreported, noted
Palmer op cit p 1038 and Re Canning Jarrah Timber Co (WA) Ltd [[1900] Ch 708.](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1900%5d%201%20Ch%20708 "View LawCiteRecord" )

Apart from any statutory provision, there was, of course, the right of the liquidator and each individual member to make a compromise and if the liquidator was able to reach a compromise with each individual member that would be efficacious; see for instance In re Anglo-Romano Water Co (Wright's
Case) [(1870) 5 Ch App 437.] There was, however, no power by scheme to bind a minority.

In this last case the Court of Appeal only sanctioned the scheme on the basis that the members would have the rights given to them under the equivalent of s 261, but the Court did not deal with the more interesting question as to whether there was any power to order a meeting for a members' scheme at all; see the discussion by Rice in (1958) 21 Mod LR 623, 628.

Up until 1936, so far as NSW is concerned, there was no power to deal with an arrangement between the members except in a situation where the company was to be wound up and where any dissentient shareholder was given a right either to stop the scheme or alternatively to be bought out at a fair value. In <case> of the Companies Act, 1936, schemes of arrangement were extended to companies whether or not there was a proposed winding up.

It will be observed that there are considerable differences between the approach under <case> of the 1936 Act which is now <case> of the Corporations
Law and (1899) s 261, which became <case> of the 1936 Act (its current equivalent is <case> of the Corporations Law). I will, from now on, use the numbers of the sections as they appear in the Corporations Law.

It will be seen that under <case>, a dissenter has the right to be bought out.
Under the authorities decided under <case>, it is no bar to a successful arrangement being made under <case> that the transaction may have been ultra vires the directors so long as it was not ultra vires the liquidator. When I speak of authorities decided under <case> I should note that as far as I am aware, the most recent case decided under the section was decided 62 years ago in O'Flaherty versus Carcary <case>; [(1934) 51 CLR 530.] The section is not even mentioned in the latest edition of
McPherson The Law of Company Liquidation: the section, however, remains in the legislation.

However, even under <case>, the liquidator could not make an arrangement whereby a member's nil limited liability (because the member held fully paid shares) was exchanged for partly paid shares in a new company: Clinch v
Financial Corp [(1868) LR 5 Eq 450], affirmed [(1868) 4 Ch App 117.] 
Again, where <case> applied, the company was ridding itself of its business and was soon to be dissolved; accordingly, there was no problem with continued relations between the members of the old company. Furthermore rights were given to dissentients to be paid out and it was clear that schemes which endeavoured to circumvent this statutory protection were invalid.

The same mindset applied when the jurisdiction was expanded to cover members' schemes. In In re Cooper, Cooper & Johnson Ltd [1902] WN (Eng) 199,
Byrne, J said that where a scheme of arrangement involved a reduction of capital, that reduction had to be carried out in accordance with the statutes specially dealing with reduction of capital. In Re Guardian Assurance Co [[1917] 1 Ch 431] at 441, Younger, J said of an earlier version of <case>, "Its purpose is strictly limited: it does not confer powers; its only effect at any time is to supply, by recourse to the procedure thereby prescribed, the absence of that individual agreement by every member of the class to be bound by the scheme which would otherwise be necessary to give it validity. The section accordingly has no application to an arrangement which is ultra vires the company, nor to an arrangement of a kind which can only be effected in a prescribed way, eg, a reduction of capital, or a reconstruction ...".

Although the actual decision in the Guardian Assurance case was overturned on appeal, those words remained of authority. Younger, J came to a similar conclusion in a case that is less well reported: Re Whitepass & Yukon
Railway Co Ltd (1918) 63 So Jo 55. See also Re Palace Hotel Ltd [[1912] Ch 438](/cgi-bin/LawCite?cit=%5b1912%5d%202%20Ch%20438 "View LawCiteRecord" ) and Re JA Nordberg Ltd [[1915] 2 Ch 439] and Re
Norfolk Island & Byron Bay Whaling Co Ltd (1969) 90 WN (Pt 1) 351.

Those initial views were built upon in later years. In Re Oceanic Steam
Navigation Co Ltd [[1939] Ch 41], Simonds, J had to consider whether there was any power in the Court to sanction an arrangement which would have been ultra vires the company. At p 47, he reached the view that the answer was no. All that the current section did was to provide machinery whereby an arrangement could be made binding on dissentient persons by order of the Court not to extend the powers of the company or its members. Despite counsel's assurance that the
Court had made many such orders, Simonds, J followed what Younger, J had said in the Guardian Assurance Co case.

In Re St James' Court Estate Ltd [[1944] Ch 6], the question was whether the Court could sanction a scheme of arrangement under which issued preference shares were to be converted into redeemable preference shares.
Simonds, J again held that he was not prepared to sanction such a scheme because such a conversion could only take place if the steps appropriate to reduction and simultaneous increase of capital had taken place.

In Victoria in Re International Harvester Co of Australia Pty Ltd <case>; [[1953] VLR 669], the Full Court had to consider whether it should sanction a scheme which altered the Memorandum of Association so as to convert the company into a proprietary company. There was a provision in the Victorian
Companies Act of 1938 permitting this to happen. The Full Court held that because this was so it was not possible to effect the alteration by scheme of arrangement.

Finally, in this State, the Chief Judge in Equity in Re Australian
Consolidated Press Ltd [(1994) 117 FLR 451] and again in
Re Bellara Medical Products Ltd [(1996) 14 ACLC 332], showed how the procedural difficulties are to be dealt with where there is a proposal both to reduce capital and also to rearrange the rights of the members or creditors.

Before summing up the effect of these cases I should deal with one other aspect. From early times it has been said that the majority must act fairly and bona fide and without improper motive; see Re Alabama, New Orleans,
Texas and Pacific Junction Railway Co [[1891] 1 Ch 213.] 
Ordinarily, subsequent cases have shown it has been sufficient protection against abuse of this principle for the Court to examine the scheme when either convening the meeting or approving it. Accordingly, as Maugham, J would have said, had he spoken in non-sexist language in Re Dorman Long & Co [[1934] Ch 635], 657, the Court must see "whether the proposal is such that an intelligent and honest person, a member of the class concerned and acting in respect of his or her interest, might reasonably approve." The Court, however, does ensure that the information given to creditors or members as the case may be is sufficiently full to enable the creditors or members to make an informed commercial decision, Re Crusader Ltd [(1995) 17 ACSR 336.] It is always recognized that in the commercial decision that has to be made, creditors or members may very well have to abandon their rights. As Trollip, J said in Du Preez versus Garber: In re die Boerebank Bpk [1963] 1 South African
LR 806, 823, "The fact, however, that a scheme deprives creditors of rights, or is prejudicial in some way to their interests is not by itself an obstacle to its confirmation by the Court, if the statutory majority of such creditors approve of it. Very few schemes conceived when a company is in liquidation because of being unable to pay its debts, can ever be perfectly satisfactory to all creditors ...".

However, it must not be forgotten that the general principle enunciated in
Re Dorman Long & Co Ltd is based on the assumption that there is no improper motive. That is, it applies if one can see that the members or creditors are bona fide dealing with a situation that has arisen in the life or in the death throes of a company. It is not designed for a section of the creditors or members to deprive a minority of rights in the interests of the majority.

In Gambotto versus WCP Ltd <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 432], the High Court held that an alteration to Articles of
Association permitting the expropriation of shares will not be valid simply because it is made for a proper purpose; it must also be fair in the circumstances. Fair dealing would at least have to include a full disclosure of all matters in relation to the alteration of the Articles and the expropriation of the shares. Just as an arrangement between the members as to expropriating a minority shareholding would be suspect because of the decision in Gambotto's case, so one would need to look very very carefully at an expropriation of shares under a scheme of arrangement.

I might now summarize, with non-controversial additions what I have said about the principles that apply to schemes of arrangement:-
The arrangement is basically an arrangement between the members which must be within their power. The effect of the Court's order is merely to bind minorities.
No scheme of arrangement, accordingly, can be put forward where the scheme is ultra vires the members or the company.
No scheme of arrangement will be confirmed if it is not bona fide and this will include the situation where the majority are endeavouring to prefer their own interests over those of the minority.
No scheme of arrangement will be confirmed where there is a specific procedure in the Corporations Law for bringing about the desired change. Thus a scheme will not be confirmed to convert a limited liability company into a no liability company, Australian Securities Commission versus Marlborough
Goldmines Ltd <case>; [(1993) 177 CLR 485] and see also Re Glendale Land Development Ltd [(1982) 2
NSWLR 563] and cases there cited.
The fourth rule may be modified if the same protection is given to those affected as would have been given had the specially designed procedures been implemented. (This fifth rule is sometimes applied in the interests of good common sense; see Re Stephen Walters & Sons Ltd <case>; [(1992) 7 ACSR 231.] For earlier examples involving a clash between what is now s and what is now <case> see Re Canning Jarrah Timber Co (WA) Ltd ; Re Sandwell Park Colliery Co Ltd [[1914] 1 Ch 589] and Re
Needhams [1923] WN (Eng) 289).
No scheme of arrangement can be confirmed unless the scheme is lawful:
Re Australian Mutual Investment & Building Co Ltd [(1899) 9 BC ]; Re Northumberland Insurance Co Ltd (No 3) [(1977) 3 ACLR .]
The Court will not confirm a scheme where there is an improper purpose involved. Thus in Re Norfolk Island & Byron Bay Whaling Co Ltd (supra) at p 354, LW Street, J would not convene a meeting to consider a scheme whose only purpose was the barring of unknown claims.

Mr Campbell QC and Mr Mark Dempsey, who appeared for the plaintiffs, argued that the Court should look kindly on the present scheme because it was akin to a charitable trust. They said that it did not matter that some of the objects in the Memorandum of Association were not charitable, they were ancillary only to the charitable purposes. However they acknowledged this argument could not be taken too far and conceded that the existence of this analogy to a cy pres scheme is not decisive in the present case. It must be decided by reference to its own facts and the requirements of company law.

It should be pointed out that fiduciary duties owed by directors or members of a corporation not aimed at making commercial gain are different from fiduciary duties that exist in the case of an ordinary corporation. With the ordinary corporation formed for gain, it is quite clear that the fiduciary duty will extend not to act in self interest so as to deprive minority members of their property. However, where the corporation is formed otherwise than for gain, that particular aspect of the fiduciary duty may be of minimal importance.
There is still a fiduciary duty. This is because the director and sometimes a member in the majority, has an obligation to use his or her power and/or property for the benefit of another.

When one thinks about it, this sort of situation is not at all unusual. There are a series of statutes which incorporate schools or charities by incorporating the committee and vesting all the property in the corporate committee. One example is the St James School Compensation Act 1886. Although the incorporated committee will, at law, own the whole of the property and there is no beneficiary as there would be in the case of a trust, the members of the committee will still have a fiduciary obligation to use the property vested in it in its corporate capacity to effectuate the purpose for which the corporation was brought into being. Thus although the property is not held on trust, the members of the committee and the committee as a corporation will have a fiduciary obligation to use the property to effectuate the purpose. The same will apply where the committee of a charity has been incorporated for the purposes of administration. The object of the charity will be to do something for others and there will be a fiduciary obligation on the charity and on the members of the committee to effectuate that purpose.

Where one has a corporation incorporated under the Co-operation Act as a community advancement society or a corporation incorporated under the
Corporations Law as a company limited by shares and guarantee or merely by guarantee, the circumstances will show whether the fiduciary obligation is to protect the members' property or to effectuate the purpose of the corporation or both.

It is trite law that a disposition to a company which has power under its
Memorandum of Association to apply its funds for certain purposes is not a trust: Bowman versus Secular Society Ltd [[1917] AC 406], 440; Re Pyke <case>; [[1974] VR 788.] However, for many years in the United States there has been a doctrine that a fiduciary relationship exists between the United States and various Indian tribes in respect of Indian reservations; see for instance
Cherokee Nation versus Georgia <case>; [(1831) 30 US 1] and Worcester versus Georgia (1832) 31 US 350. In Canada also this notion of a fiduciary duty on the Crown short of a trust, but which could be enforced in equity against the Crown was found to exist: see Guerin versus The
Queen [(1984) 13 DLR (4th) .](http://scc.lexum.umontreal.ca/en/1984/1984scr2-335/1984scr2-335.html "View Case" ) It is this type of equitable fiduciary duty that arises where a corporation holds land for a purpose. The obligation is short of a trust.
There is doubt as to who may enforce it, but there is no doubt that the equitable obligation exists.

In the present case, it would seem to me that the Company's existence is to effectuate a purpose, namely the enabling of theatrical productions. However it would be quite wrong of me to make a decision that that is so without giving the opportunity of any person who wished to allege the contrary to do so. However, my classification means that I would be less adverse to entertaining a scheme which would expropriate rights of property than I might otherwise have been.

POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS 
The plaintiff's purpose could be effectuated in five distinct ways, viz:-
There could be a simple resolution of the directors authorising the transfer of the assets of the Company to the Foundation and then a general meeting convened to ratify that resolution.
The constitution of the Company could be amended to provide that the surplus funds after payment of the expenses of the winding up be devoted to the Foundation. Then the Company could be wound up voluntarily.
There could be a reduction of the capital of the Company to a nominal amount and the returned capital donated to the Foundation.
There could be a scheme of arrangement under <case>.
There could be a resolution passed under <case>.

As to 1, I can well see the problems the directors may have with respect to fiduciary duties. It would be seldom that directors could vote to give away the whole of the property of a company and feel confident that a shareholder would not mount a representative suit for declaration that the action exceeded the directors' powers. For the reasons that I have already given, I do not consider that in the present case this is a stumbling block. There is great doubt as to whether the directors could obtain judicial advice as to their duties. "Trustee" within the meaning of [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s5.html) of the [Trustee Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/) does not comprehend a mere fiduciary who does not hold property which is impressed with a trust in favour of a person or purpose. It may be that the Court cannot give advice under [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ta1925122/s63.html) of that Act to a mere fiduciary. However, it may just be that a fiduciary can apply under the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. A fiduciary owes his or her duty because of a power in the Equity Court to control conduct of people who act on behalf of others and it may be that such people may be able to ask the Court in a proper case whether their conduct is appropriate.

It would seem to me that the mere passing of the resolution with a confirmatory resolution by shareholders to overcome any problem of technical fraud, and if need be, applications to the Court under <case> of the
Corporations Law to cure any problems of giving notice to members who have "disappeared" and an application for judicial advice under the inherent power would solve all problems without any need for any scheme. If it is not necessary to bind dissentients, then there is no need for any scheme of arrangement, and if there is no need for any scheme of arrangement, the Court will not convene the meeting to put the needless procedure in train.

As to 2, this would appear to be a simple solution. It also could give protection in respect of any claim that might be made against the directors for breach of duty. This is because there is no doubt at all that the liquidator could approach the Court for advice under <case> of the Corporations
Law.

As to 3, a reduction of capital, although this thought may have emanated from me during the argument, I cannot really see any benefit in the procedure.

As to 4, I have already dealt with this when considering proposal 1.

As to 5, it really does seem to me that this is the appropriate way to proceed. There is a transfer of assets of company A to company B, there is a provision for a meeting to be held of the members and a statutory provision for payment out of dissentients. Any problem in convening the meeting can be dealt with by the appropriate order under <case> of the Corporations Law. Any problem with fiduciary obligations is cured by going through the statutory procedure.

I said earlier that there had been no reported case dealing with <case> for over 60 years. The reason is as explained by Ford and Austin Principles of
Corporation Law 7th Ed [24.050] at p 929. However, as is implicit from what those learned authors say, the section may be utilized to advantage in appropriate situations and should not be considered to be a dead letter.

Accordingly, in my view I should dismiss the current application to convene a meeting on the basis that the Company can either effectuate what it wishes to do without the Court's intervention.

However, at present I will merely mark the papers that no order is made and leave the summons on foot so that the plaintiffs may further amend the summons if some order is required. I am completely sympathetic to giving the plaintiffs their costs up to date, but there will need to be some reinforcement to my sympathetic position by reference to authority as to when it is appropriate to give unsuccessful plaintiffs their costs out of the assets.

Accordingly, all I do at this stage is to publish these reasons, to mark the papers "no order made" and to stand the matter into my list for mention on 15
July 1996 at 9.50 am with the proviso that should some other day in that week be acceptable to counsel and my Associate is informed by the end of June of that other date, the time for mention may be amended accordingly.
 * * * 
