

Pulver Cooper and Blackley Pty Limited versus Johnson and Anor; Lake Macquarie
City Council versus Johnson and Anor Matter Nos Ca 40471/96; Ca 40473/96 [1998]
NSWSC 571 (22 September 1998) 
Last Updated: 4 December 1998 
PULVER COOPER & BLACKLEY PTY LIMITED versus JOHNSON & ANOR 
LAKE MACQUARIE CITY COUNCIL versus JOHNSON & ANOR 
CA 40471/96 and CA 40473/96 September 1998 
Sheller JA, Beazley JA, Rolfe AJA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: LAND AND ENVIRONMENT COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES - STEIN J 
FILE NO/S: CA 40471/96 and 40473/96; L&E 40173/95 
DELIVERED: 22 SEPTEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 11 AUGUST 1998 
JUDGMENT OF: SHELLER JA, BEAZLEY JA, ROLFE AJA 
PARTIES: PULVER COOPER & BLACKLEY PTY LIMITED versus JOHNSON & ANOR 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: J A AYLING 
First Respondent: T F ROBERTSON 
Second Respondent: W R DAVISON SC and I J HEMMINGS 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: CARROLL & O'DEA 
First Respondent: WOOLF & ASSOCIATES 
Second Respondent: PETER REES 
PARTIES: LAKE MACQUARIE CITY COUNCIL versus JOHNSON & ANOR 
COUNSEL 
Appellant: W R DAVISON SC and I J HEMMINGS 
First Respondent: T F ROBERTSON 
Second Respondent: J A AYLING 
SOLICITORS 
Appellant: PETER REES 
First Respondent: WOOLF & ASSOCIATES 
Second Respondent: CARROLL & O'DEA 
CATCHWORDS: Exercise of discretion under s.68(1) of Land and Environment Court Act - trial Judge miscarriage of discretion - s.104A Environmental Planning and Assessment Act - deferred commencement condition under s.91AA of Environmental Planning and Assessment Act 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 48 
PULVER COOPER & BLACKLEY PTY LIMITED versus JOHNSON & ANOR 
LAKE MACQUARIE CITY COUNCIL versus JOHNSON & ANOR 
On 18 November 1993 the appellant (Pulver Cooper) lodged a development application with the appellant (the Council) for a residential subdivision.
Local residents expressed their concern in relation to the potential environmental impact of the proposal.

The first respondent, Mr Johnson, lodged an objection to the proposal, noting his belief that a Fauna Impact Statement (FIS) was required. The Council requested by letter that Pulver Cooper provide an FIS and stated that after its receipt the application would need to be re-advertised. After the FIS was submitted, the application was re-advertised drawing attention to the FIS.

On 28 November 1994 Council approved the Development Application but included a deferred commencement condition pursuant to s.91AA of the [Environmental
Planning and Assessment Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/) (the
EPA Act). The condition was that the Pulver Cooper determine whether the
National Parks and Wildlife Service (NPWS) required that a licence be obtained and if such a licence was required, the consent would depend on it being obtained. Council and Pulver Cooper were informed by the NWPS that it was not in a position to advise whether a licence was required rather that was a choice of potential applicants. Pulver Cooper applied for a licence and the
Council purported to grant development consent on 5 May 1994 before the licence had been issued.

Mr Johnson lodged a Class 4 Application in the Land and Environment Court seeking a declaration that the consent was a nullity or was invalid and an order setting it aside. At trial the challenge was against the consent granted on 28 November 1994.

During the course of the trial, after the Council discovered and admitted breaches in the advertising of the consent, the Council sought to amend its defence to rely on provisions of s.104A of the EPA Act which would have provided a statutory bar to Mr Johnson's claim. The trial Judge refused the application to amend and held that the consent breached advertising requirements and therefore the precondition to considering the application in s.59(2) of the Environmental Planning and Assessment Regulations 1994 had not been satisfied. Therefore, the consent was invalid. The trial Judge also held that the deferred commencement condition had not been satisfied and the consent, even if it were valid, would have lapsed.

The Council appealed against the trial Judge's refusal to permit it to amend its defence, and the trial Judge's findings that the consent was invalid and the deferred commencement condition had not been complied with. Pulver Cooper appealed against the trial Judge's finding that there had not been compliance with the deferred commencement condition.

Held 
The trial Judge's refusal to grant the amendment to the defence was an exercise of his discretion under s.68(1) of the [Land and Environment Court
Act 1979](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/).
The amendment was not one which would have affected the way in which the parties had approached the conduct of the case. Mr Johnson would not have suffered any prejudice which could not have been remedied by an order for costs. The Council may have suffered very real prejudice by not being allowed to amend its defence. Therefore, the trial Judge's refusal to grant leave to amend amounted to a miscarriage of his discretion. The State of Queensland & Anor versus JL Holdings Pty Limited <case>; [(1996-1997) 189 CLR 146],
Sali versus SPC Limited <case>; [(1993) 67 ALJR 841], Ketteman versus Hansel Properties Limited [[1987] AC ] and
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Mehta [(1991) 23 NSWLR 84] discussed.
Section 104A is not a limitation provision. Rather, it deprives the Court of jurisdiction if a valid advertisement or notice has been given. In this case, its operation would have determined whether the trial Judge had jurisdiction to consider the merits of the case. Therefore, the potential effect of s.104A, is a further reason why the trial Judge's refusal to amend the defence to take it into account amounted to a miscarriage of discretion.
WYkanak versus Rockdale City Council & Ors (Land and Environment Court,
Pearlman J, 20 July 1998, unreported) applied.
The trial Judge was correct in holding that the requirements of [s.59](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s59.html)
EPA Act had not been complied with.
The deferred commencement condition required that Pulver Cooper determine whether the NPWS required a licence and if it did, that Pulver Cooper obtain such a licence. The NPWS made it clear that it could not require that a licence be obtained, therefore, the condition precedent to the deferred commencement condition never arose.
Non-compliance with the deferred commencement condition did not in this case cause the development consent to lapse. Botany Bay City Council versus Kilzi & Anor (Land and Environment Court, Stein J 7 March 1997, unreported) and Australand Holdings Limited versus Hornsby Shire Council (Land and
Environment Court, Bignold J, 20 March 1998, unreported) followed.
Undesirability of further material being provided to the Court after the conclusion of submissions and without leave having been granted: Carr &
Anor versus Finance Corporation of Australia Limited <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 246.] 
Authorities 
Australand Holdings Limited versus Hornsby Shire Council (Land and Environment Court, Bignold J, 20 March 1998, unreported) 
Bank of New Zealand & Anor versus Spedley Securities Limited (in Liquidation) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 91] 
Botany Bay City Council versus Kilzi & Anor (Land and Environment Court, Stein J 7 March 1997, unreported) 
Carr & Anor versus Finance Corporation of Australia Limited <case>; <case>; <case>; [(1946) 46 SR 318] 
The State of Queensland & Anor versus JL Holdings Pty Limited <case>; [(1996-1997) 189 CLR 146] 
WYkanak versus Rockdale City Council & Ors (Land and Environment Court, Pearlman J, 20 July 1998, unreported) 
PULVER COOPER & BLACKLEY PTY LIMITED versus JOHNSON & ANOR 
LAKE MACQUARIE CITY COUNCIL & ANOR versus JOHNSON 
JUDGMENT 
SHELLER JA: I agree with Rolfe AJA. 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Rolfe AJA. 
ROLFE AJA: 
Introduction 
On 18 November 1993 the appellant, Pulver Cooper & Blackley Pty Limited, ("Pulver Cooper"), for which Mr J.A. Ayling of Counsel appeared, lodged an application with the appellant, Lake Macquarie City Council, ("the Council"), for which Mr W.R. Davison of Senior Counsel and Mr I.J. Hemmings of Counsel appeared, for consent to develop certain land, being Lot 103 in Deposited Plan at 15 Croudace Bay Road, Belmont, by way of subdivision into some forty seven residential lots. It became Development Application No 93/00948.

A number of residents expressed concern in relation to various aspects of the proposed development, including the likelihood that there would be a significant impact on the environment of endangered species, and addressed the
Council at its meeting of 28 February 1994. On 11 April 1994 the Council rejected a recommendation from its officers to approve the application and resolved to defer consideration until a number of enquiries were concluded.

On 22 April 1994 notice was given to adjoining owners or occupiers, which contained certain errors, and, on 27 April 1994, the application was advertised. As a result of Pulver Cooper's complaint to the Council that the incorrect plan was on display, it extended the period for submissions to 19
May 1994, although it did not advertise this extension. Adjoining neighbours were, however, notified. The first respondent, Mr Johnson, for whom Mr T.F.
Robertson of Counsel appeared, lodged an objection noting his belief that a
Fauna Impact Statement, ("FIS"), was required and, on 24 May 1994, the Council wrote to Pulver Cooper requesting a "Flora and Fauna Assessment". The letter stated that after receipt of it the application would need to be re- advertised. On 3 August 1994 the Council determined that an FIS was required and, on 11 October 1994, ERM Resource Planning, which was acting on behalf of the Council and Pulver Cooper, submitted a "Fauna Impact Statement".

On 26 October 1994 the application was advertised for a second time. The advertisement drew attention to that FIS and, on 21 November 1994, in a report to the Council Committee, officers of the Council recommended that it grant a deferred commencement consent pursuant to s.91AA of the [Environmental
Planning and Assessment
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/epaaa1979389/), ("the
Act"):- ".. requiring the applicant to ascertain the requirements of the National Parks & Wildlife Service and if they required that a licence be obtained to to (sic) take or kill endangered fauna. The consent will depend on that licence being obtained if it is considered necessary by the Service." 
The Council adopted this report and, on 22 November 1994, the National Parks & Wildlife Service, ("NPWS"), advised the Council that it was not in a position to advise whether a s.120 licence was required, that being a choice for potential applicants "who must weigh up the risks of not being protected by a s.120 licence for works likely to result in a `take or kill'".

On 28 November 1994 the Council approved the Development Application, but included the following deferred commencement condition:- "DEFERRED COMMENCEMENT CONDITION: 
The applicant shall ascertain the requirements of the National Parks & Wildlife Service in respect to the subdivision. In the event that the National Parks & Wildlife Service require that a licence be obtained, documentary evidence demonstrating attainment of that licence shall be submitted to Council.

Requirements of the National Parks and Wildlife Service which relate to the construction of the subdivision shall be complied with as part of the construction works.

NOTE: . Council shall be advised of the full requirements of the National Parks and Wildlife Service and if necessary a licence obtained within six months of the date of this consent or the consent will lapse.
 . Consideration of the requirements of the National Parks & Wildlife Service may lead to the imposition of additional conditions by Council." 
The consent was endorsed on 5 December 1994, and Mr Johnson was notified of it by letter dated 13 January 1995.

Thereafter Pulver Cooper wrote to NPWS to ascertain its requirements and, by letter dated 23 January 1995, NPWS responded:- "The Service is not in a position to require a developer to seek a licence. That decision is yours to make based on the conclusions reached in your Fauna Impact Statement. Should you conclude your development will have a significant impact on the habitat of endangered species then you should apply for a S120 Licence to reduce your liability to prosecution by either the Service or any other body.

The Service's `Director Generals' requirements and comments to Council serve as a guide to some of the issues you should consider in the preparation of the FIS and in reaching your conclusion whether to seek a licence." 
The letter concluded by advising how application could be made for a licence if Pulver Cooper pursued that course. It appears that Pulver Cooper had decided, prior to receipt of that letter, to seek a licence, it having applied for one on 17 January 1995. On 3 May 1995 Pulver Cooper wrote to the Council enclosing a copy of the NPWS letter of 23 January 1995 and noting that the
Threatened Species Unit of the NPWS had advised that:- "they are seeking an extension till the 30 June 1995. They are in the process of issuing a licence and there are no essential problems with same." 
On 9 May 1995 NPWS wrote to the Council indicating that the "decision date" for the licence was 29 June 1995 but, on 5 May 1995, the Council issued a document entitled "Notice of Determination of a Development Application", which referred to the same application as was the subject of its decision on November 1994 and purported to grant development consent to the application subject to conditions which excluded the deferred commencement condition. The
Council also made a small number of other amendments to the conditions. The consent was notified to Pulver Cooper and Mr Johnson and it was also the subject of a public notice, which was advertised on 28 June 1995. On 12 May the Council advised that it was satisfied that the requirements of the deferred commencement condition had been satisfied and enclosed what it described as "the final development consent".

The Application Before The Land And Environment Court 
On 27 September 1995 Mr Johnson filed a Class 4 Application in the Land and
Environment Court whereby he sought the following substantive relief:- "1. A declaration that the consent granted by the first respondent to the second respondent on 5 May 1995 (DA/93/00948) to subdivide and carry out other works on land described as Lot 103, DP 718853, 15 Croudace Bay Road, Belmont is a nullity or, alternatively, invalid.
 . An order setting aside the said consent." 
The Points of Claim were filed on 8 November 1995 and, in paragraph 6, pleaded that on or before 11 January 1995 the Council granted Pulver Cooper a deferred development consent and, in paragraph 7, that that consent was subject to a condition that a fauna licence be issued pursuant to s.120 of the National
Parks & Wildlife Act 1974 within six months of the consent. In paragraph 8 it pleaded that on 5 May 1995 the Council granted a second development consent; in paragraph 9, that no fauna licence had been issued in relation to the subject land; and, in paragraph 10, that no Development Application was lodged by Pulver Cooper to which the second consent related.

In paragraph 11 it was pleaded that "in the premises" the deferred development consent had expired and the second consent was void or invalid and, in paragraph 12, alternatively that the proposed development would disturb land on which there is urban bushland zoned open space to which clause 6 of SEPP 19 applied. Paragraph 13 stated:- "The first respondent in breach of SEPP 19 failed to advertise the development application (if any) to which the second consent relates." 
In paragraph 14 it was pleaded that part of the subject land was potential
Koala habitat within SEPP 44; in paragraph 15 that in breach of clause 7 of
SEPP 44 the Council failed to satisfy itself whether the subject land, or part thereof, was potential Koala habitat; and, in paragraph 16, that "in the premises" the "development consents" were invalid. There was a further pleading, which concluded with a similar allegation to that in paragraph 16 and emphasised "consents".

Various other matters were pleaded to which I find it unnecessary to refer.
Suffice to say that the relief, as opposed to the pleading, was directed to the consent of 5 May 1995, it being asserted that the earlier consent had expired. No relief was sought in respect of the consent granted on 28 November .

On 10 November 1995 the Council filed its Points of Defence in which it admitted, relevantly for present purposes, paragraphs 5, 6 and 12, and denied paragraphs 8, 10, 11 and 13.

The Hearing At First Instance 
The hearing commenced before Stein J on 29 February 1996. The case proceeded as a documentary one, in the sense that Mr Robertson opened and, in the course of doing so, tendered documents on which Mr Johnson relied. As he did so he made his submissions, on the agreed basis that it would be unnecessary for them to be repeated at the conclusion of the evidence. On 29 February 1996 the
Council disavowed any reliance on the consent dated 5 May 1995 as constituting a valid development consent, but asserted that a valid development consent was granted at its meeting on 28 November 1994. Upon this concession being made Mr
Johnson sought and was granted leave, there being no opposition by the
Council, to amend the Points of Claim by deleting from paragraph 13 the words "to which the second consent relates". This, however, left the consent of 5
May 1995 as the one in respect of which substantive relief was claimed, although it seems to have been understood at that time that the challenge related to the first consent. But it was not until 14 June 1996 that Mr
Johnson further amended the application, which amendment was not opposed, by substituting in the declaration sought the date "28 November 1994" for "5 May ".

On 1 March 1996 the Council applied for an adjournment on the basis that it needed to notify its insurer of the litigation and obtain instructions on evidence going to the exercise of the Court's discretion. Stein J noted that this occurred in the context of "there being admitted breaches of the advertising requirements". These admissions were made in respect of the notice, which was advertised on 26 October 1994. The application was not opposed and his Honour granted it. On 11 March 1996 he gave directions for the filing of any further evidence and of any Notice of Motion to amend the
Defence by 18 March 1996. The extent of any amendments, which the Council might seek, was not limited. The Council availed itself of this leave and, on March 1996, filed a Notice of Motion seeking leave to amend its Defence to add:- "6. The deferred commencement consent cannot be questioned by reason of the provisions of s.104A Environmental Planning & Assessment Act 1979 as amended.

PARTICULARS 
The first respondent resolved to grant a deferred commencement consent to the development on 28 November 1994 and the notice of determination issued on 5 December 1994. The granting of the development consent was publicly notified for the purposes of s.104A of the Act on 11 January 1995 in The Post, a local newspaper." 
The hearing resumed on 14 June 1996. Mr Johnson thus had some three months to determine what course he should take if leave to amend, in the terms to which
I have referred, was granted. He further amended his application whereby he sought for the first time, on the pleadings, to have the consent of 28
November 1994 invalidated, and the Council sought to amend conformably with its Notice of Motion, which application was opposed. His Honour considered the various submissions and refused the Council's application. As that refusal is the subject of the first ground of appeal it will be necessary to return to it. The Council did not seek to call any evidence on the issue of discretion on 14 June 1996, although it was obviously contemplated in March 1996 that this may have occurred.

His Honour thereafter considered the facts to which I have essentially referred and, commencing at AB702, dealt with a number of challenges to the notification of the first consent. He rejected many, which were based on a failure to comply with clause 59 of the Environmental Planning and Assessment
Regulations 1994. As there is no Notice of Contention it is unnecessary to deal with those. His Honour found, and as to this there was no issue, that the advertisement required objections to be lodged within fourteen days, whereas it should have provided for twenty eight days. On the basis of this failure to comply with clause 59(2) of the Regulations, and in the absence of any discretionary considerations being advanced by the Council or Pulver Cooper, his Honour held that the failure to comply with clause 59(2) "was a pre- condition to consideration of the application by the Council so that the consent granted on 28 November 1994 must fail and be found to be invalid".

The third matter his Honour considered, although he did not think it was strictly necessary to do so in light of his earlier conclusions, was whether the Council could be satisfied as to compliance with the deferred commencement condition. He decided that it could not and:- "In my opinion, the deferred commencement condition was not complied with by the developer and Council could not come to the conclusion that it was satisfied that the condition had been fulfilled. Accordingly, assuming its validity, the consent would have lapsed because the deferred commencement condition was not satisfied." 
In these circumstances his Honour upheld the application and declared that the development consent granted on 28 November 1994 and endorsed with the date 5
December 1994 was invalid.

The Grounds Of Appeal 
The Council appealed against his Honour's refusal to permit it to amend its
Defence to rely upon the provisions of s.104A of the Act. It further appealed against his findings that the deferred commencement condition was not satisfied, and that the consent granted by it to Pulver Cooper was invalid because the advertisement dated 26 October 1994 did not comply with the requirements of clause 59(2) of the Regulations.

Pulver Cooper appealed, by its Amended Notice of Appeal, on the one ground, viz that his Honour erred in finding that the deferred commencement condition was not satisfied and that it lapsed.

The Refusal To Allow The Amendment 
Section 104A of the Act provides:- "In the event that public notice of the granting of a consent is given in accordance with the regulations by a consent authority, the validity of the consent shall not be questioned in any legal proceedings except those commenced in the Court by any person at any time before the expiration of three months from the date on which public notice was so given." 
Prima facie, therefore, assuming that the notice was published on 11 January and complied with the Regulations, Mr Johnson's failure to bring proceedings in the Court within three months from 11 January 1995, which he clearly did not, meant that the validity of the consent could not be questioned in any legal proceedings. The point raised went to the jurisdiction to consider the validity of the consent.

His Honour's decision as to whether or not to grant the amendment was, clearly, an exercise by him of his discretion, [s.68(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/s68.html) of the [Land and Environment Court Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/laeca1979274/) providing:- "In any proceedings before the Court, the Court shall have power at any stage of the proceedings to order, upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as the Court thinks fit, any amendments to be made which, in the opinion of the Court, are necessary in the interests of justice." 
In this context reference is frequently made to the decision of Re the Will of F.B. Gilbert (deceased) <case>; [(1946) 46 SR 318.]
At pp.322-323 Jordan CJ said:- "Next, it was said for the applicant, that, since by s.3 the question whether any and if so how much provision should be made for an applicant is in terms left to the discretion of the court, it is only in the most exceptional circumstances that a Court of Appeal could regard itself as justified in interfering with the exercise of a discretion by a Judge at first instance - only where he has misapplied the law, or his order is likely to lead to a miscarriage of justice: Evans versus Bartlam. In this connection, however, I am of opinion that, as was pointed out by this Court in Re Ryan, there is a material difference between an exercise of discretion on a point of practice or procedure and an exercise of discretion which determines substantive rights. In the former class of case, if a tight rein were not kept upon interference with the orders of the Judges of first instance, the result would be disastrous to the proper administration of justice. The disposal of cases could be delayed interminably, and costs heaped up indefinitely, if a litigant with a long purse or a litigious disposition could, at will, in effect transfer all exercises of discretion in interlocutory applications from a Judge in Chambers to a Court of Appeal. But an appeal from an exercise of a so called discretion which is determinative of legal rights stands in a somewhat different position. In this class of case, too, a Court of Appeal submits itself to self-imposed restraints, but restraints which, though strict, are somewhat less stringent than those adopted in matters of practice or procedure." 
The granting or refusal of an amendment will often be an exercise of discretion in a matter of practice or procedure. In the present case Stein J accepted that subject to any argument concerning the validity of the public notice and the legal effect of s.104A, it was patent that the defence would provide a statutory bar to Mr Johnson's claim. We were informed from the Bar table that no submission was made to his Honour that the granting of the amendment would be futile. So much is clear and his Honour made no reference to any such submission, or that if the amendment were granted it must necessarily fail. Nor did he discuss the merits of the assertion sought to be advanced, other than in the terms to which I have referred. Therefore, the amendment was not, in the way his Honour approached it, one which would necessarily give rise to further evidentiary or legal dispute, or dispute of any particular complexity, nor was it one which would impact on the way in which the trial had been conducted to that point. By that I mean that in so far as evidence had been led it could not be said that this amendment affected the way in which the parties had approached that task or the conduct of the case.

In Warringah Shire Council versus Sedevcic [(1987) 63 LGRA 361] the Court of Appeal considered the exercise of the discretionary power conferred by s.124 of the Act. In that case the Council acknowledged that the section was expressed in wide terms, and accepted that to succeed in the appeal it had to be established that the trial Judge had erred, either in law or in fact, in the exercise of his discretion consistently with the principles laid down in
House versus The King <case>; [(1936) 55 CLR 499] at 504; Gronow versus Gronow <case>; <case>; [(1986) 161 CLR 513.] At p.364 Kirby P continued:- "I shall not trouble to review the criticisms of selected sentences in his Honour's judgment. It is true that in the difficult task of attempting to disturb, on appeal, the exercise of a discretion committed to a Judge at first instance, resort must be had to the words used in the judgment, in the course of exercising that discretion. Typically, nothing else is available to an appellate court to indicate the way the Judge's mind reached its conclusion. But care must be taken in cases such as this against a pernickety approach to a phrase here or a sentence there. Appellate courts do well to avoid such an approach and to look at the substance of what the Judge did." 
His Honour expressed similar views in Bank of New Zealand & Anor v
Spedley Securities Limited (in liquidation) [(1992) 27 NSWLR 91.] The principles are so well known as not to require reference to further authority.

Against the background of these principles it is appropriate to consider the course the case took. The Council conceded, on 29 February 1996, that it could not rely on the consent of 5 May 1995. Thereupon, and without opposition, paragraph 13 of the Points of Claim was amended to delete the words "to which the second consent relates". Subsequently on 14 June 1996, the declaration was amended to substitute the date "28 November 1994" for "5 May 1995". As I have said that was the first occasion on the pleadings when the first consent was made the subject of substantive relief.

His Honour noted the submission of Mr Davison that the claim of invalidity of the 28 November 1994 consent was a new claim only made at the hearing on 28
February 1996, and that the amendment the Council sought caused no relevant prejudice to Mr Johnson "which did not exist in any event". He further submitted that the publication of the consent was not known to the Council's solicitor until 7 March 1996, he previously having been instructed by its officers that the only advertisement was that of 28 June 1995 relating to the "consent" granted on 5 May 1995.

It was submitted on behalf of Mr Johnson that the amendment should not be granted because it would prejudice the applicant "by defeating his application". Reliance was placed on the way in which the Council had pursued its case and:- "In particular, he stressed the lateness of the application to amend, indeed well after the hearing had begun and the evidence essentially complete." 
His Honour noted that Mr Robertson had all but completed his address. He referred to the submission that a notice sent by the Council to Mr Johnson dated 5 June 1995 advised that the Council had given its consent on 5 May 1995 and, by letter dated 29 June 1995, the Council had confirmed, contrary to Mr
Johnson's assertion, that it regarded the consent as valid. His Honour noted the submission that if Mr Johnson was confused as to the consent or consents, then it was wholly as a result of the Council's misleading him.

After quoting the section his Honour said:- "Subject to any argument concerning the validity of the public notice and the legal effect of s.104A, it is patent that the defence will provide a statutory bar to the applicant's claim." 
This made clear that his Honour had not been favoured with any submission concerning either the validity of the notice or the legal effect of s.104A.
Accordingly, he reserved the position in those regards.

His Honour then referred to some inelegance in the drafting of the Points of
Claim, but said it was apparent that they attacked the validity of both consents. I doubt, with respect, if that accurately specified what was pleaded. So far as the consent granted "on or before 11 January 1995" was concerned the challenge was that it "has expired". Its validity was not challenged and no order or declaration was sought in relation to it. The declaration was sought as to the invalidity of the consent granted on 5 May
His Honour referred to the denial of various matters in the Defence, and continued:- "However, one would have thought it advisable that the Council plainly tell the applicant's solicitor that it accepted that the purported consent of 5 May 1995 was not a valid development consent because this would have obvious implications for the application before the Court." 
His Honour also thought it was "noteworthy" that the Council was unaware until March 1996 that it had advertised the November 1994 consent in January 1995, (although he did not suggest that this had not occurred and had been overlooked), and he referred to the evidence of the Council's solicitor that he was originally instructed that the only relevant advertisement, pursuant to s.104A, was that published on 28 June 1995 in relation to the May 1995 "consent". He continued:- "In my opinion, it was this late advice which led to the application to amend the Defence in order to plead s.104A, rather than the applicant's amendment of paragraph 13 of the Points of Claim on 28 February 1996." 
Prima facie this must be correct. Regardless of what amendment Mr Johnson made, the Council's proposed amendment could not be made until the advertisement, which would support it, was discovered. I repeat that there was no suggestion that the advertisement had not been published. The evidence was that the Council officers were not aware of that.

His Honour then cited at length from the speech of Lord Griffiths in
Ketteman versus Hansel Properties Limited [[1987] AC 189], and referred to the "general endorsement" of what his Lordship had said by Waddell AJA in
Commonwealth Bank of Australia versus Mehta [(1991) 23 NSWLR 84] at p.107.

Ketteman was a case in which the House of Lords divided three to two, the majority holding that the granting of an amendment to allow the [Limitation Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/la133/) to be pleaded at a very late stage in the proceedings was not a proper exercise of discretion in the circumstances of that case. 
In Mehta Waddell AJA, with whom Samuels and Meagher JJA agreed, at least generally, said at pp.106-107:- "The appellants rely upon the decision of the House of Lords in Ketteman .. where, by a majority of three to two, it was held that an application to amend by raising a defence that the claims were barred pursuant to a statute of limitations made during final addresses should have been refused. The speeches reiterate the well known principle that `whether or not a proposed amendment should be allowed is a matter within the discretion of the Judge dealing with the application, but the discretion is one that falls to be exercised in accordance with well-settled principles' (per Lord Keith at 203). Lord Griffiths took, perhaps, a more unqualified view than the other members of the House when he said (at 219) `If a defendant decided not to plead a limitation defence and to fight the case on the merits he should not be permitted to fall back upon a plea of limitation as a second line of defence at the end of the trial when it is apparent that he is likely to lose on the merits. Equally, in my view, if a defence of limitation is not pleaded because the defendant's lawyers have overlooked the defence the defendant should ordinarily expect to bear the consequences of that carelessness and look to his lawyers for compensation if he is so minded.' 
It seems to me that there may be circumstances in which such an amendment should be allowed although, generally speaking, the considerations referred to by his Lordship may well support a refusal of leave to amend.

In the present case the appellants are not, in my opinion, able to point to any respect in which it could be said that the exercise of his Honour's discretion miscarried. As the trial Judge he was in a position to assess the prejudice which the amendment might cause to the respondents. This Court is not in a position to substitute its view for his." 
In the light of these observations it is appropriate to return to
Ketteman. Lord Keith, at p.202, considered that the defendants had "a cast-iron defence of limitation". At p.203 his Lordship said:- "Whether or not a proposed amendment should be allowed is a matter within the discretion of the Judge dealing with the application, but the discretion is one that falls to be exercised in accordance with well-settled principles. In his interlocutory judgment on 10 December 1982, allowing the proposed amendments, Judge Hayman set out and quoted at some length from the classical authorities on this topic. The rule is that amendment should be allowed if necessary to enable the true issues in controversy between the parties to be resolved, and if allowance would not result in injustice to the other party not capable of being compensated by an award of costs. In Clarapede & Co versus Commercial Union Association [(1883) 32 WR 262], 263 Brett MR said: `The rule of conduct of the Court in such a case is that, however negligent or careless may have been the first omission, and however late the proposed amendment, the amendment should be allowed if it can be done without injustice to the other side. There is no injustice if the other side can be compensated by costs; but, if the amendment will put them into such a position that they must be injured, it ought not to be made.' 
The sort of injury which is here in contemplation is something which places the other party in a worse position from the point of view of presentation of his case than he would have been if his opponent had pleaded the subject-matter of the proposed amendment at the proper time. If he would suffer no prejudice from that point of view, then an award of costs is sufficient to prevent him from suffering injury and the amendment should be allowed. It is not a relevant type of prejudice that allowance of the amendment will or may deprive him of a success which he would achieve if the amendment were not to be allowed. In my opinion, no sensible distinction is to be drawn for this purpose between an amendment seeking to plead limitation and any other sort of amendment. I am not aware of any authority for drawing such a distinction, nor have I experience of any practice to that effect." 
At p.205 his Lordship criticised the judgments of the Court of Appeal thus:- "The judgments in the Court of Appeal on this issue do not canvas the principles to be applied in the exercise of the discretion to allow or disallow late amendments. They do not allude to the short period of time which elapsed between the second and third defendants being given the opportunity to lodge defences and the commencement of the trial, nor to their counsel having informed Judge Hayman on 13 December 1982 of their altered position in the light of their discovery of the procedural blunders. They do not allude to any practice of disallowing late amendments designed to raise a defence of limitation. Upon the whole matter I am of the opinion that the very brief reasons given by the Court of Appeal for their decision do not indicate that they had due regard to the applicable principles and to all the relevant circumstances. I would, therefore, hold that, in so far as they purported to exercise their discretion afresh, their exercise of it was erroneous and capable of being corrected." 
Lord Brandon of Oakbrook, in dealing with the late raising of the plea of the
Limitations Act, said, at p.215:- "With regard to the second reason, it amounts to no more than this, that the second and third defendants made a serious mistake in the conduct of their cases by not raising a plea of limitation in their original defences. On the authorities, to the effect of which I referred earlier, this circumstance ought not to be regarded as of itself precluding the giving of leave to amend, in the absence of any prejudice to the plaintiffs which could not be compensated for by appropriate orders as to costs. I cannot see that there was any such prejudice." 
Lord Griffiths dealt with the matter essentially conformably with the paragraph cited by Stein J. At p.220, however, his Lordship, after distinguishing the decision in Clarapede as not being a case where the application was made at the end of the hearing, continued:- "There is a clear difference between allowing amendments to clarify the issues in dispute and those that permit a distinct defence to be raised for the first time.

Whether an amendment should be granted is a matter for the discretion of the trial Judge and he should be guided in the exercise of the discretion by his assessment of where justice lies. Many and diverse factors will bear upon the exercise of his discretion. I do not think it possible to enumerate them all or wise to attempt to do so. But justice cannot always be measured in terms of money and in my view a Judge is entitled to weigh in the balance the strain the litigation imposes on litigants, particularly if they are personal litigants rather than business corporations, the anxieties occasioned by facing new issues, the raising of false hopes, and the legitimate expectation that the trial will determine the issues one way or the other. Furthermore to allow an amendment before a trial begins is quite different from allowing it at the end of the trial to give an apparently unsuccessful defendant an opportunity to renew the fight on an entirely different defence.

Another factor that a Judge must weigh in the balance is the pressure on the courts caused by the great increase in litigation and the consequent necessity that, in the interests of the whole community, legal business should be conducted efficiently. We can no longer afford to show the same indulgence towards the negligent conduct of litigation as was perhaps possible in a more leisured age. There will be cases in which justice will be better served by allowing the consequences of the negligence of the lawyers to fall upon their own heads rather than by allowing an amendment at a very late stage of the proceedings." 
It is to be borne in mind, however, that there had been several amendments to the Points of Claim but that that dealing with the declaration as to substantive relief was not made formally until 14 June 1996. His Honour, in the context of "admitted breaches of the advertising requirements", firstly granted an adjournment on 1 March 1996 and, on 11 March 1996, permitted a motion to be brought forward for leave to amend the Defences. On 15 March 1996 the Council gave notice of the amendment it proposed and of the evidence on which it proposed to rely. On 14 June 1996, with full notice of this proposed amendment, the claim for substantive relief was amended. The application for leave to amend was clearly one intended to meet the case Mr Johnson then propounded. Accordingly, the present case was one in which it was known for some months prior to the application to amend being heard that the Council proposed to seek to rely on this defence in the event of Mr Johnson's challenging the consent of 28 November 1994.

The application for leave to amend was supported by the affidavit of the solicitor for Council sworn on 14 March 1996. In that regard the solicitor made reference to the Reply, which Mr Johnson had filed in Court on 29
February 1996, which referred to the consent given on 28 November 1994. The solicitor said that after receiving initial instructions he perused the
Council's file, which was silent on any advertising under the provisions of s.104A save for a request for advertising on 16 June 1995, and he sought information from the Council's officers as to any advertising of the Council's determination on 28 November 1994. He was provided with information that the only advertisement was on 28 June 1995.

The solicitor then stated that the Reply, which was served on "the afternoon prior to the commencement of the hearing", and which challenged the deferred commencement consent on the basis of uncertainty or error of law, led to him discussing the amendments and requesting that another search be made to confirm that there was no advertising related to the deferred commencement consent given on 5 December 1994. On 7 March 1995 the solicitor was handed details of the advertisement, which was published on 11 January 1995. He concluded:- "The amendment to the Points of Defence is necessary to enable the first respondent to rely upon the fact of the advertisement on 11 January, 1995 carried out in pursuance of s.104A of the Act, and in anticipation of the amendment that may be made to the declaration sought given its limitations in the light of the Reply." 
The solicitor was not cross-examined on this evidence. It was inherently credible and, in the absence of a challenge to it, there was no reason why it should not have been accepted without reservation. As I have suggested, on a proper reading of his Honour's reasons that was the way he approached it. In truth reliance on the advertisement only became necessary when Mr Johnson decided to amend the declaration to attack the consent given on 28 November .

His Honour dealt with the matter thus:- "It is plain that the granting of the amendment at this late stage in the proceedings, indeed after the majority of applicant's counsel address had been completed, would visit a prejudice on the applicant which cannot be remedied by costs, granting of amendments or re-opening of evidence. To allow the amendment sought by the Council would deprive the applicant of a hearing on the merits which he was entitled to reasonably believe he would receive. In particular, no mention was made of the possible amendment when the Council sought and was granted an adjournment of the hearing on 1 March, an adjournment which, it must be recalled, was consented to by the applicant. I reject the application by the first respondent to amend its Defence to plead s.104A of the Act." 
Whilst affording all respect to his Honour's decision, and giving full weight to its discretionary nature, I have come to the conclusion that, in the particular circumstances of this case, his discretion miscarried. Firstly, notwithstanding the stage the case had reached when the adjournment of 1 March was sought and granted without opposition, there was no suggestion that it had been conducted on behalf of Mr Johnson in a way which would be affected by the granting of the amendment. Secondly, shortly after the granting of the adjournment his Honour granted leave to the Council to apply for leave to amend. The terms of the proposed amendment were furnished shortly thereafter and well before the resumed hearing on 14 June 1996. There was a clear contemplation that additional pleadings and evidence may be presented, which would extend the hearing. Thirdly, it is not clear to what prejudice his
Honour was referring, although I infer that he was of the view that the amendment, if granted, may well be a complete defence without a hearing on the merits. However, if that defence was available, and particularly having regard to the fact that it was raised in the circumstances to which I have referred, that is not the type of prejudice which should preclude a point being raised.
In so far as there was prejudice by dint of the fact that Mr Johnson may have lost the case, it could have been met by an appropriate costs' order. I do not accept that Mr Johnson would have suffered any other relevant prejudice by the allowing of the amendment. Fourthly, in so far as his Honour said the prejudice could not be met by the granting of amendments or the re-opening of evidence that simply begs the question as to what amendments Mr Johnson could have sought, and what further evidence he could have called and, more importantly, it does not answer the question as to why, if any further amendments or the re-opening of evidence were and/or was required, that could not have been allowed. A usual consequence of allowing an amendment is to permit the other party to plead to meet the further case, and to call evidence in support of that pleading.

Finally, his Honour said that there was no mention of the possible amendment when the Council sought and was granted an adjournment of the hearing on 1
March 1996. However, as I have said, the Council clearly sought leave to amend and, by 18 March 1996, had stated the basis for that amendment. More significantly, it did not know on 1 March 1996 that it had the advertisement to support the amendment. Mr Robertson disclaimed expressly that the Council knew of that matter on 1 March 1996.

Whilst I appreciate and, if I may say so with respect, fully endorse the reluctance of the Court to interfere with such a discretionary decision, I do not consider that any relevant prejudice to Mr Johnson, which could not have been accommodated by an appropriate order for costs, has been demonstrated in this case. On the other hand very real prejudice may be suffered by the
Council if it is not allowed to raise this defence. That would occur solely because the Council officers erroneously believed, until early March 1996, that there was no relevant advertisement. In those circumstances, and consistently with authority, I consider his Honour's refusal to grant leave to amend was made in error, such that his discretion miscarried.

The question has recently been considered by the High Court in The State of
Queensland & Anor versus JL Holdings Pty Limited <case>; [(1996-1997) 189 CLR 146.] In that case, albeit long before the hearing and indeed before any hearing date had been fixed, the appellant sought leave to amend. There was real doubt as to whether this was necessary having regard to the existing pleadings. The application was refused at first instance and the Full Court of the Federal
Court, by majority, dismissed the appeal.

Whilst, as with all cases such as the present, each must be decided on its own particular facts the statements of principle are binding. At pp.152-153
Dawson, Gaudron and McHugh JJ said:- "The applicants applied to the Full Court of the Federal Court for leave to appeal against the refusal of the primary Judge to grant the application for leave to amend. By a majority (Whitlam and Sundberg JJ, Carr J dissenting) the Full Court granted leave but dismissed the appeal. In granting leave to appeal, the majority conceded the potential injustice involved in denying the respondent the opportunity to ventilate the issue which the proposed amendment was intended to raise. Their Honours referred to the well-known passage in the judgment of Bowen LJ in Cropper versus Smith where his Lordship said: `Now, I think it is a well established principle that the object of courts is to decide the rights of the parties, and not to punish them for mistakes they make in the conduct of their cases by deciding otherwise than in accordance with their rights. Speaking for myself, and in conformity with what I have heard laid down by the other Division of the Court of Appeal and by myself as a member of it, I know of no kind of error or mistake, which, if not fraudulent or intended to over-reach, the Court ought not to correct, if it can be done without injustice to the other party. Courts do not exist for the sake of discipline, but for the sake of deciding matters in controversy, and I do not regard such amendment as a matter of favour or of grace.' 
The majority also referred to the decision of this Court in Clough and Rogers versus Frog where applications for leave to amend the Defences in two actions by adding a new defence had been refused. The actions had been commenced more than five years previously and the applications were made two days before the actions were listed for hearing. The Court in allowing the appeals before it adopted the words above of Bowen LJ in Cropper versus Smith and said: `As the defence, if established, would be a complete answer in either action, the amendments sought should have been allowed unless it appeared that injustice would thereby have been occasioned to the respondent, there being nothing to suggest fraud or improper concealment of the defence on the part of the appellants. With the exception of the suggestion of prejudice arising in respect of the loss of the possible claim against the Nominal Defendant, the matters relied upon by the respondent in opposition to the amendment sought go at the most to delay and irregularity only, matters which are relevant to costs but do not constitute injustice to the respondent in the sense in which that expression is used.'" 
Their Honours then referred to the question of case management and disruption of Court lists, which was discussed in Sali versus SPC Limited <case>; [(1993) 67 ALJR 841] at 849, and continued:- "It may be said at once that in the passage which we have cited from Sali versus SPC Limited Toohey and Gaudron JJ are not to be taken as sanctioning any departure from the principles established in Cropper versus Smith and accepted in Clough and Rogers versus Frog. Sali versus SPC Limited was a case concerning the refusal of an adjournment in relation to which the proper principles of case management may have a particular relevance. However, nothing in that case suggests that those principles might be employed, except perhaps in extreme circumstances, to shut a party out from litigating an issue which is fairly arguable. Case management is not an end in itself. It is an important and useful aid for ensuring the prompt and efficient disposal of litigation. But it ought always to be borne in mind, even in changing times, that the ultimate aim of a court is the attainment of justice and no principle of case management can be allowed to supplant that aim." 
I am not suggesting that in the present case Stein J had in mind case management. However his reliance upon what was said by Lord Griffiths in
Ketteman has to be read in the light of his Lordship's acceptance of the relevance of case management as part of the reasons for reaching his decision.
Whilst case management considerations are, no doubt, still relevant, the High
Court has restricted the importance to be attributed to them.

At p.163 Kirby J noted the differences in Ketteman and said:- "All of these cases depend on their particular facts. The outcomes in all of them are influenced by the restraints imposed by law upon appellate intervention in such matters. In part, because of those restraints, comparatively few interlocutory orders of this kind are challenged. Those which are tend to be at the controversial end of the spectrum where the challenger, at least, feels an obvious injustice can be demonstrated." 
After referring to Cropper versus Smith Kirby J referred to Maxwell versus Keun [[1928] 1 KB 645], in which it was said:- "But, on the other hand, if it appears that the result of the order made below is to defeat the rights of the parties altogether, and to do that which the Court of Appeal is satisfied would be an injustice to one or other of the parties, then the Court has power to review such an order, and it is, to my mind, its duty to do so." 
His Honour observed that the approach taken in Cropper versus Smith was unanimously adopted and applied in Clough and Rogers versus Frog [(1974) 48
ALJR 481], and that the appellate elaboration in Maxwell was endorsed in Bloch versus Bloch <case>; [(1981) 180 CLR 390] at 395-396.

His Honour set out a number of considerations, which must be taken into account, and, at p.172, he concluded:- "Whilst taking all of the considerations relevant to the circumstances of the case into account, the Judge must always be careful to retain that flexibility which is the hallmark of justice. New considerations for the exercise of judicial discretion in such cases have been identified in recent years. But the abiding judicial duty remains the same. A Judge who ignores the modern imperatives of the efficient conduct of litigation may unconsciously work an injustice on one of the parties, or litigants generally, and on the public. But a Judge who applies case management rules too rigidly may ignore the fallible world in which legal disputes arise and in which they must be resolved." 
It seems to me that none of the matters operating in favour of the refusal of the amendment applied in the present case. The point sought to be raised was short and succinct, and any prejudice to Mr Johnson could have been overcome by an order for costs.

Mr Robertson submitted that if the amendment had been allowed it would not have availed the Council because the advertisement did not meet the statutory requirements. In effect he submitted that the amendment would have been futile and, therefore, in accordance with accepted principles should not have been allowed. There are several cogent answers to this. Firstly, Stein J made no reference to any such submissions. Secondly, his Honour did not proceed on this basis. Thirdly, if there was a dispute about the efficacy of the advertisement, but it could not be submitted that it was hopelessly defective such that leave to amend should not be granted because it would be futile, its efficacy was an issue to be determined on the hearing.

After the conclusion of the hearing and notwithstanding that the Court had not granted Mr Johnson leave to submit further material, the Registrar received a letter from the solicitors for him dated 20 August 1998 enclosing a copy of a letter from Counsel, not being Mr Robertson, who appeared for Mr Johnson before Stein J on 14 June 1996. That letter stated:- "I refer to this matter before Stein J in the Land and Environment Court.

My recollection of the submissions made to his Honour were primarily directed to the point that the amendment to the defence should not be allowed by the Court due to the lateness of the application. This point was upheld by Stein J.

The secondary point related to the submission that the notice purported to be relied upon to activate the S.104A bar was not in accordance with the Regulations. It was submitted that the description of the land and the activity on the notice was not sufficient.

My recollection is that due to the potential impact of the s.104 bar raised by the Defendant, I made as many submissions as possible against the amendment of the Defence." 
There are several observations I would make about this letter. Firstly, as I have said, the Court did not grant leave for further submissions or, more accurately, evidence of what occurred before Stein J to be adduced. In these circumstances the making of further submissions after the conclusion of a hearing, even though they are notified to the other parties, is to be deprecated: Carr & Anor versus Finance Corporation of Australia Limited <case>; [(1981) 147 CLR 246] per Mason
J at p.258. Secondly, the letter makes clear the primary focus of the submissions was "the lateness of the application". I have decided that this was not a proper basis for declining to exercise the discretion to allow the amendment. Thirdly, the letter refers to "the secondary point". This was not a matter on which Stein J relied or to which he referred and, for the reasons I have given, it should not have precluded the granting of leave unless the amendment was shown to be futile.

The matters raised in that letter, even according them full effect, do not alter the view to which I have come, viz that his Honour's exercise of discretion miscarried.

Mr Robertson submitted that the Council should have found the advertisement and pleaded its effect earlier. In one sense this is so. However, the authorities to which I have referred make it clear that such a failure is not, of itself, a reason for refusing the grant of leave to amend. An error was made, but not one which, in justice, should have precluded the Council from rectifying it by the amendment it sought.

He also submitted that the Council was attacking inferences his Honour drew from the evidence of the Council's solicitor as not being open to him. I do not think this is so. The evidence of the solicitor was unchallenged and in so far as his Honour opined that it was the late advice, rather than Mr Johnson's amendment of paragraph 13, which led to the application to amend, I think this is probably so. It was the events of 29 February 1996 which caused the solicitor to pursue the matter further with the Council officers. That led to the discovery of the advertisement and the course the litigation had taken made it appropriate to rely on it.

In my respectful opinion in all the circumstances of this case the learned trial Judge's discretion to refuse to grant the amendment miscarried and his decision in this regard should be reversed. It was submitted by the Council that this Court should decide whether the advertisement met the requirements of s.104A, rather than remitting the matter to the Land and Environment Court.
I disagree. The matter will have to be fully pleaded in that Court and evidence taken, in so far as it is sought to be led, and assessed. It is inappropriate for this Court to undertake that task. In saying that I appreciate that the prolongation of the litigation is to be regretted, but I do not see any alternative.

There is a further point which, in my opinion, is significant. Section 104A is not a limitation provision. Provided proper notice has been given pursuant to it, it precludes the validity of a development consent being questioned in any legal proceedings unless they are commenced within the time specified.

In WYkanak versus Rockdale City Council & Ors (Pearlman J - 20 July 1998 - as yet unreported) her Honour considered a defence raised in relation to a development consent based on s.104A. She did so together with a defence based on s.35 of the Act, which is in substantially the same terms and relates to the validity of an environmental planning instrument. At p.9 she said:- "Privative clauses, such as ss.35 and 104A, do not operate as an absolute bar to a challenge to an environmental planning instrument or to a development consent - they are subject to the exceptions which are specified by the principle referred to as `the Hickman principle'. That principle recognises that a privative clause shall operate and take effect to preclude a challenge, provided that the impugned decision is made in good faith, that it relates to the subject matter of the legislation, and that it does not on its face exceed the authority conferred by the legislation (see R versus Hickman; ex parte Fox <case>; [(1945) 70 CLR 598] "and Londish versus Knox Grammar School & Ors (Court of Appeal, 22 December 1997, unreported)." 
I have referred, on several occasions, to the section depriving the Court of jurisdiction if a valid advertisement or notice has been given and, in my opinion, that is a further and cogent reason why his Honour should have allowed the amendment, so that he could decide whether he had jurisdiction to consider the merits of the case. The operation of s.104A also cuts across a matter to which his Honour had regard in exercising his discretion, namely the entitlement of Mr Johnson to have his claim decided on the merits. If the procedures proscribed by s.104A had been met there was no such entitlement because Mr Johnson challenged the validity of the consent more than three months after the publication of the notice.

This, in my respectful opinion, is a further reason why his Honour's discretion miscarried.

The Failure To Comply With The Requirements Of Clause 59(2) 
In my respectful opinion the reasoning of his Honour on this point is correct.
There is nothing which I feel I can usefully add.

Whether The Deferred Commencement Condition Was Fulfilled 
His Honour posed the question whether the Council should have been satisfied as to compliance with the matter specified in the deferred commencement condition. He was of the view that when that condition was read as a whole it meant that if Pulver Cooper decided that a licence should be obtained, then it had to satisfy the Council that one had been obtained within six months of the consent. Accordingly his Honour was of the view that "Note 1" formed part of the condition and was "not merely advisory". He considered the note appeared to be a specification under s.91AA(4) of the period in which the Council may state to Pulver Cooper the evidence that must be produced sufficient to satisfy it.

His Honour then quoted the letter of 23 January 1995 from NPWS and continued:- "Neverthless, it appears that the developer had already decided, prior to receiving this letter, that it needed to obtain a licence." 
He recounted the fact that Pulver Cooper had applied for a licence on 17
January 1995, but that it had not received it within the period specified in the deferred commencement condition.

In my respectful opinion his Honour was in error in the conclusion to which he came. The deferred commencement condition placed upon Pulver Cooper the obligation of ascertaining the requirements of NPWS in respect to the subdivision and, critically in my view, stated:- "In the event that the National Parks & Wildlife Service require that a licence be obtained, documentary evidence demonstrating attainment of that licence shall be submitted to Council." 
NPWS made it quite clear that it could not require that a licence be obtained, that being a matter upon which Pulver Cooper had to make up its mind.
Therefore, NPWS did not require that a licence be obtained, so that the condition precedent to the deferred commencement condition never arose.

The balance of the condition, in my opinion, proceeds on the basis, firstly, that the requirements of NPWS would be complied with and, secondly, that "if necessary" a licence would be obtained within six months of the date of consent otherwise it would lapse. However, the letter from NPWS made it apparent that there was no necessity to obtain a licence. The fact that Pulver
Cooper decided, of its own initiative, to do so to seek to avoid, so far as possible, the consequences of any prosecution was not in consequence of any requirement of NPWS, but rather was a matter of commercial practicality for its own purposes. In these circumstances I consider that his Honour's conclusion on this aspect was in error. The words of the deferred commencement condition simply would not do the work necessary to support his Honour's conclusion.

A further issue was raised, namely whether his Honour was correct in determining that the consent had lapsed. Whilst s.91AA(5) provides that an applicant may produce evidence to the consent authority sufficient to enable it to be satisfied as to various matters and, if the consent authority has specified a period for the purpose, the evidence must be produced within that period, the section does not provide what the consequence of non-production of the evidence will be.

In Botany Bay City Council versus Kilzi & Anor (Stein J - 7 March 1997 - unreported) his Honour re-visited the question. He noted that reliance had been placed on the present decision where he found, assuming validity of the consent, that it had lapsed because a deferred commencement condition had not been satisfied. He referred to the note forming part of the condition and continued:- "The question of lapse of the consent by effluxion of time in Johnson was a matter of interpretation of the deferred commencement condition and Council's purported satisfaction therewith, rather than a consequence of s.91AA(5) of the EPA Act. It must also be noted that my remarks on the deferred commencement condition were obiter.

I do not find it necessary to determine whether, by operation of s.91AA(5), a consent lapses automatically at the expiration of the specified period if no evidence is presented to Council. In view of the decision of the Court of Appeal in Iron Gates Developments Pty Limited versus Richmond-Evans Environmental Society Inc [(1992) 81 LGERA 132], which I followed in Oshlack versus Iron Gates Pty Limited & Anor (40152 of 1996, unreported, 6 March 1997), it is apparent that a discretion remains in the Court to refuse relief to a party notwithstanding lapse of a consent. In my opinion, this is an appropriate case to exercise that discretion." 
The matter was considered at length by Bignold J in Australand Holdings
Limited versus Hornsby Shire Council (Bignold J - 20 March 1998 - as yet unreported).

His Honour, after referring to the decision in Johnson, continued, at p.20:- "In passing I would wish to add a cautionary word against the imposition of a condition on the grant of development consent which attempts to provide for the lapsing of the consent in the event that some act does not occur within a specified time. In Johnson the relevant condition so provided, and although Stein J in his obiter holding, gave full effect to the condition, it appears that no question had been raised concerning the validity of such a condition.

That such a condition is clearly of questionable validity is well attested by a long line of authority in South Australia concerning the power of a planning authority to impose conditions on the grant of development consent. It will be sufficient to limit reference to the decision of Wells J in Adelaide Pistol Club Inc versus District Council of Munno Para [(1981) 45 LGRA 119] where his Honour held to be invalid (as not being authorised by the statutory power to impose conditions) the following condition ... ." (His Honour's emphasis.) 
His Honour set forth the condition and the comments of Wells J upon it and, at p.22, concluded:- "In my respectful opinion, the resultant reasoning in Adelaide Pistol Club is prima facie applicable to the statutory power to impose conditions conferred by s.91(1) and (3) of the EP&A Act and is likewise applicable to the power sourced in ss.91 and 91AA to impose a deferred commencement condition." 
After referring to a number of authorities his Honour said, at p.32:- "In my judgment non-fulfilment of the deferred commencement condition within the stipulated time does not cause the lapsing of the deferred commencement consent." 
He set forth his reasons in extenso and, if I may say so with respect, they are compelling.

In all these circumstances I am of the view that it cannot be held that if there had been non-compliance with the deferred commencement condition, which
I am not satisfied there was, that caused the development consent to lapse.

Costs At First Instance 
As I am of the opinion that it is necessary to determine the issues raised by the amendment, I consider that the costs at first instance before Stein J should be borne in the same way as the costs of the further hearing.

Conclusions 
In my opinion, his Honour's refusal to allow the Council to amend to plead s.104A should be set aside. I would propose that the Council be granted leave to amend to plead the matter proposed to be added as paragraph 6 of its
Defence and that it pay Mr Johnson's costs of and incidental to the amendment.
I am further of the opinion that the matter should be returned to the Land and
Environment Court to determine the issue raised by that amendment including, of course, any reply thereto upon which Mr Johnson may rely.

I consider that the appeal against his Honour's decision in relation to the invalidity of the notice of 26 October 1994 should be dismissed.

I consider that the appeal against his Honour's decision in relation to the deferred commencement consent should be upheld and that it should be declared that:- the condition of the deferred commencement consent was fulfilled; and if the condition of the deferred development consent was not fulfilled that consent did not thereby lapse.

On the questions of costs the Council has been successful on two out of the three matters argued and Pulver Cooper has been successful in respect of the only matter on which it ultimately relied. In my opinion Mr Johnson should be ordered to pay eighty per cent of the Council's costs. I consider that Mr
Johnson should pay Pulver Cooper's costs and that he should have a certificate pursuant to the Suitors Fund Act, in respect of each of these costs' orders, if he is otherwise entitled to one.

Proposed Orders 
On the Council's appeal the orders and declaration I propose are:- 
Appeal allowed.

Set aside orders made by Stein J, save for the order as to the invalidity of the notice dated 26 October 1994.

Grant Lake Macquarie City Council leave to amend its Defence to plead the matter proposed to be added as paragraph 6 of its Defence.

Order Lake Macquarie City Council pay Mr Johnson's costs of and incidental to the amendment.

Remit the matter to the Land and Environment Court to determine the issues raised by the Amended Defence and any Reply thereto.

Declare that:- the condition of the deferred commencement consent was fulfilled; and if the condition of the deferred commencement consent was not fulfilled that consent did not thereby lapse.

Order Mr Johnson pay eighty per cent of the costs of Lake Macquarie City
Council and have a certificate pursuant to the Suitors Fund Act if otherwise entitled thereto.

Order the costs of the hearing at first instance follow the costs of the further hearing.

On Pulver Cooper's appeal the orders and declaration I propose are:- 
Appeal allowed.

Declare that:- the condition of the deferred commencement consent was fulfilled; and if the condition of the deferred commencement consent was not fulfilled that consent did not thereby lapse.

Order Mr Johnson pay the costs of Pulver Cooper & Blackley Pty Limited of the appeal and have a certificate pursuant to the Suitors Fund Act if otherwise entitled thereto.
 * * * 
