

Regina versus Welsh Matter No 70071/94 [1997] NSWSC 318 (20 August 1997) 
Last Updated: 8 April 1998 
REGINA versus BRIAN JOHN WELSH /94 August 1997 
Hidden J (and a Jury of Twelve) 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SUMMING-UP 
HIS HONOUR: Now, ladies and gentlemen, something over a fortnight ago you were present when the accused, Brian John Welsh, was charged that on or about 19 December 1993 at Gilgandra in the State of New South Wales he did murder Rodger Williams. To that charge he pleaded not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. 
Now, in most criminal cases the verdicts available to the jury are simply guilty or not guilty of the crime charged but in many murder cases it is open to a jury to bring in the alternative verdict of not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter, even though manslaughter is not itself charged in the indictment. This is such a case and, as you will have gathered from the addresses of both counsel, the real issue appears to be whether this killing should be classified as murder or manslaughter.

Now as I have said, the accused pleaded guilty to manslaughter, which is an admission on his part that he did kill Mr Williams in circumstances which amounted to manslaughter, although not to murder. Strictly speaking, that plea or admission does not bind you. Theoretically, it is possible for you to find the accused not guilty of either murder or manslaughter. I must say, I think if you did no one would be more surprised that Mr Welsh himself. I merely say that theoretical possibility is open to you. However, the way this case has been conducted you may think the verdicts are either guilty of murder, or not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. Put another way, a finding of guilty of manslaughter is the best the accused expects at your hands.

The unlawful killing of a human being can occur in a wide variety of circumstances. This is why we have the distinction between murder and manslaughter in law. As you are no doubt aware, the term murder is reserved for the most serious forms of homicide. Manslaughter embraces unlawful killings which, for one reason or another, are seen as less culpable than murder. There are a number of bases on which a killing might be classified as manslaughter rather than murder. For the purposes of this trial I shall refer only to two of them. The first is diminished responsibility, about which you have heard much in the course of the trial and in the addresses of both counsel. The second is manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act, to which
Mr Nicholson referred briefly in his address, but as to which I will direct you in due course.

Let me say at this early stage, however, that while manslaughter in its various forms is less culpable than murder, it is nonetheless a very serious crime. If, after deliberating on the evidence and paying heed to my directions on law, your conclusion is that the proper verdict is guilty of murder, then that is what your verdict should be. You must not use a verdict of guilty of manslaughter as some form of compromise.

On the other hand, if you determine that the proper verdict is manslaughter, then that is what your verdict should be, and you should not think that by bringing in that verdict you are in some way choosing a soft option. Whatever your verdict is, it will be the verdict which you conscientiously believe is appropriate on the evidence as you assess it. You must have no regard to the possible implications of your verdict. You should have no regard to what the result might be for the accused as a result of your verdict, or how people affected by the trial, both relatives of the deceased or the accused, might react. Your verdict must be the one which you conscientiously believe is appropriate on the evidence.

Ladies and gentlemen, at the outset of the trial I had a little bit to say to you about the functions of all of us in this court room. I need to say a bit more about that to you and expand upon it a little. The function of counsel, of the Judge, of the jury in any criminal trial is important, but of those functions undoubtedly yours, the jury's, is the most important. The function of counsel is to present the evidence upon which you will decide the case, and to address arguments to you as to how you should view that evidence. The way counsel conducts the case is of very great assistance in determining what the real issues are which the jury has to decide - what is in dispute and what is not. You have had the benefit in this case of a trial conducted by very expert and able counsel on both sides.

My function as the trial Judge is to preside over the trial, to ensure that the rules of procedure and evidence are observed, and to tell you, the jury, as much of the law as you will need to know to decide this case. Counsel on both sides have referred to matters of law in their addresses. As I said, they are both very experienced and what they have told you is correct. Nonetheless, it is ultimately my responsibility to direct you, the jury, as to the law.
That may well mean repeating much of what you have already heard from counsel but, as it is my responsibility, I must do so.

You are bound to accept my directions of law and to apply them in your deliberations, in your assessment of the evidence, and in the way in which you arrive at your conclusions; but there my function ends. It is not part of my function to tell you what evidence you should or should not accept, or what inferences you should draw from the evidence, let alone what your verdict should be, and I will not attempt to do that. Our system of justice entrusts those decisions to the jury.

You twelve citizens are what lawyers call the judges of the facts. It is your function, and only yours, to assess the evidence, to determine what you accept and what you do not accept, to draw inferences or conclusions from what you do accept and, ultimately, to decide what the verdict should be. The community entrusts those decisions to twelve of its citizens in jury trials, and it expects those citizens to draw on their commonsense and collective experiences of life in arriving at those decisions. But, as I said, you are judges and you must act judicially.

You must have regard only to the evidence you have seen and heard in this court. The evidence embraces what you have heard from the various witnesses and from the accused himself, together with the exhibits which you will have with you in the jury room. You must put out of your minds any irrelevant considerations. You must be dispassionate, unaffected by considerations of sympathy or prejudice.

On any view of it, Mr Williams met his death in a brutal way. No one suggests otherwise, least of all Mr Nicholson. But the only relevance of the brutality of that attack is what it says about the accused's state of mind at the time, and both counsel have presented to you arguments about that. That is its only relevance and the obvious brutality must not, of itself, prejudice you against the accused. No one can feel anything but the utmost sympathy for Mr Williams' former wife who gave evidence, and for his family, relatives, all his friends and loved ones, as a result of their loss; but that is an entirely irrelevant consideration as far as your deliberations in this case are concerned.

Much of what you have heard about the accused, Mr Welsh's, background would elicit your sympathy. It is common ground that he has had a tragic background.
That is directly relevant here because it bears upon the question of whether he was suffering a depressive illness at the relevant time, and that bears upon a number of questions here relevant to his state of mind at the time, but there its relevance ends. Any sympathy you may have generally for Mr Welsh must play no part in the way you decide this case.

Understandably, ladies and gentlemen, if at any time any of you need a break, please just let me know. Cases such are this are serious and can be stressful,
I understand that.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, it is entirely for you to determine whether witnesses are truthful and, if so, whether they are reliable in the sense that their recollection is accurate. As to any witness, it is entirely a matter for you whether to accept all of his or her evidence, some of it or none of it.
The same applies to the statement which the accused, Mr Welsh, made to you in this court room. You are entitled to observe the demeanour, the body language, of the witnesses and, indeed, the accused himself. You are entitled to have regard to how these people presented to you as they spoke. I suggest you be a little careful about that. Obviously it is much easier to conclude something from the body language of someone you know well, than from someone you have never seen in your life before. All these matters, however, are entirely for you, for your judgment and assessment.

Expert evidence has loomed large in this case. You have heard evidence from a number of people with specialised training and knowledge which, no doubt, you do not have and, no doubt, no one in this court room, or just about no one in this court room, has. Nonetheless, it falls to you to assess the expert evidence and to determine what you accept and do not accept of it, in the same way that you assess any other evidence that has been given in the course of the trial. Insofar as there are conflicts in the expert evidence, it is for you to resolve those conflicts if you can. You would have regard to the proved expertise of the particular witness, the degree of training and experience he or she has had in that particular field and, of course, you have regard to the factual assumptions on which those various experts arrived at their conclusions. One of the things you would ask yourself is, what was the information on which that expert expressed opinions? Was that information reliable? Does that information accord with the facts as we find them on our assessment of the evidence: we, the jury? 
Finally, as I have said, it is for you to determine what inferences or conclusions you draw from the evidence which you do accept. Matters of inference or conclusion are very important in this case. Crucial to this case is the accused's state of mind. Did he have a particular intention? Did he have a particular awareness? Was his mind abnormal at the time? These are very much matters of inference or conclusion from the whole of the evidence in the case. Your conclusions are matters entirely for you. As you have rightly been told, however, you must not guess, you must not speculate. When I talk about inferences or conclusions, I am talking about inferences or conclusions fairly available from the evidence.

Your verdict, whatever it be, must be unanimous. There is no provision in New
South Wales for majority verdicts. Now again, as you have been correctly told, what has to be unanimous is the verdict. How each of you arrives at it does not matter. In due course I will turn to the elements of the crime of murder, but you already know that murder is put to you by the Crown on four separate bases. If all of you were agreed that the appropriate verdict was murder, it would not matter that different ones of you arrive at it on different bases.
Equally, as you have heard already, there are two bases on which you might find the accused not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. Again, if all of you were agreed that the appropriate verdict was manslaughter, it would not matter that some of you arrived at it on one basis and others arrived at it on another. It is the verdict which must be unanimous.

The material in the defence case setting out the accused's account of relevant events, that is his general personal background and the events leading up to and at the time of the killing, is before you in a number of ways.

First of all, the accused made a statement to you, you recall, at the opening of the defence case. Now, when the prosecution case closed the accused had three choices. He could have said nothing at all to you, or he could have made an unsworn statement to you, or he could have entered the witness box and given evidence on oath. Mr Welsh chose the second course, that is, to make an unsworn statement. You should draw no inference adverse to him because he made that choice. In making that choice he was exercising a legal right available to him, and to everyone in New South Wales who appears for trial in a court such as this. On the other hand, in assessing the way you come to that statement you are entitled to have regard to the fact that it was not on oath, and was not subject to cross-examination. Nevertheless, it is the accused's account of matters relevant to the charge against him and you must have regard to it. It is for you to evaluate it in the light of all the material in the case.

In addition, in determining what is the accused's account of relevant matters, you may have regard also to what he told the various experts from whom you have heard in this court room: Dr Nielssen, Professor Bashir, Dr Gilandas, Mr
Klein. You can have regard also to what he is recorded as having told Dr
Milton, who saw him back in 1985, and you recall Dr Milton's report is in evidence as exhibit 1. In other words, that history that he gave those various professionals is available to you in this court room as his account of relevant events.

To that general proposition, however, there is one exception. You may recall that when Professor Bashir was being cross-examined, the Crown prosecutor took her to the accused's prison medical file and, in particular, to some notes of a consultation between a psychiatrist called Dr Lewin and the accused in May
You may remember those notes contained what appeared to be matters of history provided to Dr Lewin by the accused at that time, matters about his background and behaviour, including matters relating to his behaviour when intoxicated. Ladies and gentlemen, it would be unsafe to use that material as any evidence of the accused's background or his past behaviour. I say that because all we have are brief notes, rather than a narrative report, and brief notes of a doctor whom we have not seen or heard in this court room. Whether those notes are an accurate record of what the accused told Dr Lewin we really cannot know.

So, I direct you that you must not use that material as evidence of what the accused said to Dr Lewin in the course of that consultation and, more particularly, you may not use it as evidence of the truth of anything noted about the accused's background or behaviour or in the course of that consultation. The relevance of that consultation I will come to later, but you may understand the relevance of it in the Crown case is Dr Lewin's diagnosis that there was no endogenous depression, and also the fact that it seems to be the first time that the accused told anyone in the prison medical system that he had been hearing voices. That is of significance, and that is where its significance begins and ends. More of that later.

Ladies and gentlemen, central to our system of criminal justice is the proposition that the prosecution must prove its case against the accused, and prove it beyond reasonable doubt. Whatever the charge, an accused person in these courts enjoys what lawyers call the presumption of innocence. That means that he or she is presumed by law to be innocent of the crime charged, unless the prosecution proves guilt to that high standard. The words "beyond reasonable doubt" are associated with the criminal law, but they have no technical meaning. They mean what they say in plain English. The presumption of innocence means that an accused person need make no answer to the prosecution case. He or she need not say anything to the jury in answer to the charge. He or she need not call any evidence in answer to the charge. In that event, the burden of proof remains upon the prosecution to prove the crime charged, beyond reasonable doubt and, unless it can do so, the accused is entitled to be acquitted of that crime.

If, as in this case, the accused chooses to make a statement to the jury and to call witnesses, that does not mean that he or she assumes any burden of proving innocence of the crime charged. In that event the jury has to consider what the proper verdict should be in the light of all the material in the case, including the material produced by the accused, but the burden of proof of the crime charged would in no way shift from the prosecution. The jury might reject everything the accused says in answer to the charge and all the evidence called in the defence case and yet still not be satisfied that the crime has been proved.

So it is here, ladies and gentlemen. The crime charged is murder and the Crown bears the burden of proving the elements of that crime and proving them beyond reasonable doubt. In determining whether the Crown has done so you have regard to all of the material in the case, including the material in the defence case, but bear in mind, however you evaluate the defence material, the burden of proving the elements of the crime of murder never shifts from the Crown.
The same is true of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act, to which I will turn in due course.

On the other hand, if you are satisfied that the elements of the crime of murder have been proved, it is necessary for you in this case then to consider the question of diminished responsibility. As you have heard, on that issue, it is the accused who bears the burden of proof on the balance of probabilities. Again I will have more to say about that later. So the first thing you must decide is whether the Crown has proved the elements of the crime of murder.

Now, under the law of New South Wales, murder can be committed in a variety of circumstances, and in this case the Crown puts murder to you on four distinct bases. The first thing the Crown must prove, whatever the basis, is that it was the accused who caused Mr Williams' death. Well, ladies and gentlemen, no one suggests otherwise, although that is a matter as to which you must be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt. Mr Nicholson has not suggested otherwise, and it appears to be common ground that this accused caused Mr Williams' death. However, the Crown must also prove one of four things: 
Firstly, that the accused intended to kill Mr Williams. Alternatively, secondly, that the accused intended to inflict grievous bodily harm upon Mr
Williams. Grievous bodily harm simply means really serious bodily injury. On this basis the accused does not necessarily have to intend injury which was life threatening or permanent, but it does have to be really serious bodily injury.

The third alternative basis is what was referred to by the Crown prosecutor as reckless indifference to human life. For this basis what the Crown must prove is that the accused realised that by his actions he would probably kill Mr
Williams. It is sufficient if the Crown proves that he realised he probably would kill him by doing what he was doing. Now, I emphasise "probably" because, for this basis of murder, the Crown has to prove that the accused foresaw more than the mere possibility he might kill Mr Williams. It is necessary that the accused foresaw the probability that he would kill him.

Now, the fourth basis is what has been referred to as felony murder. Put very briefly, ladies and gentlemen, the law in New South Wales is this: if a man kills someone in the course of committing a serious crime that man is guilty of murder, even though he did not intend to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm, and even though he did not realise that by his actions he would probably kill. Provided the prosecution proves that that man was in the course of committing a serious crime during which someone was killed as a result of his deliberate act, murder is established on that basis.

Now, for this purpose, the serious crime which the Crown alleges here is assault with intent to rob with striking and wounding. I am not going to go into an elaborate definition, ladies and gentlemen, of the term "assault" or "rob". It is hardly necessary for the purposes of this case. As I have said, it appears to be common ground that the accused assaulted Mr Williams. It appears to be common ground that he struck him, and that term "striking" can include kicking. It appears to be common ground that the accused wounded Mr
Williams. A wounding simply means a breaking of the inner layer of skin so as to cause bleeding. There is no issue about any of those matters. The only issue on this basis of murder appears to be whether there was that intent to rob, and "to rob" means what you think it means. The accused had the intent to rob if you are satisfied that he intended to steal property from the person of
Mr Williams.

So the upshot of all that, ladies and gentlemen, appears to be this: there is no issue that the accused caused Mr Williams' death. The issue, the vital issue for you, is his state of mind at the time on this question of whether the elements of murder are made out. The vital issue appears to be, did he intend to kill, or did he intend to inflict grievous bodily harm, or did he realise that what he was doing would probably kill Mr Williams, or did he intend to rob him when he attacked him. They appear to be the vital issues on this question of murder.

Now, let me emphasise with those first three states of mind, intent to kill, intent to inflict grievous bodily harm, or realisation of the probability of death, the test is subjective. You must determine whether the accused actually had one of those states of mind. The same is true, of course, with intent to rob. As far as those first three states of mind, intent to kill, inflict grievous bodily harm or realisation of the probability of death are concerned, it is not necessarily to the point that the killing was spontaneous. The Crown does not have to prove that the killing was planned or premeditated. The intent to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm can be formed in an instant of time. The realisation that what you are doing will probably kill can come upon a person in an instant of time. A state of high emotion is not necessarily inconsistent with a person having one or other of those three states of mind. A state of high emotion may be the reason why an intent to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm, for example, was formed.

In determining whether the accused did intend to kill or inflict grievous bodily harm, or did realise that what he was doing would probably kill, you have regard to all the evidence and, in particular, the evidence from witnesses of what the accused did and said at the time. You may have regard to what the accused himself told you, and told the various experts, about his state of mind at the time, and about what he did at the time. Whether he had any of those states of mind is very much a matter of inference, as I say, from all that material, but I emphasise the test is subjective.

You have regard, of course, to the nature of the injuries themselves, their nature and extent. You have the evidence of Dr Bradhurst about that. You have the photographs, exhibit D, which are pages 59 to 62 of your folder, folder of photographs, showing you some of the injuries, but remember the test is subjective. It is not a question of what any reasonable person would have intended, or would have realised, if that hypothetical reasonable person had inflicted those injuries. The question was, what was in this man's mind? 
On the fourth basis of murder, felony murder, as I have said, the only intention the Crown has to prove there is the intention to rob, and you might recall the evidence about that emanates principally from Mr Chatfield.
According to him the accused said "Do you want to roll him?", meaning Mr
Williams, shortly before the attack occurred, and you were taken by counsel to those questions and answers in the recorded interview, exhibit O, questions to 157, where the accused admitted that he - let me be precise about this - it was put to the accused that he had said to Mr Chatfield "Do you want to roll him?", to which the accused said, "I think I did say that ... when I hit him." He referred to having hit Mr Williams and searched his pockets, or at least having patted his pockets.

It is from that material that the Crown says you infer that he had the intention to rob. On the other hand, the accused in this court has made no such admission, that is, that there was the intention to rob, and he certainly made no such admission of an intention to rob in his account to any of the experts who have given evidence in the case.

As to the killing itself, what he said to you in his statement was this, he described sitting in the gutter and hearing the voices - and I will have more to say about that later:- "...hearing the same voices again, saying, "I want to kill you, I'm going to kill you." 
He went on:- "I remember hitting Mr Williams on the face but everything was hazy. I must have kicked Mr Williams but I don't remember it really. I don't remember going home that night..." and this is the crucial part:- "I didn't mean to kill Mr Williams. I didn't mean to cause him any serious injury and I have (sic) no idea what I was doing would cause him death." 
Now, by that, of course, the accused denies any intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily harm, and he denies any realisation that what he was doing would cause death. He does not expressly refer to an intention to rob, but it does seem that his account, apart from speaking to the police, has consistently been that he had no intention to rob.

On this question of whether you are satisfied that the accused had any of those four states of mind: intention to kill, intention to inflict grievous bodily harm, realisation of the probability of death, or an intention to rob, you must have regard to all the evidence of his state of sobriety at the time of the offence and suggesting an abnormal state of mind at the time, including the evidence emanating from the various experts on that question.

Let me deal, first, with intoxication. Intoxication, whether it be by alcohol or drug, is not of itself a defence to any criminal charge, but it may bear upon whether the accused person had the requisite state of mind at the time, that is, the state of mind necessary to establish the charge. We all know that alcohol can loosen people's inhibitions so that their emotions are very easily aroused and they do things they would not have done if they were sober. Many people commit crimes when they are intoxicated, but the fact that they were disinhibited or loosened up by alcohol does not necessarily mean that they did not have the mental state, or the state of mind, necessary to constitute the crime charged. Sometimes intoxication explains why the person committed a crime, perhaps because the alcohol or the drug, as the case may be, gave them
Dutch courage to do something they would not have considered doing when they were sober. On the other hand, alcohol, particularly in large quantities, can cloud the conscience so as to impair people's capacity to understand the significance of events, to appreciate what is happening around them and to appreciate the likely result of their actions. In those circumstances intoxication may have a very real bearing on whether a person had the state of mind necessary to constitute the crime charged.

Now, both counsel have taken you in some detail to the evidence in this case about the accused's state of intoxication. I do not propose to repeat that material, you have heard it at length from both counsel. You recall there was evidence from the people the accused was actually with on the night. You have heard various views about his state of intoxication. The Crown prosecutor said that it certainly appeared on the whole evidence that he had had a lot to drink. You have also heard his own account of what he had had to drink and, in particular, the detailed account he gave to Mr Klein, which Mr Klein gave you in the course of his evidence.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, it is a matter for you to assess that evidence, to arrive at such conclusions as you can about his state of intoxication at the time, and that is material which you must have regard to in determining whether you are satisfied he did have the state of mind which the Crown must prove in relation to the charge of murder. It is particularly relevant to the first three: intent to kill, intent to inflict grievous bodily harm, the realisation that his actions would probably kill, and it is also relevant to intent to rob. It is relevant to his state of mind as a whole.

Equally, as I have said, you should have regard to the evidence about the accused's mental functioning in determining whether you are satisfied that he had any of those four states of mind. Evidence of abnormal mental functioning could bear again upon his capacity to perceive events, to understand the significance of events, and to appreciate the likely result of his own actions. Evidence of that abnormal state of mind is not necessarily inconsistent with his having those four states of mind I have referred to.

As you have been told more than once, you only turn to the question of diminished responsibility if you find the elements of the charge of murder made out on one basis or the other. However, at this stage in considering the crime of murder and in considering whether any one of those four states of mind has been proved, you should also have regard to the whole of the evidence about his mental functioning and any evidence about abnormality disclosed in that material.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, if you are not satisfied that the accused had any of those states of mind on which the Crown relies, either the intent to kill, the intent to inflict grievous bodily harm, the realisation that his actions would probably kill, or the intent to rob, if you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of any one of them, then the crime of murder has not been proved and the accused is entitled to be acquitted of murder.

If that were the situation you reached, you would then go on to consider whether the accused is guilty of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act. The accused is guilty of manslaughter on this basis if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he killed the deceased by an act which was both unlawful and dangerous. Now, as I have said, no one disputes here that the accused caused the death of Mr Williams.

If you turn to consider manslaughter on this basis I can also say no one has suggested that doing that was lawful. There are circumstances in which a killing is lawful, but no one suggests there is any such circumstance here. So that if you come to consider manslaughter on this basis you may have no difficulty in determining that whatever the accused here did was unlawful, but the other matter on which you would have to be satisfied is that what he did was dangerous. That means this, you would have to be satisfied that a reasonable person in the position of the accused would have realised that by doing what he did he was exposing the deceased to an appreciable risk of serious injury. That test is an objective one, unlike the test for the state of mind for murder. Considering manslaughter on this basis, you do not have to look into the mind of the accused, you do not have to determine what his state of mind was. You view the matter objectively, applying the standards of a reasonable person. If you are satisfied that what he did was such that any reasonable person in his position would have realised that it was exposing the deceased to an appreciable risk of serious injury, then the act is dangerous in the relevant sense.

As I have said, ladies and gentlemen, on this question of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act, the Crown bears the burden of proving those elements of unlawfulness and of the dangerousness of the act but, in reality,
Mr Nicholson accepts that you would have to find that. I think one of the last things he said to you in his address was, obviously what this accused did to
Mr Williams was unlawful, obviously what he did was dangerous. Mr Nicholson says, in effect, if you are not satisfied of the elements of murder, then a verdict of guilty of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act is simply inescapable. The evidence of it is overwhelming.

Again, ladies and gentlemen, that is entirely a matter for you to assess. No one can tell you what you have to find about anything, but the way this case has been conducted it is acknowledged that you would have to find that what the accused did was unlawful and dangerous in the sense in which I have described it to you, and it would be proper for you, if you were not satisfied of the elements of murder, to bring in a verdict of guilty of manslaughter on that basis.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I want to turn to the question of diminished responsibility on which I will necessarily spend a little time. It has been a long day and I think I will turn to that tomorrow.

However, when I say "on which I need to spend a little time", I do not intend to spend a great deal of time. I have a commitment tomorrow as a result of which it will not be possible for me to sit before 10, ladies and gentlemen, but I still expect to complete my summing-up well within the hour of commencing, certainly before morning tea.

Thank you all. I will excuse you for the day now and see you for a 10 o'clock start tomorrow and I expect to have you retired and considering your verdict comfortably in the course of the morning.

IN THE ABSENCE OF THE JURY 
HIS HONOUR: Any matters so far? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: No matters of law, one matter of fact. In telling the jury as to material which they could have regard to, what the accused said, your Honour went through the names of the various expert witnesses, excluding, of course, Dr Lewin. Your Honour did not mention Dr Wong. 
HIS HONOUR: But he didn't give a history. 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: But your Honour-- 
HIS HONOUR: All I was saying was, the accused's version emanates from what he said in the court and what he told the experts. He didn't give Dr Wong any history. That is why I left him out. 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: I withdraw that. 
ADJOURNED TO THURSDAY 21 AUGUST 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
CRIMINAL DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
And a Jury of Twelve 
Thursday 21 August 1997 /94 - REGINA versus Brian John WELSH 
SUMMING-UP CONTINUED 
HIS HONOUR: Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. You remember yesterday I dealt with the elements of the crime of murder and those four bases on which murder might be established. I reminded you that there is no dispute that the accused caused Mr Williams' death. As far as the crime of murder is concerned it is a question of whether you are satisfied either that the accused intended to kill him, or that he intended to inflict really serious bodily injury upon him, or that he realised what he was doing would probably kill him - even though he did not want that to happen - or he was intending to rob him. 
Now, the way this case has been conducted, if you are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of any one of those things, then the elements of murder have been proved. If you are not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of any of them, then the crime of murder has not been proved and you would then turn to the question of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act.

Now, as I said, although the Crown bears the burden of proving that crime beyond reasonable doubt, the accused himself acknowledges that you would find that crime proved. He would not be expecting to be acquitted of manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act.

On the question of those four states of mind to establish murder, you remember
I told you that it is a question of whether you are satisfied the accused actually had one of those states of mind. It is a subjective test: did he intend to kill, did he intend to inflict grievous bodily harm, did he realise that what he was doing would probably kill, or was he setting out to rob - was that his intention? You must determine his intention at the time. Relevant to this question is the evidence suggesting that his mental functioning was abnormal at the time, and also the evidence of intoxication by alcohol. You must take that material into account, together with all the evidence, to determine one of those four states of mind which is necessary to establish murder.

On the question of intoxication, I remind you of the evidence of Mr Klein. He obtained an account from the accused of how much he had to drink that day and that evening and, based on that account, he made what he himself said was a very crude estimate that his blood alcohol reading would have been somewhere between .2 and a little over .3. Mr Klein explained to you that was a very high reading, if that were the range of reading that the accused had. As you know the legal limit for drivers is .05 so .2 or .3 is very high indeed.

Mr Klein said the extent to which that would affect any individual would depend on how tolerant they are to alcohol, in effect, what experience they had with drinking, and he said the accused, on his history, was a very heavy drinker who had developed a very high tolerance to alcohol and would not be as affected by that amount of alcohol compared to a person who did not drink at all.

Ladies and gentlemen, when I have completed my summing-up to you I am going to hand you a very brief outline of my directions in relation to murder, manslaughter as a result of diminished responsibility, and manslaughter by an unlawful and dangerous act, and I will have more to say to you about that outline when I give it to you.

I want to turn now to the question of diminished responsibility which you may think has been the central issue in this case and one on which you may think much attention has been devoted.

Bear in mind diminished responsibility means just that. It does not mean that responsibility has been completely eliminated by some mental disorder. Indeed, as you have been told by both counsel, you do not even turn to the question of diminished responsibility unless you are satisfied that the elements of murder have been established on one or more of those four bases. But if you are satisfied that murder has been established, diminished responsibility is a matter you must examine whatever is the basis on which you found murder proved. Assuming you do find murder proved, whether you found the accused intended to kill, or to inflict grievous bodily harm, or realised the probability of death by his actions, or intended to rob, whatever the basis on which you found murder established, diminished responsibility would be then the relevant matter to which you would have to turn.

As has been explained to you, it is a partial defence only, it assumes that the elements of murder have been established but, if diminished responsibility is also established, then the accused's culpability for the killing is mitigated - but, of course, he is not exonerated. If you find diminished responsibility, he is still guilty of the crime of manslaughter.

Now, on this issue of diminished responsibility, it is the accused who bears the burden of proof. The standard of proof he bears is not beyond reasonable doubt, which is the standard of proof borne by the Crown, but rather on the balance of probabilities, and the accused has to show that it is more likely than not that he was suffering from diminished responsibility at the time. I will adopt Mr Nicholson's image of the scales, the weighing scales: If the accused tips the scales ever so slightly in his favour on this question of diminished responsibility, then he has proved it, and is entitled to a verdict of not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter.

The elements of diminished responsibility are these: 
Firstly, at the time the accused killed the deceased he must have been suffering from an abnormality of the mind. Secondly, that abnormality must have resulted from a disease or an injury, and I will have more to say about this in a minute. Thirdly, that abnormality of mind must be such that it substantially impaired his mental responsibility for his acts.

Now, the term "abnormality of mind" means what it says. It means his state of mind was different from that of ordinary people, that any reasonable person would call it abnormal. Now, it embraces all aspects of the mind's activities, not only the perception of events, but also the ability to form a rational judgment about whether an act is right or wrong, and the ability to exercise judgment and will-power to control one's acts in accordance with rational judgment.

It is important to understand that the notion of abnormality of mind is not confined to defects of cognition. In plain language, the accused does not have to prove he was mad, as that word is popularly used. He does not have to show that he was delusional or out of touch with reality at the time. When we speak about abnormality of mind we are dealing as much with emotional functioning as we are with mental functioning. That is significant in this case because much has been said by both counsel about the accused's behaviour at the time of the killing and after it.

Now the suggestion that the killing was not completely senseless, that he had an intent to rob Mr Williams: the evidence suggests that after the killing he sought to cover his tracks by threatening Mr Chatfield and Mr Taylor with mayhem if they said anything to anyone, by lying or at least minimising his account of what occurred to Greg Welsh and to the police, showing a consciousness of the enormity of what he had done and the desire to avoid the consequences of it. Now that material is relevant to his mental functioning and is properly raised and dealt with by both counsel. All I am saying to you now is, if he did initially set out to rob Mr Williams and if he did, after the event, try to cover his tracks, those facts are not necessarily inconsistent with his suffering from diminished responsibility because, as I say, diminished responsibility involves the examination of the whole of his mental functioning, which includes his emotional functioning, and is not confined to his intellectual functioning, to his capacity to perceive and understand events.

The second matter which the accused himself must prove is that the abnormality of mind arose from disease or injury, or perhaps a combination of both. Now, whether he had a disease or injury is very much a matter for expert evidence although, in this case, the expert evidence is conflicting and, as I said yesterday, the fact that the evidence emanates from experts must not intimidate you. You are capable of resolving, and it falls on you to resolve, those conflicts in the expert evidence in the light of all the evidence in the case.

The accused's case is that at this time he was suffering from a major depression and also had mild organic brain damage from long-standing alcohol abuse. Now, as I say, whether he was suffering from those defects is a matter for expert evidence. As I understand it, the Crown does not dispute that he had some measure of brain damage. That has not been challenged but equally, as
I understand it, no one suggests that the brain damage standing alone would be sufficient to establish diminished responsibility. The more important factor clearly is the depressive illness and, as I understand the accused's case, to be it really focuses on the depressive illness. His case is that depressive illness, with some contribution for the brain damage, is the foundation for diminished responsibility.

Now, all the experts agree that a major depression is a disease in the relevant sense. It is a recognised psychiatric disorder and one which qualifies as a disease for the purpose of the law of diminished responsibility. All the experts agree that brain damage is an injury in the relevant sense, that is, an injury within the meaning of that term in the law of diminished responsibility. The real question appears to be whether the accused was suffering from major depression at the relevant time and the subsidiary question is, what part did his consumption of alcohol have to play in what he did, which leads me to the next direction I must give you.

As you have rightly been told by both counsel on this question of diminished responsibility, you must have no regard to his state of intoxication that night. As a matter of policy the law excludes the temporary effects of alcohol from the defence of diminished responsibility. I emphasise the temporary effects. The long-term effects of alcohol abuse may well be relevant and, indeed, they are here, because there is unchallenged evidence that that long- term alcohol abuse has caused this man some measure of brain damage. That is relevant to this question of diminished responsibility but, as a matter of law, you may have no regard to the temporary effect of alcohol: his state of intoxication on that night. That must be put to one side on this question of diminished responsibility.

The third matter the accused must prove is that, as a result of his abnormality of mind, his mental responsibility for his acts at the time of the killing was substantially impaired. The term "mental responsibility for his acts" involves a consideration of the extent to which his mind was answerable to his physical acts, and that includes a consideration of the extent to which he was able to exercise judgment and willpower to control his acts. The impairment must be substantial, that is, it must be more than minimal or trivial but it need not be total or complete. The word "substantial" has its ordinary meaning in ordinary English usage.

As I have said, whether the accused was suffering from major depression and/or brain damage at the relevant time is very much a matter for expert evidence, although the evidence here is conflicting: But whether, as a result, he suffered from an abnormality of mind and whether that abnormality of mind substantially impaired his mental responsibility for his acts are very much matters for your judgment using your commonsense and applying your minds to the whole of the evidence in the case. The experts are entitled to express their opinions about those matters, as they have done here, but those opinions do not bind you. Those opinions are merely part of the whole web of evidence on which you must arrive at your own conclusion about those matters.

Now, let me remind you briefly what the accused's case is on this question of diminished responsibility, and I promise you I will be brief. This matter, in particular, has been dealt with very thoroughly by both counsel and I have no intention of re-hashing what they have said. I should start by reminding you of what the accused said to you in his statement, and it is easier to read it to you I think, because it is only brief and I took you to part of it yesterday when I was dealing with the question of the elements of murder. The accused said: "Your Honour, members of the jury, I am not guilty of the murder but guilty of manslaughter. What I have told expert doctors is the truth. May I tell you a little bit about my life.

When I was about eight years old I was walking to the shops with my uncle and then I got this great pain in the chest and then I blacked out. Later on my uncle found me laying in the grass. Then he took me to the hospital to find out what was wrong with me but they found nothing. Later that night we received the news that my father had been shot in the chest.

When I was living with my uncle and aunty I wasn't happy there. It wasn't that they were bad people. I just missed my mother and father and I wanted to be with them.

When I was thirteen my sister and I moved to Kempsey. I wasn't any good at school and when I turned fifteen I was starting to hit the grog and marijuana, because I was getting bad thoughts and hearing voices and having hallucinations which made me unhappy. The voices mainly always related to my father's killer and saying that, 'I want to kill you, I'm going to kill you.' 
Since my Dad's death I have always been depressed and I can't get my life together and I still can't. I was so unhappy I didn't want to live and I thought if I got drunk it would get better. The reason why I didn't want to go to Gilgandra in the first place was because I didn't want to see my aunty die.
I was very fond of her. She was like a mother to me and I loved her very much and I can't cope with this because it reminds me of my father's death.

The night before going to Gilgandra I had a dream telling me 'Don't go' but I went. On the night of the incident I went to my cousin's place but no one was home. I was feeling edgy and I sat back down in the gutter. Around this time I was hearing the same voices again, saying 'I want to kill you, I'm going to kill you.' 
I remember hitting Mr Williams on the face but everything was hazy. I must have kicked Mr Williams but I don't remember it really. I don't remember going home that night. I didn't mean to kill Mr Williams. I didn't mean to cause him any serious injury and I have no idea what I was doing would cause him death.

Your Honour, members of the jury, I am deeply sorry for Mr Williams' death and
I feel really sorry for his family and I have no idea what I was doing and I deeply regret what happened and I am ashamed of it.

I don't know what came over me. All I remember was being afraid of the voices and wanting them to stop. Your Honour, members of the jury I am not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. Thank you." 
Now, ladies and gentlemen, as I said yesterday, you may also have regard to what the accused told the various doctors and other experts to whom he spoke as to his account of his background and the events of this fateful night. From that, you may remember, I excluded the notes from the Prison Medical Service of the history he gave to Dr Lewin which I alluded to in my summing-up yesterday: the evidence of his past medical history and past behaviour.

In addition to what the accused himself told the various doctors - or perhaps
I should use the expression "experts", because we had doctors who are experts in the medical and psychiatric fields and we had behavioural psychologists - apart from what the accused told the various experts, you also can have regard to what his mother, Mrs Welsh, had to say to Professor Bashir and, more importantly, what she had to say to you in this court.

You also heard evidence touching on the accused's background from his uncle,
Trevor Reid - you may recall it was with his uncle he was living at Gilgandra after his parents' separation - from his sister, Vivien Welsh, and his aunts,
Miriam Pittman and Josephine Windsor. You may remember he lived with Mrs
Pittman at Kempsey for a period of time and he lived with Josephine Windsor for a period of time at Windsor.

You also heard some brief evidence about his background, touching mainly upon the effect of his father's death, from some of the witnesses called in the
Crown case - from his cousins, David Welsh and Gregory Welsh - and also something about his general mood and behaviour from Deborah Welsh. Counsel have been over this material and I do not intend to repeat it. Shortly, it is clear though, that his parents separated, that led to his going to Gilgandra with his sister where he was brought up for some years by his uncle and aunt.
Then there was the murder, well, the killing at least, of his father in Sydney and you remember, I just reminded you of what he said in his statement of his reaction, perhaps, to that very killing by experiencing abdominal pains himself. He told you about that, as did Mr Reid, and there are in evidence the hospital notes, exhibit 4, the Gilgandra Hospital notes about his admission to hospital for these unexplained abdominal pains.

Then you heard the evidence of the emotional effect upon him of his father's death and there was evidence that he became quiet and withdraw and remained so. There is evidence to suggest that his schooling was affected, although it seems from time to time he was involved in sport and was good at it. There was the evidence of his problem drinking. There was evidence that he was introduced to alcohol at quite an early age, but the evidence is from his mid- teens he had become a consistent excessive drinker. You recall after a period at Gilgandra he rejoined his mother and lived at Gilgandra where he continued to live until this fateful time. There was evidence of a history of hearing the voices saying, "I'm going to kill you" or words to that effect.

There was the evidence of the circumstances of his going to Gilgandra and you recall the conflict in the evidence of whether he was reluctant to go to
Gilgandra and had to be dragged there, or whether he intended to go there in any event with a view to visiting his father's grave in Coonamble, and you recall counsels' competing submissions about that. What is common ground is that the reason for going to Gilgandra was because his Aunt Audrey, of whom he was very fond, was dying.

Much of that evidence is not in dispute, ladies and gentlemen. The real issue is what is the significance of it. You recall there is the report of Dr Rod
Milton, exhibit 1, of his assessment of the accused in 1985; exhibit 2, the notes of the Macleay Family Health Service, which he attended apparently on Dr
Milton's advice back around that time in the mid-eighties. There is also the evidence of the family history of depression, including his mother's own history of depression of which you heard evidence in this court and as to which you also have the report of Dr Rod Milton of 1986, I think, exhibit 3.

Now, I am certainly not going to remind you of the evidence of the accused's behaviour at around the relevant time, from his arrival in Gilgandra until this fateful day. It has been gone over well and truly by both counsel and I will remind you very briefly in due course of the competing submissions about it.

On the question of the major depressive illness, the defence relies primarily on the evidence of Professor Bashir who diagnosed it. She had seen him, you may recall, at prison at the request of the Aboriginal Medical Service before she became involved forensically in the matter and her conclusion was that he had a long-standing major depressive illness, although the degree of depression fluctuated from not so bad to very bad. Her conclusion on all the material she had was that at the relevant time, that is 19 December 1993, he was in a severe episode of depression and she said his account of hearing voices at that time was consistent with it being a severe episode of depression.

That diagnosis was supported to some extent by Dr Gilandas who approached the matter as a psychologist, but he said his personality testing of the accused was consistent with a long-standing depression. It was supported also to some extent by Mr Klein, a behavioural scientist, although he acknowledged that that was not really his area of expertise.

Mr Nicholson relied heavily upon the nature of the killing itself as demonstrative of the fact that the accused's mind was abnormal as a result of the major depression primarily, and perhaps also partly brain damage. He used,
I think, Mr Klein's word "irruptive" to describe this attack. He said, on the evidence, Mr Williams had done nothing to provoke this violence. Indeed, on the accused's account the only thing he had done was a kindness, giving him a cigarette. He said, even if the accused's initial intention was to rob Mr
Williams, which is not conceded, but even it were, the violence was wholly out of proportion to anything he might have needed to have done to get Mr
Williams' property from him. Mr Williams was, after all, a man in ill health.
He apparently had had a fair bit to drink himself and was obviously defenceless. So, Mr Nicholson says, the very senseless nature of the killing itself is demonstrative of the fact that it was the product of an abnormal mind and it cannot be explained simply by the disinhibiting effects of alcohol and it is too senseless for that.

He reminded you, I think it is question 110 in the recorded interview with the accused, where he was asked why he hit Mr Williams and he said "dunno". Mr
Nicholson says that is an indication of his complete lack of insight into what had occurred.

As to the evidence of the accused's behaviour about the time of these events - as I say, I won't remind you of it, but you recall there was evidence from a number of people about how he appeared and how he was behaving since his arrival in Gilgandra right up to the time of the killing from Mrs Welsh herself, from Trevor Reid, from Mr Chatfield, Mr Taylor, Sandra Smith, Wayne
Smith, Wayne Bamblett, Mrs Parkes, Pippa, his cousins David and Greg Welsh and
Deborah Welsh, who spoke of his behaviour on Monday after the event, and there was also evidence of the police, Detective Sergeant Gott, Detective Sergeant
Mongan, Sergeant Guymer, Detective Sergeant Pollock - and you recall Mr
Nicholson's submission was, while none of these people may have noticed anything remarkable about him, nothing they noticed was inconsistent with his having been profoundly depressed at the time. The fact that he did seek to cover his tracks afterwards, that he did seek to avoid responsibility for what he has done by lying, at least in part, about what had happened, was simply the product of the realisation after the event of what he had done, but was in no sense inconsistent with his mind having been abnormal at the relevant time.

Now, the Crown's response to this issue of diminished responsibility was initially, what he submitted to you was a knockout point and that is this: You remember I directed you that the temporary effects of alcohol must be disregarded on this question of diminished responsibility, it must be put to one side. The Crown's first submission to you was in this case you cannot do that, and you recall both counsel took you to the evidence of this, particularly to that of Dr Gilandas, but also Professor Bashir and Mr Klein.
The effect of the evidence of Dr Gilandas and, to a lesser extent, Professor
Bashir according to the Crown, was this: Assume he did have an abnormality at the time, assume that it did substantially impair his responsibility for his acts, assume that he was suffering from major depression, assume that he had brain damage. He was, however, also significantly intoxicated and, if you cannot disentangle the intoxication from the other factors bearing upon his mental state at the time, his mental response at the time, then you cannot know what effect the depressive illness and the brain damage had as opposed to the intoxication, the temporary effects of alcohol. If that be so, even assuming that these things were operating, you could not be satisfied that the brain damage and the depressive illness isolated from the intoxication substantially impaired his responsibility.

Mr Crown says, if that is so, that is the end of diminished responsibility. Mr
Nicholson said, on the other hand, not so. He said, true it is no one suggests that you can actually apportion in percentage terms the contribution that alcohol made to his irresponsibility as opposed to depressive illness and brain damage, but Mr Nicholson said you do not have to. It does not matter if alcohol had some effect, provided you are satisfied that the depressive illness and the brain damage had a substantial effect then diminished responsibility is still made out. The fact that you cannot precisely quantify their contribution to his irresponsibility, as opposed to that of the alcohol, does not alter the fact that it is open to you to find that their contribution was substantial. That being so, you do have an abnormality arising from depressive illness and/or brain damage substantially impairing his responsibility. They are the competing arguments, ladies and gentlemen.

The Crown went on to say, however, you would not be satisfied there was a major depression in any event, and unless you were there just is not enough for diminished responsibility. Now, the experts upon whom he primarily relied were Dr Wong and Dr Nielssen. Dr Wong, as you recall, did not have the advantage of having seen the accused himself, and you remember the reasons for that were explained to you. Let me say this to you, ladies and gentlemen, the fact that the accused declined to see Dr Wong cannot be used in any way against him. It was his right to decline to be examined by Dr Wong. The fact that he exercised that right must not be used against him on any issue in this case and, in particular, on this issue of diminished responsibility and whether he has proved it. Dr Nielssen, on the other hand, did have the advantage of seeing the accused and taking a history from him.

Now, again I won't remind you of the evidence of the doctors, it has been dealt with thoroughly by both counsel. The effect of Dr Wong's evidence is the evidence as to the accused's behaviour in the period leading up to the killing, at the time and after, is inconsistent with there being a major depression. Somewhat depressed he may well have been, but not a depression such as to amount to a psychiatric illness, says Dr Wong. Dr Nielssen was of the same view. He diagnosed the accused as suffering from what he called dysthymia, which meant long-standing low grade depression, but he did not believe that the accused was suffering from a major depression. He considered it possible but unlikely, having regard to the history he obtained and what he knew of the observations of witnesses. Both doctors agreed that auditory hallucinations - the hearing of voices - can be associated with severe depression, albeit rarely, but their view was that there was not a severe depression in the accused at the relevant time. From that it seems to flow that he didn't hear the voices, or if he did it was not a true auditory hallucination or a pseudo hallucination.

As I understand the Crown's submissions to you, you would have doubts about the entire history of the accused hearing voices but, even if you believed he did, they were not true auditory hallucinations at any time and certainly not at this time. Both Dr Wong and Dr Nielssen acknowledged that the accused may well have been severely depressed earlier in his life - and that report of Dr
Milton suggested that - but both were of the view that on the whole of the evidence you could not draw that conclusion at the relevant time, that is, 17
December 1993.

The Crown relied also on the material from the Prison Medical Service, the effect of which was summarised for you by Dr Wong. From it it appears that not long after going into custody the accused complained of suicidal thoughts, but said he had been able to be dissuaded from any attempt at suicide by a pep talk from his fellow prisoners. Otherwise, it seems there is no indication in his prison history of any psychiatric illness, other than in the conversation which Dr Lewin had with him in May 1994, when he did not diagnose any psychiatric illness, in particular I think his expression was that he did not find any endogenous depression. You will recall Dr Bashir's evidence about the
Prison Medical Service generally and Mr Nicholson's comments about that. His submission in reply to that is you would not credit the Prison Medical Service frankly with any great competence or care, and signs of depression might have been missed.

There are competing submissions, ladies and gentlemen, on that aspect of the matter. The Crown says: Look, this was an attempted robbery that got out of hand because he was drunk and it is as simple as that. Why he went so far to kill Mr Williams, says the Crown, we will never know, but that is really what this case is all about.

Mr Nicholson, on the other hand, says you just cannot explain this senseless killing by the disinhibiting effects of alcohol, and he called in aid the observations of Mr Klein about that. There has to have been something more than alcohol to explain this otherwise inexplicable killing. Mr Nicholson says it is the abnormal state of mind brought about by the depression and/or brain damage.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, very briefly, they are the competing arguments.
That is the nature of the evidence upon which counsel relied.

Now I remind you that, to establish diminished responsibility, the accused has to show that more likely than not he was suffering from an abnormality of mind at the time of the killing, that that abnormality arose from disease and/or injury - in this case, major depression and/or brain damage - and that, as a result of the abnormality, that his mental responsibility for these acts was substantially impaired. If he tips the scales in his favour on all three of those matters, the defence of diminished responsibility is made out and he is entitled to a verdict of not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter.
However, if he fails to prove on the balance any one of those matters, the defence of diminished responsibility fails and the appropriate verdict is guilty of murder.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, I foreshadowed that I would hand to you a document containing a very brief outline of the directions relating to the major issues in this case and I will have that done now. Let me say at the outset, ladies and gentlemen, this is not a substitute for my summing-up. I think it will help you to remember the directions I have given you, but if there is anything about which you are unclear, please send a note through your Foreman and we will bring you back and clear it up. This is merely a reminder. It is not a substitute for my directions.

I deal firstly, as you see, with the elements of murder and I summarise there the fact that the Crown must satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt, first, that the accused caused the death of the deceased. As I have said, about that matter there is no dispute, but the Crown must then satisfy you beyond reasonable doubt about one of the four things set out in paragraph 2, either intent to kill, intent to inflict grievous bodily harm, a realisation by his actions he would probably kill, or the intent to rob, that is, that he was assaulting the deceased with the intent to rob him and in the course of that assault struck and wounded the deceased.

I then deal with the elements of diminished responsibility to which you turn only if you are satisfied of the elements of murder, not otherwise. If you are not satisfied of the elements of murder, you do not need to concern yourselves with diminished responsibility. As I explained there, if you are satisfied of the elements of murder on any one of those four bases, you then turn to the question of diminished responsibility. As to that, the accused must satisfy you on the balance of probabilities that he was suffering from an abnormality of mind and that that abnormality arose from disease and/or injury and, as a result of that abnormality, his mental responsibility for his acts was substantially impaired.

If you are satisfied on the balance of those three matters, your verdict is not guilty of murder but guilty of manslaughter. But if you are not satisfied on the balance of any one of them, your verdict should be guilty of murder.

Finally, I turn to manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous act. You turn to this question if you are not satisfied that the elements of murder have been made out. If that is so, you should turn to consider this question of manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous act. As I have said, there is no issue that the accused caused the death of the deceased and there is no issue that what he did was unlawful. No one is suggesting any basis on which it could have been lawful, so the real question on this basis of manslaughter is to say: Would a reasonable person in the position of the accused have realised that by his actions the deceased was being exposed to an appreciable risk of serious injury? You recall I told you that is a purely objective test. It has nothing to do with the accused's state of mind. It is an objective assessment of the dangerousness of his actions.

As I said, ladies and gentlemen, if you are not satisfied of the elements of murder and you turn to this question of manslaughter by unlawful and dangerous act, it is theoretically possible for you to acquit him of that also, in which case he is guilty of no crime, but not even the accused suggests you do that.
He acknowledges guilt of manslaughter and that is the verdict, that is the best verdict he expects from you.

Now, ladies and gentlemen, that completes my summing-up. The exhibits will go to the jury room with you. You must feel under no pressure of time. This is an important case. Take the time you need. If towards the end of the day you are still deliberating, I might ask you to come back and inquire how you are going. At that point if you think you are close to a verdict and you would like to keep going, that is what we will do. If you say you would rather come back tomorrow, that is what we will do. I leave that entirely in your hands.
Take the time you need, there is no rush.

If you need to be reminded of any of the evidence, please send me a note and it will be done. If you need clarification of any of the directions of law, please send me a note and that will be done. If you are having any difficulty, do not suffer in silence. Tell us about it.

When you have reached your verdict you will again send me a note and you will be brought back into court. My associate will ask your foreman to stand and she will say, "Members of the jury have you agreed upon your verdicts?" If you have, your foreman will say "Yes". She will then say, "How say you?" or "How do you find, is the accused guilty or not guilty of murder?" If you say "Guilty" that will be the end of the matter and no further verdict will be taken. If you say "Not guilty", she will then say, "How do you find, is the accused guilty or not guilty of manslaughter?" and you will give your verdict, guilty or not guilty, as the case may be although, as I remind you, no one expects a verdict of not guilty of manslaughter. Whatever your verdict is, my associate will then repeat it to you and she will say, "So says your foreman, so say you all?" That is a question to ensure that the verdict is unanimous and when she asks that question we would appreciate it if you would either say yes or nod your head to indicate you all agree with the verdict your foreman has announced.

HIS HONOUR: Any matters, gentlemen? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: No. 
NICHOLSON: No. 
AT 11.06AM THE JURY RETIRED TO CONSIDER THEIR VERDICT.

AT 3PM IN THE ABSENCE OF THE JURY 
HIS HONOUR: Mr Crown, Mr Nicholson, we have a note from the jury which reads: "We would like a copy of the nine points of use of DSM4 as used by the witness. We want this to further clarify whether the accused was suffering from major depression." 
Well, that is, in effect, a request for a reminder of the evidence. I can read it to them from, perhaps, the evidence of Dr Wong, gentlemen, or we can copy that part of the transcript, gentlemen, whatever you think should be done.

CROWN PROSECUTOR: Copy the transcript, your Honour. 
NICHOLSON: I just cannot find it. 
HIS HONOUR: It was in Dr Wong's evidence. 
NICHOLSON: If they only want it for comment and Dr Wong offers a comment, yes. My view is it shouldn't be given to them unless they want a comment. 
HIS HONOUR: Oh, yes, I agree with that. 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: Page 194; not much comment there. 
HIS HONOUR: No, I think that is right. What I propose, Mr Nicholson, is to copy page 194 from line 29 but blotting out everything above it, over to the first line on page 195 and that is it. I think that covers it. I should also so insofar as the jury's note is, "We would like a copy of DSM4", I will just copy that part of the transcript. 
What I propose to do is copy the transcript starting from line 29 on page 194, going over to page 195, commencing with, "A suicide attempt".

NICHOLSON: I think he is the only one that catalogued the items in the DSM and certainly the rest of the evidence may, to some extent, have comments on the validity of those. 
HIS HONOUR: I think that is so but I do not think anyone was taken to that seriatim, after Dr Wong. 
While you are here, it occurs to me that a copy of the directions I gave to the jury should be marked for identification 10 and this question will be marked for identification 11.

MARKED FOR IDENTIFICATION #10 HIS HONOUR'S DIRECTIONS TO THE JURY.

MARKED FOR IDENTIFICATION #11 THE JURY'S QUESTION.

IN THE PRESENCE OF THE JURY 
HIS HONOUR: Ladies and gentlemen, we have your note which asks for a copy of the nine points of use of DSM4 as used by the witness, and you say you want this to clarify whether the accused was suffering from a major depression. The easiest way to do that, we think, is to extract the evidence of Dr Wong where he set them out one by one; so we will copy that from the transcript and send it to you in the jury room. 
If there is anything else you want, please ask us. Please bear with us, ladies and gentlemen, it takes some time to prepare this.

THE JURY RETIRED TO FURTHER CONSIDER ITS VERDICT AT 3.10PM.

AT 4.25PM IN THE ABSENCE OF THE JURY 
HIS HONOUR: I have simply been told, gentlemen, that the jury want to be brought back in. I have not been told it is a verdict. I think they simply want to tell us how they are going. 
IN THE PRESENCE OF THE JURY 
HIS HONOUR: Mr Foreman, I take it you just want to report the progress of your deliberations, do you? 
FOREMAN: That is correct, yes. 
HIS HONOUR: What is the position? 
FOREMAN: The position is that we would like to come back tomorrow to further consider the verdict. 
HIS HONOUR: That is fine. Well, ladies and gentlemen, that being so, I will excuse you now. If you could just return tomorrow -- 
FOREMAN: I am sorry, we talked about the time and we were wondering if 9.30 would suit the court? 
HIS HONOUR: That is fine. Again, if any of you are given to reading the law notices you will see it is 10 o'clock but disregard that. If you would like to return to the court at 9.30 a.m., but do not come into the court room, just return to the jury room. Remember, though, do not discuss the case until all twelve of you are together. You can leave the Court now. (The jury left the court room) 
IN THE ABSENCE OF THE JURY 
HIS HONOUR: I take it there will be no problem with Corrective Services in relation to Mr Welsh being here at 9.30 a.m.? 
CROWN PROSECUTOR: No, your Honour. 
ADJOURNED TO 9.30 AM FRIDAY, 22 AUGUST 1997.

THE SUPREME COURT 
OF NEW SOUTH WALES 
CRIMINAL DIVISION 
HIDDEN J 
And a Jury of Twelve 
Friday 22 August 1997 /94 - REGINA versus Brian John WELSH mfi #12 NOTE FROM THE JURY 
JURY RETURNED WITH A VERDICT OF GUILTY TO MURDER AT 11.30AM 
JURY DISCHARGED AT 11.35AM 
ADJOURNED TO A DATE TO BE FIXED * * * 
