

Regina versus Smith Matter No 007/93 [1994] NSWSC 2 (20 December 1994) 
Last Updated: 13 January 1999 
REGINA versus STEPHEN ALLAN SMITH /93 December 1994 
Grove J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
DETERMINATION OF LIFE SENTENCE 
HIS HONOUR: Stephen Allan Smith (the applicant) seeks fixing of minimum and additional terms which will together replace an original sentence of penal servitude for life - upon conviction of the murder shortly to be mentioned - imposed by Maxwell J on 20 February 1989. His Honour then directed that the sentence date from 29 March 1985 which was the day following the applicant's arrest in Victoria shortly before midnight and the original preferment of the charge of murdering Frank Michael Salvietti @ Stapp at Concord New South Wales on 19 March 1985. He has been in custody in this State continuously since 9 April 1985. He had served previous terms of imprisonment. In 1977 he was given a sentence of six years with a direction that he be considered for parole after twenty one months in the Supreme Court of Queensland upon conviction for an offence described as "stealing with actual and personal violence whilst armed in company". On 15 December 1982 he was sentenced in the Sydney District Court on two counts of armed robbery to concurrent head sentences of ten years penal servitude with a non parole period of three years. He was released to parole on 18 January 1985 - a period of only two months prior to the murder. 
It is convenient to note that the applicant was originally convicted after a trial on 19 June 1986 but this was set aside upon appeal and a new trial ordered. A further appeal against the conviction before Maxwell J was dismissed on 15 July 1991. Whilst this litigation progressed the applicant's pre-existing parole was revoked and he was ordered to serve its balance. It was calculated that - as at 24 November 1994 the hearing date of this application - the applicant had been in custody since arrest on the murder charge for just under nine years eight months of which nearly six years were exclusively referrable to the life sentence because for the rest of the longer period he was concurrently serving that balance of parole.

The determination is governed by [s
A](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/). The
Crown and the Serious Offenders Review Council support the setting of a determinate sentence and I agree with that stance. [Section
A(8)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) will not require reference. I do need to have regard to the precepts in [s
A(9)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s13a.html) viz: "13A (9) The Supreme Court, in exercising its functions under this section, is to have regard to: the knowledge of the original sentencing court that a person sentenced to imprisonment for life was eligible to be released on licence under section 463 of the [Crimes Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/ca190082/) and of the practice relating to the issue of such licences; and any report on the person made by the Review Council and any other relevant reports prepared after sentence (including, for example, reports on the person's rehabilitation), being in either case reports made available to the
Supreme Court; and any relevant comments made by the original sentencing court when imposing the sentence; and the age of the person (at the time the person committed the offence and also at the time the Supreme Court deals with the application), and may have regard to any other relevant matter." 
Prior to 1985 the applicant and Salvietti were active criminals and they had resumed contact after the former's release to parole in January of that year.
The killing occurred while the applicant was riding as a passenger in a car belonging to Salvietti's wife but which at the time was being driven by him.
The applicant aimed a pistol at the back of his head and discharged it at point blank range. As a result of the demise of the driver, the vehicle collided with a parked car and thereby halted. The applicant gathered a bundle of cash - said to be $10,000 although the precise amount is not of consequence - and fled.

The record of facts compiled by the Crown chronicled that the pair were journeying for the purpose - at least on Salvietti's part - of participating in drug trafficking. At interview with police after arrest in Melbourne the applicant said that Salvietti had given him a pistol as they set out and that after an argument about a plan proposed by Salvietti to kill a complainant who was scheduled to give evidence against them in support of charges of sexual offences - of which the applicant was subsequently acquitted - the subject turned to the undivided spoils of some earlier robberies.

The following answers given by the applicant at the time seem to me to be eloquent of a cold blooded criminal execution.

When asked a general question about circumstances he said: "Like I was saying, we started arguing about the girl, and I was saying it wasn't necessary to do nothing to the girl, then we went back to the armed holdups I did, which Frank was involved in, and I wore them for him and which he didn't give me my share of the money. We had been arguing for about five minutes, and then I shot him." 
And later when asked whether he knew the name of the street in which the event took place he elaborated in these terms: "No, we were going to a place but when we started arguing he started to drive around slowly and we came to a dead end street. It was while we were arguing I thought fuck it, there's no point any more, he told me I was either for us or against us and that's when I shot him." 
I note that the applicant declined to sign the record of interview but at the trial the interviewing officers testified to its content and I do not consider it unreliable. The above extracts are taken from the surviving document and I have corrected some of the more obvious typing errors.

The applicant testified that he was merely receiving a lift from Salvietti and intended to be dropped at a friend's house, that he was given the pistol for some undiscerned reason and that it accidentally discharged. That story was rejected by the jury as I also reject it. Mr Thompson for the Crown stated that the prosecution was prepared to rest its case on the assertion that the applicant shot Salvietti with requisite intent without relying upon the demonstration of any particular motive. The Crown also did not contest the submission on behalf of the applicant that the killing was unpremeditated in the sense that it occurred apparently on "the spur of the moment" without forward planning. I am prepared to deal with the matter in the context of those concessions. The latter proposition is significantly corroborated by the disorganized panic marking the applicant's flight to Victoria and observations of him made by a witness Marshall at various relevant times.

I am required by the statutory provisions already mentioned to have regard to certain previous practice relating to eligibility for an issue for tickets of leave. I note the information contained in Annexures A and B to the Serious
Offenders Review Board (now Council) report and take it into account. I declare, however, the caution with which I approach elements therein in which averages are expressed repeating, as I have frequently said of the same material in similar applications, that the much publicised 11.7 year mean length of time before first release served by the prisoners the subject of the particular survey has been derived from a span of incarcerations stretching from three to thirty four years.

I turn to some subjective matters concerning the applicant. I take into account that he was aged thirty years at the time of the events and is now thirty nine. A valuable information source is the report of the Serious
Offenders Review Council as supplemented by the evidence of Ms Dent. The entirety is reflected in this extract of the conclusion of the report: "Smith appears to be a model prisoner. Since coming into custody in April , he has had two charges against him for breaches of discipline.

He has constantly sought to improve his education and skills, with the aim of being able to support himself upon release.

The Board supports the granting of his application for the fixing of a minimum term." 
There have been two further disciplinary matters occurring in July this year.
The Visiting Committee of the Board assessed them as so minor as not to warrant further enquiry. A total of four such matters during nearly ten years of custody is a relatively commendable record.

The applicant has made - subject to the uncertainties of this determination and the Board's decision as to actual release - realistic plans for his future. These are focussed upon his relationship with Ms Helen Smith. Upon release, accommodation is available to the applicant at a home owned by her at
Vincentia. In their evidence, he expressed, and she implied, hope for their marriage in due course. Her teenaged daughters see him as a father figure and he is said to have developed an excellent relationship with them. At the urging of the younger daughter, they have adopted the surname Smith and given public notice by Deed Poll of that change. Ms Smith is a divorced woman of multiple academic attainments and she is presently employed doing youth work.
She impressed as a mature and decisive woman and I accept her testimony. I add that the applicant originally comes from Nowra - which is nearby to Vincentia - and there is apparently continuing family support available to him as well as the opportunity for resettlement with Ms Smith and her daughters.

The totality of subjective features weigh heavily in the applicant's favour.
My task, however, is not primarily to determine by reference to present progress towards rehabilitation just when the applicant should be released into the community - that is a function of the Offenders Review Board - but it is to undertake a sentencing exercise similar to that which would have previously been undertaken if the penalty had been discretionary but, of course, I have the permissible advantage of certain hindsights.

I therefore make some findings and assessments. The crime was an intentional killing of one active criminal by another. In the circumstances, I would reject any suggestion that the applicant's intention might have been only to do grievous bodily harm. That the offence was committed shortly after release to parole and during its currency are matters of significant aggravation. The money was not the motive but taking it - even if simply to facilitate a panicked escape - could hardly be adjudged creditable. The applicant is burdened by his serious prior record.

The maintenance of his assertion of accident makes his acceptance of responsibility somewhat artificial and it detracts from otherwise outstanding favourable subjective features that I cannot find that he bears any significant sense of remorse or contrition. I record that there are no relevant remarks on sentence by Maxwell J which I need to take into account.

Nevertheless this is certainly a case in which a determinate sentence should be fixed. The progress of the applicant and his apparent genuine desire for reform should be recognized. It is markedly in his favour that, although he adhered to his rejected defence, he embarked upon rehabilitative steps by way of education and training whilst his trials and the associated appellate processes were in train. This can be contrasted with his attitude during earlier incarcerations.

There are some matters to be recorded before I proceed to sentence. I should refer to the circumstance that the Visiting Comittee of Council included amongst the material a program for the projected movement of the applicant to final minimum classification as a C3 prisoner. Only when he attains this status will he be eligible for work release and for understandable reasons this classification is normally given only during the last twelve to perhaps eighteen months of custody. I mention the matter only to note that I do not regard the proposal, as Ms Dent accepted, as capable of governing my task and any coordination between my decision and the schedule is coincidental.

The applicant's former associate Marshall gave important Crown evidence against him. He may be residing in the Nowra area. I recommend to the Board that conditions of the applicant's parole include a suitable inhibition on contact. In evidence, the applicant expressed consent to the imposition of such a condition.

Finally, I note that [s (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/) does not apply and that the minimum and additional terms are such as I consider appropriate to the particular circumstances and they take into account that, for a significant time, the applicant was concurrently serving sentence for murder and balance of parole for the earlier armed robberies. I record that I have been referred by counsel for comparative and guidance purposes to sentences imposed in the cases of Coles (14 May 1991) and Butler (12 March ) as well as the determination of life sentence in the case of Murray (29 April 1993) and with special reference to concurrency to Regina versus Cribb
Court of Criminal Appeal, unreported 4 November 1994.

Stephen Allan Smith, for the murder of Frank Michael Salvietti in substitution for the existing term of penal servitude for life, I impose a term of sentence of penal servitude for seventeen years consisting of a minimum term of twelve and a half years to commence from 29 March 1985 and to expire on 28 September together with an additional term of four and a half years. In respect of this sentence you will be eligible for parole on 29 September 1997.
 * * * 
