

Bowden versus Lo and Ors Matter No 3188/95 [1998] NSWSC 216 (19 May 1998) 
Last Updated: 17 June 1998 
BOWDEN versus LO & ORS /95 May 1998 
Hodgson CJ in EQ 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Equity Division 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: Until 6th July 1995, the plaintiff Mr. Bowden was in occupation of the property 9 Sylvia Street, Chatswood, consequent upon a residential tenancy agreement made on 8th November 1994 with the owners of the property, the first and second defendants, Mr. and Mrs. Lo. On 6th July 1995, Mr. Bowden was evicted from the property pursuant to an order made by the Residential Tenancies Tribunal on 28th June 1995. 
In these proceedings, Mr. Bowden seeks orders against Mr. and Mrs. Lo concerning certain goods left by him on the property, namely, orders for the return of goods and/or damages for the loss of certain goods and for damage caused to some of the goods which were returned. Originally, Mr. Bowden also sought similar orders against Mr. Winchester, the lessor's agent; but the proceedings against Mr. Winchester have now been resolved by agreement.

OUTLINE OF FACTS 
The Residential Tenancy Agreement was for the period from 12th November 1994 to 31st December 1995, at a rent of $1,825.00 per calendar month, payable in advance on the first day of each month. The agreement also provided for a bond of $1,680.00: however, Mr. Bowden did not pay this bond.

About two months after moving in, Mr. Bowden sublet part of the premises to sub-tenants, Nikki Staerck and Mark Mortensen. These sub-tenants moved out in about June 1995. Mr. Bowden failed to pay the rent due on 1st April, 1st May, and 1st June, 1995. Mr. Winchester applied to the Rental Tenancies Tribunal for an order for possession; and the Tribunal made an order on 28th June 1995 that possession be given on 1st July 1995 at noon. The Tribunal also ordered that Mr. Bowden pay the landlord $5,000.00 immediately; and it noted an undertaking by Mr. Winchester to leave a letter in an appropriately worded form at the premises no later than 6.30pm on 28th June 1995. In a letter to
Mr. Lo advising him of the order, the Tribunal stated as follows: 
The tenant should be aware that any goods left on the premises after the landlord has taken possession in accordance with these orders may be deemed to have been abandoned.

Mr. Bowden did not vacate the premises, and Mr. Winchester obtained a warrant for the enforcement of the order.

At about 10.00am on 6th July 1995, the Sheriff came to the premises with Mr.
Lo and a locksmith. As they entered the premises, Mr. Bowden went out of the premises, taking only car keys and some cash. He left at the premises some motor vehicles and a large amount of furniture and effects. He did not speak to the landlord or the Sheriff, or attempt to make any arrangement concerning his goods.

However, Mr. Bowden says that he went back to the premises later that day, and also over the next couple of days, to try to make arrangements to pick up his goods. He says that Mr. and Mrs. Lo were there, that signs had been put up "No
Trespassing", that Mr. and Mrs. Lo told him to go away, and that he could not enter into any conversation with them. Mr. Bowden also says that he left a message on Mr. Winchester's answering machine on 7th July to the effect that he had not abandoned the goods.

There is in evidence a letter on Mr. Winchester's letterhead, dated 7th July and addressed to Mr. Bowden, asserting that an amount of $6,845.00 was outstanding; and asserting that this amount must be paid in full before Mr.
Bowden could obtain access to the property to obtain his personal effects. It does not appear that this letter was delivered to Mr. Bowden.

On 19th July 1995, Mr. Winchester placed an advertisement in the Sydney
Morning Herald advising that goods left by Mr. Bowden would be sold, unless they were redeemed within thirty days by Mr. Bowden paying all the money which was owing.

It appears that following his eviction, Mr. Bowden raised some money by selling a car; and in early August, he saw Mr. Winchester, and made an arrangement whereby he paid Mr. Winchester $5,000.00 to hold on behalf of the landlords, and Mr. Winchester was to hold certain goods set out in a list (a copy of which is Annexure A to this judgment) and also an MG car belonging to
Mr. Bowden. In return, Mr. Bowden was to have access to the garage of the property to pick up goods stored there, and also supervised access to the house to remove other goods.

On 8th August 1995, Mr. Bowden went to the property with Mr. Winchester. He noted that many items had been moved, and many goods had been packed into a large number of cardboard cartons. It appears that these cartons had been purchased by Mr. Winchester to enable the goods left by Mr. Bowden to be packed and ultimately removed, and that Mr. Winchester had arranged for a Mr.
Hank Carr to work there packing the goods. According to Mr. Bowden, he noticed in a Otto garbage bin at the premises a travel diary and some personal records. Outside the front door, in a pile of rubbish beside the door, he saw a half empty bottle of Chivas Regal. He also saw a refrigerator in which there had been some champagne, which was missing.

Mr. Bowden had hired a trailer for seven days from 8th to 15th August 1995, for $150.00, to enable him to collect his goods. On 8th and 9th August, he took some loads from the garage and from the house. On 10th August 1995, he took further loads from the garage, but access to the house was then denied.
On 11th August, access to the garage was blocked by the owners' vehicle. These proceedings were commenced on 15th August 1995.

On 17th August 1995, Justice Brownie by consent made orders that Mr. and Mrs.
Lo permit Mr. Bowden to have access to the premises to identify and remove his property. Mr. Bowden hired a trailer for a further seven days from 17th
August, for a further $150.00. He claims that, but for the non-co-operation of
Mr. and Mrs. Lo, he could have removed all his property within seven days.

Mr. Bowden gave evidence to the effect that his goods were handled roughly by
Mr. Lo, particularly in passing cartons out the front door, and dropping a fish tank at the side of the house. Mr. Bowden's evidence received some corroboration on these matters by a friend, Mr. Reece.

On 28th September 1995, solicitors acting for Mr. and Mrs. Lo authorised Mr.
Winchester to release the goods which he had placed in storage, and also the
MG motor vehicle, to Mr. Bowden. They also withdrew Mr. Winchester's instructions to act as agent for Mr. and Mrs. Lo. Mr. Bowden collected these goods. Mr. and Mrs. Lo paid towing and storage costs in relation to the MG vehicle, amounting to $643.40; and storage costs amounting to $210.00. Mr.
Winchester accounted to Mr. and Mrs. Lo for the $5,000.00 he had received from
Mr. Bowden, deducting from it a total of $2,323.10. That amount deducted was made up principally of $40.00 paid to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal; $90.00 paid to the Sheriff; $140.00 paid for storage of the goods stored pursuant to the agreement with Mr. Bowden; $124.20 for the advertisement in the Sydney Morning Herald; $455.00 for cartons and wages for packing; $175.00 for the locksmith; $51.90 for locks and chains for a side gate; and $1,260.00 for Mr. Winchester's own time in relation to the proceedings before the
Residential Tenancies Tribunal and dealings with Mr. Bowden.

Mr. Bowden claimed that some valuable property of his had not been recovered or returned, notably some valuable coins and notes which were part of an extensive coin collection. According to a numismatic dealer, Mr. Noble, the missing items were worth of the order of $33,000.00: see Annexure B. Mr.
Bowden claimed that an antique sterling silver canteen was also missing, which
Mr. Bowden estimated to be worth $7,500.00. Other missing items have been specified, totalling about $3,500.00: see Annexure C. Mr. Bowden also claimed that property that was returned had been damaged, notably a dining room table, a fish tank, and a television set. He also claimed that certain valuable binoculars which had been held pursuant to the agreement with Mr. Winchester had been replaced by cheaper binoculars.

In about the middle of 1996, there was a meeting between Mr. Bowden and Mr. Lo at the Community Justice Centre. As a result of this meeting, a number of items claimed by Mr. Bowden not to have been returned were returned to him, including a green Jaguar model car, and a backpack.

ISSUES 
It will be necessary for me first to express some views as to the credit of the main witnesses, Mr. Bowden and Mr. Lo.

Next, Mr. Bowden's primary claim was that the Court could conclude that Mr.
and/or Mrs. Lo still had the missing items, or at least that it could be inferred that they had taken them. Alternatively, he submitted that it could be inferred that the items had been lost because Mr. and Mrs. Lo had not taken reasonable care of them. Similarly, it was submitted that it could be inferred that items had been damaged because of lack of care by Mr. and Mrs. Lo.

To the extent that the plaintiff might be entitled to succeed on the basis that Mr. and Mrs. Lo had not taken proper care of the goods, a question arises whether Mr. Bowden himself might bear some responsibility for the loss of the goods, which could result in a reduction of any damages on the basis of contributory negligence.

Mr. and Mrs. Lo did not put on a cross-claim in these proceedings for rent; but they did make a claim for rent, and it seemed to me, having regard to the way these proceedings had been conducted, that it would be appropriate, if I found a verdict in favour of Mr. Bowden, to set off against that verdict any rent owing by Mr. Bowden to Mr. and Mrs. Lo.

CREDIT 
I found Mr. Bowden's evidence evasive and unsatisfactory on one matter in particular, namely his awareness of the eviction proceedings being taken against him, and the opportunity which he had to make arrangements to leave the premises and remove his property before possession was taken by the lessors. He claimed that he first knew of the proceedings when he received a letter two or three days before he was evicted, enclosing a copy of the
Tribunal order. He claimed that he had not previously received any letter or any document advising him of proceedings before the Tribunal. He suggested that previous documents may have been taken by the sub-tenants, or taken from the letterbox in front of the house. He claimed not to have seen a document addressed to him from the sub-tenants that Mr. Lo found on the premises after the eviction, which was dated 25th May 1995 and referred to a Notice of
Termination. I feel certain that Mr. Bowden knew a lot more about the proceedings being taken to evict him than he admitted in evidence, and that he did set out to give a false impression about this. I also consider that his gross disregard of the landlord's rights in failing to pay rent for three months, and leaving the landlords with the problem of a house full of valuable goods, reflects badly on his credit: his own evidence is that he had a large amount of valuable property, some of which was undoubtedly saleable, and that it was only after eviction that he sold just one motor vehicle to raise the $5,000.00 which he paid to the agent. In all these circumstances, I feel that
I cannot rely confidently on his evidence.

As regards Mr. Lo, I feel considerable sympathy with his claim to have been a victim in this matter, and his further claim that he acted in reliance on advice from the agent. However, I considered his evidence unsatisfactory concerning the goods which were returned after the meeting at the Community
Justice Centre. He did not give any coherent account of how it was that, one year after the eviction, he still had some quite distinctive property of Mr.
Bowden, such as the large green Jaguar car model. In this and in other matters, he attributed responsibility to his wife; but I considered his explanation of this matter most unsatisfactory, and it left me unable to rely with confidence on Mr. Lo's evidence.

HAS MR. BOWDEN PROVED THAT VALUABLE GOODS WERE NOT RETURNED TO HIM? 
Although I have the reservations I have indicated about Mr. Bowden's credit, I do not believe he has set out to make a fraudulent claim. On the balance of probabilities, I am satisfied that he did before eviction own the property which he has claimed, and did discover it missing after the eviction and after the recovery of the property which he was able to recover. On the balance of probabilities, I also accept that he has given a fair description of the missing numismatic items to the Court and to Mr. Noble, so that I am satisfied on the balance of probabilities that he has lost numismatic items to a total value of $33,350.00. As regards the other items claimed, and the alleged damage to recovered items, I find that I cannot be confident of Mr. Bowden's estimate of value, and the evidence which he gave as to the purchase price of various items does not enable me to reach a confident view as to their present value. Doing the best I can, I would estimate the total value of lost items and the total value of damage to be $40,000.00. In that, I include any amount which Mr. Bowden had to pay for extra trailer hire because of obstructive conduct by Mr. and Mrs. Lo.

HAS MR.BOWDEN PROVED THAT MR. AND/OR MRS. LO TOOK THE LOST ITEMS? 
I do infer that most (at least) of the missing coins were deliberately taken: the largest single item missing is a 1930 Australia penny valued at $8,000.00, and that was a single item taken out of an album containing a large number of pennies held in a large number of sheets. The removal of this one very valuable item from the album is not consistent with accidental loss. This item, and the other numismatic items, could possibly have been taken by Mr.
Lo, Mrs. Lo, Mr. Winchester, or Mr. Carr. Mr. Lo denied taking the items, as did Mr. Winchester. Mrs. Lo did not give evidence: it appears that she is in
Singapore. Mr. Carr did not give evidence: he had previously refused to provide an affidavit, and although he was subpoenaed to give evidence by Mr.
Bowden, he did not attend, providing a letter from a hospital indicating that he was to have elective surgery on the first day of the hearing.

In these circumstances, it has not been proved on the balance of probabilities that Mr. Lo, or Mr. and Mrs. Lo, deliberately took any of the missing items.
The evidence certainly does not sufficiently exclude the possibility that items deliberately taken were taken by Mr. Carr, or even by Mrs. Lo without
Mr. Lo's knowledge. The reservations I have expressed about Mr. Lo's evidence do not enable me to infer that he deliberately took any of the missing items, or that he still has them.

FAILURE TO CARE FOR GOODS 
It appears that Mr. and Mrs. Lo, on Mr. Winchester's advice, proceeded on the assumption that they were entitled to retain Mr. Bowden's goods until he paid all amounts owing to them pursuant to the tenancy. Regulation 27 of the
Residential Tenancies Regulation 1989 provided as follows: (1) If a residential tenancy agreement is terminated and goods are left by the tenant on the residential premises, the former landlord, not less than 2 days after the agreement is terminated: may, in the case of goods that are perishable foodstuffs or about which the landlord is reasonably of the opinion that their value is less than the estimated cost of their removal, storage and sale, remove and destroy or dispose of the goods, as the landlord thinks fit; or must, in the case of goods not dealt with under paragraph (a), remove the goods and store them in a safe place for a period of not less than 30 days.

A former landlord who has stored goods in accordance with subclause (1)(b) must, not later than 7 days after storing the goods, give a notice to the tenant at any forwarding address known to the former landlord and cause a notice to be inserted in a newspaper circulating generally throughout the State, containing the following particulars: the landlord's name and address, or an address at which the goods can be claimed; the former tenant's name; the address of the residential premises; a description of the goods; a statement that, on or after a specified date, the goods will be sold by public auction unless they are first claimed and the reasonable costs of removal and storage and any amounts payable under the relevant residential tenancy agreement are paid; a statement that the former landlord will retain out of the proceeds of the sale of the goods the reasonable costs of removal, storage and sale and any amounts payable under the relevant residential tenancy agreement.

A person who has a lawful interest in goods left on residential premises may, at any time before they are destroyed, disposed of or sold under this clause, reclaim the goods and the former landlord must deliver the goods to the person on payment of the reasonable costs of removal and storage and any amounts payable under the relevant residential tenancy agreement.

If goods stored in accordance with subclause (1)(b) are not reclaimed under subclause (3) or any amount payable in respect of the goods to the former landlord is not paid, the former landlord is required, as soon as practicable after the end of 30 days after the goods were stored, to cause them to be sold by public auction.

The balance of the proceeds of the sale of the goods are to be dealt with, after deduction of the reasonable costs of removal, storage and sale of the goods, by the former landlord as if the landlord were a business and the money were unclaimed money under the Unclaimed Money Act 1982.

A former landlord may apply to the Tribunal for an order that the former landlord may deduct an amount payable under the relevant residential tenancy agreement from the balance of the proceeds of the sale of goods under this clause.

If the goods left on the residential premises consist of a movable dwelling, the landlord need not comply with subclause (1)(b) but must comply with subclauses (2), (4) and (5) in relation to the goods.

On 31st August 1995, new regulations commenced, namely the [Residential
Tenancies (Residential Premises) Regulation ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedreg/rtpr1995499/). The new regulation made it clear that the landlord was entitled only to deal with goods that had not been removed from the residential premises within two working days after the tenant vacates the premises; and that such goods could be recovered on payment of a reasonable amount for the landlord's costs and expenses actually incurred in the removal and storage of the goods; whereas under the regulation applying in July 1989, it would appear that the landlord was entitled to retain goods until payment of amounts payable under the lease itself. However, even under that regulation, it would appear that the landlord's rights arose not less than two days after termination of the agreement; suggesting that until the expiry of those two days, the tenant was entitled to collect his goods. It would appear that Mr. and Mrs. Lo deliberately prevented Mr. Bowden collecting his goods within the first two days after termination of the tenancy.

However, I accept that Mr. and Mrs. Lo and Mr. Winchester believed they were entitled to hold onto the goods until amounts owing were paid; and accordingly, I would consider the agreement made in August 1995 between Mr.
Bowden and Mr. Winchester to be a valid one, even if, in the last analysis,
Mr. and Mrs. Lo had lost their right to retain the goods against payment of what was owing, because they had not permitted Mr. Bowden to collect goods during the first two days after eviction.

However that may be, in my opinion, Mr. and Mrs. Lo became bailees of the goods for Mr. Bowden. Even though they initially had possession involuntarily because the goods were left in their house, it is reasonable to regard their possession as voluntary from shortly after that: cf. Chesworth v. Farrer [(1967) 1 QB 407.] 
Bailees are obliged to exercise reasonable care in relation to bailed goods, and if the goods are lost or damaged the onus lies on them to prove that the loss or damage was not caused by their own negligence or that of their servants or agents: Glebe Island Terminals v. Continental Seagram [(1993) 40
NSWLR 206] at 228. It appears that this is true for gratuitous bailees as for bailees for reward, although the application of the standard of care may vary according to circumstances: see Mitchell v. Ealing LBC [(1979) QB ], Sutcliffe v. Chief Constable of West Yorkshire (CA UK, unreported 19/5/95). However, even if this is not entirely clear (see TNT (Melbourne) v. May & Baker <case>; [(1966) 125 CLR 353] at 366-7; note at [(1971) 45 ALJ 101-2]; Brambles Security Services v. Bi-Lo [(1992) Aust.Tort Rep.
-161] at 61, 269), I am in any event satisfied that Mr. and
Mrs. Lo should be treated as bailees for reward: they were relying on their possession of the goods in order to gain the advantage of having some security for money owing by Mr. Bowden.

Accordingly, Mr. and Mrs. Lo would be liable as bailees to Mr. Bowden for the goods that were lost or damaged, unless they could prove that the loss or damage was not due to their own negligence or the negligence of their servants or agents. In my opinion, that onus is not discharged.

The evidence does not show how the goods were lost, and I cannot be satisfied that their loss was not due to lack of care by Mr. and Mrs. Lo. Even if I were satisfied that the goods were lost due to dishonest conduct of Mr. Carr and/or
Mr. Winchester (and I am not satisfied), I do not believe this would relieve
Mr. and Mrs. Lo of liability. Mr. Carr and Mr. Winchester were acting as agents for Mr. and Mrs. Lo in dealing with goods which Mr. and Mrs. Lo were obliged to take care of, so that in my opinion Mr. and Mrs. Lo would be liable for their acts: see Bowstead on Agency, (14th Ed) pp.310-317. Similar comments apply to the damage to recovered goods.

Accordingly, subject to the question of contributory negligence, Mr. and Mrs.
Lo are liable to Mr. Bowden for $40,000.00.

CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE [Section (1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/s10.html) of the [Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/lrpa1965404/) relevantly provides as follows: (1) Where any person suffers damage as the result partly of his own fault and partly of the fault of any other person or persons, a claim in respect of that damage shall not be defeated by reason of the fault of the person suffering the damage, but the damages recoverable in respect thereof shall be reduced to such extent as the court thinks just and equitable having regard to the claimant's share in the responsibility for the damage: ....

In my opinion, although I am unaware of any case dealing directly with this question, this provision applies in appropriate cases to an action between a bailor and bailee: see Palmer Bailment (2nd Ed.) p.71 Because it has not been proved that either Mr. or Mrs. Lo actually took any of the goods in question, I think it is appropriate to consider whether or not Mr. Bowden bears some responsibility for his own loss. In my opinion, he in fact bears a very large responsibility for his loss. He failed to pay rent over a number of months; knowing the landlord was seeking possession, he did nothing to remove or safeguard his goods, not even easily portable and very valuable goods such as the coin collection; he made no attempt to arrange with the Sheriff at the time of eviction for collection of his goods; and he therefore left the landlord with the very considerable problem of dealing with a large amount of unprotected valuable goods.

There is some difficulty in comparing the responsibility of Mr. and Mrs. Lo, arising from their failure to negative lack of due care, and that of Mr.
Bowden, arising from affirmative satisfaction that his loss was partly his own fault; but in my opinion the Court can and should do so, taking a broad view as to respective overall responsibilities for what happened. On that basis, I would regard Mr. Bowden's responsibility as 75%, and Mr. and Mrs. Lo's as 25%.
Accordingly, subject to set-off, I think Mr. Bowden should recover a sum of $10,000.00 from Mr. and Mrs. Lo.

SET-OFF 
Mr. and Mrs. Lo are entitled to rent and the costs of eviction. In my opinion, they are also entitled to the costs of storage. Storage was necessary, pursuant to the agreement reached between Mr. Bowden and Mr. Winchester, and I have held that that was a valid agreement. In my opinion, Mr. Bowden is liable for three full months' rent and rent for the first six days of July. In my opinion, a further three weeks should be added to this, for time to remove Mr.
Bowden's goods and time to re-let to a new tenant. Accordingly, I would put
Mr. Bowden's rent liability at four times $1,825.00, that is, $7,300.00. He has paid $5,000.00, but from this must be deducted $2,316.00 paid to Mr.
Winchester, $643.40 paid by Mr. and Mrs. Lo for towing and storing the MG vehicle, and a further $210.00 paid by Mr. Lo for storing the other goods, making a total to be deducted of $3,169.50. Accordingly, the amount to be deducted from $7,300.00 is $1,830.50, leaving an amount due to Mr. and Mrs. Lo of $5,469.50.

Accordingly, in my opinion, there should be a verdict for Mr. Bowden for a net sum of $4,530.50.

CONCLUSION 
As regards costs, in my opinion, the plaintiff is entitled to costs. Not only has the plaintiff recovered a small verdict, but also it was necessary for the plaintiff to come to this Court in order to recover the great bulk of his goods which he did in fact recover. The plaintiff is entitled to the costs of filing the summons and other out-of-pocket expenses, but is not entitled to compensation for the time spent by him in preparing and conducting the case:
Cachia v. Hanes <case>; [(1994) 179 CLR 403]; and to avoid further expense and delay in the matter, I would fix the plaintiff's costs at $1,000.00 in all. I should add that I have not thought it appropriate to add interest to the rent claim of Mr. and Mrs.
Lo, or to compensate Mr. Bowden for the time during which he was left without his property. In my opinion, these two things substantially cancel out.

In the result, I make the following orders:
I order that the first and second defendants pay the plaintiff $4,530.50.
I order that the first and second defendants pay the plaintiff's costs assessed at $1,000.00.
Exhibits may be returned after 28 days if there is no appeal.
 * * * 
