

Regina versus Stephen Kwok Kan Yu No. 60165/95 [1995] NSWSC 68 (9 October 1995) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
GROVE(2), JAMES(3) AND HULME(1) JJ
HRNG
SYDNEY 1 September #DATE 1:9:1995 #ADD 9:10:1995
ORDER
Appeal dismissed
JUDGE1
HULME J Stephen Yu, the applicant for leave to appeal, pleaded guilty before his Honour Judge Court to eight charges laid pursuant to section 10(1)(b) of the Commonwealth Passports Act. Each offence carried a maximum penalty of $5000 or imprisonment for two years. Apart from matters of detail the charges were in identical terms.
The first was as follows: "On or about 14 April, 1992 at Sydney, New South Wales (the applicant) knowingly made a false statement in writing in support of an application by another person for an
Australian passport in that he stated ... 'I declare that
I have known Victoria Chu for one year(s) and vouch for his/her identity' which was a statement he knew to be false."
On 28 March last his Honour sentenced the applicant to imprisonment for twelve months but directed the applicant's release at the expiration of four months upon his entering into a recognizance to be of good behaviour for the balance of the term.
 .
Mr Yu had no criminal record. There was adduced on his behalf a deal of complimentary character evidence. For example, a Brother
Kelly of Saint
Patrick's College at Strathfield said that he saw the applicant as "one of the most ethical people I know, a man of very high principle." An officer of the
Probation Service expressed the opinion that the applicant "has a good reputation as a worthwhile member of the community, with high integrity and admirable ethics. His role in his company is vital in the servicing of the
Cantonese-speaking clientele."
His Honour said he accepted all of the "highly favourable subjective material at face value." His Honour also accepted that no direct or financial gain from the activities the subject of the charges was sought or received by the applicant, the most likely explanation for his behaviour being a desire to create goodwill for the accountancy practice of which he was a partner. His
Honour acknowledged that the applicant was entitled to credit for his pleas of guilty and said that he regarded these as a manifestation of contrition.
Despite these matters favourable to the applicant, his Honour took the view that, given the multiplicity of offences, reasons of general deterrence required that fully custodial sentences be imposed.
It is, I think, necessary that the events of which the applicant's conduct formed part be identified. Passports are, of course, commonly regarded as a reliable indication of citizenship. Apparently unauthorised Certificates of
Australian Citizenship could be supplied by or obtained from an officer of the
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the Department's records nevertheless indicating the cancellation of such certificates. A scheme was devised whereby such a certificate would be made available to a person not otherwise entitled to, but desirous of obtaining, an Australian passport; that person would execute a deed poll purporting to change his or her name from that stated in the certificate to his or her real name and then, with the benefit of one or both of the documents, an application for an Australian passport would be prepared in the usual fashion, submitted to Mr Yu or some other person for certification of identity, endorsed in the terms set out in the charges and finally submitted to the Passports Office. It is apparent that persons obtaining passports in this fashion paid amounts of the order of $40,000 to $80,000 to those running the scheme.
The applicant's certification was given, in the case of persons whose applications are the subject of charges, at the request of a business acquaintance who would refer the persons seeking such passports to him. It does not seem to be suggested by the Crown that the applicant was the author of or a principal in the scheme. However, an examination of documents obtained pursuant to search warrant from offices of the firm of accountants of which Mr
Yu is a member demonstrated that he must have been aware that some illegitimate activity was occurring. These searches of his office revealed, inter alia, the presence of photocopies ofcitizenship certificates and deed polls in respect of most of the applicants for passports which were subject to charges. A table which I will include in the final version of these reasons sets out respectively the names of the passport applicants, the dates upon which Mr Yu made his declarations, the dates of the deed polls in respect of those applicants and the dates of their citizenship certificates. 
Name
Declaration Date  Deed Poll Date  Certificate Date
Chu        14.4.92     13.4.92       9.3.92
Liang-Hoang .5.92      7.5.92      27.2.92
Tan-Lui      12.5.92     12.5.92      12.3.94
Yam     .6.92               8.5.92
Yang        9.6.93     11.5.92      26.3.92
Choy     .6.92     17.6.92      15.6.92
Zeng        9.7.92     11.6.92       9.3.92
Kung      .8.92               16.6.92
The table covers a period of four months. It shows, inter alia, that in the case of six of the eight passport applications which were the subject of the charges, Mr Yu had in his possession deed polls recording changes of name of the persons seeking passports. None of the deed polls was older than one month before the date of Mr Yu's certification and most of them bore the same date as that certification or the date of the previous day. The documents also revealed that all names were Asian. There was no case of a change to a name of
English or other European origin.
The name changes closely followed the dates of the citizenship certificates.
Many of the photocopies of the citizenship certificates and deed polls found also bore notes made, one may infer, by Mr Yu, recording personal details of the person named in the passport such as date of arrival, occupation, the name of other family members and circumstances of introduction. Furthermore, there was also found in the course of execution of the search warrants a flow chart or diagrammatic representation of the following matters or events. I will but list them though the document contained circles, lines and arrows indicative of some connection or relationship between various of the items. The items were: 
Computer
Immigration Department
Naturalisation
Passport
Arrive in Australia
Foreign
Passport
Immigrant
The documents seized show more interest in what was occurring than one might expect from someone who was merely certifying the identity of someone whom he knew.
Furthermore, that so many applicants for passports within such a short time should have registered changes of name could not be, and could not have been believed by Mr Yu to be, coincidence or innocent. The note-taking is indicative of the taking of steps to prevent detection in the event of contact with Mr Yu by the authorities as foreshadowed in the passport application forms.
A number of reasons were advanced in support of the contention that the sentences imposed should not be allowed to stand. it was submitted that the applicant had naively lent himself to the final procedural aspects of the applications without being aware of the nature and extent of the criminal enterprise. He may not have known all but he knew enough so that he must have been aware that there was some illegitimate and probably illegal enterprise and that his false certificates were being used in it.
Complaint is made that his Honour did not refer specifically to section
A and other sentencing provisions of the Commonwealth Crimes Act. His Honour did say: "I am conscious of the various sentencing provisions of the
Commonwealth Crimes Act and, in particular, section 16A and section 16G...." 
He was not required to refer specifically to the various sections. His Honour is a very experienced judge in the Criminal Jurisdiction and there is no basis for any suggestion that inadequate regard was had to any of the provisions of the Act.
His Honour also referred to sentences imposed on other persons who had been sentenced for their participation in the scheme and said that in the interest of overall parity of sentence, he had regard to those penalties. It was submitted that his Honour erred in so doing, given that the applicant was not a party to the scheme's formulation, promotion or execution and did not share in the proceeds therefrom.
I do not agree. It would have been wrong for his Honour to ignore the sentences imposed on the others, though obviously the differences in roles meant that the sentences were not closely comparable. And, at least as against some of the other participants, the applicant did not fare badly in comparison. Though three of the four passport applicants mentioned by his
Honour received sentences of periodic detention. This was the result of offers of future assistance to the authorities. The fourth, charged with two counts under section 10(1)(a) of the
Passports Act, each of which carried the same penalty as the charges faced by the applicant, received sentences of three and four months, to be served cumulatively. The first three persons to whom I have referred faced only one charge each.
Two others more centrally involved received sentences which were likely to result in their release from prison on good behaviour bonds after six and nine months respectively. In the case of the person receiving the shorter of these sentences, there were some mitigating circumstances not present here. Mr
Barin, who was the person who introduced the passport applicants to Mr Yu, received a sentence of one hundred and fifty hours' community service. He was aged over seventy. He received a considerable discount for the promise of future assistance to the authorities, assistance apparently regarded as valuable.
In light of all of these sentences, I do not regard any attention that
Judge Court gave to parity as unfairly prejudicing Mr Yu though I would also record my impression that some of the persons to whom I have referred may well have been treated unduly lightly.
There remains the question of whether, notwithstanding the number and nature of the offences committed by the applicant, his past good record, character and reputation were such that it was an error in Judge Court's sentencing discretion for him to impose the sentence he did and in particular the fully custodial component thereof.
In my view there was no such error. Australian citizenship or, indeed, the appearance of it is valuable; so is the reliability of the passport system. Those who undertake the task of certifying as to the identity of persons wishing to obtain benefits conferred by or reflected in the legislation dealing with these matters must accept the responsibility involved in their actions. The custodial component of the sentence imposed by Judge
Court is but onesixth of what could have been imposed for but one offence. The applicant before us committed eight. Although I do not suggest that the practical maximum which could have been imposed was sixteen years, that is the penalty for which the applicant before us rendered himself liable. I am unable to conclude that either the twelve months' total sentence or the four months' custodial component thereof was excessive.
I would grant leave to the applicant to appeal against the sentence imposed but dismiss the appeal.
JUDGE2
GROVE J wish to add a few words only in respect of one matter advanced on behalf of the applicant. I share the view expressed by Hulme J that even allowing for the offers of future assistance in some cases, there would appear to have been given an extraordinary degree of leniency to some of the participants in the scheme.
The applicant, as it has been said, was to an extent shielded from actual knowledge of the details of the scheme, but it seems to me that it was inevitable that he must have been alerted to the existence of illegitimacy.
It was recognised in Lowe versus The Queen that sometimes a sentence which is otherwise appropriate may need to be reduced if cooffenders are treated with greater than proper leniency in order to remove a potential sense of grievance held by the person receiving the greater sentence. As I indicated, this is a matter that has caused me some concern, but in the end I have come to the conclusion that this is not a case in which, having regard to all of the circumstances, particularly those delineated by Mr Justice Hulme, such a
grievance could justifiably be held. Accordingly, I agree with the order proposed.
The orders of the court therefore will be that the application for leave to appeal against sentence is granted but the appeal is dismissed, conviction and sentence are confirmed. The applicant must surrender into custody.
JUDGE3
JAMES J I agree with both of the judgments which have been delivered.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1995/68.html  
