

Houghton and Anor versus Immer (No. 155) Pty Ltd Matter No Ca 40764/96 [1997]
NSWSC 608 (4 December 1997) 
Houghton & Anor versus Immer (No. 155) Pty Ltd 
CA 40764/96, ED 2378/96 December 1997 
Mason P, Handley JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: Supreme Court Equity (Cowdroy AJ) 
FILE NO/S: CA 40764/96; ED 2378/96 
DELIVERED: Thursday 4 December 1997 
HEARING DATE/S: Tuesday 29 July 1997 
PARTIES: Wayne Lawrence HOUGHTON & Anor v IMMER (No. 155) PTY LTD 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P HANDLEY JA BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL: * Appellant: R C McDougal QC/M A Ashurst * Respondent: C J Birch/A C Scotting 
SOLICITORS: * Appellant: Blackshaw Lindsay & Le Page * Respondent: Angus Begg 
CATCHWORDS: * EQUITY - fraud on power - fraud on minority * EQUITY - compensation * EQUITY - right of co-owner to recover cost of improvements * RESTITUTION - right of co-owner to recover cost of improvements * STRATA TITLES - common property - strata plan of subdivision - unanimous resolution not required 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: APPEAL DISMISSED - ORDERD VARIED 
NO OF PAGES: 32 
Wayne Lawrence HOUGHTON & Anor versus IMMER (NO. 155) PTY LTD & Anor 
EQUITY - fraud on power - fraud on minority 
EQUITY - compensation 
EQUITY - right of co-owner to recover cost of improvements 
RESTITUTION - right of co-owner to recover cost of improvements 
STRATA TITLES - common property - strata plan of subdivision - unanimous resolution not required 
The parties were the proprietors of lots in a strata plan. The appellants held % of the aggregate unit entitlement and the respondent 20%. On 15 March 1993 the body corporate passed a resolution to permit the appellants, the proprietors of lot 5, to construct two penthouses in the lot and the roof which was common property. On 10 May 1995 the body corporate passed a by-law conferring privileges on the proprietors of lot 5 to construct the penthouses and "to retain the consequent improvements". On 16 April 1996 a special resolution was passed to authorise the subdivision of lot 5 and common property on and above the former roof to create two penthouse lots. The resolution authorised the body corporate to transfer to the appellants its interests in the penthouse lots derived from common property for $1. The plaintiff submitted that a unanimous resolution was required and the special resolution was a fraud on the minority. The trial Judge found that the resolution was ultra vires, and a fraud on the minority, and awarded equitable compensation. The defendants appealed.

HELD: (1) The special resolution approving the strata plan of subdivision was formally valid as it did not effect a transfer of or dealing in common property and a unanimous resolution was not required. (2) The doctrine of fraud on a minority is of general application and applies to bodies corporate under the Strata Titles Act. The transfer of the former common property on the roof for $1 was a fraud on the minority, and the resolution was voidable in equity. Cook versus Deeks <case>; [[1916] 1 AC 554] at 508 applied. (8) The respondent should also be compensated for the loss of a chance to negotiate to obtain more than 20% of the value of the common property. 
ORDERS 
The appeal should be dismissed with costs but the orders below should be varied by adding the following as order 2A: 
A Order that the third defendant be restrained from transferring its interest in lots 18 and 19 of the Strata Plan pursuant to paragraphs 7.1(iv) and (v) of the resolution of 16 April 1996, and that the first and second defendants be restrained from accepting such a transfer, until the sum of $120,000 and interest thereon from 13 November 1996, has been paid to the plaintiff.
 
Wayne Lawrence HOUGHTON & Anor versus IMMER (NO. 155) PTY LTD & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Handley JA. 
Wayne Lawrence HOUGHTON & Anor versus IMMER (NO. 155) PTY LTD & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
HANDLEY JA: The appellants appeal from the decision of Cowdroy AJ, sitting as a Judge in the Equity Division, that a special resolution of the Proprietors - Strata Plan No. 803 was ultra vires and a fraud on the minority. The appellants (herein the defendants) were proprietors of lots 2-5 with 80% of the aggregate unit entitlement. The first respondent (the plaintiff) is the proprietor of lot 1 with 20% of the aggregate unit entitlement. The second respondent, the body corporate, submitted to the orders of the Court. 
The strata plan, registered on 6 April 1964, related to premises at 121-125
Riley Street, East Sydney, a 5 storey building then used for commercial purposes. The building had a flat concrete roof surrounded by a parapet wall, which was common property. In 1974 the plaintiff became the proprietor of lot , which comprised substantially the whole of the ground floor in which it conducted a business known as "Carroll's Auto Repairs".

A partnership, comprising the defendants and Dr Graham Bates, purchased lots -5 in 1992 with a view to developing them for residential purposes. At the annual general meeting on 11 August 1992, the partners exercised their voting power to carry a resolution approving the complete refurbishment of all common areas, including the replacement of the lift. At an extraordinary general meeting on 13 October that year, the partners again exercised their voting power to carry a resolution purporting to strike a special levy of $990,200 for the reinstatement of the common property.

Building work commenced on lots 2-5 later that month. The Judge found that the sole purpose of the work was to make the building suitable for residential use. An extraordinary general meeting on 15 March 1993 passed the following resolution: "The Body Corporate resolved pursuant to by-law 16 to permit the proprietors of lot 5, Dr W Houghton and Dr G Bates, to undertake the construction of two penthouse units upon the fourth floor and the roof level in accordance with the drawings which form Exhibit 1 to these minutes of meeting".

The resolution required certain conditions to be fulfilled before building work could commence on the roof.

In 1995 the second defendant bought out the interest of Dr Bates in the partnership. An extraordinary general meeting on 10 May 1995 passed the following by-law: "On the following conditions, the proprietor for the time being of Lot 5 ("the
Proprietor") shall have special privileges in respect of the common property to undertake the construction of the apartments identified in the development approvals of South Sydney City Council numbers U92/1129 and U93/938 within the building ("the works") and to retain the consequent improvements ..." (the conditions are not presently relevant) 
This was registered as Special By-Law 3. At the annual general meeting on 16
April 1996, before the building work was finished, the following resolution was passed: "7.1(i) That the Body Corporate SPECIALLY RESOLVE pursuant to <case> and s (b) of the Strata Titles Act, 1973, to approve a sub-division of lots 2, 3, , 5 and common property in accordance with the strata plan of subdivision prepared by Robert Douglas Dunlop dated 19 February, 1996, and to agree to the unit entitlement of each proposed lot and the proposed aggregate unit entitlement according to the variations to unit entitlements specified on page one of said plan.

That the common seal of the Body Corporate be affixed to the Certificate required pursuant to <case>(a) of the Act for the purposes of the subdivision.

That subject to the issue by South Sydney Council pursuant to <case> (4) of the Act of a Certificate of Approval of the subdivision: the common seal of the Body Corporate be affixed to a Certificate pursuant to <case> (3)(d)(i) of the Act for the purposes of the registration of a plan of subdivision.

That the common seal of the Body Corporate be affixed to a Transfer to WL
Houghton and Glencora Pty Limited for a consideration of $1.00 of the Body
Corporate's interest in the lots to be created by the subdivision of lot 5 and common property.

That the managing agent be authorised and instructed to affix the seal of the Body Corporate to all documents required on the part of the Body Corporate for the purposes of the Subdivision and Transfer, to produce the Certificate of Title comprising the common property at the Land Titles Office and to do all such other things required on behalf of the Body Corporate for these purposes".

Proceedings were commenced in July and the work must have been completed shortly afterwards, because on 13 September the Registrar General registered a strata plan of sub-division (SP SD 53399) (the plan). This sub-divided the first, second and third floors previously lots 2-4 into lots 6-17, and the fourth floor, previously lot 5, became part of lots 18 and 19 which also included the old and new roof levels. Certificates of title for lots 18 and , issued on 26 September, described the registered proprietors as: "The proprietors of Strata Plan 803 of part formerly in CP/SP803 and Glencora
Pty Limited and Wayne Lawrence Houghton as tenants in common in equal shares of part formerly in 5/SP803".

The validity of the resolution of 16 April 1996 
Division 2 of Pt 2 of the Strata Titles Act (the Act) is headed "Common
Property". Section 18(3) in this Division provides that the common property is vested in the body corporate as "agent" for the proprietors as tenants in common in shares in proportion to their unit entitlements (s 20 (b)). Section provides: "Common property shall not be capable of being dealt with except in accordance with the provisions of this Act".

Any dealing in relation to a lot automatically carries the share of the common property held for the proprietor of that lot (s 24 (1)), which can only be dealt with in conjunction with that lot (s 24 (2)).

Section 25 (1) provides that a body corporate may "pursuant to a unanimous resolution, execute a transfer or lease of common property". Section 26 (1) enables a body corporate to execute dealings creating or releasing easements or restrictions which burden or benefit the common property but only by unanimous resolution. Similarly <case> (2) enables the body corporate, by unanimous resolution, to dedicate common property as a public road or reserve.
Section 28 (4)(a) provides that a "dealing" for the purposes of Div 2 shall not be registered unless it is accompanied by a certificate under the common seal of the body corporate certifying that the resolution authorising the dealing was unanimous. Dealing for this purpose includes a plan referred to in s 27 (2) (s 28 (1)), but not a strata plan of sub-division.

The dealings with common property authorised by Div 2 require a unanimous resolution. The Judge held that the plan which created lots 18 and 19 out of old lot 5 and common property also required a unanimous resolution. This conclusion depended, in part, on the effect that such a plan has on the common property. A lot is defined in <case> (1) as one or more cubic spaces delineated on a floor plan forming part of a strata plan. Floor plan is also defined, and s 5 (2) provides that the boundaries of any cubic space delineated on a floor plan correspond with the inner surface of walls making vertical boundaries, the upper surface of any floor, and the under surface of any ceiling. Common property is defined as meaning "so much of a parcel as from time to time is not comprised in any lot".

Section 5 (7) provides that a sub-division of a lot or common property includes an alteration of the boundaries of "(c) one or more lots and common property ... so as to create one or more different lots or one or more different lots and common property" and "(d) common property ... so as to create one or more lots".

Section 9, which makes provision for the sub-division of lots and common property, is in Div 1 of Pt 2 headed "Creation of Lots and Common Property".
It provides that lots or common property, or lots and common property, may be sub-divided by the registration of a plan that complies with sub-s (3). One such requirement ((b)(ii)), where the sub-division falls within <case> (7)(c) or , is that the plan be accompanied by a certificate of the local council in accordance with <case> (4). Section 11 provides that such a plan shall not be registered unless it is accompanied by a certificate under the seal of the body corporate certifying that it has agreed, by the special resolution referred to in <case> (4)(a), to the new unit entitlement.

Division 4 headed "Certificates of Approval of Local Councils" includes <case> , which applies to plans within <case> (7)(c) or (d). Section 37 (4)(a) provides that a local council may issue a certificate of approval if the plan "was accompanied by a certificate under the seal of the body corporate ...
that it has by special resolution consented to the proposed sub-division".

The registration of a plan containing lots made up in whole or in part from common property (s 5 (7)(c) and (d)) changes the nature of that property.
Since common property is the land in a parcel that is not comprised in a lot, lots and common property are mutually exclusive.

The roof and air space incorporated in lots 18 and 19 ceased to be common property on 13 September 1996 when the plan was registered. It was still vested in the body corporate but beneficially instead of as "agent" for the proprietors. The certificates of title for lots 18 and 19 reflect the result because they showed the body corporate as the owner of so much of those lots as was formerly common property.

The Act does not require lots derived in whole or in part from common property to be dealt with as if they were still common property. The reverse is the case because <case> (1)(d) provides that a body corporate may "dispose of or otherwise deal with any lot vested in the body corporate as a result of a sub- division effected under <case>".

The Judge held that Div 2 of Pt 2 "Common Property" created a code relating to dealings in common property and said that it was: "... impossible to accept that Parliament, having made such express provisions requiring a unanimous resolution for any dealing with common property in <case>, and specifically providing that common property shall only be dealt with in accordance with the Act (s 21) could have intended that by virtue of only a special resolution, disposal of such property, albeit with a subdivision intervening, could be effected under <case> (1)".

He considered that the presumption against interference with property rights was applicable, and concluded that <case> (1)(d) must be read as subject to <case> so that a unanimous resolution was required for the disposal of the body corporate's interests in lots 18 and 19.

Mr Birch supported these conclusions, but also argued that a plan, which converted common property into property in a lot, involved a transfer for the purposes of <case>. This followed, in his submission, from the change in the title of the body corporate from ownership as "agent" for the proprietors as tenants in common, to beneficial ownership and he invoked the analogy of a transfer by joint tenants to themselves as tenants in common.

On the Judge's view, the plan was validly approved pursuant to a special resolution, but the transfer of the body corporate's interests in lots 18 and required a unanimous resolution. Mr Birch's alternative argument was that the plan was a transfer of common property within <case> which itself required a unanimous resolution. In my judgment both views fail to give proper effect to the express provisions of the Act.

The Judge's view that the body corporate can only dispose of its interests in lots 18 and 19 by unanimous resolution treats those interests as if they were still common property, but they were not. Common property and lots are mutually exclusive, and the Act, in clear and specific terms, enables a body corporate to convert common property into property in a lot. The effect is to withdraw the former common property from Div 2 of Pt 2, and subject it to a different regime in Div 1 of Pt 4 headed "Management".

The alternative argument that a plan which converts common property into property in a lot, is a transfer of that common property which requires a unanimous resolution, is contrary to the provisions which enable such a sub- division to be approved by a special resolution. See <case> (7)(c) and (d), <case> and (3)(b)(ii) and <case> (4). The provisions which authorise a body corporate to approve such a sub-division by special resolution are clear and leave no room for the presumption against interference with private property.
They exclude any requirement for a unanimous resolution, and provide no support for the view that the change in the interest of the body corporate can be ignored. In my judgment the plan was formally valid, and the disposal of the interest of the body corporate in lots 18 and 19 did not require approval by a unanimous resolution.

Was the resolution a fraud on the power? 
The Judge found, as an alternative ground for granting the plaintiff relief, that the 1996 resolution was a fraud on the minority. This approved the plan and authorised a future transfer to the defendants of the body corporate's interests in lots 18 and 19 for $1. He held that the resolution deprived the plaintiff of valuable rights, and said that it was an irresistible inference that the resolution was only for the benefit of the first and second defendants.

Mr McDougall's first submission on this issue was that the doctrine of fraud on a power was excluded by the comprehensive provisions in the Act governing the common property, and in particular the safeguards for minorities in the provisions relating to its sub-division and alienation. He also relied on the provisions in Pt 5 dealing with the resolution of disputes but this submission is easily disposed of since <case> (1) provides: "Nothing in this Act derogates from any rights or remedies that a proprietor ... of a lot ... may have in relation to any lot or the common property apart from this Act".

The earlier submission must suffer the same fate, not only because of <case> , but also because it is contrary to principle. Compliance with the formal requirements for the valid exercise of a power does not exclude the right to equitable relief. In fact the formal validity of an exercise of the power is a pre-condition for the grant of equitable relief against its fraudulent exercise. If the attempted exercise of the power was void, adequate relief was available at law, and there was no occasion for equity to intervene. Thus
Sugden on Powers, 5th Ed, 1831, p 415 states: "But there are some cases which a court of law cannot reach. This happens where the power is duly executed according to the terms of it; but there is some bargain behind, or some ill motive, which renders the execution fraudulent, and will enable equity to relieve".

The same point was made by Dixon J in Mills versus Mills <case>; [(1938) 60 CLR 150] in dealing with a challenge to an issue of shares when he referred, at 185, to resolutions of directors "which ... are ostensibly within their powers".

The power of a proprietor to vote at general meetings of the body corporate is not fiduciary, and within limits it may be exercised by the proprietor for his or her own benefit. Mr McDougall also submitted that the principles which restrain the exercise by shareholders of their power to alter the Articles of
Association of limited liability companies are not applicable because bodies corporate were not subject to the general legislation affecting companies. See s 54 (2).

This submission overlooks the fact that the doctrine of fraud on a power is of general application, and was developed long before the earliest legislation dealing with companies. As Lord Lindley said in Free Church of Scotland v
Overtoun [[1904] AC 515] at 695: "I take it to be clear that there is a condition implied in this as well as in other instruments which create powers, namely, that the powers shall be used bona fide for the purposes for which they are conferred".

Lord Parker explained in Vatcher versus Paull [[1915] AC 372] at 378: "The term fraud in connection with frauds on a power does not necessarily denote any conduct on the part of the appointor amounting to fraud in the common law meaning of the term or any conduct which could be properly termed dishonest or immoral. It merely means that the power has been exercised for a purpose, or with an intention, beyond the scope of or not justified by the instrument creating the power".

The application of this doctrine to the exercise of powers conferred on a majority, or special majority, of shareholders at a general meeting is well established. In British Equitable Assurance Company Limited versus Baily [[1906]
AC 35] at 42,
Lord Lindley said: "Of course, the powers of altering by-laws, like other powers, must be exercised bona fide, and having regard to the purposes for which they are created, and to the rights of persons affected by them".

The relevant principles were explained in Peters' American Delicacy Company
Limited versus Heath & Ors <case>; [(1939) 61 CLR 457] by Dixon J in the following passage at 511: "If no restraint were laid upon the power of altering articles of association, it would be possible for a shareholder controlling the necessary voting power so to mould the regulations of a company that its operations would be conducted or its property used so that he would profit either in some other capacity than that of member ... or, if as member, in a special and peculiar way inconsistent with conceptions of honesty so widely held or professed that departure from them is described, without further analysis, as fraud ...

The chief reason for denying an unlimited effect to widely express powers such as that of altering a company's articles is the fear or knowledge that an apparently regular exercise of a power may in truth be but a means of securing some personal or particular gain, whether pecuniary or otherwise, which does not fairly arise out of the subjects dealt with by the power and is outside and even inconsistent with the contemplated objects of the power".

See also Gambotto versus W C P Ltd <case>; [(1995) 182 CLR 432] at 444-5. In my judgment these principles apply to bodies corporate formed under the Act, and to the powers of the proprietors exercisable at general meetings.

The Judge found that the common property appropriated by the defendants, pursuant to the 1996 resolution, was worth $600,000. They challenged this finding and argued that the relevant common property was worthless. It will be necessary to consider the valuation evidence at a later point in these reasons. However, if the common property had more than a nominal value, there can be no doubt that the special resolution authorised the appropriation of what had been common property for their exclusive benefit, and the resolution was a fraud on the minority. See Cook versus Deeks <case>; [[1916] 1 AC 554] at 564-5.

The property in question 
Although the common property on and above the original roof was incorporated in the penthouses, it remained common property until the plan was registered.
It was still common property at the time of the 1996 annual general meeting.
Mr McDougall disclaimed any reliance on the special resolution as creating or evidencing a contract for sale. This was understandable in the light of s (1) which provides: "A body corporate may, pursuant to a unanimous resolution, execute a transfer ... of common property ...".

This section does not refer to contracts, but nothing turns on this distinction. Section 21 prohibits any dealing with common property "except in accordance with the provisions of this Act", and prohibits any transfer of common property pursuant to a contract unless either the contract or the transfer has been approved by a unanimous resolution.

The resolution authorised the transfer of the former common property after the plan had been registered. It constituted a revocable mandate and did not confer rights on the appellants unless and until it was acted on. The subject matter of the future transfer was the body corporate's interests in lots 18 and 19 as constructed.

This analysis focuses attention on the legal situation prior to the 1996 resolution. The 1993 resolution authorised the majority proprietors "to undertake the construction of two penthouse units upon the fourth floor and the roof level". This purported to take effect as a licence under by-law 16 in
Sch 1 of the Act, which provides that a proprietor shall not damage any structure that forms part of the common property without the approval in writing of the body corporate.

The work authorised involved the construction of permanent improvements, which would become part of the common property. The resolution, which was not unanimous, could neither authorise a contract for the transfer of an interest in the common property, or bring about such a transfer in equity. Equity enforces proprietary estoppels arising from representations or acquiescence which have induced a party to act to his detriment where it would be unconscionable for the inducing party to ignore the change of position.
Compare Willmott versus Barber [[1880] 15 ChD 96] and similar cases. The equity created by the estoppel may be a beneficial interest or a charge. In the present case, even if the elements of a proprietary estoppel were otherwise present, the defendants could not acquire a further beneficial interest in the common property because of their improvements, because this would involve a transfer, contrary to <case>, or a dealing not authorised by the
Act, contrary to <case>. Compare Chalmers versus Pardoe [[1963] 1 WLR 677 .] 
The defendants could not acquire an equitable charge or lien for the cost of their improvements either. Such a dealing is not authorised by the Act and is forbidden by <case>. Moreover <case> (2) prevents any dealing with the beneficial interest of a proprietor in the common property except in conjunction with the relevant lot, and <case> (4) prohibits the recording of any mortgage or charge on the common property.

The 1995 resolution provided: "the proprietor for the time being of lot 5 ... shall have special privileges in respect of the common property to undertake the construction of the apartments identified in the development approvals of South Sydney City
Council ... within the building ... and to retain the consequent improvements".

Section 58 (7)(a) provides that the body corporate, by special resolution, may make a by-law conferring on the proprietor of a lot: "(i) a right of exclusive use and enjoyment of; or special privileges in respect of, ... any specified part of the common property".

The first part of the 1995 resolution was capable of taking effect under <case> , but not the second. Title to the permanent improvements accrued automatically to the owners of the common property, and this could not be prevented by any declaration of a contrary intention. In any event the attempt, by special resolution, to give the majority a separate interest in the improvements was contrary to <case>.

The common property incorporated in lots 18 and 19 on the registration of the plan was not unimproved air space, but part of the completed penthouses. It was clearly valuable and on no possible basis could it have been worth only $1.

Section 65 (1)(d) authorised the body corporate to dispose of, or otherwise deal with, "any lot" vested in it by a sub-division effected under <case>. The body corporate had a partial interest in lots 18 and 19 being a co-owner for a divided interest, and it was submitted by Mr Birch that <case> (1)(d) did not enable it to sell the lesser interest. In my judgment the commonsense principle that the greater includes the less should be applied, and the section construed as applicable to any interest in a lot vested in the body corporate. There is no apparent reason why Parliament would want to authorise the body corporate to dispose of a lot which it owned outright, but not authorise it to dispose of a partial interest.

Valuation issues 
The 1996 resolution, being a fraud on the minority, was voidable in equity.
However, that and earlier resolutions had been acted on. Proceedings were commenced in July 1996 before work had finished, but the plaintiff did not seek interlocutory relief. The defendants were thus able to complete the construction of lots 18 and 19 and register the plan. As the Judge said: "It is now too late, in practical terms, to revert to the position in which the parties were placed prior to the commencement of any development work in late 1992".

The plaintiff did not challenge the 1993 and 1995 resolutions but they could not confer any title on the defendants. The Judge rejected a defence of laches and said that it would be unconscionable for the majority to have the benefit of the common property in the roof area without being required to compensate the minority. He said: "I consider that the plaintiff, in lieu of the relief claimed, is entitled to equitable compensation in accordance with the principles referred to in
Greater Pacific Investments Pty Ltd (in Liq) versus Australian National Industries
Ltd & Anor [(1996) 39 NSWLR 143] at 153".

The case referred to involved breaches of fiduciary duty, and was not directly in point. However nothing turns on this because the finding of equitable fraud must be upheld, and there was power to award equitable compensation for the reasons given by Lord Haldane in Nocton versus Lord Ashburton [[1914] AC ] at -3 and following.

A permanent injunction against acting on the 1996 resolution would prevent any award of equitable compensation for the loss of the plaintiff's interest. It would preserve the interests of the body corporate in the lots, but allow the defendants to acquire those interests under <case> (1)(d) for what they considered was a proper price. In all probability this would provoke further litigation. Section 63 of the Supreme Court Act directs the Court to grant plaintiffs all remedies to which they appear to be entitled so that, as far as possible, all matters in controversy may be completely and finally determined, and all multiplicity of legal proceedings avoided. In these circumstances the appropriate course was to allow the body corporate to transfer its interests to the defendants for $1, pursuant to the resolution, and award the plaintiff equitable compensation.

Equitable compensation is intended to compensate for loss caused by conduct which equity holds to be fraudulent. Since the defendants are not in a fiduciary relationship with the plaintiff and have not committed a tort, they are not accountable for profits derived from the project. Compare Mason &
Carter, "Restitution Law in Australia", para 1630. The award should compensate the plaintiff but it is no part of its function to strip profits from the defendants, or to punish them for wrongdoing.

If the 1996 special resolution is implemented, the defendants will acquire proprietary interests in the penthouses as constructed, but they have already paid the costs of construction. The plaintiff will have lost an undivided interest in the common property on and above the roof in its improved condition as at 13 September 1996, when the plan was registered.

If equitable compensation was assessed on a basis which ignored the cost of construction, the plaintiff would be over-compensated, and the defendants penalised by having to pay more than once for the improvements. It would be contrary to principle to assess equitable compensation in this way, and authority requires a different approach.

Section 18 (3) by vesting common property in the body corporate as "agent" makes the proprietors equitable tenants in common. A co-owner, either at law or in equity, who improves the common property has no remedy for the money expended "so long as the property is enjoyed in common". See Brickwood v
Young & Ors <case>; [(1905) 2 CLR 387] at 394-5. However, a remedy is required when the co-ownership comes to an end. Griffith CJ said, at 396: "... I cannot regard the equitable right of a tenant in common to compensation as against his co-tenants as merely personal to the individual tenant who effects the improvements. The principle appears to be that the making of permanent improvements by one tenant in common ... gives rise to an equity attaching to the land ... enforceable only in the event of partition or a distribution of the value of the land amongst the tenants in common".

As that decision made clear (at 398) the equity of the co-owner is to be reimbursed for the appropriate proportion of the money expended on permanent improvements not exceeding the increase in the value of the relevant share resulting from such expenditure. See also Forgeard versus Shanahan [(1994) 35
NSWLR 206.] This equity does not include any allowances for risk or profit, any expense, including interest, in borrowing the funds, or any holding charges. An increase in value above cost accrues to all co-owners, and any loss because the cost exceeded the increase in value falls on the improver.

This equity is normally an interest in the land, but a proprietary equity is excluded by the requirement for a unanimous resolution. Ordinarily, as
Griffith CJ said in Brickwood versus Young at 396 "the equitable right of a tenant in common to compensation as against his co-tenants [is not] merely personal". But where a proprietary equity is excluded by statute, a personal equity will remain to recover in restitution for any unjust enrichment that another proprietor receives, on a sale or partition, as a result of such expenditure. Compare Mason & Carter, para 616. The conversion of the common property into property in the lots, and its transfer to the defendants, will constitute a sale for this purpose.

This personal equity must be taken into account when assessing the compensation due to the plaintiff. This should reflect its 20% share of the market value of the common property, as improved, reduced by setting off the increase in value resulting from the improvements not exceeding their cost.
The defendants would have the onus of proof on the latter issues.

Valuers qualified by both sides gave evidence orally and by report, Mr Watts in the plaintiff's case, and Mr Edmonds in the defendants'. In his report Mr
Watts adopted the direct comparison method based on comparable sales and on this basis valued the roof space at $447,000. For comparison purposes he also applied a hypothetical development or residual value analysis and arrived at a value of $402,000.

Mr Edmonds, on the other hand, relied solely on a hypothetical development analysis and concluded that "it was not financially feasible to use the common property on the roof" and so it had only a nominal value.

The Judge did not accept the evidence of Mr Edmonds. He noted that the methods adopted by both valuers were very much dependent on hypothetical and speculative considerations and allowances. He said that he was not greatly assisted by either valuation, which I take to refer to the written valuations prepared before the trial. He found that the roof area "obviously had some value" which would depend on the price a developer would pay for such unique space. He preferred the approach of Mr Watts and in particular his oral evidence that the common property on and above the former roof represented about one third of the value of the completed penthouses.

The Judge also accepted Mr Watts' evidence that units 18 and 19 were worth about $950,000 each. He allowed for the cost of selling those lots and took an estimated nett realisable value of $900,000 for each or $1,800,000 for both.
On the basis of Mr Watts' oral evidence, he held that $600,000 of this sum represented the value of the former common property included in those lots, and assessed the plaintiff's compensation at $120,000.

In the light of my earlier analysis, much of the valuation evidence on both sides was irrelevant. The Court is not concerned with the value of the common property in its unimproved condition, or with an analysis of a hypothetical development either in conjunction with other floors, or on a stand alone basis. It is also clear that the defendants are not entitled to the other allowances discussed in the evidence.

The Judge relied on evidence given by Mr Watts in re-examination to arrive at the figure of $600,000 for the value of the former common property included in lots 18 and 19. Mr McDougall submitted that his Honour misunderstood this evidence. At the trial Mr Watts submitted a revised residual value analysis (Ex A) in which he deduced a value of $315,000. He was skilfully cross- examined and made a number of significant concessions about this analysis, but maintained his opinion based on comparable sales. In re-examination he gave the following evidence: "Q. If the penthouses are actually sold can we say that the value that you have given expresses or reflects any component of that price? 
A. Yes, it does.

Q. And what would be that component? 
A. Well, the component I am suggesting is about a third of the value of the extra space created.

Q. And does that, in turn, reflect some part of the input into the total construction of the units taking account of all of the materials and rights and entitlements that were necessary to construct them? 
A. Yes.

Q. And which component in that respect? 
A. I have allowed for the right of the developer to make a profit out of the venture; that is, the profit and risk allowance, and I have also allowed for the costs of creating those parts of the penthouses that now exist on the roof ...

His Honour: Q. When you said the sale price would reflect one third of the value of the space, are you suggesting that the sale price of Unit 18 or 19, whatever that sale price is, one third of it could be attributed to the area or the value of the area of the roof space? 
A. Yes.

Q. So if, for example, the units were sold for $900,000 you would attribute a $300,000 component to the fact that there is this building above the old roof line? 
A. Yes.

Q. In that figure do you take into account the costs of the development that had taken place necessary to produce the $900,000? 
A. Yes".

Mr McDougall argued that Mr Watts did not intend by this evidence to endorse a valuation of the space at $600,000, so much higher than his earlier valuations of $447,000, $403,758 and $315,000. Exhibit A showed the improved value of the space derived from the common property as $1,092,150, and his residual value of $315,000 was approximately one third of this figure. With respect to the
Judge, I do not think that the witness can properly be understood as intending, by this evidence, to nearly double the result of his last residual value analysis. His first answer to Mr Birch, referring to the figure of one third, was consistent with his analysis in Ex A. The Judge's first question ("when you said ...") appears to repeat this answer, and the witness probably understood it in that way. The second question and answer are ambiguous, but the witness could well have understood "the units were sold for $900,000" as meaning $900,000 each, to give a gross sales price of $1,800,000, again in line with Ex A. The next question and answer can also be read consistently with Ex A, where the witness deducted the cost of construction from the estimated sales price of each unit.

In my judgment this evidence, properly understood, did not support the Judge's finding that the unimproved common property incorporated in lots 18 and 19 was worth $600,000. This conclusion requires the Court to consider whether it can properly assess the compensation payable to the plaintiff. In the light of the
Judge's general findings, the Court should adopt Mr Watts' valuation of $950,000 for each unit, and his analysis in Ex A which shows that the improved value of the space in lots 18 and 19 derived from the common property was worth $1,092,150.

The defendants are entitled to a set-off for the actual cost of the improvements, but there was no evidence of this cost. The accounting issue would normally be referred to a Master but the trial was not conducted on this basis. The defendants would have great difficulty in such an enquiry, since no attempt appears to have been made to keep separate records of the cost of constructing the improvements on the common property.

The builder, Mr Ross Georges, swore an affidavit but was not available for cross-examination. He estimated the cost of constructing lots 18 and 19 at $1,141,520, but this was a notional cost for a stand alone development of lot and the common property, whereas his work involved the development of lots -4 as well. The defendants were not entitled to deduct the notional costs of the notional development, but only the additional costs incurred in the development of the common property over and above those incurred for the development of lots 2-5 and these were not proved.

At this stage the Court should only remit the matter to a Master as a last resort, if no other course is fairly open. The defendants, having improved common property without lawful authority, and attempted to effect a fraud on the minority, are wrongdoers, and their failure to keep and produce proper accounts of their actual expenditure on the common property has made it difficult to assess the compensation due to the plaintiff. Compare Armory v
Delamirie (1722) 1 Stra 505 <case>; [(93
ER 664).] In my judgment the Court should assess the compensation in a robust manner, relying on the presumption against wrongdoers, the onus of proof, and resolving doubtful questions against the party "whose actions have made an accurate determination so problematic". See LJP Investments Pty Ltd versus Howard Chia
Investments Pty Ltd [(1990) 24 NSWLR 499] at 508.

In Ex A, Mr Watts estimated the cost of constructing the improvements on the common property at $518,260. After deducting the estimated building cost from the value of the space as improved, a figure of $573,890 is obtained, 20% of which is $114,778, $5,222 less than the sum awarded by the Judge.

The plaintiff relied on the decisions in Wrotham Park Estate Co Ltd v
Parkside Homes Ltd [[1974] 1 WLR 798], Bracewell & Anor versus Appleby [[1975] Ch 408], Carr-Saunders v
Dick McNeil Associates Ltd [[1986] 1 WLR 922] and LJP
Investments Pty Ltd & Anor versus Howard Chia Investments Pty Ltd [(1990) 24
NSWLR 499], where allowance was made in assessing damages for the bargaining position of a party possessing rights which could prevent or inhibit a proposed development. The courts were assessing damages under Lord
Cairns' Act (Supreme Court Act, <case>) but this plaintiff was in a similar position in its claim for equitable compensation. If the defendants wished to undertake this development lawfully, so that they acquired a good title to their improvements, they had to purchase the common property on the roof before commencing work, but this required the consent of the plaintiff. In my judgment, the unlawful course pursued by the defendants has deprived the plaintiff of the chance of obtaining something more than its 20% share of the value of this common property, and that chance was worth at least $5,222.

The appeal should be dismissed with costs but the orders below should be varied by adding the following as order 2A: 
A Order that the third defendant be restrained from transferring its interest in lots 18 and 19 of the Strata Plan pursuant to paragraphs 7.1(iv) and (v) of the resolution of 16 April 1996, and that the first and second defendants be restrained from accepting such a transfer, until the sum of $120,000 and interest thereon from 13 November 1996, has been paid to the plaintiff.
 
Wayne Lawrence HOUGHTON & Anor versus IMMER (NO. 155) PTY LTD & Anor 
JUDGMENT 
BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Handley JA. * * * 
