

Regina versus Dodge Matter No Cca 60230/97 [1997] NSWSC 397 (12 September 1997) 
Regina versus Clinton DODGE 
CCA 60230/97 September 1997 
Smart J, Sully J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
CCA 60230/97 REGINA versus Clinton DODGE 
JUDGMENT 
SMART J: Clinton John Dodge seeks leave to appeal against the severity of sentences comprising a minimum term of twenty-one months, an additional term of seven months and a fixed term of eighteen months imposed by the
District Court for offences of criminal dishonesty.

Dodge pleaded guilty to, on 16 August 1994 at Wetherill Park, dishonestly obtaining for himself a financial advantage being an advance of credit from
Parra Power Tools of $34,905, by deception. On that date, Dodge completed an
Application For Credit Account in the name CTD Food Transport, stated that the owner was "Michael Higgins" and signed the application "M Higgins". Dodge falsely pretended that his correct name was "Michael Higgins" and that he resided at 27 Allawah Street, Blacktown. Based on the information provided,
Dodge's application was approved and the name CTD Food Transport appeared on the Account Listing kept at every establishment of Parra Power.

Dodge's credit limit was about $5,000. Parra Power had five separate establishments, namely its head office at Wetherill Park, Caringbah,
Liverpool, City and Granville.

Between 21 November 1994 and 19 January 1995, Dodge, masquerading as Michael
Higgins, CTD Food Transport, visited each of the establishments of Parra Power and obtained goods. On each visit he obtained goods of about $5,000 in value or less. In some instances, he made a number of visits. To add credibility to his orders, Dodge arrived in presentable vehicles such as a large truck with the letters CTD Food Transport painted on the side or a well maintained utility. His requests for goods were usually accompanied by a credible story.
It was not until 31 January 1995 that the Managing Director of Parra Power discovered what had happened. "Mr Higgins" could not be contacted.

On this count, the judge was asked to take into account a further offence that between 30 November 1994 and 20 December 1994, Dodge obtained a benefit by deception from Ashdown Enterprises, namely goods.

Dodge pleaded guilty to 2 further counts of dishonestly obtaining for himself a financial advantage, being an advance of credit, by deception. On 30 May , he completed a false credit application to Gleeman Truck Parts, Chipping
Norton, in the name of M Higgins, as owner of CTD Food Transport and supplied false details. On 15 and 28 December 1994, he obtained goods from Gleeman
Truck Parts on credit. The total value was $1928.78.

On 28 August 1994, Dodge went to Trucking Supplies company, Chipping Norton, and completed a false credit application. He purported to be Michael Higgins, the owner of CTD Food Transport. The application contained false contact details. On 4 occasions between 16 November 1994 and 9 January 1995, Dodge obtained credit from Trucking Supplies Company totalling $9565.89. All attempts by Trucking Supplies Company to locate Dodge failed due to the false details which he had supplied.

Dodge pleaded guilty to a further count of dishonestly obtaining a valuable thing by deception. On 29 September 1994, Dodge attended at Northwest Office
Furniture at Castle Hill and introduced himself as Michael Higgins. He had a plausible story for needing office furniture for six months. He selected furniture valued at about $8025. Higgins wrote out a cheque for the amount sought for the first month's rent and arrangements were made for the furniture to be delivered to an address at Condell Park. The contract for hire which was sent with the goods, was returned signed by "Michael Higgins". No further monthly payments were made. "Higgins" could not be contacted. When first spoken to by Police on the telephone, Dodge stated that when he moved offices, he had furniture stored on a trailer in the trucking yard and that the trailer and furniture had been stolen.

There was also before the sentencing judge an appeal against a sentence imposed by a magistrate of a fixed term of six months and an order for compensation of $6035.65. The offence was that between 16 August and 12
October 1994 at Revesby, Dodge obtained credit by means of fraud. This Court has no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal in that matter and none has been brought. The Judge dismissed the appeal against the 6 months sentence but made it concurrent with the other sentences which she imposed. She quashed the compensation order in view of the length of the other sentences.

Dodge was born on 14 January 1961. He has a poor record for dishonesty extending from 1979 to 1987-1998. He had received bonds and fines. In 1980 he was sentenced to twelve months hard labour for illegally using a motor vehicle. There were concurrent sentences of six months hard labour for two break, enter and steal offences. In March 1988 in respect of a conspiracy to cheat and defraud, uttering, forgery and larceny he received a total head sentence of five years and a non parole of two years. This was increased in
July 1988 by this Court on a Crown appeal to a head sentence of six years with a non parole period of three years. The [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/) intervened and the sentence was recalculated. We have been informed by counsel that as a result of the recalculation, Mr Dodge was released on 1 February 1990. There was thus a period from 1 February 1990 to the latter part of 1994 in which there were no dishonesty or other offences alleged. If one takes into account the period in gaol, then the period free of offences would extend back to about March 1988.

Dodge had a de facto wife and supported her, along with her three children and their daughter. He also helped to support a son by a previous marriage. At the time of sentencing, Dodge had been the operations manager of a small business owned by Mr Joe Tritapepe, or his company. Mr Tritapepe died on 19 March 1996.
Upon his death his widow took over and she and Dodge ran and built up the business considerably. It distributes oil and fuel.

It is necessary to go back a little in time. Upon Dodge's divorce, Dodge stated that he found that his wife had run up substantial debts on his various accounts and that he had to struggle to pay them off. He developed a bad credit rating and had difficulty in obtaining credit to obtain a car. He established a transport business under the name CTD Food Transport but some of the debtors did not pay and the business went downhill. He had hoped to establish a credit rating which would enable him to borrow through the accounts established by CTD Food Transport and Michael Higgins. This did not work.

Eventually, he began working for Mr Tritapepe and tried to establish himself through Mr Tritapepe's company. Mrs K A Tritapepe gave evidence which rightly impressed the Judge. She was widowed with three children. She had become much more involved in the business and the employees had risen from two to twelve.
Dodge was now the general manager. He had told the Tritapepes of his past.
There has been no hint of dishonesty on his part in the conduct of the business of the Tritapepes. Dodge had run the business for two months after her husband's death while she was grief stricken. She spoke of Dodge's hard work in building up and running the business and of the substantial sums which he would receive. She relied heavily upon him.

The Judge gave Dodge full allowance for his full and frank admissions to the
Police, his full cooperation and the pleas of guilty entered at an early stage. She noted correctly that fraud trials are often lengthy. It appears from the material Dodge is an astute and articulate man who presents well.
Obviously, he impressed the various credit officers.

At the sentencing hearing, Dodge acknowledged the gravity of the offences. He asked that he not be sent to gaol but be allowed to continue to assist Mrs
Tritapepe who needed his skills and hard work to the keep the business going and growing. He said that he would repay the total amounts outstanding of almost $60,000 at the rate of about $4000 per month. The Judge took this offer into account as a mitigating factor. The financial material before the Judge could have justified the conclusion that there was a basis on which payments could be made. In such a context, it would not matter a great deal whether it were $2000, $3000 or $4000 per month. It was also open to the judge to be sceptical. There was not a long period of good earnings. Further, no moneys had been paid by way of compensation. Dodge was first charged on 10 May 1995.
He was committed for sentence on 27 September 1995 on the Parra Power matter and on 23 November 1995 on the three other matters.

Mr Ainsworth, in his carefully drawn submissions, has submitted that the appropriate order was one for periodic detention as this would have allowed
Dodge to continue in full employment with benefit to the community and those dependent on him. In view of her Honour's disquiet at the scheme for repayment being unproven, an appropriate course would have been to impose a Griffith remand to assess whether the appellant was bona fide and the scheme realistic.
Such a course would not have bound her Honour to impose a non- custodial sentence upon the expiration of the remand but may have led to further findings of fact favourable to the appellant.

It was further submitted that her Honour gave insufficient weight to the applicant not offending for a substantial period and to his prospects of rehabilitation. I do not think that the judge failed to give sufficient weight to these matters. The objective gravity of the offences did not allow periodic detention. A Griffith remand would have been inappropriate.

It was further submitted that if this Court took the view that periodic detention was inappropriate, nevertheless it should reduce the minimum term, having regard to the applicant's prospects of rehabilitation.

In discussion between the bench and counsel for Mr Dodge, the position was summarised along these lines: Dodge had a poor record, the offences themselves were serious but at long last he had found a way of working successfully and being in a position to make money to support his family, and also to repay the creditors.

While repayment is important it is not of itself normally determinative and it is not in this case. I have reached the conclusion that, given the extent of the criminality and the objective gravity of the offences, the sentences imposed by the judge were lenient. Leave to appeal should be granted but the appeal should be dismissed.

SULLY J: I entirely agree. 
SMART J: The orders will be as proposed. * * * 
