

Regina versus Fing Matter Nos 60109/97 [1998] NSWSC 1029 (22 June 1998) 
Last Updated: 12 August 1998 
REGINA versus Trevor Leslie FING /97, 60120/97, 60320/97 June 1998 
Grove J, Barr J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: The court is in a position to give a judgment forthwith, and I will ask Barr J to give the first judgment. 
BARR J: Trevor Leslie Fing seeks leave to appeal against a series of sentences imposed upon him in the District Court, the effect of which was a total period of imprisonment or penal servitude of nine years and nine months, comprising a minimum term of seven years and nine months and an additional term of two years. 
The first offence for which he was sentenced was supplying not less than the commercial quantity of methylamphetamines. He pleaded not guilty. His defence was that he always believed that the drug he handled was veterinary steroids.
After the first day of the trial he pleaded guilty.

The facts were briefly these. As a result of information received, officers of the Drug Enforcement Agency left the sum of $10,500 in cash under a tree stump next to a road near Minmi, near Newcastle. They waited and watched. The applicant came, collected the money, and drove away.

Some time later he returned and placed a parcel of methylamphetamines in the place he had taken the money from. The weight was 457.5 grams. The commercial quantity is 250 grams. Police searched the applicant's car and found a further grams of methylamphetamines, together with a set of electronic scales, rubber gloves, and a jar of white powder that turned out to be Fructose. They searched his house as well, and found a large number of resealable plastic bags.

After the applicant changed his plea a statement was tendered on his behalf and he gave evidence, the effect of which was that he had been told that the substance he was handling was veterinary steroids, but that he had had a suspicion that it might be an illegal drug, yet closed his eyes to the possibility. That account was designed to reduce his criminality as far as might be without traversing his plea of guilty. He told a complicated story to try to explain away his possession of the Fructose, some spoons, and the scales and plastic bags, which were the stuff of drug dealers. McGuire DCJ rejected the account as a "silly story" and a "blatant concoction".

The maximum penalty was imprisonment for 20 years and a $350,000 fine. On 15
May, 1996 his Honour sentenced the applicant to imprisonment for three years and six months, comprising a minimum term of two years and nine months and an additional term of nine months. At the time of this offence the applicant had been on bail following his arrest on charges of fraud and the illegal possession of fire arms.

The next matters to be dealt with were fraud charges, which came on for trial on 28 February, 1997. There were seven charges of dishonestly obtaining a valuable thing by deception, two of dishonestly obtaining a financial advantage by deception, three of dishonestly attempting to obtain money by deception, and two of dishonestly attempting to obtain a valuable thing by deception.

The offences were committed between May, 1993 and June, 1994. They concerned his efforts to get people to part with their money for certificates of title to land which he dishonestly obtained from the Registrar-General. In three cases he obtained cheques in the amounts of $5,750, $6,650 and $60,926.30. In other cases he obtained the credit of money to his bank account in the sums of $52,126.90 and $61,775.74.

At the time of sentence the sum of $286,000 in compensation had been paid from the Land Titles Compensation Fund, and the figure was expected to rise to at least $300,000. In order to carry out his schemes the applicant made extensive plans, applying for new certificates of title, falsifying drivers' licences and using other false documents, and dealing with various business and professional people whilst pretending to be someone he was not.

Armitage DCJ of Queen's Counsel concluded that the applicant completely lacked contrition, remarking upon an attempt during the defence case to cast suspicion upon an innocent man, whom the applicant named, and on the applicant's having induced a man to come to Australia from the United States of America to tell a palpably false story in order to try to explain how a package of forged birth certificates had come to be addressed to the applicant.

His Honour held that the 14 offences were part of a continuous course of criminal conduct which would have entitled him to receive concurrent sentences but for the fact that the maximum penalty for any one offence, namely five years imprisonment, was insufficient to reflect the totality of the criminality of all the offences.

On the first seven counts his Honour imposed seven concurrent fixed terms of imprisonment, each of two years, commencing at the expiry of the minimum term of the sentence imposed by McGuire DCJ, and on the remaining counts seven concurrent sentences, accumulated on the fixed terms, each of two years, eight months comprising minimum terms of two years and additional terms of eight months.

The last offence to be dealt with was that of possessing a firearm, namely a pistol, in contravention of a firearms prohibition order. The Commissioner of
Police had made a prohibition order because of previous firearm offences the applicant had committed. The maximum penalty was imprisonment for ten years.
The applicant pleaded guilty just as his trial was about to start. He asked
Job DCJ of Queen's Counsel to take four other offences into account in sentencing him.

First was the possession of hand guns which were found at his house during a police search in September, 1994.

The other three offences concerned things that happened during preparations for his trial on the charge of supplying methylamphetamines. The applicant knew that a man called Anthony Lynch was likely to give evidence at the trial.
During the latter half of 1995 he unlawfully entered the residence of Mr Lynch at the Minmi Hotel in order to install an unlawful telephone interception device, with the intention of finding out what information Mr Lynch had. The next offence was the unlawful entry of another house with the same intent.
Finally, one day in May, 1996 he offered Mr Lynch the sum of $10,000 to change his evidence.

These last three offences constituted a very serious course of criminal conduct. The last of them, influencing a witness, carried a maximum penalty of seven years imprisonment.

The accumulative effect of the sentences then in existence was that the applicant was required to serve a minimum term of six years and nine months, following which he was entitled to be considered for release on parole for a period of eight months. His Honour sentenced the applicant to three years imprisonment, comprising a minimum term of one year commencing at the expiry of the latest of the existing minimum terms, and an additional term of two years.

The applicant is 44 years old. In 1973 he was convicted of two counts of false pretences, three counts of forgery, and five counts of uttering. In 1983 he was convicted of two counts of possessing a prohibited drug. In 1986 he was convicted of four counts of possessing a prohibited weapon, eight counts of possessing an unlicensed pistol, and one of possessing a prohibited article.

He is married and he and his wife have three sons, now aged 19, 14 and 9 years respectively. He was accepted by all sentencing judges as a good father and husband. Since obtaining his Higher School Certificate he has been engaged in a variety of occupations and is a hard worker. He and his wife established and operated a number of businesses which prospered. Unfortunately, they eventually lost them and were declared bankrupt. At the time of his sentence by Judge McGuire the applicant was unemployed but had prospects of engagement as a commercial helicopter pilot.

The first submission was that both the minimum term and the total effective term of the final sentence were manifestly excessive, bearing in mind the principle of totality, and paid insufficient regard to the favourable circumstances of the applicant.

When considering such a submission in a case like the present, where there are offences, there is no purpose in considering the appropriateness of any individual sentence for any individual offence. It is necessary instead to consider and compare the total effective sentence and the whole of the criminality to which that sentence is intended to apply.

The serious objective features of the offences were the number of them and the period of time over which they were committed, from May, 1993 to May, 1996.
The charge of supplying methylamphetamines contemplated the applicant's dealing in the drug, the weight of which was a little over twice the commercial quantity. The applicant has two prior convictions for possessing, though not for supplying, prohibited drugs.

The land frauds seriously affected a number of victims and incorporated detailed planning and deception. About $300,000 was lost.

The firearms offence was the latest in a series of such serious offences. The matters taken into account on sentence were collectively as serious as the firearms offence itself. Particularly disturbing was the applicant's attempt to bribe a witness to give evidence favourable to him. Success would have perverted the course of justice.

The applicant was not contrite and Armitage DCJ was entitled to come to his expressed view that there was no prospect of rehabilitation on the evidence before his Honour. The pleas of guilty, where they occurred, were late and were no evidence of contrition. The manner in which the applicant conducted himself during the hearings, blaming another man, whom he named, for the frauds, and inducing a man to come from the United States of America to give false evidence in the fraud trial, demonstrated his lack of contrition. He originally appealed against his conviction on the fraud charges, though that appeal has been abandoned. He has a history of dishonesty.

The favourable features were the high regard in which the applicant is held by his family and friends. He was a good worker. He pleaded guilty to two of the charges, and although that was no evidence of contrition, he saved the community some time and expense and was entitled to appropriate recognition for that. He had never before, until the first of these matters, been sentenced to a period of imprisonment.

In my opinion the totality of criminality was so great that a substantial sentence was called for. I think that the resultant sentence, both as to minimum term and total effective term, is not outside the range of sentences necessary to reflect such criminality.

The next submission, which was related to the first, was that the additional term of two years during which the applicant will become eligible for release on parole, was not long enough. Instead, special circumstances ought to be found justifying the imposition of an additional term exceeding one third of the effective minimum term. In imposing the final sentence Job DCJ did find special circumstances, namely the accumulation of sentences, which justified such an adjustment of the sentence his Honour imposed.

It was submitted however that the minium term and additional term in existence when Job DCJ sentenced the applicant were such that his Honour had insufficient discretion to correct the existing errors.

The question for this Court however is whether the effective additional term is just when compared with the effective minimum term. It is two years as against seven years and nine months, a little over one quarter of the minimum term.

Judgments like the present are essentially matters of impression. It does not appear to me that two years will be insufficient to do what must be done after the applicant is released from custody and before his sentence comes to an end. He has the support of his family and will go to them. He will receive assistance in looking for work. He is a mature man. His personal characteristics do not demand a long period of parole. In my opinion two years is sufficient.

Because of the seriousness of the offences I would grant leave to appeal, but
I would dismiss the appeal.

GROVE J: I agree. The orders of the court therefore are as proposed by Barr J. * * * 
