

Tsuji versus Metromix Pty Ltd and Anor Matter No Ca 40789/96 [1998] NSWSC 691 (17 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 14 January 1999 
TSUJI versus METROMIX PTY LTD & ANOR 
CA 40789/96 December 1998 
Mason P, Priestley JA, Beazley JA 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Appeal 
NATURE OF JURISDICTION: DISTRICT COURT - HIS HONOUR JUDGE NASH 
FILE NO/S: CA 40789/96; DC 740/96 
DELIVERED: 17 DECEMBER 1998 
HEARING DATE: 20 NOVEMBER 1998 
PARTIES: TSUJI V METROMIX PTY LTD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT OF: MASON P, PRIESTLEY JA, BEAZLEY JA 
COUNSEL: 
Appellant: J D HISLOP QC / R K WEAVER 
Respondent: P W TAYLOR SC / B HULL 
SOLICITORS: 
Appellant: BARBER & ASSOCIATES 
Respondent: MALCOLM JOHNS & CO 
CATCHWORDS: 
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - DUTY OF MOTORISTS - LIABILITY 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: RESERVED 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: ALLOWED 
NO OF PAGES: 13 
TSUJI versus METROMIX PTY LTD & ANOR 
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT - DUTY OF MOTORISTS - LIABILITY - The plaintiff was hit by the defendant's truck when starting to cross an area of road uncontrolled by traffic lights or a pedestrian crossing - four witnesses gave direct yet differing evidence as to the circumstances surrounding the accident - the trial judge, in focusing on the "high duty" of pedestrians when crossing roads, did not make a number of factual findings, including whether the plaintiff was still running when she began to cross the road - based on his understanding of the rules governing both motorists and pedestrians, the trial judge acquitted the defendant of negligence - the plaintiff appealed.

Held: in deciding cases such as these, the emphasis should be on the duty of drivers to drive reasonably in the circumstances in which they find themselves and not their "entitlements" as drivers; Stocks versus Baldwin;
On the Stocks versus Baldwin approach, there was some degree of material negligence on the part of the respondent driver; however, because of the contributory negligence of the appellant damages should accordingly be reduced by sixty per cent.

Schieb versus Abbott (Unreported, Court of Appeal, 19 March 1998 per Mason P,
Priestley, Beazley JJA) 
Stocks versus Baldwin <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40] 
ORDERS
Appeal upheld.
Verdict and judgment set aside.
In lieu, declare the defendants liable to verdict and judgments once damages have been assessed.
There should be a further trial of the action limited to the assessment of damages.
Once damages have been assessed, the plaintiff is to have a verdict and judgment for 40% of the assessed figure.
The defendants are to bear the plaintiff's costs of the first trial and of this appeal.

TSUJI versus METROMIX PTY LTD & ANOR 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I agree with Priestley JA. 
PRIESTLEY JA: The appellant in this appeal was the unsuccessful plaintiff in a District Court action in which she sought damages from the owner and driver of a five tonne tipper truck for injury suffered by her when she and the truck came into collision on 5 April 1995. 
The trial was before his Honour Judge Nash. Four witnesses gave direct evidence of the circumstances of the accident: the plaintiff, her daughter, the driver of the truck and Mr G. Rutherford. All accounts differed in various respects. From the various accounts the trial judge concluded that what had happened was that the truck driver had driven through traffic lights at the intersection of George Street and Lee Street in Railway Square, Sydney, when the lights were green, and was travelling south along Lee Street when the plaintiff, who was intending to cross Lee Street at a part of that road uncontrolled either by traffic lights or any pedestrian crossing "went onto the road when the truck was in such close proximity that the collision that in fact occurred could not be avoided" (Reasons p 8, AB 83). He therefore thought the driver was not negligent and so entered a verdict for both the driver and the owner of the truck.

In arriving at this conclusion his Honour indicated at two stages in his reasons the rules by reference to which he decided the case. First, he said, in regard to the truck driver going into Lee Street from George Street through the green light at the intersection, that "Normally he therefore was entitled to proceed at the speed at which his truck was being driven into Lee Street and not be involved in a collision with a pedestrian." (Reasons p 7, AB 82) (The driver had said his speed was 60 kph.) 
At a later stage the judge said: "When not in a pedestrian crossing, there is a high duty on a pedestrian not to go onto the roadway at all unless it is completely safe to do so and motorists approaching a pedestrian in those circumstances is entitled to act and react accordingly. Drivers of motor vehicles cannot be expected to take evasive action by slowing down or stopping or sounding the horn merely because a pedestrian is near a roadway upon which the motor vehicle is and may be foolish enough to go onto it." (Reasons p 8 AB 83) 
Because of this approach to the matter, the trial judge did not think it necessary to decide a number of questions of fact. An important one of these was whether the plaintiff ran into Lee Street.

Mr Rutherford had said that prior to the plaintiff going onto Lee Street and almost immediately coming into collision with the truck, she had been moving at a fairly brisk running pace.

The truck driver said when he was about half way through the intersection he saw two people running across from the other side of the road to his left.
Asked "What did you see them do once you became aware of their presence, once you saw them, what did they do?", he answered "They were still running" (AB /54). Again, asked to describe what he saw them do after he first saw them, he said "I saw them run across the median strip and one stopped and the other one didn't" (AB 41/7): (see also AB 47/16). The trial judge found that the median strip the driver referred to was actually a traffic island which the plaintiff crossed and from which she moved off into Lee Street.

The plaintiff said she had moved into the roadway at normal walking pace.

The plaintiff's daughter's evidence was to the same effect.

The trial judge accepted that when the driver first saw the plaintiff and her daughter "they were then what could be described as running but nothing really turns on this" (Reasons p 7, AB 82); but, he made no finding on the question whether the plaintiff was still running when she started to cross Lee
Street. He thought this did not matter, no doubt because of what he thought were the applicable rules as he stated them in what I have quoted above from his reasons.

There was a conflict of evidence about whether the truck driver had sounded his horn when he saw the plaintiff nearing the Lee Street kerb. The driver had also said that he had swerved slightly before the collision. The plaintiff's evidence about these matters was to the contrary of the driver's, and so was her daughter's; Mr Rutherford's evidence was equivocal. The trial judge did not think it necessary to make findings.

In my respectful opinion the trial judge was not giving full account to the relevant rules in his statements setting out the position as he understood it.
A significantly different approach to situations such as that in the present case is shown by what Mahony P said in Stocks versus Baldwin [(1996) 24 MVR ]
where, after referring to what Mason J had said in Wyong Shire Council v
Shirt <case>; [(1980) 146 CLR 40], he continued: "I have stressed that the reasonable person would accept that it is not the duty of a driver so to drive that there is no foreseeable risk of injury to others. To think otherwise would be to ignore the realities of city life. But it is not to be taken from what I have said that risks may be ignored. In the `balancing' process to which Mason J referred, at least four things are to be borne in mind: the extent of the damage that may be done by a driver to a pedestrian; the degree of likelihood that a pedestrian will suddenly come into the path of an ongoing vehicle; the consequent extent of the precautions which a driver must take against that eventuality; and the extent of what a driver is able to do when confronted with such a danger.

The damage which a driver may do to a pedestrian is great: the injuries suffered by the present plaintiff show this. This is an important matter when deciding what a driver must do. The inconvenience of driving slower is to be measured against, inter alia, what may be done to a pedestrian if the driver's estimate of the risk is wrong.

Pedestrians sometimes act carelessly. I do not mean by this that they do so more often than not. But, in my opinion, they do so with sufficient frequency that a prudent driver would take account of it. The likelihood of that occurring is not a `far-fetched or fanciful' risk which is to be put aside or discounted. It is something which occurs often enough for the prudent driver to foresee it and take it into account." (at 420) 
Simos AJA expressed the same opinion: "Notwithstanding that it is, in my opinion, generally correct that the appellant, was entitled to assume that a person in the position of the plaintiff would take reasonable care for his or her own safety by pausing and looking to the left before stepping into the kerbside on the western side of
Condamine St, it would still, in my opinion, have been reasonably foreseeable that a person in the position of the plaintiff, more especially in the prevailing conditions at the time, might not take reasonable care for his or her own safety and act as did the plaintiff in the present case. In such circumstances a reasonable person in the position of the appellant is in accordance with Shirt's case, required to assess both the magnitude of the risk and the degree of probability of its occurrence along with the difficulty and inconvenience of taking alleviating action." (at 425) 
What was said in Stocks versus Baldwin has frequently been acted on in this court: see Schieb versus Abbott (Mason P, Priestley JA, Beazley JA, unreported, March 1998) and other cases referred to by Beazley JA in her reasons.

The difference in approach between the trial judge and this court is shown by his remark that "motorists approaching a pedestrian" at the side of the road and not in the pedestrian crossing "is (sic) entitled to act and react accordingly", that is, in accordance with what the trial judge thought was the high duty on such a pedestrian not to go onto the roadway at all unless completely safe to do so.

In my view the approach required by cases such as Stocks versus Baldwin is one which does not place such emphasis on the entitlement of drivers but more upon their duty, being in charge of frequently lethal machines, to drive reasonably in the circumstances in which they find themselves. In the present case the relevant circumstances included the facts that the driver had lawfully passed through a green light into the intersection of Lee and George Streets and was going along Lee Street at a speed within the limit prescribed by the written law.

There were other circumstances however which needed to be taken into account as well. It was about 8.45 am. Traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian was quite heavy. The truck was travelling at about sixty kph. According to the driver's evidence in chief, when he was half way through the intersection and some way from where the plaintiff very shortly after went on to the road, he had seen her and her daughter running from the other side of the road (on his left); he had seen them still running as they neared the kerb of Lee Street; he had sounded his horn and touched the foot brake to slow the truck down, and he then heard a thud on the truck. The trial judge accepted Mr Rutherford's evidence that the plaintiff had come into contact with the truck at the forward section of the tray behind the cabin.

On the driver's own account of the accident, and bearing in mind the approach to such situations stated in Stocks versus Baldwin, my opinion would be that some degree of negligence by him materially contributed to the accident. In my view, if he saw the plaintiff behaving as he described, and at as early a stage as he described (even though on his account a matter of only two or three seconds was involved) he should have been more alert to the possibility of foolish behaviour on the part of the plaintiff and either sounded his horn earlier and more decisively, or slowed more markedly, or both. Even so, on this view of the matter I would think the plaintiff's contributory negligence was such that the damages recoverable by her from the defendants should be reduced by sixty per cent having regard to her share in the responsibility for the accident and the damage she suffered.

However, that result would be reached by accepting the driver's own account of the accident, in particular his observation of the plaintiff's running for the length of time that he saw her doing so until immediately before impact. The account of the plaintiff and her daughter was to the contrary in this respect.
If their account, that the plaintiff was walking only, when stepping off the kerb and moving into the path of the truck, were to be accepted, my conclusion might well be different. The case might then fall into the category where a driver is suddenly confronted with a pedestrian whom the driver had no prior reason to think might suddenly step in front of the vehicle. In that category of case, depending on the precise facts, drivers are frequently found not to have been relevantly negligent.

The absence of any specific finding of fact on this aspect of the case could, as a matter of logic, lead to the ordering of a new trial. On the other hand, the trial judge does appear to have accepted generally the evidence of Mr
Rutherford, even although he did not make that clear in respect of this particular fact. Mr Rutherford's evidence coincides in a general way with that of the driver in regard to the plaintiff's having been running at all relevant times. On that basis, it seems to me appropriate to take it as the fact, in the appeal, that the plaintiff was running from the time he first saw her, until the collision. During the first part of this period the driver could reasonably have thought the plaintiff would stop before running into the road, but the longer she ran, the more did reasonableness require that he take measures to avoid a collision; he himself partly recognised this: he was asked about having touched his foot on the brake, and was then asked "so in other words you anticipated that just in case the pedestrians kept coming you wanted to slow down?" and replied "Yes, okay yes" (AB 48).

Taking these as the facts, I come to the conclusion already mentioned, which means setting aside the verdict and judgment of the trial judge, finding instead that the driver had been negligent and the plaintiff guilty of contributory negligence, with the consequence that once the damages have been assessed, the plaintiff should receive a judgment only for forty per cent of the assessed figure.

The orders I suggest are:
Appeal upheld.
Verdict and judgment set aside.
In lieu, declare the defendants liable to verdict and judgments once damages have been assessed.
There should be a further trial of the action limited to the assessment of damages.
Once damages have been assessed, the plaintiff is to have a verdict and judgment for 40% of the assessed figure.
The defendants are to bear the plaintiff's costs of the first trial and of this appeal.

BEAZLEY JA: I agree with Priestley JA. * * * 
