

Regina versus Dawson Matter No Cca 60249/98 [1998] NSWSC 540 (16 September )

Last Updated: 27 November 1998 
REGINA versus BRETT DAWSON 
CCA 60249/98 September 1998 
Grove J, Kirby J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal 
JUDGMENT 
GROVE J: This is an application for leave to appeal against sentence by Brett Dawson. The circumstances which bring him before the Court should be shortly related. He was originally charged with the offence of larceny of a motor vehicle. That vehicle was taken from a home in the city of Tamworth and, as a result of the activity of the applicant and a co-offender, it was totally written off. 
On appearance initially in the District Court before his Honour Judge Twigg
QC, the applicant was released upon a recognizance to be of good behaviour for a specified period of years and upon other conditions. He did not keep those conditions. He was called up for breach of the recognizance and the matter came before his Honour Judge Gallen in the Newcastle District Court. There, on September 1996, his Honour having found the breach proved proceeded to impose sentence for the matter upon which it had been deferred by Twigg DCJ.
The sentence which he imposed was a fixed term which he ordered served by way of periodic detention. There is an element of leniency built into that sentence. The applicant nevertheless did not avail himself of that leniency and, in due course, application was made for cancellation of the order for periodic detention.

The statute relevant in the circumstances makes provision for the balance of term to be served by way of full-time imprisonment upon such cancellation.

It is noted that no appeal lies to this Court against that order for cancellation.

Nevertheless, this Court does have jurisdiction to intervene in respect of the sentence which is imposed consequent upon cancellation. In this case the applicant did not appear on the cancellation proceedings and his Honour Judge
Coleman QC proceeded to make a cancellation order and then directed that the balance sentence of eighty four weeks be served by way of full-time imprisonment. His Honour was also vested with power to specify minimum and additional term elements of that sentence. He proceeded so to do and he divided the term in accordance with the prescription in [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/).

Accordingly, he directed that the applicant serve a minimum term of sixty- three weeks and be released to parole for an additional term of twenty-one weeks.

It is in relation to that division that essentially the present appeal is brought. The applicant has offered explanation for his non-attendance. It is unnecessary, in my view, to relate all of the matters that have been put before the Court in writing and by way of affidavit. In short, the applicant had a problem with the ingestion of illicit drugs. It suffices to observe that the information before the Court suggests that he and his wife have made genuine efforts to seek to rehabilitate himself and indeed themselves. In the meantime a child has been born and that child is in good health. It seems to me that had the applicant appeared before Coleman DCJ there were substantial matters to be taken into account which would have persuaded his Honour to come to the conclusion that there were special circumstances justifying departure from the division of terms specified in [section (2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nt/consolact/sa121/). In particular, the efforts as to rehabilitation, in my view, would have given rise to a finding that an extended period of additional term during which the applicant might be released subject to the supervision of the Probation and
Parole Service would be of great potential benefit. The applicant himself would have been able to demonstrate that special circumstances existed in his apparently genuine and sincere attempts at rehabilitation. It might be noted in passing that the original application to this Court was made by a document filled in by the applicant himself in prison and, in his own handwriting, he asserted that he had taken steps to rehabilitate himself. In the circumstances, I am persuaded that this Court should intervene and, in my view, a finding of special circumstances should be made to the extent that the period necessarily to be served by the applicant of eighty four weeks should be divided into minimum and additional terms of equal length.

Accordingly, I propose the following orders: that application for leave to appeal against sentence be granted and that that appeal be allowed, that the sentence imposed by Coleman DCJ on 26 February be quashed and in lieu thereof the following sentence imposed, that the applicant be sentenced to imprisonment for eighty four weeks consisting of a minimum term of forty-two weeks to commence from 28 April 1998 and to expire on 15 February 1999, together with an additional term of forty-two weeks commencing on 16 February
The applicant should be ordered released to parole on 16 February 1999 and whilst on parole be subject to the supervision of the Probation and Parole
Service.

KIRBY J: I agree. 
GROVE J: The orders of the Court will be as I have proposed. * * * 
