

Gunning versus Fellows [1997] NSWSC 22 (11 February 1997) 
GUNNING versus FELLOWS (By his Tutor L Fellows) /96; CL 40054/93  February 1997 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COURT OF APPEAL 
MASON P, COLE, BEAZLEY JJA 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE- Child on bicycle near road- Standard of care expected of a reasonably prudent driver- Motorist to exercise greater care and caution than usual when young children in the vicinity.

CONTRIBUTORY NEGLIGENCE- Appropriate apportionment-Standard of care expected of children 
EX TEMPORE/RESERVED: EX TEMPORE 
ALLOWED/DISMISSED: DISMISSED 
JUDGMENT 
MASON P: I will ask Beazley JA to give the first judgment.

BEAZLEY JA: This is an appeal from a judgment on liability only by Master Greenwood in which the Master held that the appellant was negligent when his motor vehicle collided with the respondent who had ridden a bicycle down a driveway and onto the road. The respondent was held to be twenty-five per cent contributorily negligent for the accident. As a result of the collision the respondent, who was almost twelve years old at the time, suffered severe head injures and permanent brain damage. So severe were his injuries he was unable to give evidence.

The accident occurred at 7 pm on 14 November 1992 during daylight saving time in well lit, clear conditions. The footpath upon which the respondent and two companions had been standing just before the respondent rode down the driveway was higher than the road by about one metre and separated from it by a grass verge approximately 6.8 metres wide. The accident occurred on the second occasion that the respondent rode the bicycle down the driveway. On the occasion when the collision occurred the respondent rode the bicycle slowly down the driveway but as he entered upon the roadway "he pedalled fast" and that is when the appellant's vehicle hit him. At that time the appellant was driving in a westward direction along Ashmont Avenue, Wagga Wagga.

According to his statement to the police the appellant was travelling about sixty kilometres an hour. He said: "A kid on a bike rode onto the roadway from a driveway on the left-hand side of the road. I didn't have time to brake or swerve and he ran into me on the front left-hand side of the car." 
The appellant didn't give evidence and from this statement to the police officer the Master found that he did not see the child. The point of impact occurred about five metres into the roadway at a point about a metre to the left-hand side of the dividing line between the two lanes of the road. The
Master found that the bike collided with the car "closer to its front".

Master Greenwood accepted the evidence given by Constable Swain who attended at the scene of the accident and a private investigator, Mr Connolly, retained by the respondent that a driver driving west along Ashmont Avenue would have had a view from 100 metres from the kerb at the point where the respondent rode the bike onto the road and that "he was able to see three children and a bike at a minimum distance of 80 metres from the point where the boys were then standing on the footpath." 
The Master held that there was no parked car impeding the appellant's view.
That finding is now accepted by the appellant although it had been challenged originally in the Notice of Appeal.

As argued in Court essentially two issues were raised on the appeal: first, whether the appellant had breached the duty of care owed to the respondent and, secondly, whether the Master had erred in assessing contributory negligence at twenty-five per cent, the appellant contending that the assessment should have been reversed, namely, that the respondent was seventy- five per cent contributorily negligent for the accident.

Although the appellant did not challenge the existence of a duty of care in the circumstances, it is important when determining whether there has been a breach of such duty to remind oneself of what the duty of care entails. It has been consistently established by authority that when young children are in the vicinity of a road or reasonably to be expected to be in the vicinity, a greater standard of care and caution is demanded of motorists (see:
Lolomanaia versus Rush (unreported) NSW Court of Appeal 15 July 1996; Mitchell v
GIO [(1992) 15 MVR 369]; Settree versus Roberts (unreported) NSW Court of Appeal 5
June 1981; Stoeckel versus Harpas [(1971) 1 SASR 172] and Mye v
Peters [(1967) 68 SR 298).] 
In Stoeckel versus Harpas (supra) Wells J exhorted jurors to: "Require of motorists a measure of what is sometimes called defensive driving or a lookout that not only sees immediate or immediately developing danger but looks well ahead and searches for potential danger." 
In Mitchell versus GIO (supra) Kirby P observed in relation to the standard of caution required of motorists where children are near a roadway that the principle is: "... based on knowledge of the well-known propensities of children which the law attributes to drivers. It is also based, as Mahoney JA stressed in
Settree that it is the driver who is generally in a better situation to anticipate and control events. He or she tends to be much older and more experienced in the ways of the traffic-way. Furthermore, he or she is in charge of a faster moving object with a large potential to cause grave injury and even loss of life, including to children who are pedestrians or otherwise near the highway. It is this disproportion of responsibility, control and experience, as well as knowledge of the occasional irresponsible behaviour attributed to children and known by the motoring public, that has led to the development of the approach to which an unbroken series of decisions in this
Court has given effect..." 
In Settree versus Roberts Hope JA at page 4 also made the following observations which are applicable to this case: "... Seeing a group of young children so close to the side of the trafficable portion of the road, even though their backs were turned to that portion of the road, the defendant had a duty to take appropriate precautions to guard against the event that one or more of the children might do what children have a well-known propensity of doing, that is, move suddenly out onto the road: cf. Mye versus Peters [(1967) 68 SR 298.]
That one of the children might so act was a possibility which the defendant ought reasonably to have foreseen and guarded against. There was ample time and ample room for her to adopt some course of action to avoid the risk of an accident; she took none. By slowing down or by moving away from the side of the road towards the centre, or across it (there is no evidence that any vehicles were coming in the opposite direction at the time and it was not suggested to witnesses who saw the accident that there were) she would have given both the plaintiff and herself a greater opportunity of avoiding the accident. The use of the horn would have warned the plaintiff of the danger created by her approach (cf. Motor Traffic Regulation No 107). It was open to the learned judge to find that the defendant could and should have taken some action to avoid the foreseeable risk to the plaintiff, and that her failure to do so constituted negligence. I respectfully agree with this conclusion ..." 
Master Greenwood found that from the point of view of the appellant driving west on Ashmont Avenue he was able to see the three children and the bike, as
I have said, at a minimum distance of eighty metres. Given the degree of vigilance and responsibility required of a driver in the circumstances of this case, I am of the opinion that the appellant clearly breached the duty which he owed to the respondent to become aware of the presence of the children on the footpath and, as Master Greenwood found, to have been aware of the impulsiveness of a young boy of about the age of the respondent to ride down a steep driveway. The appellant in those circumstances was required to keep an eye on the children to see what they might do and to be in a position to take preventative action if necessary such as to have sounded his horn, to have slowed down and if necessary to have braked and swerved so as to avoid a collision. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Master's finding was correct and that the appellant breached the duty of care which he owed to the respondent.

That leaves the question as to whether the Master erred in his assessment of the respondent's contributory negligence. Contributory negligence, of course, is measured by the failure of the person to take reasonable care for the person's own safety. The authorities, again, establish that the law employs a sliding scale of responsibility where children are involved, sliding down, of course, according to age. In Cotton versus Commissioner for Road Transport <case>; [(1942) 43 SR 66]
Jordan CJ observed at 69: "...It is obvious that a child is less capable of taking care for its own safety than a normal adult and the younger the child the less the capacity until a stage is reached at which there is none." 
In McHale versus Watson [(1966) 115 CLR 119] Kitto J stated: "...the standard of care is objective; it is the standard to be expected of a child, meaning any ordinary child, of comparable age ... not that which is to be expected of an adult; and the child's blamelessness, by the standard so determined, is treated as saving his conduct from being regarded as such a cause of his injury as to affect the question of the defendant's liability..." 
In determining what is an appropriate apportionment, the High Court said in
Pennington versus Norris <case>; [(1956) 96 CLR 10] at page 16: "... What has to be done is to arrive at a 'just and equitable' apportionment as between the plaintiff and the defendant of the 'responsibility' for the damage.
 ... ...

Here, in our opinion, the negligence of the defendant was in a high degree more culpable, more gross, than that of the plaintiff. The plaintiff's conduct was ex hypothesi careless and unreasonable but, after all, it was the sort of thing that is very commonly done: he simply did not look when a reasonably careful man would have looked. We think too that in this case the very fact that his conduct did not endanger the defendant or anybody else is a material consideration." 
In this case the respondent although not a very young child, was still not quite twelve years of age. The appellant was able to see him at least from about eighty metres before the point of collision.

Having regard to the fact that a motor vehicle, of its nature, is able to inflict a greater injury than is a bike and, taking into account the fact that the very duty including the standard of care which is imposed on the appellant so as to recognise that children often act suddenly, impulsively and without thought, or perhaps to adopt the language of senior counsel for the appellant, stupidly and illogically, I am of the opinion that the Master's assessment of contributory negligence was within an appropriate range having regard to the circumstances. Accordingly, in my opinion the appeal should be dismissed with costs.

MASON P: I agree. In Mitchell versus GIO at page 371 Kirby P quoted from an earlier judgment of his Johnson versus Johnson and said that only the advent of compulsory insurance "... can explain the shift of community attitudes to accident prevention reflected in the decision of the Court ... The advent of compulsory motor vehicle insurance has indisputably (although often unconsciously) affected the determination by courts that particular conduct in the control of a motor vehicle amounts to negligence ..." 
I think this is a case that particularly merits reference to that passage. I agree in the orders proposed.

COLE JA: I agree with the judgment of Beazley JA. I would only add that the circumstances in which this Court may interfere with an assessment of contributory negligence are limited (see Pennington versus Norris (1956) 96 CLR pages 10 and 15 and Podrebersek versus Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd <case>; [(1985) 59 ALJR 492] at 493-4). I agree with the orders proposed.

MASON P: The appeal is dismissed with costs.
 * * * 
