

Regina versus Bowhay Matter No 70074/97 [1998] NSWSC 782 (18 December 1998) 
Last Updated: 11 February 1999 
REGINA versus ADAM JOHN BOWHAY /97 December 1998 
Dunford J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Criminal Division 
SENTENCE - 
HIS HONOUR: The prisoner, Adam John Bowhay, has been found guilty of the murder of Steven Lindsay Jarvis at Casino early on the morning of Sunday 9 March 1997. 
The body of the deceased was found later that morning in a lonely public reserve area near the banks of the Richmond River by a couple walking their dog. When he was found a number of stab wounds to his neck were apparent, but a later post-mortem examination found a total of six separate such wounds to the front of the neck. The majority of them were only a couple of centimetres or less deep, but the major one was a zigzagged shaped wound forty-one millimetres in length which penetrated the tissue immediately beneath the skin, the muscles of the neck, and in at least two points went through the back of the tongue to the front of the spine to a depth at its deepest point of five and a half centimetres, the penetration of the tongue at two points indicating two thrusting movements of the knife.

There were also abrasions to the left side of the neck and two areas of bruising on the right side consistent with choking or strangulation, injuries and bruising to the chin above the left ear lobe and inside the mouth consistent with punches to the head, and obvious external bruising to the chest and left arm, and an abrasion to the right arm consistent with his arms being held down by someone's knees. There were also considerable internal injuries, including bruising and mobility in the areas of the thyroid cartilage and hyoid bone, again consistent with strangulation, bruising beneath the skin of the chest wall, particularly on the right side, and fractures to the back of the 8th, 9th and 10th ribs on the left side, the front of the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 8th ribs on the same side, and the front of the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th ribs on the right side. In a number of places these fractures were associated with tears in the lining of the rib cage allowing the potential for the lungs to collapse, and the lungs showed tears or lacerations of their outer aspects and some bleeding into the lower parts of the lungs themselves. There was also haemorrhage or bruising within the base of the mesentery tissue and the tissue surrounding the kidney on the right side. All these internal injuries, including the fractured ribs were consistent with a person having jumped on the deceased.

In the opinion of Dr Botterill, the pathologist, the cause of death was the combined effect of stab wounds to the neck, strangulation and the blunt force injuries to the trunk resulting in the fractured ribs, tears to the lining of the lung and the lung surfaces themselves, and bruising around the right kidney area.

It is not necessary to detail the steps which led the police to suspect the prisoner and his companion, a fourteen year old girl referred to as "RF" and with whom he was arrested at Tallangatta in north eastern Victoria about 5.20 pm on Thursday 20 March 1997.

It appears that the prisoner and RF, having stayed the night previous to the killing with an acquaintance of RF's in Kyogle, Terri Leahy, hitched a ride and arrived in Casino at about 9 pm, and shortly afterwards were seen in the company of the deceased, whom they had not previously known, outside the
Oxford Hotel where the deceased bought them a drink and then gave the prisoner money to buy beer for the three of them at the hotel from which he had, by that time, been banned.

They remained in his company and at about twelve midnight went back to the deceased's room at the Commercial Hotel where they remained for about an hour before the three of them went to the park area where the deceased met his death.

There was evidence that the deceased was an alcoholic, and the post-mortem showed a high blood alcohol reading. He was drunk on the evening before his death and he had previously been diagnosed as a schizophrenic. He lived alone in his hotel room at the Commercial Hotel and had done so for about two weeks.

Following the killing the prisoner and RF returned to the deceased's room, which they ransacked, taking a small amount of money and some other items, including an EFTPOS card which they unsuccessfully attempted to use to get money.

They then hitched a ride from the southern outskirts of Casino to Whiporie, a small village, where they stayed until Monday when they hitched a ride to
Grafton. Subsequently they made their way to Wauchope where they stole a car, the Central Coast where the prisoner spoke to his step grandmother, referred to as his Nan, who advised him to give himself up (advice which he rejected), and RF spoke to her mother, and then to the South Coast, Jindabyne, and on to
Tallangatta, where their stolen car broke down and they were arrested.

Whilst being held at Tallangatta Police Station the prisoner told Detective
Hunt, and confirmed it later that evening in an audio recorded interview at
Wodonga, that he did not do the killing but was with "the bloke" who did, and to use his words, "he wasn't pissed but only half pissed".

The following evening he took part in a lengthy audio and video recorded interview with Detective Campbell at Wangaratta Police Centre in which he immediately confessed that he had killed the deceased (A18), that he had stabbed him, strangled him, and jumped all over him (A19). He said he did it because the deceased, "pissed him off and kept on touching RF" (A20).

Answers 21, 22, and 23 are worth quoting in full.

Q21. "And what happened then? 
A. I looked, told him. I said what would you do if I punched you in the mouth.
He said I'd probably ask why. So I smacked him a good one in the head. I told him I was going to keep going and he pulled out a knife. So I pulled out a knife as well. I know how to use a knife, he didn't.

Q22. What happened then? 
A. Well, I stabbed him, strangled him to make sure he was dead, jumped all over him, dragged him down. I took his wallet first and his hotel keys, dragged him down to the side of the river, just left him there. Went back to his hotel, took what I wanted out of his room and left Casino.

Q23. Were you alone at the time you say you killed Mr Jarvis? 
A. Yeah. Me girlfriend was there but she wasn't close enough to know really what was going on." 
He said he and RF had left their homes on the Central Coast in mid February and travelled to Macksville where he had committed three break and enters on the 19th, including one at the Macksville Trading Post from which he stole a number of Swiss Army and other knives. They then stayed at Nambucca Heads for a few days before travelling to Byron Bay where they stole a motor vehicle on March. In that vehicle they drove to Beaudesert in Queensland, where on 6
March they stole petrol from an Ampol Service Station. On 7 March they stayed with Miss Leahy in Kyogle and on 8 March they abandoned the stolen vehicle and hitched a ride to Casino.

He then described how they met the deceased, that he had between six and twelve beers over the whole night, how they went to his room and the deceased was paying unwanted attention to RF by touching her, putting his arm around her and trying to put his hands on her, and saying she was his, so the prisoner invited him to walk with them to a party, but there was no party, and he intended to take him outside and "flog him".

He said that when they got to the reserve he punched the deceased in the face with force, that the deceased pulled a knife, and so the prisoner pulled one of the Swiss Army knives stolen from Macksville, put his arms around the deceased's neck and threw him to the ground, straddled him by pinning him down with one knee on each arm, strangled him with his hands, and punched his head, and then stabbed him several times in the throat with the Swiss Army knife, on one occasion "hacking into his throat with it". Not knowing if he had "killed him good enough" he jumped on his chest, jumped on his head, kicked him in the ribs. He said, "I just schitzed right out on him ... I never thought he could get enough, so I just kept on jumping on him" (A254).

Questions and answers 314, 315 and 360 to 362 were as follows: 
Q314. "Why did you stab him then? 
A. Because if I had of left him there he could have jumped up. He could have had a crack at me. I didn't know if he was dead or what. I made sure he was dead. I stabbed him. He deserved it anyway. I'm not sorry I done it.

Q315. Why did he deserve it? 
A. Because mate, look at the way he talked to my girlfriend, touched her. He was probably a child molester. . . . .

Q360. After you left Casino, let's say when you were on your way to Whiporie how did you feel about what happened with Steve when you stabbed him? 
A. Didn't worry me.

Q361. Do you still feel that way? 
A. Yep. I regret stabbing him, yeah. He probably still should be alive, but if he hadn't pulled out a knife on me, if he had of treated my girlfriend with a bit more respect then he wouldn't have got it would he. Anyone who doesn't treat her with respect will get the same thing.

Q362. Is that the reason you stabbed him? 
A. Yeah. I was only going to bash him to start with, but he wanted to pull out a knife thinking he was a hero. He ain't no hero now." 
In his sworn evidence at the trial the prisoner conceded that the deceased did not pull a knife on him and that he had not acted in self defence.

He said he was grossly affected by alcohol and drugs, including cannabis, amphetamines, and heroin, which he had been using constantly since leaving the
Central Coast and that he was provoked into taking the deceased down to the park area to give him a flogging by the deceased's unwelcome and inappropriate approaches to, touching of, and remarks about, RF.

He said he warned the deceased a number of times, and after taking two of the deceased's Serenace tablets, which he saw in the deceased's room, formed the intention of taking the deceased out and flogging him. He also thought the deceased could have been a child molester or a rapist.

He said when they got to the reserve he punched Jarvis about three or four times and threw him to the ground where he started screaming and yelling, whereupon the prisoner sat on his chest. He said the deceased was trying to scratch his face and was still screaming, so he told him to be quiet, and put his knees on top of his arms to stop him scratching his face. The deceased continued to scream, so the prisoner put his hands around his neck to stop him screaming, but when he released his grip the deceased started to scream again.
So he asked RF for a knife which he intended to use to threaten or scare the deceased but not to kill him. RF, who was nearby, opened the blade and handed the knife to the prisoner, but he has no recollection of what happened next, although he realises he must have stabbed him because he then saw lots of blood and the knife in his hand. He then lost control and jumped on the deceased's chest a number of times.

He insisted he had no memory of the actual stabbing, that he had been threatened in the cells before he took part in the recorded interview, and that he had not been fed properly between the time of his arrest and shortly before the interview, that he lied in the interview because he said the first thing that came into his mind and/or because he said what he believed the police wanted him to say.

When asked why, if he and RF were offended or upset by the attitude of the deceased and actions to RF, they simply did not leave his company, he replied, "I don't know" (p 791). He said (p 741) he now regrets stabbing the deceased, when he planned to fight him he did not want him to die and he wishes that he was still alive. I found the plaintiff was a most unsatisfactory witness, and am satisfied by the evidence of Detective Campbell and Detective Berryman, and most strongly convinced by the video itself, that he was not threatened by the police before taking part in the interview; and the written records of the
Victoria Police establish beyond any doubt that he was properly fed in the period prior to the interview. The video of the interview is most revealing, not only for the demeanour of the prisoner and his manner of answering questions, but also for the content of the answers he gave.

Although I accept that he was using cannabis and alcohol from the age of eighteen and hard drugs, including amphetamines, from New Year's Eve 1995/96,
I do not believe he was using them to the extent he claimed, particularly in the period leading up to the killing, and in this regard I refer in particular to the evidence of Eleisha Thompson and Terri Leahy, and the fact that there was no evidence of him being affected by drugs or alcohol shortly after the killing, and in this regard I refer to the evidence of Mr Eustace and Miss
McQuillen who gave him the lift from Casino to Whiporie.

Moreover, in the three to four weeks leading up to the murder, after the prisoner and RF left the Central Coast, they were without funds except for the proceeds of any break and enters they did. They had no money to pay for petrol at Beaudesert, and yet the prisoner claimed he was constantly using and buying hard drugs, and described two incidents, one at Ballina where he claimed he ripped off prospective drug purchasers by selling them crushed Panadol, and one at Byron Bay where he allegedly ripped off a drug dealer and got away with it. I found this evidence not credible.

The jury rejected the defences of provocation and diminished responsibility. I am satisfied, except in relation to the deceased having a knife, that the substantial truth of the matter is to be found in the video recorded interview.

I am satisfied that the deceased, who was aged forty-two at the time of his death, was a lonely drunk who wanted someone's company. He may have made inappropriate comments about RF and may have put his arms around her and touched her breasts, but he was so drunk as to be quite incapable of doing any real harm. Even if he did touch RF, and giving the prisoner the benefit of the doubt in that regard, I am satisfied that that was not the cause of what followed. The prisoner and RF could have got up and left at any time.

I am satisfied that the prisoner saw this almost helpless drunk as an easy target for his aggression, and thought he could have some fun at the victim's expense.

I cannot be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the motive for the killing was robbery, or that the prisoner formed an intention to kill before they left the Commercial Hotel, and it may be that at that stage he only intended to belt up the victim, and for no good reason.

But I am satisfied to the requisite standard that in the course of inflicting the belting, he found himself enjoying it and formed an intention to kill, which he carried out by stabbing, strangling, and stomping, until he was sure the victim was dead.

I am satisfied he remembered the stabbing as he claimed in the interview. He did it because he wanted to do it, and in the interview he was proud of it and boasting of it.

Alcohol, and possibly cannabis, may have made him less inhibited than otherwise may have been the case, but in no way reduced his responsibility for the offence. This was a deliberate and callous attack on one of the less fortunate members of the community, who was quite incapable of defending himself. Although not in the worst category of cases, the objective criminality is very high.

I am not satisfied that the prisoner has shown any genuine remorse. His evidence of remorse at the trial, to which I have referred, I did not find persuasive, particularly when contrasted with the answers he gave in the recorded interview. Any regret, it seems to me, was for his own present predicament, rather than for the deceased's loss of life.

RF has been committed for trial on the charge of accessory after the fact of murder, and has not yet been dealt with. Although, in the trial, reference was made to the part she allegedly played in handing the prisoner the knife, I record that I find that totally irrelevant. Whether she did or did not hand the prisoner the knife in no way reduces the prisoner's responsibility for what he did. After all, he asked for the knife and used it, she was only fourteen at the time; and one wonders why he now places such emphasis on the part allegedly played by her.

The prisoner was born on 17 August 1978, so that he was aged eighteen and a half at the time of the murder, and is now aged twenty. He had a most unfortunate childhood.

His mother and natural father separated before he was born. His mother, in effect, deserted him and one, but not both, of his sisters when he was four years old. In the meantime she had married his stepfather whom she then left.
His stepfather has been away from home for long periods of time and he has not had a close relationship with him. His upbringing has been left to Mrs Carol
Bowhay, who is not a blood relation of any kind, but the mother of his stepfather.

She has obviously done her best in a most difficult situation, although I am informed that his younger sister, who has also been brought up by Mrs Bowhay has never had any problems with the law.

Nevertheless, one can understand a sense of resentment, and also bitterness, of the way his natural parents ignored him.

He got into trouble at school, from which he truanted and was suspended from time to time. He began smoking marijuana and drinking alcohol at the age of thirteen, and following a New Year's Eve party in 1995/96 he started using heavier drugs including amphetamines, heroin, and cocaine, and various types of pills.

He was arrested on 2 January 1996 on a charge of violent disorder, and again on 9 January 1996 on charges of a violent disorder, four counts of causing malicious damage, and stealing. These were dealt with at the Wyong Children's
Court on 23 February 1996, and he was subjected to a control order for three months.

He was arrested again twice on 25 January 1996, firstly at The Entrance on a charge of cruelty to a dog, and later that same day at Toukley on a charge of goods in custody. These were dealt with at Wyong Children's Court on 29 April , when he was placed on probation for eighteen months from 23 February .

Having served the control order, he was arrested again on 22 August 1996 at
Coffs Harbour and charged with stealing a motor vehicle, drive manner dangerous, not stopping after a motor vehicle accident, and other traffic matters, and on 5 September 1996 was sentenced by Wyong Local Court to imprisonment for four months commencing 22 August 1996.

Whilst in custody he was dealt with for four counts of break, enter and steal relating to the period before he went into custody, ie between May and August , and again placed on probation.

He does not appear to have learned anything beneficial from his time in custody.

After his release from custody on 22 December 1996 he soon resumed drinking and drug taking, although as I have indicated, I do not accept his evidence as to the extent of that drug taking. It was no doubt serious, but not as he would have us believe. Then in the middle of February he left the Central
Coast with RF on the trip that ultimately finished at Tallangatta.

He appears to have embarked on a life of crime and to have decided that
Society's rules do not apply to him.

Four psychiatrists gave evidence in the trial. Dr McMurdo and Dr Strum, who were called in the defence case, saw the prisoner before the trial. Dr Milton and Dr Delaforce, who were called by the Crown, were not given that opportunity, but Dr Delaforce sat in court and heard a lot of the evidence, including that of the accused.

After preparing their reports and before giving evidence, Dr McMurdo and Dr
Strum had access to the files from the Departments of Juvenile Justice and
Corrective Services, which documents were also available to the psychiatrists called on behalf of the Crown. I will not detail the contents of those files, nor the references to the apparent suicide attempts by the prisoner whilst in custody, nor the slashing of his wrists in Cessnock. I should, however, refer to his prior history.

Dr McMurdo and Dr Strum, in their initial reports, accepted the history of drug taking given by the prisoner which, as I said, I find to be exaggerated.
Dr McMurdo considered he suffered from a depressive illness and an amphetamine psychosis, although he also considered the possibility of an antisocial personality disorder. After access to the departmental records he preferred to describe the prisoner as having a borderline personality disorder.

In his report Dr Strum considered that the prisoner was suffering from major depression and an antisocial personality disorder, but at the trial, after access to the departmental records, attributed his conduct of the night in question to a borderline personality disorder, although, as I understand his evidence, he did not rule out the existence of an antisocial personality disorder as well, although he did not like the use of the label 'psychopath'.

Dr Milton rejected the diagnoses of amphetamine psychosis, major depression, and borderline personality disorder, but diagnosed an antisocial personality disorder which he described as a person who does not stick to the rules of society, does not care about others, acts impulsively, uses drugs and alcohol, does not settle to anything, and enjoys inflicting pain on other people.

Dr Delaforce rejected a drug induced psychosis and major depression, but considered the prisoner had both an antisocial personality disorder and a borderline personality disorder.

In the light of this evidence I am satisfied that the prisoner had, and has, an antisocial personality disorder as attested to by Drs Strum, Milton, and
Delaforce, noting that his conduct demonstrates an attitude not to abide by
Society's rules, as evidenced by the break enter and steal, car stealing, the drug and alcohol use, and this particular killing with no credible motive.

He may also have some symptoms of depression, although not a major depressive illness, and a borderline personality disorder.

But for sentencing purposes I consider the antisocial personality disorder as the most important, and in this regard I refer to what Dr Strum said in his report of 10 December 1997, "Having said all this, I believe that Mr Bowhay is the net result of his upbringing but I do not think that it be the whole story. I think that
Antisocial Personality Disorder is largely constitutional ... I think Mr
Bowhay is capable of learning from experience. People with Antisocial
Personality Disorder tend to mature somewhat later, in their thirties or forties, and do not tend to cause much problem in society after that age. I think that, with time and future education, Mr Bowhay may possibly be at a state where he can fit into society. Poor impulse control and a tendency to run away are his most unfortunate attributes although, his recent time in gaol seems to have settled him down a little. The overall prognosis remains guarded." 
In sentencing, it is necessary to bear in mind the objective seriousness of the offence as well as the subjective features of the prisoner, and to have regard to the protection of the community, retribution, general and personal deterrence, and the prisoner's rehabilitation.

Having regard to my finding of Antisocial Personality Disorder, the protection of the community and personal deterrence assume particular importance. I note his youth and was referred to cases dealing with young offenders including
R versus GDP [(1991) 53 A Crim R 12], but I note in that case the offender was only fifteen; and the authorities dealing with the reduced significance of general deterrence relate to juveniles, rather than young adults, and have very limited, if any, application to offenders who conduct themselves as adults and commit crimes of considerable gravity. The age of the offender may, however, be relevant to the issue of special circumstances within the meaning of [s5(2)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s5.html) of the [Sentencing Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/).

Taking into account all of the matters to which I have referred, I consider that the sentence should be longer than is the case in many other murder sentences, but the increase should be weighted towards the additional term rather than the minimum term because of the prisoner's youth, and so that, if released on parole at the expiration of the minimum term, which will depend on a number of factors (see [s17](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/s17.html) of the [Sentencing
Act](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/repealedact/sa1989121/)), he will then be subject, not only to supervision for a lengthy period, but also be liable to be returned to custody if he fails to behave in a lawful manner.

Adam John Bowhay, for the murder of Steven Lindsay Jarvis I sentence you to penal servitude for a minimum term of sixteen years with an additional term of seven years. The minimum term is to be deemed to have commenced on 20 March
The earliest date on which you will be eligible for release on parole will be 19 March 2013. The additional term exceeds one third of the minimum term because of special circumstances, namely, your comparative youth and need for lengthy period of supervision on parole.

The remaining exhibits are to be returned to the Crown.
 * * * 
