

B P Edleston versus State Rail Authority of NSW [1996] NSWSC 479 (10 October )

BARRY PETER EDLESTON versus STATE RAIL AUTHORITY OF NSW /90 
THURSDAY 10 OCTOBER 1996 
THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES COMMON LAW DIVISION 
GROVE J 
CATCHWORDS: NEGLIGENCE - FALL FROM BRIDGE ON RAILWAY STATION WHEN FENCE COLLAPSES - DAMAGES ASSESSED.
 
JUDGMENT 
HIS HONOUR: On Friday, 15 September 1989, Barry Peter Edleston arrived at the St Peters' Railway Station in company with his friend, Mr Haylock. Each of them, at the time, was employed in the building industry, although on that day they had worked at different sites.

As a result of industrial disruption, that working day so far as the plaintiff was concerned, was shortened. He waited for his friend in a city hotel and I am satisfied that he arrived there after work somewhere in the vicinity between 2 and 3.00 pm. Mr Haylock arrived not too much later. They travelled to St Peters as it was their intention to do some work over the weekend at Mr
Haylock's mother's residence, which was apparently nearby to the railway station. Both the young men stayed in the hotel for a few hours and consumed intoxicating liquor. There was neither anything unlawful nor unusual about their so-doing. They left the hotel and had something to eat at the McDonald's establishment near to Wynyard Station and thereafter caught the train to St
Peters. I am satisfied that they arrived there shortly after 7.00 pm. They were carrying bags including fairly heavy tool boxes which no doubt contained implements which would be useful for the intended weekend activity.

In order to egress from the station, it was necessary for them to pass along a footway which I need not pause to describe, as it is amply illustrated in the many photographs tendered in evidence. It suffices for present purposes to observe that the walkway passed over the railway line at a height of approximately six metres, and the sides of the walkway contained fencing or a barrier consisting, in part, of Colorbond steel sheeting.

Whilst the young men were on the walkway they put down their loads, and I am satisfied that I can infer that they were, to an extent, skylarking, but I do not, in that finding, indicate that in my view they were doing anything improper or relevantly dangerous to their own safety. In a way that the evidence does not enable me precisely to establish the young men fell against one of the Colorbond panels. The impact was obviously sufficient to dislodge it, and they fell to the railway line below. Mr Haylock was gravely injured and there is evidence that as a result of brain damage, he has been described by his family as being in a vegetative state.

The plaintiff was also seriously injured, but it has to been said not to the extreme extent that Mr Haylock was injured.

The plaintiff sued both the State Rail Authority and later joined John
Lysaght, a subsidiary of BHP. The latter was provoked by a cross-claim brought by the SRA which was eventually discontinued.

It is conceded by counsel for the plaintiff that there is nothing in the evidence, now completed, which would entitle the plaintiff to a verdict against the second defendant, and there will be judgment for the second defendant with costs in due course.

It is convenient to mention that in exchange with counsel, it was not contended on behalf of the remaining defendant that in the event that the plaintiff secured an order for costs against it, those costs should not include those which the plaintiff is ordered to pay to the successful second defendant along the lines of the procedure generally referred to by reference to Bullock versus London Omnibus Company.
 
I return, however, to the issues in this trial. It is obvious that the fence was inadequate to the task of preventing human beings from falling through it onto the line below. In the course of the trial there was a skirmish arising out of correspondence between solicitors relating to admission of liability. I do not regard that correspondence as a necessary foundation for my finding, as counsel for the defendant very properly stated in his opening remarks in the final address: "There is no material I can put that would assist my client on the question of breach of duty of care". As I have said, that concession was most appropriately made. The live issue is the assertion by the defendant of contributory negligence. This is an issue upon which it is incumbent upon the defendant to provide proof. Exactly what the young men were doing to precipitate the accident cannot be established from the evidence. What the plaintiff said was that all he knew is that he fell over the bags (by which I take him to be including the tool boxes) and he fell up against the fence or corrugated sheets, and that he and his companion fell through the open space.
There was a suggestion that there was, between them, some sort of wrestling or fighting, but that suggestion was not accepted by the plaintiff who said he had no memory of such.

I note that the plaintiff was cross-examined and conceded that inquiries he had made revealed to him that there were witnesses to the incident but the defendant has called no such witnesses. It was put to him that to behave in such a fashion, that is to say wrestling or fighting, would not be having great regard for his own safety, and he agreed that that was so. For my part,
I would not necessarily agree with the plaintiff's concession because I would regard fencing in a position such as on a cross-bridge over a railway as requiring, in terms of reasonableness, a strength to sustain impact and sufficient to prevent people falling onto the line below. The reports of Mr
Osman show the very inadequate fashion in which the Colorbond sheeting was placed in this instance. In any event, the plaintiff's concession is irrelevant, as the fundamental proof that he was actually wrestling or fighting, is lacking.

It is convenient to mention that he was also asked whether he agreed that it was sensible just to walk along the footpath. No doubt this is so, but that is a judgment of hindsight. What fences and barriers are for, must surely be for the prevention of accidents. A fence is by definition a guard. There is no evidence that the impact of the young men's bodies was extraordinary. A fence should restrain and not collapse. I observe in passing - although it is not strictly relevant to the issue of contributory negligence - that approximately months before this accident, railway records show that another person had fallen through the Colorbond sheeting on the St Peters' railway bridge crossing. I am unpersuaded that the evidence demonstrates that the plaintiff was guilty of contributory negligence.

Counsel for the defendant emphasised the concession by the plaintiff that he had consumed a lot of intoxicating liquor, and indeed Mr Haylock had fallen asleep on the train and it was the plaintiff who had awakened him. As I pointed out earlier, it is not unlawful to partake of intoxicating liquor even in quantity and although the word "drunk" was put to the plaintiff, I observe that in his own judgment he thought that he was sober when he alighted from the train.

Putting all the evidence together, I am satisfied that he was, to an extent, affected by intoxicating liquor, but I do not regard that as relevant to the occurrence. Persons affected by intoxicating liquor, provided they are well behaved, are entitled to use the public transport system. I find nothing inherently dangerous in the plaintiff's behaviour on this occasion, bearing in mind, as I have said, that the explanation for actually contacting the fence, remains obscure. I am not satisfied that the impact force was any greater than would result from tripping or stumbling. The fence clearly should have restrained human beings from falling onto the line below and my conclusion is that the cause of the accident was entirely the breach of duty of care by the
State Rail Authority whose responsibility for the efficacy of the bridge and the fence it was.

The plaintiff was born on 13 March 1965. He was therefore 24 years of age when the accident happened and is now 31. In his early life he suffered considerable misfortune. I regard it as necessary to refer to this as the plaintiff's reaction to injury is rendered significant, to an extent, by that background. His mother died at an early age and he was taken into care by relatives in what has been described as unfortunate circumstances. Better fortune came his way when he was fostered to Mr and Mrs Edleston whose surname he has adopted.

When I refer to his father or mother I intend to refer to Mr and Mrs Edleston.
His father was a builder and, after completing his high school education to the school certificate standard the plaintiff commenced an apprenticeship as a carpenter and joiner. With some break in the continuity of his apprenticeship he eventually became a qualified tradesman. As I understand it, up to the time of the accident he had gained employment specialising somewhat in ceiling fixing on large projects. At the time of the accident he was employed by a corporation called Gridcon which was involved essentially in longer and larger building activity.

The plaintiff lost consciousness for a time as a result of the fall and it seems that between it and his transfer to hospital he may have had periods of emerging into and fading out of consciousness. In a very abbreviated fashion it can be said that his injuries consisted of a fracture to the left wrist, an injury to the back and a rupture of the spleen which required surgical removal.

The entirety of medical evidence, save some cross -examination of a psychiatrist, Dr McMurdo, is to be found in the reports in exhibit B. Included among those reports are some which were obtained on behalf of the defendant in the course of preparation for trial. I do not propose to quote at length from what can be read in those reports but I do propose to make some reference to a number of aspects which emerge from them.

In the early days after the accident the plaintiff consulted a general practitioner in Newtown, Dr Luke Baker. That practitioner knew from the history that the plaintiff had had the rupture of the spleen and the fracture of his left distal radius and he had an additional history about facial lacerations and bruising over the lumbosacral spine and left hip. Dr Baker was able to observe on examination very shortly after the accident that the left hip showed a painful mass over the lateral aspect which became prominent on flexion. As will later be detected by radiological examination, there seems to have been some lower back disruption.

Whilst the plaintiff was an inpatient at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital it was apparently considered that he might usefully be seen by a staff psychiatrist.
I have a letter from her, Dr Melissa Corr, which sets out what occurred at that time. I am satisfied from that and from other material to which I will later refer that the plaintiff was undoubtedly vulnerable to psychiatric damage.

This is hardly surprising, given the detail of his earlier life to which I have made only the briefest of reference but, as indicated by one of the psychiatrists whom he has seen and whose opinion in this regard I accept, the accident itself acted as a trigger in bringing forward repressed feelings of distress which the plaintiff harboured in relation to his earlier unfortunate life. His emotional situation manifested itself in, at times, violent behaviour sometimes directed towards his girlfriend and he told psychiatrists; for example, Dr Sharah, that he felt like killing himself when he was in his rages.

The plaintiff has seen a number of psychiatrists. The reasons for the changes being, in part, his election in about 1992 to move to Coolangatta which was apparently nearby to his girlfriend's parents' residence. It is implicit in the pattern of reference by general practitioners to psychiatrists that the plaintiff's condition was florid and detectable during most of the period with which I have to deal.

I should add that the plaintiff's presentation in the witness box, which was deliberate and slow, was to my observation entirely consistent with a person who has suffered from a depression of the type described from time to time in the various psychiatric reports. Reference to that aspect of the plaintiff's situation should not obscure the seriousness of his physical deficits.

In September 1992 the plaintiff was seen for medico-legal purposes by Dr Selby
Brown, an orthopaedic surgeon. I refer to this as it was the focus of specific submission on behalf of the defendant. My attention was drawn to observations by Dr Selby Brown on examination that the plaintiff had reasonably full ranges of left wrist joint motion and his observations about ranges of movement in the lumbar spine. Those matters detected upon examination need to be assessed in the context of Dr Selby Brown's clinical opinion which was expressed then in these terms: "Mr Edleston has ongoing problems in his left wrist and low back. In the left wrist he has sustained a comminuted intra-articular fracture of the distal left radius and at some later indeterminate date I consider that he most probably will develop post-traumatic osteo-arthritic change in this joint. In his low back he has significant ongoing pain with radiation into the right lower limb, as noted above, and there is very significant tenderness to palpation in this limb." 
Dr Selby Brown thought that there should be further investigations in order to elaborate the lumbar spinal situation. These were duly undertaken and he later reported, in 1993, that a CT scan had revealed some minimal posterior disc bulging at L4/5 and L5/S1 levels and he thought that this probably indicated that the plaintiff did sustain some injury to both of these discs at the time of the fall. I accept Dr Selby Brown's observations and my finding is coordinate with it.

It is convenient here to interpose reference to an event which I understand to have taken place whilst the plaintiff was in Coolangatta. He then fell whilst in the bath or shower and refractured the injured wrist. That fracture itself was also an intra-articular fracture. The plaintiff said that, to his appreciation, after the second fracture had settled down he felt that his wrist had returned to the state in which it was prior to the second occurrence.

I accept the plaintiff's evidence in this regard. No doubt the second fracture, which is unconnected with the tort, will operate to accelerate the prospect of osteo-arthritic development but, in the scheme of things and in the plaintiff's overall condition, I regard that acceleration as something of only minimal consequence. I will take the potential consequences of other matters into account in a way in which I will indicate when I come to specify the individual ingredients of damage.

Whilst the plaintiff was residing in Coolangatta he was referred to Dr Danesi, a psychiatrist practising in Tweed Heads. Like some medical practitioners who have seen the plaintiff subsequently, I also find Dr Danesi's report of 8 May a most useful and informative resource. Set out on page 2 of that report is a considerable amount of detail about the plaintiff's earlier life which I will not now pause to recite but which I have already said I regard to be significant. That significance can be articulated by quoting from Dr Danesi's report the following: "Falling from the bridge, the subsequent inability to work and his friend suffering severe injuries has been one of the aetiological factors in the onset of his depression. The other aetiological factor to his depression is that the accident has been a trigger for distressing childhood experiences surfacing which have been previously minimised or blocked out. They have not been easy for him to acknowledge or work through." 
Dr Danesi makes reference to the failure of the establishment of rapport between the plaintiff and some other psychiatrists. It is almost essential for successful psychiatric treatment for such rapport to exist but the failure to establish it is not, in my view, in this case in any way the fault of the plaintiff.

After the plaintiff returned to Sydney his solicitors arranged for a medico- legal assessment to be performed by Dr Malcolm Dent, a psychiatrist practising in this city. That report contains valuable background material and, in accordance with the practice to which I have made reference of division between medico-legal examination and psychotherapeutic treatment, the plaintiff saw his general practitioner who sent him on to Dr Rob McMurdo. Dr
McMurdo has undertaken some treatment of the plaintiff and I accept his evidence that the plaintiff ought to have some future psychotherapeutic treatment.

As is obvious, one cannot predict the extent and the result of such treatment.
One can only deal with probabilities but, having regard to the evidence before me, I propose to operate on the thesis that the psychotherapy needs of the plaintiff will be fulfilled by approximately a dozen appointments with Dr
McMurdo at monthly intervals.

Dr McMurdo, using the scales in common use throughout the medical profession, diagnosed the plaintiff as having major depressive disorder. I find that the plaintiff is so disordered. The prospect for remission will depend upon the success of the psychotherapeutic treatment suggested.

I should not depart from the medical material without noting that at one stage the plaintiff undertook some work in a hotel picking up empty glasses. What I presume to be the repetitive process required of him, was such as to provoke symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome which, had he continued, would be likely to lead him to have to undertake surgery. As events have turned out, the plaintiff has found other suitable employment.

The final reference which I make to the medical material is to the most recent report available in the bundle which is that of Dr Bodel who saw the plaintiff on 20 August this year. He, in fact, saw the plaintiff on behalf of the first defendant. The report concludes with these observations, amongst others: "From a musculo-skeletal point of view the patient's ongoing disability is the back and left wrist. His complaints are quite genuine and his condition has stabilised. I would encourage him to continue to exercise in order to optimise function. He is not fit for unrestrictive heavy work but is capable of his current work indefinitely." 
Dr Bodel, of course, did not turn his mind to any psychiatric condition which might be affecting the plaintiff.

Although I have indicated that the plaintiff's presentation suggested to me the undoubted correctness of the diagnosis of depression, I am satisfied that the plaintiff was doing his best to answer questions put to him truthfully and honestly and, indeed, counsel for the defendant did not suggest otherwise.

I am satisfied that in practical terms the plaintiff is not and will not be, in a commercial sense, in the future capable of returning to his trade as a carpenter and joiner.

His present employment, which commenced about 21 months ago, is as a kitchen hand in a restaurant at Artarmon. The plaintiff is of obviously enthusiastic about this work and, indeed, in response to questions by counsel for the defendant as to whether he was happy there his response was to say that he was extremely happy. That work does not pay as well as the earnings of a tradesman.

What I propose to do next is to turn to the ingredients of damage and make some observations as I deal with them of the way in which the pros and cons and pluses and minuses are taken into account in my assessment.

The first item of damage is an agreed sum of $7,240 for out of pocket expenses to date. Thanks to the cooperation of counsel, I have figures which I can use as guides for the assessment of damages relating to economic incapacity. As is conventional, I will deal with this in two stages; first, economic loss to date and, second, future economic loss.

As a matter of mathematics, it is agreed that if the plaintiff had continued from the date of accident to the present to work as a ceiling fixer on a six day week but without overtime he would have earned $208,199 nett. As opposed to this, such employment as he has had has returned him, during that period, a total of $23,282. The difference between those two figures is, arithmetically, $184,917.

It was vigorously contended on behalf of the defendant that, having regard to the assessments of Dr Selby Brown and some concessions in cross-examination by the plaintiff as to what he could do as at about September 1992, that I should regard that time as a relevant point for diminution of the plaintiff's damages as against those calculated sums. There is a great difference between the ability to perform tasks such as carpentry and the ability to earn one's living by performing such tasks on a five or six day a week basis. As I have sought to indicate, even though the plaintiff may have made a significant recovery from serious physical injury, he has had throughout a genuine depression provoked by the accident and I believe that that is the root cause for his unemployment throughout the period to date.

It needs to be understood in this context what "depression" means. It means that one is apparently lethargic, uninterested and simply unable to function but a person suffering from what Dr McMurdo assesses as a major depressive illness is not lethargic and uninterested because of choice but because the illness makes him unable to operate or function in any other way.

I have, nevertheless, I believe in fairness to the balance between the parties, to take some other matters into account as against the arithmetic that I have specified. The plaintiff was at all times vulnerable to psychiatric symptom and the building industry itself notoriously has a cycle of abundant employment and leaner times. It is not inevitable that the plaintiff would have continued to work six days a week during the last seven years.

As against that, of course, it is pointed out by counsel for the plaintiff that he has not made any claim based upon a calculation of overtime earnings.

Taking into account all these matters, which includes whatever contribution might be made by the non-tort induced accident of the fall in the bath, I have concluded that it would be appropriate to take the calculated figure of $184,917 and discount that by twelve and a half per cent. This would, arithmetically, leave a resultant figure of $161,802 and that figure will be included in the damages as representing my finding as to the production of economic loss to the plaintiff by the tort in the period since the accident to date.

Interest is sought on this ingredient of damage. For that purpose it has been agreed between the parties that the plaintiff has, during the period, received $45,931 by way of social security benefit. The differential figure between that and my award is $115,871. As an appropriate rate of interest for the past seven years I would select 14 per cent but I halve that figure in order to allow for the gradual accrual of loss during the period.

The interest component then is to be found from the resultant equation of seven per cent on $115,871 for seven years which equals $56,777. That amount will be included in the damages.

I turn to the next item of economic loss in the future. Again I am assisted by counsel in their agreement as to certain arithmetical facts.

It is agreed that a carpenter and joiner working as a ceiling fixer for six days a week without overtime would presently earn $634.21 per week net. The plaintiff, as a kitchen hand, is in fact earning $311.90 per week net. Simple arithmetic will determine that the difference between those postulated earnings is $322.31 per week.

The plaintiff, as I have indicated, is now 31 going onto 32 years of age. He gave some evidence that, in so far as he had ever turned his mind to it, he thought he would work on indefinitely in the pattern of his builder father.

I do not regard it as realistic to project any guidance calculations beyond the conventional retiring age of 65 and I propose to use that for such purposes.

During the next 12 months the plaintiff may be expected to undertake the psychotherapy postulated by Dr McMurdo. Doing the best I can to make a judgment about the matter, I conclude that that treatment is more probably than not likely to assuage significantly the major depressive illness from which the plaintiff suffers.

During that 12 months it seems to me that it is appropriate to award the plaintiff, for economic loss, a figure referenced to the differential of $322 per week. For the next 12 months then the plaintiff should receive, by way of damages, $16,744.

More difficult, obviously, is looking into the future. As I have already indicated, it does not seem to me that it would do justice to the balance between the parties simply to assume that the current difference would forever represent interference with earning capacity to the plaintiff which is likely to be productive of economic loss. The plaintiff will, by reason of the remission of the significant burden of major depression, have an increased capacity for work. It may be, of course, that his present happiness in his current position is such that he elects to remain there, but my task is to calculate damages which a tortfeasor should pay him for the damage it has and will do to him. I have to take into account the notorious cycles in the building industry to which I have referred.

It seems to me that the plaintiff's residual earning capacity after the psychotherapeutic treatment will be at least the current earnings that he is making and that the remission of those symptoms should be regarded as increasing that residual capacity.

Taking all matters into account and of similar theme to those to which I have referred in dealing with economic loss to date, I elect to take as a guide, for the purpose of a calculation a theoretical loss of $200 per week net over the 32 years to the plaintiff's 65th year but commencing one year after the accident. It is for that reason that the period is 32 years and not 33.

On the appropriate three per cent tables the formula reduces to a sum of $200 by .971 to allow for one year's deferral by 1,079.8, being the factor for 32 years, which equals a capitalised sum of $209,697.

It is submitted on behalf of the plaintiff that it would be appropriate to discount any such sum by the conventional 15 per cent but allow for adverse vicissitudes. In this particular case I see no reason to adopt any other approach and I do so accordingly, thus reducing the calculated sum to $178,242.

There are minor items of future cost to be considered. Dr McMurdo's psychotherapeutic treatment will cost $150 per consultation. A dozen consultations, therefore, will cost $1800. There is also in the background the possibility - and I emphasise that it is no more than that - of the requirement of surgical intervention to relieve either osteo-arthritic development or carpal tunnel syndrome. I have no figures in relation to these matters and, of course, it may be that such will never be undertaken or be undertaken very, very many years into the future. It seems to me, however, that I should not ignore the possibility altogether.

I therefore propose to include the relatively minor sum of $3,000 to include future psychotherapy and any other medical treatment.

I turn then to the final ingredient of damages for non-specific loss. The assessment of general damages must necessarily be a matter of impression. The plaintiff has undoubtedly, had a time which I would assess as miserable over the years that have passed. I have not ignored the circumstance of the contribution of his reaction to the devastation of the life of his friend but it does not seem to be that I need to dwell upon that aspect of the matter. As
I have said, he has real physical disability but these are not, of course, of the most grievous kind that it is the misfortune of the courts to have to deal with from time to time.

Allowing for his youth and doing the best I can, I reach the conclusion that general damages in the sum of $75,000 should be included with the other ingredients I have mentioned.

For the purpose of interest I specify $40,000, part of that sum representing loss as accrued over the time and, at the rate of two per cent for seven years, an interest component of $5,600 should be included in the damages.

For ease of reference I shall recapitulate the figures for damage which I have indicated: the out of pocket expenses are $7,240; economic loss to date $161,802; interest on economic loss to date $56,777; future economic loss in two components; first, $16,744, second, $178,242; future costs $3,000; general damages $75,000; interest on general damages to date $5,600; total $504,405.

I direct entry of judgment for the plaintiff against the first defendant $504,405. I order the first defendant to pay the plaintiff's costs. I direct entry of judgment for the second defendant. I order the plaintiff to pay the second defendant's costs.

The order of costs in favour of the plaintiff against the first defendant will include those costs which the plaintiff is ordered to pay the second defendant. Liberty to apply.

I direct that the exhibits be returned upon the undertaking of the respective solicitors to retain the same and make them available in the event they are required for any future proceedings.
 * * * 
