

Gulasi versus Gulasi Matter No 14434/92 [1997] NSWSC 248 (4 July 1997) 
Last Updated: 27 February 1998 
Pinar Gulasi by her next friend Mesrin Gulasi versus Shane Gulasi /92 July 1997 
Simpson J 
The Supreme Court of New South Wales Common Law Division /92 Pinar GULASI by her Next Friend Mesrin GULASI versus Shane GULASI 
JUDGMENT 
HER HONOUR: The plaintiff was born on 6 October 1981. On 11 July 1982, when she was nine months old, the motor vehicle in which she was a passenger collided with another vehicle, as a result of which she sustained serious injury, including brain damage. She accordingly claims damages against the driver of the vehicle. Liability is admitted. By reason of the date of the injury the damages are to be assessed under the common law, unaffected by subsequent statutory modification. 
There is nothing to suggest that, prior to the injury, the plaintiff was other than a healthy, normal infant. Her history of consultations with the family's general practitioner, and a report of an obstetrician/gynaecologist who had attended her mother prior to confinement and perused the hospital records of the delivery, contain nothing to indicate otherwise. There is no suggestion that twins, born to her parents two years subsequently, are other than normal and healthy. While there is some doubt expressed in some of the medical reports whether the cause of the plaintiff's present intellectual impairment is clearly shown to have been the injury she suffered in the collision, no such argument was pursued in the hearing. The matter proceeded on the basis that, absent the motor vehicle collision, the plaintiff would have had normal intellectual capacity. It is common ground that the plaintiff now suffers from some intellectual impairment. Dr Simon Clarke who attended her within a couple of weeks of the injury, and who continued to do so, sporadically, until 1993, described her as having "moderate developmental delay." Dr Fearnside, a neurological surgeon, considered her to be "considerably disabled" and to be "moderately to severely retarded." Dr Wendy Roberts conducted extensive tests and examinations on the plaintiff for the purpose of reporting to and advising the defendant, and assessed her as "functioning in the upper range of moderate retardation." Professor Richard Jones, a rehabilitation medicine specialist, who examined the plaintiff for the same purpose, considered, in October 1995, that it was then premature to prognosticate on her ultimate potential for independence in social living outside her family home, but that such potential, and potential for vocational rehabilitation, did exist.

One of the central questions upon which the plaintiff's claim for damages depends is the level of her disability, and the extent to which she will require the assistance of others for normal daily life in the future.

The plaintiff was fifteen years of age when her claim came to trial and she was able to give evidence. It was possible to gain some practical understanding of the level at which she functions. She believed that she had been born in 1981, but did not know the date or the month; she could not tell what day of the week it was. She was able to say that she had some ambitions to a career as a hairdresser, although that is clearly not a realistic prospect. She attends a conventional school where she has been assigned to a special class identified as "IM", meaning "intellectually mild"; another class, styled "IO", meaning "intellectually moderate" caters for children of lesser capacity. She is, therefore, it seems, treated (educationally) as a little below or at the bottom of the range of unimpaired students. Dr Clarke thought that she was, in truth, on the borderline between the two classes, that is, at the lower boundary of the IM range, but that she was able to hold her position because of her pleasant personality.

According to her mother, she is able to do little for herself at home, has to be woken in the mornings, and got out of bed by others, is unable fully to dress herself without supervision, is unable (unlike her younger brother and sister) to prepare her own breakfast, is bathed by her mother who also combs her hair, and travels to school only in the company of others, either her siblings or one of her parents. She suffers from regular headaches and dizziness for which she takes prescribed medication, and sometimes from nightmares, and is prone to temper tantrums.

Her mother claims that the plaintiff cannot be left alone, and needs constant care and supervision while not at school. Her school teacher agrees that, although she can be trained to perform simple and repetitive tasks, she will always need a support system around her, and would not be able to cope with full time employment. Dr Clarke, too, believes that she will never function independently and will require virtually full time supervision. There is little prospect that she will marry or have children.

Dr Clarke assessed her capacity at about half the average, putting her in the bottom .5 percent of intellectual functioning. He spoke also of behavioural problems, mentioned in the medical reports, as being explicable by reference to her delayed development, and as being likely to show some slow improvement over time with maturity. There is likely also to be some development in her capacity to cope with domestic activities although she will never be fully independent. In other respects improvement is unlikely. She has a slightly increased risk of epilepsy. She has no prospect of employment other than in some kind of sheltered workshop. Dr Clarke sees as the most favourable option, when she reaches an age to live apart from her family, what he describes as a half-way house, or a group home, shared with others of comparable need, and under the general care of suitable adults.

GENERAL DAMAGES 
On behalf of the defendant it was argued that the plaintiff's ability is suppressed by over-protectiveness on the part of her parents, particularly her mother, and that the true extent of her capacity to develop greater independence has not yet been seen and that this fact and the potential for improvement should reduce the damages to be awarded. In my view the evidence is overwhelming that the plaintiff will not ever develop real independence, although I accept, as Dr Clarke said, that with advancing age she will acquire some maturity and some additional capacity. Even if, to some limited extent (which I do not accept) her full potential is inhibited by parental attitudes, that fact does not affect the quantification of the damages to which she is entitled: Nader versus Urban Transit Authority [(1985) 2 NSWLR 501.] 
The defendant also pointed to the evidence showing that the plaintiff attends school, where she appears to be reasonably comfortable and happy, has made friends, and engages in many of the normal activities, as indicative of a relatively contented life, and a capacity to make her way in the world.
Against that must be seen the evidence of temper tantrums and behavioural problems, which I consider denote a level of insight, and frustration at the circumstances in which she finds herself. She has, I believe, sufficient appreciation of her condition to recognise differences between herself and others and some of the ways in which her freedom is impeded.

It is undeniable that she is deprived of the joys and benefits of learning and of the satisfaction of educational attainment. She will be deprived of the satisfaction of employment, and of earning her own living and adopting and maintaining an independent lifestyle. She will probably never experience marriage, children, or family life as an adult.

The recurrent headaches pose something of a problem. In a report dated 9 July Dr Clarke expressed some doubt about their causal connection with the injury, but in all other reports, where headaches have been mentioned, they appear to have been treated as part of the sequelae of the accident. Since no issue was taken, and no submissions were addressed to the findings of fact I should make in this regard, I propose to treat them as one of the consequences of the injury. In February 1991 Dr Clarke had expressed some optimism about the treatment of the headaches with Panadol, but subsequent reports make it clear that this optimism was premature. Dr Clarke had, at the time of the hearing, recently begun to prescribe Sandomigran, but had not seen her since that treatment commenced and was unable to say whether it had had any beneficial effect.

Taking all of these matters into account, I have concluded that the appropriate amount to award the plaintiff by way of general damages is $250,000.

INTEREST 
The plaintiff is entitled to interest on that component of the general damages which is attributable to the period from the date of accident to the present.
That is now of fifteen years. She has a normal life expectancy, 62 years. I consider that the general damages should be evenly spread across her whole life span of a total of almost 77 years, of which about one fifth has passed.
I therefore propose to allow interest on one fifth of the amount awarded, that is on $50,000 at 2 percent per annum, for fifteen years. I allow $15,000.

ECONOMIC LOSS 
From the plaintiff's extremely limited pre-injury history it is not possible to hypothesise other than in the most general terms what course her life might have taken had she not been injured. The family history, so far as it is disclosed in the evidence, suggests that she would have been an average achiever, at school and in post school activities. The parties took the sensible course of agreeing on a figure of $453.55 as representing net average weekly earnings, and I propose to adopt this figure in calculating her losses, which will cover the whole of what would have been her working life. She will certainly never work in mainstream employment.

A question which did arise concerns what, if any, residual earning capacity she retains. There was some suggestion that she might obtain employment in a sheltered workshop, but competition for such employment appears to be very high, and there was no useful evidence about her prospects of securing it, about the hours or duration of employment, the conditions of employment if she were to obtain it, her aptitude for the work, or the income that would be produced. Dr Clarke's opinion was that employment of that kind would generate income only to top up the disability allowance, and barely equal a living wage. I am of the view that the plaintiff must be treated as unemployable for the purpose of the calculation of the losses produced by her loss of earning capacity, but that, from the total sum so calculated, some deductions must be made. These are, firstly, to represent the relatively trivial sums she may in fact earn in the future, and, secondly, to represent periods that she may, uninjured, have had out of the work force for any of the variety of reasons that cause working people to withdraw from employment for periods of time over their working lives.

I will assume that the plaintiff would have commenced employment at the age of eighteen years, and would have had a working life to the age of sixty-five, a period of forty-seven years. In this regard I note that no claim has been made for the loss of superannuation benefits now routinely associated with employment. I have selected the age of sixty-five because my attention was drawn to [s ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ssa1991186/s23.html) of the [Social Security Act ](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consolact/ssa1991186/) (Cth), which provides that a woman of the plaintiff's age reaches pension age when she turns sixty-five. Applying the 3 percent tables for that period to the weekly net income of $453.55 produces a figure of $601,090; this must be deferred by two years, reducing that sum to $566,828; this figure, in turn, must be further discounted to take account of the possibility of some earnings by the plaintiff as she now is, and of some periods of unemployment had she, uninjured, proceeded into the work force. That discount is incapable of precise quantification and I assess it at approximately 10 percent, producing a figure of $510,145. The final discount is that for vicissitudes, conventionally 15 percent, and which I see no reason to vary, leaving a sum of $433,623. After all these deductions, I award the sum of $435,000 for loss of earning capacity.

PAST DOMESTIC SERVICES 
Plainly enough, when first injured, the plaintiff was totally dependent upon her parents in any event for her care, and, although she may have become a little more demanding following her injury, it is unlikely that any significant additional time was devoted by them to her. This, I consider, continued to be the position until she reached an age when, in the ordinary course, she would have begun to attain some independence. From the beginning of school age, and increasingly, the gap between the services now voluntarily provided by her parents and those they would in any event have provided has widened and continues to widen. The comparison that must be drawn is between the time and attention her parents would, in the normal course, have given to her care and supervision, and that time and attention they have been obliged, by reason of her injury, to commit. The discrepancy will increase with age; while an uninjured child becomes less dependent and requires less time from her parents and siblings, the plaintiff does not. The differential therefore increases as time passes. Counsel for the defendant accepted that some allowance should be made for the years from 1984, when the plaintiff was three, to the present, but argued that the allowance should be modest, limited to as little as one hour per day for seven days of the week. That submission, in my view, does not recognise the unchallenged evidence of the plaintiff's mother as to what is done for the plaintiff. Either she or the plaintiff's sister tidies the plaintiff's room, makes her bed, she brushes the plaintiff's hair, supervises her teeth cleaning, and showering, and cares for her at night when the nightmares trouble her. She has had to be taken to medical appointments over the years. All meals have to be prepared for her, although she has now reached an age where, uninjured, she could have been expected to do more for herself, including preparing some meals. The award of damages representing compensation for the need for assistance must, in this case, be calculated on a sliding scale, increasing with the plaintiff's advancing physical maturity. For the years 1984 (age three) to 1988 (age seven) I propose to allow damages under this head representing one and a half hours' voluntary care per day. From 1988 to 1991 (age ten) I allow 21/2 hours per day. From 1991 to 1997 (age sixteen), the plaintiff's need for care and supervision has not decreased as it ordinarily would in a child of that age.
For that period I allow 4 hours per day for school days, 5 hours per day for school holidays and weekends. This comes to 30 hours per week for 40 weeks of the year, 35 hours per week for 12 weeks of the year, an average of 31 hours per week. For voluntary domestic services to the present time I allow as follows: ---|---|---|---  
Dates 
Number of hours allowed per week 
Rate 
No of weeks 
Weekly Total 
Amount Allowed  -1988  .5 hours per week  $15 per hour   $157.50  $32,760  -1991  .5 hours per week  $15 per hour   $262.50  $40,950  -1997  .00 hours per week  $15 per hour   $465.00  $145,080  
TOTAL:  $218,790  
FUTURE CARE 
The quantification of the plaintiff's claim for damages for future care poses considerable difficulties. It is beyond question that she will, for the remainder of her life, require extensive care and supervision. What is difficult is to determine the circumstances in which she is likely to be accommodated, and therefore the costs applicable to her care.

It is her mother's stated intention to continue to care for her for the rest of her own life. But that course does not accord with Dr Clarke's perception of the plaintiff's best interests. He believes she should reside in a group home, with four or five other young adults with comparable disabilities, cared for by paid and trained house parents.

Alternative scenarios were proposed. One emerged from a report from an organisation called I.D.E.A.S. (Information on Disability - Equipment Access
Services) in which reference was made to a half way house, estimated to cost "$80 per day lowest" or $560 per week. This report can be given little weight.
Its author was not called and the report which was brief to the point of taciturnity opened with what amounted to a disclaimer, that the information therein contained was taken from other (undisclosed) organisations "who are more well informed that I.D.E.A.S." I put this proposal to one side.

Another alternative was proposed by the defendant. This was to allow the plaintiff damages for future care on the basis that she be accommodated in an institution, such as Cherrywood Village, about which some evidence was adduced from Mr Graham Wright, a widely experienced health industry professional, and
Ms Jean McCardle, the Cherrywood Village Manager. Cherrywood presently accommodates forty residents in individual serviced apartments. The present cost to each resident with private means, such as insurance settlements, is $230 per week, the balance of the actual cost of services being met from subsidies provided by the private fund raising activities of the Foundation through which the unit is conducted.

There are two reasons why the defendant's proposal cannot be accepted. The first stems from the decision of the High Court in Griffiths v
Kerkemeyer [(1977) CLR 161.] There it was made clear that subsidies or services provided gratuitously for the benefit of an injured person should not diminish a tortfeasor's obligation to compensate that person for the loss caused by the tort. To award the plaintiff damages only on the basis that she is liable for that part of her future accommodation which is unsubsidised is to throw the cost of meeting the needs created by the injury onto a private charitable organisation. Even if the plaintiff were to be accommodated in such a place, it would be appropriate to measure the damages, not by reference to the subsidised cost of the accommodation, but by reference to the real cost.

The second, and even more compelling, reason why the argument cannot be accepted concerns the uncertain future of Cherrywood and institutions like it.
Mr Wright acknowledged, both in his oral evidence and in a letter to the solicitors for the defendant (ex 2) that government policy has, for many years, been to re-locate residents of such institutions into group homes.
While he observed that, at the time of writing his letter (October 1996) those plans had foundered, he added, significantly, "it would not be surprising if
Cherrywood Village were to continue in operation for another decade or more".
Even if his prediction is correct, the plaintiff's need for this kind of service is not likely to arise until approximately, or at the earliest, that time - that is the time when, even on Mr Wright's most optimistic forecast,
Cherrywood is likely to cease functioning, at least in its present form. This proposal, too, must be put to one side.

What remains is the assessment of the plaintiff's realistic needs in the future. Doing the best I can on the material available, I have concluded that the plaintiff will probably remain in the care of her parents until she is twenty-five, or the beginning of 2007, another nine and a half years. For one and a half of those years she will continue to attend school. For that year and a half, the allowance for the costs of her care should be as for the preceding six years, that is for thirty-one hours per week at $15 per hour. At $465 per week for one and a half years, applying the 3 percent tables, she is entitled to a sum of $35,619.

The next question is what allowance should be made for the succeeding eight years, when she will probably remain with her parents but will not be attending school. Evidence in this regard was given by Ms Anna Calvans, the manager of the Disability Services Programme of the Aging and Disability
Department of the NSW Government. The plaintiff can expect to attend a day care or day activity centre that providces programmes in basic living skills.
Ms Calvans' evidence was that the plaintiff could be expected to re-enrol annually in such a course until she reaches an age at which daily attendance is impractical. I take this age in the plaintiff's case to be sixty-five years. Each such program carries a total cost of $20,000, but at present this cost is met by government grant and is not charged to the consumer. That raises the question whether its cost, which will, over the plaintiff's projected lifespan, be substantial, should be a component in her award of damages.

In Griffiths versus Kerkemeyer Gibbs CJ drew a distinction between such services or subsidies provided by a friend or relative, and those provided by the State, and considered that, as a general rule, in the latter case no provision should be made in favour of the plaintiff for the services. (p 169).

That opinion is not binding upon me. The passage is plainly obiter, there having been no question of reimbursement or compensation for state provided services in that case and, although all three members of the Bench delivered separate judgments, neither Stephen J nor Mason J joined in the opinions so expressed.

I have come to the conclusion that I should award the plaintiff damages to allow for services which, under present arrangements, will be provided by government at no charge to her. There is no guarantee that, in years to come, those arrangements will continue. It is not possible to overlook the contingency and, indeed the likelihood, that, in the future, government policy will compel authorities to recover the costs of such care from those in a position to pay, and, should that eventuate, the plaintiff will, unless an amount is included in her award of damages, be under compensated. It has been an increasing trend on the part of governments in the twenty years since
Griffiths was decided, to recover costs or reduce benefits in circumstances where the beneficiaries have been the recipients of awards of damages.

I therefore propose to allow the plaintiff as a component of her damages a sum that will cover the cost of attendance at a day care centre from the age of eighteen to the age of sixty-five (forty-seven years) at a cost of $20,000 per annum, or $385 per week. Capitalised on the 3 percent tables, that amount is $510,240; since the need for the programmes will not arise until the plaintiff leaves school in 1998, that must be deferred one and a half years, giving a present day value of $488,230. This amount will be included in the final award.

There will, additionally, continue to be a need for care from her parents or siblings during the years from 1999 to 2007 during which time I have assumed she will remain at home but attend the day care programme. These programmes are variable, some observing school holidays and some not. All are five day per week programmes. I consider that the need for care will then be somewhat less than it presently is, and assess it as two hours per day, seven days per week, or $210 per week. For eight years the capitalised sum is $78,078, which, when deferred one and a half years, yields $74,721.

From 2007 allowance must be made for more formalised living arrangements. I accept that, by then, the plaintiff is likely to be living in one of the group homes to which I have referred at a cost of $35,000 per annum, or $673 per week. This care will continue for the remainder of her life, her expectation of which is another of 62 years. Since the need will not commence until 2007 the allowance will be for fifty-two years; on the 3 percent tables the capitalised sum if $932,576. Deferred ten years the amount is $693,837.

The $35,000 per annum represents the cost of accommodation, care and keep at the group home. Since all of the plaintiff's living costs are included in this sum, except perhaps for clothing and entertainment, there must be a deduction to represent the amount which, from her own earnings, she would, uninjured, have expended on accommodation and sustenance. And since the amount awarded for loss of economic capacity is founded upon average weekly earnings, it may safely be assumed that a good proportion of her weekly income would have been so expended. From this component of future care costs I deduct the sum of $290,000, representing two-thirds of the amount awarded for loss of earning capacity, which I consider to be a realistic assessment of that part of her earnings which she would have spent on provision for her own accommodation and sustenance. The amount remaining to be awarded for care in a group home is $403,837.

I have awarded damages to cover the plaintiff's costs of the day care programme only up to the age of sixty-five, on the basis of the evidence that there will come a time when it is no longer practicable for her to attend such a course. But, as Ms Calvans said, when she ceases to attend that course those costs "flick back to the accommodation service", to cover the additional staff which will then be required at the home rather than at the establishment where the course is conducted. It is necessary, therefore, to allow an additional component for the last twelve years of the plaintiff's life, from age sixty- five to age seventy-seven. In my view she will require care, additional to that covered by the group home, during the years when she is not attending a day care programme, of four hours per day, or twenty-eight hours per week, a total of $420 per week. On the 3 per cent tables this gives a figure of $221,424, which must be deferred for forty-eight years leaving a total of $53,585. That figure must further be reduced to take account of the possibility that, with advancing age, the plaintiff may have, in any event, required nursing home or other care during this period. I allow $50,000.

The total amount therefore allowed for the plaintiff's future care needs is $1,052,407.

OUT OF POCKET EXPENSES 
The parties put before me agreed figures identified as those representing past and future pharmaceutical expenses. For the past these were $3,328; for the future $12,115. Each of these amounts is allowed.

However it is not clear to me that these figures represent the entirety of the plaintiff's medical expenses to date, and anticipated medical expenses in the future; they appear to be limited to pharmaceuticals. I specifically reserve to the parties liberty to apply in relation to medical expenses other than those covered by the agreement.

FUND MANAGEMENT 
It is conceded that the plaintiff is entitled to an amount payable to the
Protective Commission as fees for the management of the fund which will be available to her. The total amount of the components of the verdict so far considered is $1,986,640. For the purpose of fund management expenses, from this must be deducted the sum representing past out of pocket expenses, $3,328, leaving a total of $1,983,312 for investment. The tables of fees charged by the Protective Commission was before me (ex G); on a fund of $2,000,000, for a person with a life expectancy of sixty-two years, the fees payable are $189,114; on $1,950,000, the fees are $184,538. It is appropriate, therefore, to allow the sum of $188,000 for fund management, and this amount is added to the verdict. The total amount of the verdict is therefore $2,174,640.

The defendant is to have credit for any sums already paid on his behalf. I order that the verdict moneys, after payment out of such sums as are authorised to be paid, be paid to the Protective Commissioner to be dealt with on behalf of the plaintiff in accordance with the relevant legislation. The defendant must pay the plaintiff's costs.
 * * * 
