

Cigna Insurance Australia Ltd and Ors versus Csr Ltd and Ors No. 50133 of 1995 [1996] NSWSC 318 (2 August 1996) 
COURT
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMMERCIAL DIVISION
ROLFE J
HRNG
SYDNEY, 10 November 1995 #DATE 10:11:1995 #ADD 2:8:1996 
Counsel for the Plaintiffs     Mr A S Bell 
Solicitors for the Plaintiffs    Phillips Fox 
Counsel for CSR Ltd
Mr J C Kelly SC 
Solicitors for CSR Ltd       Freehill Hollingdale and Page
ORDER
Orders accordingly.
JUDGE1
ROLFE J The history of these proceedings, for present purposes, is set forth in the reasons for judgment I published on 15
August 1995. 
On 21 July 1995 the first defendant, CSR Ltd, ("CSR"), applied by way of a
Notice of Motion for an order pursuant to Pt11 R8(j) that the proceedings be permanently stayed or dismissed or, alternatively, for an order pursuant to that rule that these proceedings be adjourned pending the final hearing and determination of the United States proceedings. In the alternative an order is sought pursuant to Pt11 R8(h) that the Court decline, in its discretion, to exercise its Jurisdiction over CSR in these proceedings.
The attitude adopted by CSR, at all times, has been to avoid, so far as possible, taking any step in the proceedings which could have the effect of it being submitted that, as a matter of discretion, it is precluded from obtaining the orders sought in the Notice of Motion. Those steps have been taken out of an abundance of caution, although it is now suggested by the plaintiffs that CSR is asserting it is not amenable to the Jurisdiction. I do not think that accurately states CSR's position. It is incorporated in New
South Wales and, in these proceedings, it has been regularly sued in the
Supreme Court of this State and served in New South
Wales with the Summons. In these circumstances it is clearly amenable to the jurisdiction, but it wishes to contend in the Notice of Motion to which I have referred that in all the circumstances this is an appropriate case in which this Court should decline, in the exercise of its discretion, to exercise its jurisdiction, which pre-supposes the existence of the jurisdiction, or that it should grant such other relief as it <case>. 
THE BASES FOR THE PRESENT NOTICE OF MOTION
Pt11 R8(1)(h) and R8(1)(j) provide: "The Court may, on application made by a defendant to any originating process on Notice of Motion filed within the time fixed by subR(2), by order:- ...
decline in its discretion to exercise its jurisdiction in the proceedings; grant such other relief as it thinks appropriate."
R8 also gives the Court power to take appropriate steps, such as setting aside the originating process, or declaring that a defendant has not been duly served, or discharging any order giving leave to serve a defendant outside the
State, or confirming service of a defendant outside the State, or declaring that the Court has no jurisdiction over the defendant in respect of the subject matter of the proceedings. The relief under these various sub-rules is directed to circumstances in which there is a challenge to the Court's jurisdiction over the defendant. In contra distinction subR(h) assumes
Jurisdiction but permits the Court, in the exercise of its discretion, to decline to exercise it. SubR(j) provides additional powers to the Court in any of the circumstances previously referred to in R1. THE
CSR has served Notices to Produce on certain of the plaintiffs, the documents being required for use in the determination of its Notice of Motion.
Each Notice to Produce is endorsed:- "By issuing this Notice to Produce the First Defendant does not intend to waive its rights to object to the jurisdiction of this Court."
The power to issue a Notice to Produce is contained in Pt36 R16(1) which relevantly, for present purposes, provides: "Where a party to any proceedings serves on another party notice requiring the party served to produce at any trial or hearing in the proceedings, or with the leave of the
Court, on any day, or before any Judge, of ... any document ...
for the purpose of evidence and the document ... is in the possession, custody or power of the party served, the party served shall, unless the Court otherwise orders, produce the document ... in accordance with the notice, without the need for any subpoena for production." [S19(1)](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/s19.html) of the [Supreme Court Act 1970](http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consolact/sca1970183/) defines a "party" as including "any defendant and any person against whom a claim for relief is made under s78", and "defendant" is defined as including "any person served with a Statement of
Claim or Summons ...".
It seems to me beyond dispute that CSR is a defendant and, hence, a party, such that it prima facie has the night to serve a Notice to Produce.
The plaintiffs submit that CSR does not have that right because it is, in effect, acting inconsistently. It is suggested it is acting inconsistently because it is disputing the jurisdiction of the Court. The basis of the submission appears in para6 of the written submissions of the plaintiffs: "Pt36, R16(1) permits 'a party to any proceedings' to issue a Notice to Produce and provides that the party to whom the notice is directed shall produce the document or documents 'unless the Court otherwise orders'."
It is submitted that this is an appropriate case for the Court to "otherwise order" "for it is fundamentally inconsistent for a party at once to claim that it is not amenable to the Court's jurisdiction (for reasons which are far from obvious) and yet at the same time seek to take advantage of the
Court's processes. Moreover, CSR, by asserting that it does not wish to waive its objection to the jurisdiction, apparently considers that it is not properly a party to any proceedings in New South Wales".
The submissions on behalf of
CSR stress that the relief is sought pursuant to subR(h) and subR(j), and that there is no submission being made that the Court has no jurisdiction over CSR in respect to the subject matter of the proceedings, which would flow from an order being sought under subR(g).
In my opinion the plaintiffs have misconceived the basis on which the application is being made. The terms of the application make it clear that CSR does not dispute the Court has jurisdiction over it in respect of these proceedings. The issue is whether the Court should decline, in the exercise of its discretion, to exercise that jurisdiction. CSR prays in aid the assistance of the
Notice to Produce procedure to obtain documents, which it wishes to use in support of its application.
It does not seem to be in issue that the appropriate principles to be applied in determining whether this stay should be granted are those stated by the High Court in Voth versus Manildra Flour Mills Pty Ltd and Another <case>; [(1990) 171
CLR 538.] For CSR to succeed it will be necessary to establish that New South
Wales is a clearly inappropriate forum. However, that determination relies upon discretionary considerations of the type to which their Honours referred and, having regard to the history of this case, it seems to me that there may be many documents which, arguably, could be relevant to a determination of the issue. However, questions of admissibility do not, generally speaking, govern the entitlement of a party to the production of documents. Those questions, once again speaking generally, are determined when an attempt is made to tender the documents.
The view to which I have come is that the stance taken by CSR, in the context of the basis upon which the present application is brought, is not one which precludes it from exercising the prima facie night it has, as a party to the proceedings, to serve a Notice to Produce and to have produced to it the documents set forth therein. I make it clear that I am only ruling upon the particular application before me, although it may well be that a similar conclusion would be reached if an application were brought under the other provisions of subR8.
 .
It has also been submitted by the plaintiffs that their objection to producing the documents is strengthened when one has regard to the fact that a party to whom documents are produced for the purposes of Court proceedings falls under certain obligations in respect of those documents: Harman v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [(1983) 1 AC 280] and Capital
Television Group Ltd and Anor versus Northern Rivers Television Pty Ltd (Bainton J September 1995 - as yet unreported).
I do not consider this is a basis for refusing to order compliance with the Notices to Produce if it is otherwise appropriate that there should be compliance with them. CSR and, perhaps more importantly, its legal advisers, are within the jurisdiction and are amenable to the Jurisdiction of Court.
It was finally submitted that in the circumstances of this case the Court should "otherwise order" that a Notice to Produce not be served. Essentially for the reasons to which I have referred I do not consider this submission should be upheld.
It was also submitted that subR3 of R8 impacts in some way upon the present application. It seems to me that that only strengthens the view I have taken about the position of CSR and justifies the comment I made that CSR was acting out of an abundance of caution.
 
EXCEPTIONS
What I have said does not preclude the plaintiffs from asserting that the
Notices to
Produce should be set aside on the basis that they are too wide, or objecting to the documents produced being made available to CSR on the basis of legal professional privilege. Each of these points is taken.
The plaintiffs submitted the Notices to Produce "are oppressive and an illegitimate fishing exercise". Reference is then made to the test in Voth and the submission is made that the documents "cannot properly be said to be necessary for disposing fairly of application to stay proceedings"; nor that the documents have "any apparent relevance" to the proceedings. It is further submitted that: "Documents relating to the foreign dispute cannot be relevant or necessary for disposing fairly of an application to stay proceedings in New
South Wales".
These various general statements, which I appreciate are taken from authorities, must be read subject to the issues in dispute in the cases in which they were stated. The present case has a number of unique features. One issue which may be expected to arise is what has motivated the plaintiffs to bring proceedings in New South Wales rather than raise by way of defence the matters raised in the New South Wales proceedings in the New Jersey proceedings. It would be unreal to seek to disentangle the issues raised in the various proceedings in a consideration of the matters relevant to the exercise of the Court's Jurisdiction under subr(h). Further, the exercise of discretion and the application of the test provided by Voth gives a wide range for a consideration of evidentiary material.
In my opinion the appropriate time to assert an absence of relevance is at the hearing when the trial Judge has the opportunity of determining, in the light of the particular issues presented to him, the question of relevance. In a case such as the present a Judge at first instance must bear in mind that there could be difficulties, at an appellate level, in rejecting evidence on the ground of relevance:
Dubbo Base Hospital versus Jones [(1979) 1 NSWLR 225.]
However, I would be disposed to hear any submissions as to relevance in relation to any specific documents. I merely state my prima facie view that, in the context of this litigation and for the additional reason to which I have referred, it may be a difficult submission to sustain.
There is also a claim for legal professional privilege which is to be further refined and articulated.
As I contemplate I will be the judge hearing the motion, it seems to me undesirable that I should rule upon that question unless it is done in relation to generalised categories of documents. By that
I mean categories of documents upon which rulings can be made without the necessity of considering the documents. If it becomes necessary I shall ask the Chief Judge to make arrangements to have questions of legal professional privilege in relation to individual documents decided by another Judge of the
Division.
I should also note that the parties have given me great assistance in furnishing me detailed written submissions which will be with the papers and which enabled me to give judgment quickly in a matter which does require a speedy resolution.
 * * * 
AustLII: [Copyright Policy](/austlii/copyright.html) |
[Disclaimers](/austlii/disclaimers.html) |
[Privacy Policy](/austlii/privacy.html) |
[Feedback](/austlii/feedback.html)  
URL: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/nsw/NSWSC/1996/318.html  
